## Chapter 1 Introduction

Physics works best when there is a good interaction between experiment
and theory. Unfortunately, for many of the interesting questions that
arise, either it is impossible to perform the appropriate experiments or
they are too costly. This is where the power of computer simulations
plays an important role. In some sense, the computer simulation plays
the role of the experiment. In modern particle physics, the experimental
tools are large accelerators and the theories are typically quantum
field theories. One of these is that of the strong interactions known as
Quantum Chromodynamics. It is very difficult to extract some predictions
from this theory as they fall in a non-perturbative regime and many
physicists have resorted to computer simulations to extract the physical
predictions.

Similarly, many of the more speculative ideas emerging in physics
involve strongly interacting field theories, some of these have novel
features such as non-commutativity of the space-time coordinates. This
type of structure is also suggested by string theory. The work of this
thesis is dedicated to developing non-perturbative techniques adequate
to these non-commutative theories and hopefully to string theory.

Fuzzy spaces are included in the wider framework of non-commutative
geometry.

The idea of involving non-commutativity into Physics dated from the
middle of the last century, nevertheless the substantial development has
taken place in the last few years. There are several reasons why
studying non-commutative (NC) spaces has become so popular in the
physics community. Although our interest in the study of fuzzy spaces is
related to the study of Quantum Field Theories as we will discuss later,
we would like to mention some other motivations for the study of NC
geometry in Physics.

Many interesting phenomena in Physics have been discovered by
extensions, therefore generalising commutative spaces into
non-commutative spaces seems a natural extension. In this spirit,
generalising commutative spaces to non-commutative spaces seems
motivated. Non-commutativity can be incorporated into many branches of
Physics like Gravitational Theories, Condensed Matter Physics and
Quantum Field Theories. The first attempts to involve NC theories in
Quantum Gravity date from the last decade [ 1 ] . Fuzzy spaces can be
found in String Theories (with D-Branes) under certain conditions — see
Ref. [ 2 ] - [ 4 ] . In Condensed Matter Physics it was found that the
Quantum Hall Effect can be formulated in terms of non-commutative
coordinates where a magnetic background field @xmath is related to the
non-commutative parameter [ 5 ] - [ 7 ] .

One of the open problems in Field Theory is the existence of non well
defined finite quantities: the divergences . The regularisation
procedure modifies the Field Theory to remove those divergences. The
three well establish methods to the date are the dimensional
regularisation, Pauli-Villars regularisation and the lattice
regularisation [ 8 ] . The first two methods are for exclusive
application at small coupling regimes. Regarding our motivation, we plan
to test the feasibility of fuzzy spaces as a regularisation scheme in
Quantum Field Theories. It should work, as the lattice procedure, at any
regime.

Suppose we want to study QFT through the path integral formalism on a
given space. If we want to access the non-perturbative regime it is
necessary to discretise the space in order to get a finite number of
degrees of freedom. The standard method is to approximate the space by
discrete points — a lattice — representing the space and then calculate
the observables over that set of points. This simple idea has generated
some of the most successful theories in Physics, Lattice Field Theories,
a review of them can be found in Ref. [ 9 ] .

On the lattice the continuous translational and rotational symmetry is
explicitly broken. This certainly is a disadvantage in models where
these symmetries are important. This takes us to search an alternative
method that preserves these symmetries.

Before proposing an alternative one has to ask which is the information
necessary to describe an arbitrary space. The answer to this question
was found by Connes and others in the context of non-commutative
geometry [ 10 ] . It is known that it is possible to reconstruct a
manifold ¹ ¹ 1 Spaces are included in this more general notion of
manifold . For our purposes we work only with spaces. @xmath if we have
the algebra @xmath of functions over @xmath , a Hilbert space, @xmath ,
and a differential operator able to specify the geometry (in Ref. [ 10 ]
that operator is the Dirac operator, @xmath , although for scalar
theories as those studied in the present thesis it was conjectured in [
11 ] that the Laplace-Beltrami operator @xmath is enough to specify the
geometry). Then, instead of discretising directly @xmath by means of
points we can discretise the triplet @xmath and here the fuzzy spaces
enter: they are essentially discretisations at algebraic level. If we
want to obtain a finite number of degrees of freedom — namely, the
coefficients in the expansion of a function in the algebra basis — the
algebra has to be finite dimensional, i.e. a matrix algebra of dimension
@xmath , @xmath , and as a consequence we have a non-commutative
algebra. The elements in the algebra act on a finite dimensional version
of the Hilbert space, @xmath , and an appropriate version of @xmath is
needed. In the limit @xmath (called the commutative limit) we have to
recover @xmath .

Summarising, the fuzzy discretisation ² ² 2 We denote it as
fuzzification . consist in the replacement:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The term “fuzzy” originates from the following observation: since in the
fuzzy space the coordinates will be matrices and they do not commute,
this will mean in the Quantum Mechanics spirit that the notion of points
does not exist, i.e.  the space turns fuzzy.

The seminal work on fuzzy spaces is due to Madore; in his work [ 12 ] a
fuzzy approximation of a two-dimensional sphere is constructed. Since
then there exists a large compendium of fuzzy literature, e.g. Refs. [
13 ] - [ 18 ] . Most of fuzzy spaces have been constructed based on the
following observation: If we quantise a classical phase space we obtain
a finite dimensional Hilbert space. This implies that the candidates to
be quantised are manifolds of finite volume which have a symplectic
structure. Co-adjoint orbits of Lie groups fall into this class. A
didactic example of them are the complex projective spaces, @xmath ,
they are @xmath -dimensional spaces that can be defined as @xmath
orbits. A discussion of its fuzzy version is given in Ref. [ 18 ] . The
family of @xmath is especially interesting since @xmath ; @xmath and
@xmath can be obtained form @xmath (see Ref. [ 16 ] ).

Once we count with a fuzzy version of a space, the next step in our
program is to define a Field Theory on it, e.g. Refs. [ 19 ] - [ 25 ] .
Then we need to construct fuzzy versions of Laplacians, Dirac operators,
etc. The solid mathematical background of the fuzzy approach makes it
easy to identify such fuzzy versions. Of course one has to check whether
the proposed theory reproduces the continuum theory.

Field Theories on fuzzy spaces share a generic property of Field
Theories on general non-commutative spaces called the UV-IR mixing [ 26
] . The UV-IR mixing was originally discovered in perturbative
calculations Refs. [ 27 ] - [ 29 ] . In non-commutative spaces we have
two kinds of diagrams, those that reduce to commutative diagrams and
those diagrams without a commutative counterpart, these are divergent at
low momenta.

Simulations on fuzzy spaces are a relatively recent topic, see Refs. [
30 ] - [ 34 ] .

In the present thesis we concentrate on the study of Scalar Field
Theories on fuzzy spaces. We cover two important remarks in the fuzzy
program:

1.  Test the feasibility as a discretisation method through a numerical
    simulation.

2.  Show that the fuzzy approach allows for a transparent geometrical
    analysis of Field Theories.

As a pilot study we describe a numerical study of the @xmath model on
the 3 dimensional Euclidean space @xmath by means of the Metropolis
algorithm.

Our regularisation consists of

-    the fuzzy sphere @xmath for the spatial coordinates

-   a conventional lattice with periodic boundary conditions for the
    time direction.

The organisation of this first part of this thesis is the following: In
chapter 4 we present a detailed description of both discretisation
schemes, emphasising the advantages of each method. In chapter 5 we
present the characterisation of the phases in the model; we dedicate
part of this chapter to the description of some technical aspects
related to thermalisation problems in Monte Carlo simulations. In
chapter 6 we identify the phase diagram of the model analysing the
scaling behaviour of the critical lines. In chapter 7 we present the
discussion of our results. The key point of this analysis is the
behaviour of the triple point under different limits. It reveals that in
the thermodynamic limit @xmath is it not possible to recover the Ising
universality class due to the dominance of a phase that breaks the
rotational symmetry spontaneously. We find that the UV-IR mixing
predicted in the perturbative regime of the model appears in the strong
coupling regime as well. There are ways to remove those divergences. In
the context of the scalar field theory @xmath on the fuzzy sphere this
is done by a suitable choice of the action [ 22 ] . The UV-IR mixing
exists in the non-perturbative regime e.g. Refs. [ 35 ] - [ 38 ] where
it was detected as a matrix or striped phase which has no counterpart in
the commutative theory.

As a second point in this thesis we present an analytical part. We study
a Scalar Field Theory on @xmath . @xmath is a special @xmath
-dimensional curved space, taking its radius to infinity, we arrive at
@xmath . @xmath is not a phase space, hence its “construction” involves
some complications that are explained in chapter 9 . To solve this
problem we allow @xmath to fluctuate into a larger space, this is @xmath
. We present a review of the construction of @xmath as @xmath orbit.
Nevertheless for moving on @xmath , it is enough to preserve rotations
in @xmath dimensions. We find that @xmath can also be constructed as a
@xmath orbit, but demanding this less restrictive symmetry we construct
a squashed @xmath . For our purposes we demonstrate that this
construction has more advantages since it allows us to identify @xmath
as a fibre bundle over @xmath with @xmath as the fibre. We start chapter
10 with a short review of [ 39 ] . There, a Scalar Field Theory on an
squashed @xmath is defined. Then a penalisation method for all the non
@xmath modes is introduced. This probabilistic method introduces an
apparently “artificial” parameter @xmath , such that @xmath positive and
large makes the non @xmath configurations improbable. Now we give an
interpretation to this parameter through a geometrical analysis of the
proposed model. Using coherent state techniques it is possible to
extract the geometry. At the end we are able to “visualise” the
penalisation method as a Kaluza Klein reduction of @xmath to @xmath .
@xmath is interpreted in terms of the radius of the fibre @xmath .

## Part I Simulations of the @xmath Model on the Space @xmath

### Chapter 2 Generalities of the method

#### 2.1 Path integrals and functional integrals

The functional integral provides a powerful tool to study Quantum Field
Theories. It can be thought of as a generalisation of the path integral
formalism in Quantum Mechanics introduced by R. P. Feynman in the late
40’s (see e.g. [ 8 ] and [ 40 ] ). The crucial idea behind the path
integral is the superposition law. If we want to calculate the
transition amplitude for going from an initial state at @xmath to a
final one at time @xmath , one has to consider a superposition of all
possible paths.

To state this in a mathematical form, let us suppose the initial state
at @xmath to be denoted by @xmath and at time @xmath we have @xmath .
Then the transition amplitude is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is the Hamiltonian of the system, which we assume to be time
independent.

We start slicing the time interval @xmath into @xmath subintervals of
duration @xmath as in figure 2.1 .

[]

The time evolution operator can be broken into intervals:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath and @xmath .
@xmath has the general form @xmath , where @xmath . For @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have used Trotter’s formula. Eq. ( 2.4 ) holds if @xmath and
@xmath are semibounded. The next trick is to insert between each term
@xmath the set of complete states

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

then eq. ( 2.1 ) can be written as the product of @xmath terms

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Suppose @xmath depends on the position @xmath and @xmath depends on the
momentum @xmath . It is possible to demonstrate that (see e.g. Refs. [ 8
] , [ 41 ] - [ 42 ] ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

In eq. ( 2.6 ) we note that the argument in the exponential can be
written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we recognise a discrete version of Lagrangian in the interval
@xmath times the duration of the interval @xmath , i.e., the action in
such an interval. Taking the product of the @xmath -terms of the type in
eq. ( 2.6 ) and taking @xmath we arrive at

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the action

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath is the Lagrangian of the system. @xmath is a path that
interpolates between @xmath and @xmath , @xmath is the functional
measure, therefore “ @xmath ” denotes the integral over all paths
between @xmath and @xmath .

An important remark is that from eq.( 2.7 ) we can beautifully recover
the least action principle noting that in the limit, @xmath , the path
of minimum action dominates the integral since the phase @xmath of any
path away from this fluctuates rapidly and different contributions
cancel.

The generalisation to quantum fields is a straightforward generalisation
of eq. ( 2.7 ). But before introducing its expression we would like to
remark that using path-integral methods it is common to give the action
an imaginary time in order to simplify the calculations — the weight in
the path integral is an exponential with real argument, which is easier
to handle numerically — and then return to a real action at the end.
This can be done if the Osterwalder-Schrader axioms hold (see Refs. [ 43
] - [ 44 ] ).

Besides simplification purposes, in imaginary time the paths away from
the classical path are exponentially suppressed. This makes the path
integral to converge much better than the phase rotation. This is
crucial for numerical studies since it allows us to have reliable
results with a relatively modest statistics.

There is a deeper consequence of considering an imaginary time: it
allows us to establish a connection to Statistical Mechanics.

##### 2.1.1 From Euclidean time to real time

In complex analysis, a branch of mathematics, analytic continuation is a
technique to be used in the domain of definition of a given analytic
function. We can apply such techniques here to go from real time @xmath
to the imaginary time @xmath called the Euclidean time . (For a formal
treatment see Ref. [ 41 ] ).

Imaginary time and spatial coordinates play equivalent rôles. For
example, in real time the D’Alembertian operator is given by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Under the Euclidean prescription we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we set @xmath .

In Quantum Mechanics we consider the possible particle positions at each
time, given by functions @xmath (or @xmath in @xmath ), and the path
integral integrates over all these functions, i.e. over all possible
particle paths (with the given end-point). This reproduces the canonical
Quantum Mechanics, but space and time are not treated in the same way.
In field theory, one does treat them in the same manner and introduces a
functions of any space-time point @xmath , which are denoted as fields.
The simplest case is a neutral scalar field, where this field values are
real, @xmath . The assignement of a field value in each space-time point
@xmath is called a configuration, and it takes over the role of paths in
Quantum Mechanics. Consequently, the functional integral now runs over
all field configurations, @xmath . The Lagrangian @xmath is now the
integral of a Lagrangian density at each point @xmath , @xmath , and the
action is obtained by an integral over the space-time volume, @xmath .

In imaginary time, the analog of eq. ( 2.7 ) for quantum fields is given
by ¹ ¹ 1 We set @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the Euclidean formulation the time evolution becomes a transfer
matrix, @xmath , and in the case that @xmath is time independent eq. (
2.2 ) becomes @xmath . Furthermore the quantum partition function @xmath
becomes the functional integral over paths that are periodic in
Euclidean time of period @xmath , where @xmath with @xmath Boltzmann’s
constant. There is also a second interpretation of the resulting
functional integral as a functional integral in statistical field
theory. Here one considers the Euclidean action as the energy functional
of an analog statistical mechanical system with @xmath . As is
conventional in lattice field theory it is the latter analogue that will
be used in this thesis. Then eq. ( 2.9 ) describes a statistical system
in equilibrium.

##### 2.1.2 Expectation values

The expectation values of an observable @xmath , denoted @xmath , can be
calculated as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the partition function.

The integration in eq. ( 2.10 ) involves all the possibles
configurations in the functional space.

The problem is how to measure (or estimate) the value in ( 2.10 ). Here
is where the importance sampling methods enters. The most popular
approach is the Monte Carlo Method (see appendix A for a brief
description). The main idea of this method is that we can estimate (
2.10 ) considering a representative sample of (independent)
configurations.

The way to produce the representative samples is through random moves to
explore the search space.

In this thesis we use a variant of the Monte Carlo method called the
Metropolis algorithm [ 45 ] to estimate the expectation values of the
observables defined in chapter 4 .

### Chapter 3 A review of the 2 dimensional @xmath model on a fuzzy
sphere

We devote this section to a review of some aspects of the @xmath
-dimensional @xmath model on a fuzzy sphere. We will discuss generic
properties of fuzzy spaces by means of the most studied example: the
fuzzy sphere. We will show that the fuzzy sphere can retain the exact
rotational symmetry.

#### 3.1 The 2 dimensional @xmath model

A quite general scalar field theory on a @xmath dimensional sphere is
given by the action

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath is a neutral scalar field on the sphere. It
depends on the coordinates @xmath which satisfy:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the radius of the sphere. @xmath , and @xmath are the
angular momentum operators. @xmath is the potential of the model.

Eq. ( 3.2 ) describes @xmath embedded in @xmath .

#### 3.2 The fuzzy sphere

To obtain a fuzzy version of a continuous space we have to replace the
algebra of the continuous space by a sequence of matrix algebras of
dimension @xmath , @xmath .

In the case of the fuzzy sphere , the permitted values of @xmath are
@xmath where @xmath is the largest angular momentum (the cutoff), which
can take the values @xmath . The coordinates @xmath are elements in the
algebra of functions of @xmath , @xmath . They are replaced by the
coordinate operators , @xmath , which are defined as @xmath , where
@xmath , are the @xmath generators in the @xmath -dimensional
irreducible representation.

The coordinate operators satisfy the constraint

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

which can be interpreted as a matrix equation for a sphere, the analog
to eq. ( 3.2 ). Note that the operators @xmath do not commute,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Following the above prescription, the scalar field is represented by a
hermitian matrix @xmath of dimension @xmath . Just as in the standard
case where @xmath can be expressed as a polynomial in the coordinates
@xmath , its fuzzy version @xmath can be written as a polynomial in the
fuzzy coordinates . The differential operators @xmath are replaced by
@xmath and the integral over @xmath is replaced by the trace.
Summarising the above:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Note that @xmath implies that @xmath is hermitian and the choice of
normalisation in eq. ( 3.8 ) ensures that the integral of the unit
function equals the trace of the unit matrix, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Rotations on the fuzzy sphere are performed by the adjoint action of an
element @xmath of @xmath in the dimension @xmath unitary irreducible
representation. @xmath has the general form @xmath . The coordinate
operators are then rotated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the field transforms as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### 3.2.1 Limits of the fuzzy sphere

Following [ 20 ] , for the spatial part of our model (the fuzzy sphere)
we have:

-   The commutative sphere limit @xmath :

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.13)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   The Moyal plane limit @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.14)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   The commutative flat limit @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.15)
      -- -------- -- --------

The limit given by eq. ( 3.13 ) arises naturally from the fact that
@xmath recovers @xmath .

A short way to deduce eqs. ( 3.14 )-( 3.15 ) is the following:

Considering the north pole on the fuzzy sphere where @xmath , we can
re-scale the coordinate @xmath to @xmath , and re-write the commutation
relation ( 3.4 ) at the north pole as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

We propose @xmath as a function in @xmath . For the non-commutative
plane we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

then, comparing eq. ( 3.16 ) to ( 3.17 ) we obtain @xmath .

We define the exponent @xmath in the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath we have @xmath For @xmath the commutator ( 3.16 ) vanishes if
@xmath . Note that in this limit we also require the commutator given by
eq. ( 3.4 ) to vanish and this requirement is immediately satisfied for
@xmath .

##### 3.2.2 The scalar action on the fuzzy sphere

The next step is to define our field theory on the fuzzy sphere.
Implementing the replacements given by eqs. ( 3.5 )-( 3.9 ) in eq. ( 3.1
) we arrive at the following expression,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 3.19 ) is valid for any potential @xmath . For testing purposes it
is convenient to select a simple model. In Ref. [ 32 ] the @xmath model
on a fuzzy sphere was studied, where the action is written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is a Hermitian matrix of size @xmath . After a suitable
rescaling, the parameters @xmath and @xmath become the mass squared and
the self-coupling, respectively.

In Ref. [ 32 ] @xmath was rescaled to fix @xmath . The model in eq. (
3.20 ) was also studied in Ref. [ 30 ] but in terms of a different
convention of parameters

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 3.3 Numerical results on the two dimensional model

The model in eq. ( 3.20 ) has been studied numerically by several
authors —see Refs. [ 30 ] , [ 32 ] - [ 34 ] . We follow those results in
Refs. [ 32 ] , which are summarised in figure 3.1 . ¹ ¹ 1 We thank the
authors of Refs. [ 32 ] for their permission to reproduce the graph
here.

Figure 3.1 shows the existence of three phases:

-   Disordered

-   Non-uniform ordered

-   Uniform ordered

It is remarkable that the three coexistence lines collapse under the
same re-scaling in @xmath for the axes @xmath vs. @xmath . Two
coexistence lines are:

-   Disordered - Ordered uniform:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.22)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   Disordered - Non-uniform ordered:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.23)
      -- -------- -- --------

The triple point is given by the intersection of the three critical
lines

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

The transition in eq. ( 3.23 ) is only valid for large values of @xmath
. Therefore eq. ( 3.24 ) is not the intersection of eqs. ( 3.22 )-( 3.23
).

Although we discretised the spatial part of our three dimensional model
by means of a fuzzy sphere , our simulations will show that the
properties differ from those of the two dimensional model in eq. ( 3.20
). In certain limits the @xmath theory on the fuzzy sphere can emerge as
a limit of the @xmath -dimensional model in eq. ( 4.7 ).

The model in eq. ( 3.20 ) depends on the parameters @xmath and @xmath
—or equivalently it depends on @xmath and @xmath , see eq .( 3.21 )— but
it effectively depends only on two out of three parameters @xmath and
@xmath . For the three dimensional model in addition to the parameters
in the @xmath -dimensional model we have as parameters the number of
lattice sites, @xmath and the lattice spacing @xmath . We will fix in
section 4.4.3 @xmath and the model will effectively depend on four
parameters.

The first question is if the three dimensional model has the phase of
non-uniform ordering. We will see in chapter 5 that the answer to this
question is yes.

### Chapter 4 Description of the model

In this Chapter we present the discretisation of the @xmath -dimensional
model composed by a @xmath -dimensional sphere plus a Euclidean time
direction.

We first recall the results of chapter 3 for the discretisation of the
continuous model. We will apply them to the @xmath -dimensional model.
After performing the discretisation in the time direction we present the
model to be studied by Monte Carlo techniques. In section 4.4 we present
the observables and a brief description of their meaning.

#### 4.1 Regularisation of the action

It is convenient to consider the Euclidean version of the model.

As it was remark in chapter 2 , the main advantage of working in this
formalism is that it allows to establish a connection to Statistical
Physics and the functional integral converges with a relatively modest
statistics.

The model to regularise is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is a neutral scalar field on the sphere. It depends on time
(euclidean) and on the coordinates @xmath satisfying eq. ( 3.2 ), where
@xmath is the radius of the sphere.

We consider the integral over Euclidean time on a compact version,
@xmath , which has circumference @xmath .

First we will explain how to discretise the spatial directions and then
we will perform the discretisation in time direction.

##### 4.1.1 Discretising by a fuzzy sphere

Let us consider the spatial part of the action given in eq. ( 4.1 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Implementing the replacements given by eqs. ( 3.5 )-( 3.9 ) in eq. ( 4.2
) we arrive at

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, the action ( 4.1 ) “discretised” in the spatial directions is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The model given by eq. ( 4.4 ) has the exact rotation symmetry of model
( 4.1 ) since any rotation on the sphere is allowed and the action ( 4.4
) is invariant under uniform rotations given by eq. ( 3.12 ).

##### 4.1.2 Discretisation of the time direction

To discretise the time direction we take a set of @xmath equidistant
points, then @xmath .

The changes to implement in eq. ( 4.1 ) are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

We arrive at

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath      @xmath            (4.7)
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- -------

One configuration @xmath corresponds to a set of matrices @xmath , for
@xmath .

Alternatively we can write down eq. ( 4.7 ) in terms of the constants
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath defined in eqs. ( 4.8 )-( 4.11 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Then the action reads:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 4.2 Decomposition of the field

As we mentioned in the previous section, we are representing a
configuration of the field in our model by a set of matrices @xmath ,
for @xmath . Every element in this set can be expanded in the
polarisation tensor basis

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are @xmath coefficients. The polarisation tensors @xmath
are @xmath matrices that are the analog of the spherical harmonics,
@xmath . Details about the polarisation tensors are presented in
appendix B .

At the end, the quantities of interest can be expressed as expectation
values or averages over the configurations. The expectation value of the
observable @xmath was defined in eq. ( 2.10 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the partition function. Quantities of interest will be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where eq. ( 4.15 ) is a condensate and eq. ( 4.16 ) is a correlation
function. These can be mapped to standard correlation functions by
replacing the @xmath by @xmath . We can reduce the expressions ( 4.15
)-( 4.16 ) to combinations of the expectation values of the coefficients
@xmath introduced in eq. ( 4.13 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now it is convenient to compute the quantities ( 4.17 )-( 4.18 ) after a
Fourier transform in (Euclidean) time.

Following Ref. [ 29 ] , the complete Fourier decomposition of the field
is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

It will sometimes prove convenient to define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this space the correlator ( 4.18 ) is diagonal,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is the Green function in momentum space. Here the term “momentum
space” is used to include both angular momentum @xmath and frequency
@xmath .

#### 4.3 The different limits

For all our simulations we are interested in taking the thermodynamic
limit @xmath .

For the time direction, we are interested on taking @xmath .

We now set to @xmath . Now, the tricky part is how to relate the
parameter @xmath , the radius of the spheres, and @xmath , the dimension
of the matrices.

For the limits of the spatial part of our model we follow section 3.2.1
.

#### 4.4 Definitions of the observables

We define the field averaged over the time lattice as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The average over the time lattice of the coefficients @xmath are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

This picks out the zero frequency component of @xmath , i.e. eqs. ( 4.23
)-( 4.24 ) are particular cases of the equations ( 4.19 )-( 4.21 ) when
@xmath .

Some particular cases in eq. ( 4.24 ) are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are given in eqs. ( B.12 )-( B.14 ) of appendix B .

##### 4.4.1 Order parameters

We want to measure the contributions of different modes to the
configuration @xmath . For this purpose we need a control parameter.
This turns out to be the sum

@xmath , this quantity was called the full power of the field in Ref. [
30 ] and it represents the norm of the field @xmath ; it can be
calculate as :

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.27)
  -- -- -- --------

Although @xmath cannot play the rôle of an order parameter, we will show
that it is useful to localise the region where the phases split into
disordered and ordered. We expect @xmath in the disordered phase and
@xmath in the ordered phase.

To distinguish the contributions from the different modes to eq. ( 4.27
) we define the quantity:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can re-write eq. ( 4.27 ) in terms of the quantities in eq. ( 4.28 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the disordered phase we expect @xmath for all @xmath .

Studying the contributions of the different modes to @xmath can provide
more information about the phases. If @xmath for @xmath it indicates
that the rotational symmetry is broken. In our simulations we measure
quantities related to the lowest modes: the zero mode for @xmath and the
first mode for @xmath as representative of those modes where the
rotational symmetry is broken.

Choosing the particular case @xmath in eq. ( 4.28 ) we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath , if the contribution of the fuzzy kinetic term to the action
is not negligible we can expect the kinetic term to select the zero mode
as the leading one, @xmath . As a consequence @xmath in the uniform
ordered phase; @xmath is expected to be close to zero in the disordered
phase.

Its corresponding susceptibility is defined as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

As the contribution of the kinetic term to the action reduces compared
to the potential contribution we can expect the system can undergo the
condensation of higher modes. Let us consider the p-wave contribution to
@xmath , i.e. the contribution of the @xmath mode. Using @xmath , @xmath
we introduce a 3-dimensional vector,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

With this vector we can define the order parameter @xmath , as a
particular case @xmath in eq. ( 4.28 ) we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

and its susceptibility , @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Following Ref. [ 30 ] the ordered non-uniform phase is then
characterised by @xmath . Note, however, that due to fluctuations we
will always have @xmath , so we have to specify how large it has to be.
We will give more details of how to characterise this phase in the next
section.

We can include contributions of the remaining modes generalising ( 4.32
) and ( 4.33 ). In practice the study of the first two modes should be
enough to understand the behaviour of the system.

##### 4.4.2 Energy and specific heat

The internal energy is defined as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the specific heat takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

These terms correspond to the usual definitions @xmath and @xmath where
@xmath is the partition function. ¹ ¹ 1 @xmath is proportional to the
inverse of the temperature @xmath , i.e. @xmath , where @xmath is the
Boltzmann constant.

We separate the action ( 4.12 ) into its four contributions:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.36)
     @xmath   @xmath               (4.37)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.38)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath were defined in eqs. ( 4.8 )-( 4.11 ).

The corresponding expectation values to eqs. ( 4.36 )-( 4.39 ) are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.40)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.41)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.42)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

##### 4.4.3 Dimensionless parameters.

-    Eq. ( 4.7 ) is written in terms of the following parameters: a
    general temporal lattice spacing @xmath , the radius of the sphere
    @xmath , the dimension of the matrices @xmath , the number of points
    in the lattice @xmath ,the mass squared @xmath and the self-coupling
    @xmath .

-    In order to simplify the simulations, we use the freedom to
    re-scale the field @xmath to fix the value of one of the constants
    given in eqs. ( 4.8 )-( 4.11 ). For our simulations we fix @xmath —
    see chapter 7 for more details. We defined the dimensionless
    parameters:

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.44)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.45)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.46)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

-    In all our simulations for the @xmath -dimensional model @xmath was
    taken equal to @xmath .

### Chapter 5 Description of the different phases in the model

In this chapter we characterise the different phases present in this
model. According to the values of @xmath relative to a critical value
@xmath we will see that we can divide the space of parameters into two
regions. In both cases we can subdivide according to values of @xmath :

1.  @xmath .

    1.   For @xmath we have a uniform ordering (Ising type).

    2.   For @xmath we have the disordered phase.

2.  @xmath .

    1.   For @xmath we have a non-uniform ordering.

    2.   For @xmath we have the disordered phase.

#### 5.1 Behaviour of the system for @xmath

In the previous chapter we defined the observable @xmath called the full
power of the field . It provides a control parameter since it represents
a norm of the matrix @xmath . We will see that @xmath defines a
disordered phase while @xmath defines a kind of ordered regime. But to
describe the type of ordering it is necessary to study the contribution
from separate modes to @xmath . In figure 5.1 we present a typical case
for @xmath where we show the partial contributions from the zero and
first mode to @xmath .

[]

From figure 5.1 we can observe that for @xmath : @xmath , @xmath :
@xmath , so the dominant mode turns out to be the zero mode.

[]

Figure 5.2 shows the order parameters @xmath and @xmath . In order to
determine precisely where the phase transition occurs the standard way
is to search the maximum in the susceptibility, in this case @xmath
since the zero mode is relevant for this phase transition.

@xmath peaks at @xmath and in figure 5.3 we can observe that the
susceptibility associated to the first mode reveals a small response
too.

Figure 5.4 shows the internal energy for the same parameters as in
figures 5.1 - 5.3 .

[]

We observe in figure 5.4 that the leading contribution for @xmath to the
internal energy @xmath , is the one that comes from the kinetic fuzzy
term in eq. ( 4.40 ). Note that the phase transition occurs at @xmath
where the potential contributions @xmath and @xmath deviate from zero.

Figure 5.5 shows an archetypical behaviour of the specific heat for
@xmath .

[]

The specific heat provides an alternative criterion to the
susceptibilities to determine where the phase transition occurs. It
provides information about the order of the phase transition. We prefer
at this point to follow the specific heat criterion because it is a more
universal quantity that does not distinguish the dominant mode. Since we
expect that as we increase @xmath the dominant modes are higher than the
zero and first mode, we cannot ensure that in that region the
susceptibilities related to such modes @xmath and @xmath give a reliable
prediction to the critical point. If we follow the criteria of the
susceptibilities we have to take into account which mode is the dominant
one. Both criteria are theoretically supposed to detect the same phase
transition at the same parameters. For @xmath where the dominant mode in
the ordered phase is the zero mode, this is confirmed comparing figure
5.3 to figure 5.5 since the susceptibility of the dominant mode, @xmath
, and the specific heat peaks around the same value in @xmath . We can
also observe in figure 5.5 that there is a smaller response in the
susceptibility of the first mode, @xmath . For @xmath we will see that
this situation is different since the susceptibilities of the
non-dominant modes do not peak at the phase transition.

We call the value of @xmath where the specific heat peaks @xmath , and
for figure 5.5 @xmath . ¹ ¹ 1 For practical purposes we had to estimate
the error by referring to the spacing of the @xmath values that we
simulated. In the case that for @xmath the kinetic term is not leading,
it appears as a small shift between both peaks. This happens when @xmath
is big enough to have @xmath small , @xmath . Another observation is
that in figure 5.3 the error bars are smaller than in the case of the
specific heat from figure 5.5 . The reason is that in general more
statistics is necessary for the specific heat than for the
susceptibilities. This phase transition is of second order as it is
shown in figure 5.5

##### 5.1.1 Thermalisation with respect to the observables

In this section we want to present the typical behaviour of the
observables for @xmath and @xmath .

###### @xmath

First we discuss some aspects of the thermalisation procedure. We define
the thermalisation time as the number of Monte Carlo steps necessary for
an observable to stabilise around one value independently of the
starting conditions. If @xmath we are in the disordered phase that is
characterised by the property that the coefficients @xmath in eq. ( 4.24
) are in average near to zero. We assume that the thermalisation of the
coefficients @xmath is similar, and we check if the coefficient @xmath
thermalises. Figure 5.6 shows the thermalisation of the action and the
coefficient ² ² 2 During the run the values stored were @xmath and from
them we can trivially calculate @xmath . We prefer to present the
histories and histogram of @xmath rather than @xmath in order to check
if the samples are symmetric under @xmath . @xmath for the point @xmath
in the figures 5.1 - 5.5 .

[] []

We chose a hot start ³ ³ 3 The starting configuration is a vector of
hermitian matrices filled in with random numbers. For more details see
appendix A . for figure 5.6 . We simulate the same parameters with a
cold start ⁴ ⁴ 4 The starting configuration is a vector of matrices
proportional to the unit. and we obtained results in agreement within
the statistical errors. The thermalisation time for @xmath in figure 5.6
is estimated to @xmath Monte Carlo steps.

After the thermalisation we begin the measurement procedure. Figure 5.7
shows the histograms ⁵ ⁵ 5 The area is normalised to @xmath . The number
of bins is @xmath . for the observables and parameters used in the
simulations of figure 5.6 :

[] []

###### @xmath

If @xmath we are in the ordered regime, for @xmath we have uniform
ordering characterised by the property that in the expansion ( 4.23 )
all coefficients @xmath for @xmath average zero. Again it is sufficient
to check if the coefficient @xmath thermalise. Figure 5.8 shows the
thermalisation of the action and the parameter @xmath for the point
@xmath in the figures 5.1 - 5.5 .

[] []

We chose a hot start for figure 5.8 . After @xmath Monte Carlo steps the
value of @xmath oscillates around @xmath and the energy per unit of
volume fluctuates around @xmath . We also simulated at the same
parameters with a cold start . We obtained the same results within the
statistical error but the thermalisation time decreases by more than
@xmath as we can observe in figure 5.9 .

[] []

Finally, after the thermalisation procedure we measure the expectation
value of the observables. We present the histograms for the same
parameters as in figure 5.8 :

[] []

The peaks in the probability distribution of @xmath are approximately
located at @xmath . In figure 5.10 the peaks are approximately located
at @xmath and @xmath . As we move forward for a more negative @xmath
this prediction is more accurate. This is shown in figure 5.11 .

[]

#### 5.2 Behaviour of the system for @xmath

For this region of the phase diagram we observe two phases: for @xmath
we have the disordered phase characterise by @xmath , for @xmath we have
the ordered phase characterised by @xmath . For @xmath there are
thermalisation problems, we will discuss these difficulties in section
5.2.1 .

In Figure 5.12 we present the partial contributions from the zero and
first mode in @xmath .

[]

We observe in figure 5.12 @xmath for @xmath while for @xmath we have
@xmath and for @xmath we observe @xmath .

[]

For those values of @xmath where @xmath we can observe a kind of
irregularity in the quantities @xmath and @xmath in figure 5.12 and in
@xmath and @xmath in figure 5.13 since they do not grow monotonously. We
will come back to this point at section 5.2.1 . For the moment we focus
on the region where the observables behave smoothly, i.e. @xmath .

In figure 5.14 we can observe that @xmath indicates a phase transition
for @xmath while @xmath cannot detect it since @xmath keeps growing as
@xmath decreases. We conjecture that @xmath should peak for some value
of @xmath .

[]

The specific heat in figure 5.16 indicates a phase transition at @xmath
.

[]

As we can observe comparing figure 5.14 to figure 5.16 , there is a
small difference in the critical value of @xmath predicted by the
susceptibility of the zero mode @xmath and the one given by the specific
heat. We conjecture that this is due to a finite volume effect,
nevertheless both criteria are qualitatively the same. For more details
see appendix C .

##### 5.2.1 Thermalisation problems

In this section we want to sketch the thermalisation problems.

The program was designed to perform an arbitrary number of independent ⁶
⁶ 6 If we choose a hot start , they have different starting
configurations. simulations in every run, @xmath . In the case of figure
5.17 we performed ten independent simulations, the first three of them
with a cold start while for the last seven simulations we chose a hot
start .

[] []

We can observe in figure 5.17 that the expectation value of the energy
and the coefficient @xmath depend on the starting conditions. The
interpretation of this phenomenon is that the effective potential of the
system has several local minima with barriers large enough to suppress
tunnelling between them. For different starting conditions the system
gets trapped in one of those minima. As a consequence we have
thermalisation problems (or practical ergocidity problems in the
algorithm). They should disappear at an infinitely large Monte Carlo
time, @xmath . In figure 5.17 we have a new simulation every @xmath
Monte Carlo steps from which the first @xmath steps where taken as
thermalisation time.

The large error bars in the observables at @xmath in figures 5.12 and
5.13 can be explained because the different simulations give different
results. For cold starts the action of the system oscillates around
@xmath – this is the value of the energy in the absolute minima – and
the trace @xmath of the sampled configurations fluctuate around @xmath ;
for hot starts the energy of the system oscillates around @xmath and the
trace @xmath of the sampled configurations fluctuate around zero.

Figure 5.18 shows the histograms corresponding to figure 5.17 .

[] []

#### 5.3 Estimating the maximal number of minima

It is possible to observe, from the Monte Carlo time evolution of the
observable @xmath in eq. ( 4.25 ) that there are no thermalisation
problems and that its probability distribution has several peaks.

[]

The history corresponding of the action for the same parameters in
figure 5.19 is the following:

[]

In this case the fluctuations were large enough to jump from one minimum
to another. Nevertheless the configurations sampled belong to different
subspaces of the spaces of configurations characterised by the different
values of @xmath it is shown in figure 5.19 .

The histogram corresponding to figure 5.19 is presented in figure 5.21 .

[]

The estimated value for the triple point for @xmath , @xmath is @xmath ,
the parameters simulated for figures 5.19 - 5.20 are in the region
@xmath (i.e. in the ordered non-uniform phase). For this region the
leading contribution comes from configurations characterised by a
angular momentum @xmath as we can check from the expansion of the norm
of the field eq. ( 4.27 ): @xmath For the parameters simulated for
figure 5.19 the contributions to @xmath split as follows @xmath .

The several maxima in figure 5.21 reflect the existence of several
minima in the effective action. If @xmath it is expected that the
potential provides the leading contribution to the action, turning into
a pure potential model. Then, if @xmath is large enough, for this region
of parameters the minima in the effective action are given by the minima
in the potential.

#### 5.4 The equilibrium configurations

The maximal number of local minima for our model can be obtained from
the maximal number of local minima for the two-dimensional model. In
Ref. [ 30 ] it was conjectured that the minima in the 2-dimensional pure
potential model are given by the disjoint orbits:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are @xmath matrices ( @xmath ), i.e. we have
@xmath disjoint orbits.

In our case that we have @xmath lattice points. Note that in the
expression ( 5.1 ) the constant @xmath is in terms of the parameters of
the @xmath -dimensional —see eqs. ( 3.20 )-( 3.21 ). For large values of
@xmath we can establish their “equivalence” in the three dimensional
model via eq. ( 6.51 ) —see section 6.5.2 . We conjecture that the
minima in the @xmath -dimensional model are at

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a diagonal matrix with eigenvalues @xmath or @xmath .

To prove the expression ( 5.2 ) we analyse @xmath .

The coefficient @xmath –see eq. ( 4.25 )– can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

From expression ( 5.2 ) we have @xmath possible values

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

takes integer values as in figure 5.21 where @xmath .

The maximal number of minima is @xmath . For @xmath as in figure 5.21
the maximal number of peaks is @xmath but we just observe @xmath of
them.

We can discuss intuitively why we cannot observe the maximal number of
peaks. There is a single way to obtain the value @xmath in eq. ( 5.4 )
–all the matrices @xmath , @xmath should be proportional to the
identity. To get in eq. ( 5.4 ) the value @xmath we should have @xmath ,
@xmath for @xmath . Since @xmath is invariant under interchange of the
lattice points and interchange of the eigenvalues on each matrix @xmath
there are @xmath ways to obtain the value @xmath in eq. ( 5.4 ). This
give us an rough notion of the volume of the potential minima. Those
when eq. ( 5.4 ) are around @xmath have a larger volume than those where
@xmath , they are the most probable to fall in a simulation with hot
starting conditions.

Since the number of local minima is larger the measurement problems are
more severe than in the @xmath -dimensional case, see e.g.  Ref [ 30 ] -
[ 32 ] . The tunnelling between different minima depends on the size of
its potential barrier and the size of the fluctuations.

In general we can diagonalise only one of the @xmath matrices @xmath .
This is represented in figure 5.22 where the matrix @xmath is
diagonalised though a rotation @xmath to @xmath . For @xmath , @xmath
the matrices are not diagonal.

@xmath it can be map to the continuum to @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is schematically shown in figure 5.22 with the signs ⁷ ⁷ 7 @xmath
for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . ” @xmath ” in red on @xmath .

Note that the model in eq. ( 4.7 ) can be brought to one of diagonal
matrices if the contribution of fuzzy kinetics term in eq. ( 4.36 ) is
negligible (see Ref. [ 48 ] - [ 49 ] ). We have the picture it figure
5.23 .

### Chapter 6 The scaling behaviour

In this chapter we focus on finding out the dependence of the transition
curves and triple point on the parameters of the system.

#### 6.1 Phase transition disordered to ordered-uniform

First we explore the transition curve for @xmath and we consider several
values for @xmath .

[]

We observe in figure 6.1 that the transition curve is a line that
crosses the origin, given by the equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

In addition we tried a fit of the form @xmath and we found the
expression

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Eqs. ( 6.1 ) and ( 6.2 ) are in agreement. We choose a linear fit for
our transition curves.

For general values of @xmath and @xmath we propose a transition line
between the disordered phase and the ordered uniform phase of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

To identify the slope @xmath our strategy is the following:

1.   First we extract the dependence on @xmath varying @xmath and
    keeping @xmath fixed. What we would expect is of the form

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (6.4)
      -- -------- -- -------

2.   Then, if @xmath does not depend on @xmath we extract the dependence
    on @xmath proposing

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (6.5)
      -- -------- -- -------

3.   Note that eq.( 6.3 ) would still be valid if both sides of the
    expression are multiplied by a common factor. We will use this
    factor to stabilise the triple point to a fixed value. This
    procedure will be explained in section 6.3 .

The slope @xmath could have a more complicated dependence on @xmath or
@xmath , nevertheless we will prove the choice @xmath is a good ansatz.

###### Step 1

Now, to find the collapse on @xmath , we keep @xmath and we consider
@xmath .

[]

In figure 6.2 we re-scale the @xmath -axis by a factor of @xmath . We
will see in section 6.3 this factor stabilises the value of the triple
point in @xmath .

The equation of the fit of figure 6.2 is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The exponent on @xmath , @xmath is optimal for this fit; to compare with
another exponent we show the same data on the next figure 6.3 for @xmath
:

[]

As we observed comparing figure 6.2 to figure 6.3 , the fit for the
exponent @xmath is better and we estimate the error on @xmath to the
value @xmath for @xmath , this is @xmath .

The next case @xmath in figure 6.4 seems to confirm the value for the
exponent, @xmath .

[]

We illustrate the case @xmath in figures 6.5 - 6.6 .

[]

[]

We have evidence to believe the exponent @xmath depends on @xmath . But
for the moment we content ourselves with choosing @xmath as @xmath and
we consider the error as @xmath , this is @xmath .

Now that we have the collapse on @xmath we can study the coefficient
@xmath in eq. ( 6.3 ).

###### Step 2

[]

In the previous figure 6.7 we estimate the errors on the fit of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then the equation for the transition curve from the disordered phase to
the ordered-uniform phase is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

In terms of the constants @xmath and @xmath in eqs. ( 4.8 )-( 4.11 ) we
re-write ¹ ¹ 1 @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath eq. ( 6.8 ) as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Checking the collapse on @xmath for @xmath we obtain figure 6.8 :

[]

We observed for @xmath – where @xmath – that the collapse given by eq. (
6.10 ) is not good.

Now we can check the collapse on @xmath for @xmath , for @xmath , see
figure 6.9 .

[]

Finally the collapse of data in eq. ( 6.10 ) considering all our data is
shown in figure 6.10 .

[]

We observe that for @xmath and @xmath the collapse is not good ² ² 2 The
case @xmath , @xmath could fall in this class, but is not possible to
conclude due to the poor resolution for these points. .

We conclude that the range where eq. ( 6.10 ) gives a good approximation
is @xmath . If we want to include transition points for @xmath we have
to reconsider @xmath defined in eq. ( 6.3 ) as a more complicated
function on @xmath . For the moment we exclude the data that are not in
the interval @xmath and we present the figure 6.11 .

[]

To conclude the present section, the expression of the collapse in
figure 6.11 is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 6.2 Phase transition disordered to ordered non-uniform

First we explore this transition curve for @xmath .

[]

We observe that the transition curve shows curvature. The most natural
fit we can propose is a polynomial where the coefficients are functions
that depend on @xmath and @xmath . In figure 6.12 we used a polynomial
fit of degree @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.11)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the figure 6.12 we covered a large range of @xmath . Nevertheless, to
predict the triple point we can concentrate on “small” values of @xmath
but above @xmath . For this range of values the transition curve can be
approximated by a polynomial of a smaller degree. In figure 6.13 we
present a linear fit for an interval of figure 6.12 :

[]

First we explore a linear fit for the transition curves. In the
subsequent section 6.4 we will compare it with the results obtained for
a fit using a polynomial of second degree.

The fit of figure 6.13 is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

For general @xmath we propose a linear fit for the transition curve from
the disordered phase to the ordered non-uniform phase of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we further make a factorisation ansatz and @xmath .

First we concentrate on the scaling in @xmath , keeping @xmath and
varying @xmath .

[]

The fit for figure 6.14 is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here we conclude @xmath , @xmath

Now we want the stabilise the triple point, at least the value of @xmath
as ³ ³ 3 To stabilise the value of @xmath it is not sufficient to
re-scale the @xmath -axis. we did in the previous section. Then if we
re-scale the @xmath -axis in figure 6.14 by a factor @xmath we get the
figure 6.15 :

[]

We fit the transition curves for @xmath for different @xmath by eq. (
6.13 ) in order to find the coefficient @xmath .

[]

[]

[]

[]

Now that we get the collapse on @xmath as @xmath we can determine the
coefficients, we propose:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Figure 6.20 shows @xmath and its fit.

[]

Then we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 6.16 ) is the slope of the coexistence line from the disordered
phase to the ordered non-uniform phase. To solve the equation of this
coexistence line we use the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we want to collapse the transition line completely, it is not enough
to re-scale the @xmath -axis. It is necessary to shift @xmath , for
example, by substituting @xmath in figure 6.15 . This leads to figure
6.21 .

[]

As another example for @xmath , form figure 6.17 we obtain figure 6.22 .

[]

We conclude that for @xmath around @xmath the transition curve from the
disordered phase to the ordered non-uniform phase obeys eq. ( 6.18 ).

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 6.3 Stabilising the triple point

As we mentioned in section 6.1 we have the freedom to re-scale both axes
of the phase diagram by a common factor. We want to use this factor to
fix the triple point, i.e. we want to find a function of @xmath and
@xmath , @xmath , such that @xmath

To identify the triple point @xmath our strategy is the following:

1.   First we extract the dependence on @xmath varying @xmath and
    keeping @xmath fixed. What we would expect is of the form

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.19)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.20)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

    For each @xmath we estimate the exponents @xmath and the
    coefficients @xmath using the package “gnu-plot”.

2.   In general the exponents can depend on @xmath , but we will show
    they do not and fix @xmath to a certain value. Since our final
    expression of the triple point may strongly depend on the choice of
    @xmath , we will compare the expressions for two different sets of
    exponents. ⁴ ⁴ 4 We will choose @xmath vs. @xmath and its
    corresponding coefficients @xmath . Both fits for @xmath in the case
    of @xmath – or @xmath in the case of @xmath – will be presented in
    the corresponding figures. We include the case when we vary @xmath
    and @xmath – or @xmath and @xmath in the case of @xmath .

3.   We extract the dependence on @xmath proposing

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.21)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.22)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

###### Step 0

First we explore the dependence on @xmath . To do this we consider
@xmath and several values for @xmath and we estimate the intersection of
both transition curves. Figure 6.23 is an example of this procedure.

[]

The linear fit for figure 6.23 is given by the equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The intersection of both curves is estimated in @xmath , @xmath .

###### Step 1

Figure 6.24 shows the estimated values of @xmath for different @xmath
fixing @xmath and a fit for these points:

[]

The fit for Figure 6.24 is: ⁵ ⁵ 5 We tried another exponent and we got
an acceptable fit for @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, if we multiply both axes in the phase diagram by a factor on
@xmath such that the @xmath -axis is @xmath , we stabilise the triple
point to the value of @xmath .

We can check the consistency of @xmath with the eq. ( 6.10 ):

[]

The equation of the collapse is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, if we re-scale the @xmath -axis by a factor @xmath we stabilize
the value of @xmath .

We conclude that for @xmath the equation of the triple point reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Now, to estimate the dependence on @xmath we apply the same procedure as
in the case @xmath , for @xmath and @xmath . As in figures 6.24 - 6.25
we will compare three different fits.

[]

[]

We conclude that for @xmath the equations of the triple point reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.28)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

[]

[]

At @xmath the equations of the triple point are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

[]

[]

At @xmath the equations of the triple point are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.32)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We summarise the coefficients @xmath obtained in eq. ( 6.26 )-( 6.33 )
in Table 6.1 .

  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath

Figure 6.32 shows the values of @xmath in Table 6.1 and three different
fits:

[]

For @xmath we present a constant fit in figure 6.33 .

[]

Then we get as estimation for the triple point the eqs.:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In eq. ( 6.35 ) we observe that @xmath seems not to depend on @xmath .

Let us consider the expression for the triple point fixing the exponents
to @xmath . The coefficients @xmath and @xmath are slightly different to
those obtained with @xmath , they are summarise in the Table 6.2 .

The values of @xmath in Table 6.2 can be fitted via the function @xmath
, then the expression for @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath we observe the values of @xmath in Table 6.2 are practically
the same that in Table 6.1 . We take as prediction of @xmath eq. ( 6.37
):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

For simplicity from all the fits presented in this section we choose
those where the exponents can be written as integer multiples of @xmath
.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note eq. ( 6.38 ) is in agreement with eq. ( 6.10 ) since if we
substitute @xmath in eq. ( 6.36 ) into eq. ( 6.10 ), the expected @xmath
turns out to be:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

eq. ( 6.37 ) coincides with the expression for @xmath in eq. ( 6.38 )
within the errors.

#### 6.4 Testing the fit of the transition curve @xmath

In this section we want to check the viability of a linear fit for the
disordered to ordered non-uniform phase transition curve for values of
@xmath slightly above @xmath .

We study the significance of a quadratic term in @xmath . We propose

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the previous section we adopt the assumption @xmath and @xmath and
we propose @xmath .

We observe @xmath . To find @xmath , we keep @xmath fixed and fit the
curve ( 6.40 ) for the set of data with different @xmath . Figure 6.23
is an example for the procedure.

Now we present the plots and fits for @xmath and @xmath .

[]

The fit for figure 6.34 is :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

[]

The fit for figure 6.35 is :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we can observe the coefficients obtained by a fit with a polynomial
of degree @xmath and @xmath are very similar. Thus the linear fit should
be a good approximation for the region around the triple point. ⁶ ⁶ 6 We
chose the fit of the form @xmath since we could not find a fit of the
form @xmath good enough to reproduce our set of data.

[]

The fit for figure 6.36 is :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

The final expression for this transition curve is:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.44)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

#### 6.5 Collapse of observables

##### 6.5.1 Collapse for @xmath

For this range of @xmath we find that rescaling the @xmath -axis by the
factor @xmath the susceptibilities @xmath and @xmath collapse. We show
an example in figure 6.37 .

[] []

The related graph of figure 6.37 for @xmath is:

[]

[]

We can see from figures 6.37 - 6.39 the equivallence between the
Specific Heat criteria and the susceptibilities criteria at this regime.
This subject is more widely disccussed in appendix C .

##### 6.5.2 Collapse for @xmath

If @xmath is sufficiently large we expect that the relevant
contributions to the action in eq. ( 4.12 ) are those of the potential
terms. Depending on the value of @xmath one or both of the kinetic terms
(fuzzy and time derivatives) can be negligible.

This leads us to reduced models , i.e. models that effectively depend on
less parameters than those in our model in eq. ( 4.12 ).

If the time derivative terms are negligible we would have a chain of
@xmath -independent fuzzy spheres. If the fuzzy kinetic term is
negligible the reduced model is a chain of matrix models , see Refs. [
46 ] - [ 47 ] . If both kinetic terms are negligible two parameters are
redundant, this lead us to the 1-matrix model (see Ref. [ 49 ] ).

We devote this section to the study of our model for @xmath . We
concentrated our analysis in the collapse of the phase transition and
some observables.

The transition curve for this region of the space of parameters can be
well fitted by the expression ( 6.45 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

The exponent @xmath typically oscillates in the range @xmath as it can
be appreciated in Table D.1 in appendix D .

As an example we present the transition curve disordered — ordered
non-uniform for @xmath and its proposed fit in Figure 6.40 :

[]

A characteristical behaviour of the specific heat ( 4.35 ) for the this
region of large @xmath is shown in figure 6.41 for @xmath , the last
point in figure 6.40 ( @xmath ):

[]

The corresponding internal energy ( 4.34 ) and its partial contributions
( 4.40 )-( 4.43 ) to figure 6.41 are shown in figure 6.42

[]

Figure 6.42 shows that the leading contributions to the internal energy
is from the potential. Although small, the contributions of the kinetic
terms are not negligible.

The next step would be to try to collapse in @xmath and @xmath the
transition curves in this region of large @xmath . As we have mentioned,
the exponent @xmath typically oscillates in the range @xmath . The
optimal value of @xmath strongly depends on the considered region of
@xmath –see Table D.1 in appendix D .

In section 6.2 we focused in the region around the triple point, there
we considered the transition curve a straight line, i.e. @xmath . As we
increase the range of @xmath the exponent @xmath decreases.

###### The @xmath-matrix model

If the fuzzy kinetic term is negligible we arrive at a chain of matrix
model .

Ref. [ 47 ] studied the large @xmath limit of this model, with a
potential @xmath . There a phase transition was predicted at the
critical value ( 6.46 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the critical value of the coupling and @xmath is the
squared mass parameter. Under the appropiate translation to our
parameters in eqs. ( 4.44 )-( 4.46 ), eq. ( 6.46 ) reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

In terms of the coefficient @xmath and exponent @xmath in eq. ( 6.45 )
the prediction for the transition curve disordered ordered non-uniform
at large @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

The transition in figure 6.40 obeys eq. ( 6.47 ) (the fit in figure 6.40
is @xmath and the prediction from eq. ( 6.47 ) is @xmath ).

Some other examples that have the transition in eq. ( 6.47 ) are shown
in figures 6.43 - 6.44 .

[]

[]

In figure 6.44 we observe that the fit @xmath works well for @xmath (the
prediction for @xmath in eq. ( 6.48 ) is @xmath ). Therefore if we only
consider (or measure) @xmath for this case the estimated value for
@xmath would be @xmath . This can explain the different estimated values
for @xmath in Table D.1 in appendix D . A second possibility is that for
those cases in Table D.1 where @xmath is that we have a transition of a
different nature. This is analysed in the following section 6.5.2 .

###### The 1-matrix model

In the 1-matrix model a transition is expected at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

according to the notation in Ref. [ 30 ] where it was confirmed
numerically, or

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

according to the notation in Ref. [ 32 ] –see eq. ( 3.21 ).

The question is if our model has such a transition. Theoretically for
very large values of @xmath and small value of @xmath , the dominant
term in the action is the potential. Then the model should effectively
depend on less parameters. Following Ref. [ 50 ] we obtain the relevant
parameters in our model form those in the @xmath -dimensional model:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

As a next step we verify if our model has a transition at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

With this intention we present figures 6.45 - 6.46 .

[]

[]

For the points with larger @xmath in figure 6.45 the @xmath data can be
fitted by a line eq. ( 6.53 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

but a substantial difference is that it does not cross the origin as in
eq. ( 6.52 ).

A similar situation occurs for @xmath in figure 6.46 for @xmath where
the fit is given by eq. ( 6.54 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the coefficients in eq. ( 6.53 ) for @xmath are approximately
doubled compared to eq. ( 6.54 ) for @xmath .

We conclude that we cannot confirm the phase transition in eq. ( 6.51 )
for the @xmath -dimensional model. A possible explanation is that in the
data obtained we have not reached a sufficiently large @xmath .

Now we focus on the collapse of other observables.

###### Collapse of @xmath

In this section we investigate the collapse of the norm of the field in
eq. ( 4.27 ) for large @xmath . This quantity is of interest since for
the ordered non-uniform phase for large @xmath the main contribution to
@xmath comes form higher modes, and the other quantities we are
measuring are related to the lowest modes. In addition it is known from
the 1-matrix model studied in Ref. [ 30 ] that for a region where the
kinetic term is negligible, @xmath has the simple form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the squared mass parameter. It would be interesting to
check if our model, under the appropriate translation of parameters, can
reproduce the 1-matrix result as a limiting case.

For @xmath we found that the norm of the field, @xmath — eq. ( 4.27 ) —,
can be well fitted by a line. A important difference from the 1-matrix
model studied in Ref. [ 30 ] is that the line does not crosses the
origin. We propose eq. ( 6.56 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

A concrete example is presented in figure 6.47 for the same parameters
as in figures 6.41 - 6.42 .

[]

###### Note:

There are some technical difficulties in the measurement of @xmath and
@xmath : The coefficients @xmath and @xmath must be measured on an
appropriate range of @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath stabilise. This
typically happens for @xmath , i.e. in the ordered non-uniform phase
where we have thermalisation problems. For the parameters in figure 6.47
they appear for @xmath . Then in figure 6.47 the value of @xmath and
@xmath stabilise for @xmath .

In addition to the 1-matrix model, our model has another limiting case:
the chain of matrix models . In the chain of matrix models the fuzzy
kinetic term should be negligible while in the 1-matrix model both
kinetic terms are negligible.

We conjecture that the non-vanishing coefficient @xmath is related to
the chain of matrix models and therefore should reduce to zero for the
limiting case of the 1-matrix model. Therefore the coefficients @xmath
and @xmath should depend differently on @xmath and @xmath .

Finally we present the attempts to collapse @xmath for @xmath in figures
6.48 - 6.49 .

[]

In figure 6.48 the @xmath -axis is re-scaled by the factor @xmath . The
optimal value of @xmath depends on the range of @xmath . @xmath is
optimal for @xmath , it gives and acceptable collapse for @xmath in the
range @xmath . For @xmath we choose @xmath as in figure 6.49 .

[]

We conclude that the collapse of @xmath depends on the range of @xmath .
For the Specific Heat we have a similar situation a for @xmath .

For @xmath we have in figure 6.50 the collapse of the Specific Heat
re-scaling the @xmath axis by the factor @xmath with @xmath as in figure
6.48 .

[]

In figure 6.51 we present the collapse of the Specific Heat for the same
data that in figure 6.50 , but re-scaling the @xmath axis by the factor
@xmath .

[]

[]

From figures 6.51 - 6.52 we observe that re-scaling the @xmath -axis by
the factor
@xmath we fix the critical value of @xmath to @xmath . We have the same
case in figure 6.53 for @xmath :

[]

We conclude the collapse of observables and the transition curve for
@xmath does not lead to the @xmath -matrix model. Furthermore, the
collapse of observables indicates that the exponent of collapse — @xmath
for @xmath as in figures 6.48 - 6.49 — depends on the range of @xmath .

For the largest values of @xmath considered our results agree to those
predicted for the chain of matrix models in Ref. [ 47 ] at large @xmath
, as it is shown in figures 6.51 - 6.53 .

### Chapter 7 Discussion of the results

As it was mentioned in section 4.3 we are interested in taking the limit
@xmath . If we scale @xmath in terms of @xmath we can access different
limiting models. The key point in our analysis is the behaviour of the
triple point and the phase coexistence curves under those limits; it
will decide which phases survive at the end.

If the triple point remains finite, it indicates that the three phases
exist. If the triple point goes to infinity it would indicate the
existence of the Ising type phases while the ordered non-uniform phases
would disappear.

Now we proceed to analyse the model around the critical curves. Coming
back to the discretised model given by eq. ( 4.12 ), it can be
re-written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we repeat for conveniece the definitions ( 4.8 )-( 4.11 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

We have the freedom to re-scale the field @xmath in the following way:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the constants ( 7.2 ) - ( 7.5 ) change to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

As we mentioned in section 4.4.3 we can choose @xmath such that we fix
one of the constants ( 7.7 )-( 7.10 ). We fix @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Under the re-scaling ( 7.11 ) the constants ( 7.7 )-( 7.10 ) change to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We re-write the obtained expression of the triple point of eq. ( 6.38 )
making the substitutions of eqs. ( 4.44 )-( 4.46 ) to get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath .

We scale @xmath for @xmath , then @xmath as @xmath .
Eq. ( 7.16 ) changes to eq. ( 7.17 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Choice of @xmath.

We choose

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath as an ansatz.

Then the time extension @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath .
If @xmath then @xmath as @xmath .

Implementing eq. ( 7.18 ) in eq. ( 7.17 ) we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

We note that the dimensionless quantities in eq. ( 7.20 ) goes to zero
as @xmath .

Eq. ( 7.20 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

To analyse the limit @xmath we focus on the exponents of @xmath in eq. (
7.20 ). For @xmath the exponent is @xmath and this is clearly negative
if @xmath . Although the error in @xmath is quite large even taking the
lower bound ¹ ¹ 1 The lower bound would be @xmath . the exponent @xmath
is negative, which implies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath the exponent of @xmath is @xmath , it is positive or negative
depending on the values of @xmath and @xmath .

In any case what we would have is the disappearance of the ordered
uniform phase and therefore the phase diagram of the commutative theory
cannot be recovered from the one of our studied model ( 7.1 ).

The tricritical action reads ² ² 2 We chose @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.22)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We consider the particular case @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.23)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The exponent of @xmath for the @xmath -term in eq. ( 7.23 ), @xmath , is
negative for the values of @xmath considered in the limits in section
4.3 –see eqs. ( 3.13 )-( 3.15 ). We observe that for @xmath large the
leading contribution to eq. ( 7.23 ) comes from the temporal kinetic
term. ³ ³ 3 We will identify @xmath .

If we compare the powers on @xmath multiplying the kinetic terms in
eq. ( 7.23 ), we see that the temporal kinetic term is @xmath times
larger than the fuzzy kinetic term. Under the limit @xmath the fuzzy
kinetic term is negligible and then, because in some sense the geometry
of the sphere is screened by the temporal kinetic term, the model
behaves more like a “matrix chain” system interacting to first
neighbours with the potential @xmath (see Ref. [ 46 ] ).

To maintain the uniform ordered phase in the limit @xmath it is
necessary to reinforce the fuzzy kinetic term as in Refs. [ 22 ] - [ 29
] . We will come back to this point in the conclusions.

#### 7.1 Comparison with other numerical studies

##### 7.1.1 @xmath on the fuzzy sphere

We found the @xmath phases present in the model in eq. ( 3.20 ) –see
Refs. [ 30 ] - [ 32 ] .

A substantial difference from the @xmath -dimensional case studied in
Refs. [ 30 ] - [ 32 ] is that the whole phase diagram in figure 3.1
collapses using the same scaling function of @xmath . We do not have
this situation since the scaling on @xmath for the the transition curves
( 6.10 ) ( 6.18 ) are different. The collapse in the @xmath dimensional
studies do not depend on the radius since it can be absorbed in the
couplings. This is in contrast to the @xmath dimensional case, where the
radius plays an independent rôle.

In section 6.5.2 we studied the collapse of observables and of the
transition curve disordered to ordered non-uniform. We conclude that we
do not observe the same scaling behaviour ⁴ ⁴ 4 This is under the
appropriate translation of parameters from the @xmath -dimensional model
to the @xmath -dimensional model, see eq. ( 6.51 ). that as in the
@xmath -dimensional case. Furthermore, the collapse of the transition
curve @xmath for large @xmath – see eq. ( 6.47 )– indicates that in this
regime our model behaves as a chain of interacting matrices , where the
fuzzy kinetic term is neglected Ref. [ 47 ] .

##### 7.1.2 Non-commutative lattice studies

In this section we want to compare our results with those obtained in
Refs. [ 35 ] , [ 36 ] and [ 37 ] where the following model was studied:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.24)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

@xmath is an hermitian matrix. Eq. ( 7.24 ) describes a scalar field
@xmath living on a non-commutative torus and interacting under the
@xmath potential.

Comparing eq. ( 7.24 ) to eq. ( 7.1 ) we observe that, besides the
different interpretation in each discretisation scheme, the substantial
difference between the models is in the spatial kinetic term. The first
term on the right-hand-side in eq. ( 7.24 ) corresponds to the energy
due to spatial translations on a squared @xmath lattice with lattice
spacing @xmath , while the first term on the right-hand-side in eq. (
7.1 ) corresponds to the energy due to translations (or rotations) over
a discrete version of the sphere. It is to be expected that in the
regime where the spatial kinetic term is negligible, both models
describe the same physics. Now we want to compare the phase diagram for
each model, but first we denote the constants of the model given by (
7.24 ) as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.27)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In Refs. [ 35 ] - [ 36 ] the phase diagram shows the existence of three
phases:

-    Disordered phase

-    Uniform phase

-    Striped phase

This phase diagram stabilises taking the axes as @xmath vs. @xmath ,
this is, under the re-scaling of the axes @xmath and @xmath the
transition lines collapse as follows:

-    Disordered phase — Uniform phase coexistence line:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (7.29)
      -- -------- -- --------

-    Disordered phase — Striped phase coexistence line:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (7.30)
      -- -------- -- --------

and the triple point is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the model ( 7.1 ) we found the existence of three phases:

-    I: Disordered phase

-    II: Ordered uniform phase

-    III: Ordered non-uniform phase

We conjecture that the striped phase of the model in eq. ( 7.24 )
corresponds to the ordered non-uniform phase in the model given by eq. (
7.1 ).

Coming back to the fuzzy model in eq. ( 7.1 ), their coexistence curves
@xmath and @xmath stabilise under different scaling:

-    Disordered phase — Ordered uniform phase:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (7.32)
      -- -------- -- --------

-    Disordered phase — Ordered non-uniform phase:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (7.33)
      -- -------- -- --------

The triple point is given by the equations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the region around the transition curve @xmath (to the ordered uniform
phase) the kinetic term is relevant. Then, because of the difference in
the nature of the kinetic term in the models in eq. ( 7.24 ) and eq. (
7.1 ), we cannot expect that there exists a re-scaling such that both
collapses are compatible. In the region around the transition curve
@xmath (to the ordered non-uniform phase) the leading term is the one
due to the potential, then we could expect that there exists a
re-scaling such that both collapses are compatible for the transition
curve @xmath . Now we consider an special case of @xmath and @xmath .

###### Case @xmath, @xmath.

We consider @xmath and @xmath . Implementing the substitution in eq. (
7.32 ) we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Comparing eq. ( 7.29 ) to eq. ( 7.35 ) and considering @xmath , we
conclude that the transition line @xmath for both models collapse with
the same dependence in @xmath . We have the same situation when we
compare the triple points. Implementing the substitutions @xmath and
@xmath in eq. ( 7.16 ) we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The dependence of the triple point on @xmath is the same as in Refs. [
35 ] - [ 36 ] . The critical action is:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.37)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

From ( 7.37 ) we observe that the dominance of the temporal kinetic term
is even stronger than in eq. ( 7.23 ).

-    Observation:

    Choosing @xmath in eq. ( 7.23 ) we get the same critical action as
    in eq. ( 7.37 ), but the dependence on @xmath in the triple point is
    not the same.

    The triple point ( 7.20 ) for @xmath is:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (7.38)
      -- -------- -- --------

For the transition curve @xmath the predictions from models ( 7.1 )-(
7.24 ) are different. The main difference is that the transition curve
in the model given by ( 7.1 ) is a curve as it is shown in figures 6.43
- 6.44 , whereas in the model given by eq. ( 7.24 ) this transition
curve is a straight line. Nevertheless, we found that in a range of
parameters around the triple point the transition curve @xmath in the
model ( 7.1 ) could be approximated by a line as in ( 7.24 ). We
conjecture that this is the range of parameters studied in Refs. [ 35 ]
- [ 36 ] .

Taking @xmath and @xmath in ( 7.33 ) we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we consider just the terms in @xmath and @xmath in ( 7.39 ), we
obtain @xmath vs. @xmath . We observed @xmath while @xmath . We conclude
that the dependence on @xmath in the eq. ( 7.39 ) could be the same as
in eq. ( 7.30 ).

### Chapter 8 Conclusions from part I

-    We presented a numerical study of the @xmath model on the @xmath
    -dimensional Euclidean space which was regularised by means of:

    -    the fuzzy sphere @xmath for the spatial coordinates

    -    a conventional lattice with periodic boundary conditions for
        the time direction.

    The obtained model was

      -- -------- -- -------- -------- -------
         @xmath      @xmath            (8.1)
                              @xmath   
      -- -------- -- -------- -------- -------

    where @xmath , for @xmath .

-    We found the phase diagram of the model according to the specific
    heat. Following this criterion we determined the critical values of
    @xmath and @xmath for fixed @xmath and @xmath denoted by an index
    “c”, @xmath and @xmath . In addition we found the tricritical point
    @xmath . @xmath divides the phase diagrams into two regions
    according to the behaviour of the observables.

    -   @xmath . In this domain we observe Ising type orderings. For
        @xmath we have a disordered phase. For @xmath we found a uniform
        ordering.

    -   @xmath . For @xmath we have a disordered phase. As in the two
        dimensional model discussed in chapter 3 , we found for @xmath
        there is a non-uniform ordering. For @xmath we encountered
        thermalisation problems, therefore we cannot conclude if there
        exists a boundary for the non-uniform ordered phase as in the
        @xmath -dimensional case [ 32 ] .

-    We compared our results with those obtained by other criteria (two
    point functions of the different modes) and we conclude both
    criteria are qualitatively equivalent. We followed the specific heat
    criterion which is a more universal quantity: it captures the phase
    transition without taking into account which is the dominant mode.

-    We found the existence of three phases:

    -   @xmath : Disordered phase.

    -   @xmath : Ordered Uniform phase.

    -   @xmath : Ordered Non-Uniform phase.

    These three phases were also found in the 2-dimensional @xmath model
    on a fuzzy sphere studied in Refs. [ 30 ] , [ 32 ] .

-    The phase of non-uniform ordering is characterised by the dominance
    of several angular momenta for @xmath . In this phase the rotational
    invariance is broken.

-    We get the transition curves of the model:

    -   @xmath : It turns out to be a line given by the equation:

          -- -------- -- -------
             @xmath      (8.2)
          -- -------- -- -------

    -   @xmath : We can observe that the transition curve shows
        curvature. The most natural fit we can propose is a polynomial
        where the coefficients are functions that depend on @xmath ,
        @xmath and @xmath . Nevertheless, to predict the triple point we
        can concentrate on values of @xmath slightly above @xmath . For
        this range of values the transition curve can be approximated by
        a line. We conclude that for @xmath around @xmath the transition
        curve from the disordered phase to the ordered non-uniform phase
        obeys the following equation:

          -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
             @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.3)
                                        @xmath   
          -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

    -    We conjecture the existence of a transition curve @xmath as in
        Ref. [ 32 ] , but due to thermalisation problems it was not
        possible to measure it.

    -    The effective action has several minima, and the thermalisation
        problems appear when it is not possible for the algorithm to
        tunnel between those minima. We sketched the main technical
        features of these thermalisation problems.

-    We obtained the equation for the triple point:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (8.4)
      -- -------- -- -------

-    Different limits of the fuzzy sphere can be obtained scaling @xmath
    as a function in @xmath and taking the limit @xmath ,

    -    Commutative sphere: @xmath

    -    Quantum Plane: @xmath

    -    Continuum flat limit. It requires:

          -- -------- -- -------
             @xmath      (8.5)
          -- -------- -- -------

    We analysed the behaviour of the scalar model in ( 8.1 ) under the
    different limiting spaces above.

-    Our numerical results reveal that the triple point goes to zero
    under the limit @xmath , this is valid for all cases considered in
    the previous point.

-    In other words, in the limit @xmath the non-uniform ordered phase
    dominates the phase diagram. This result is as consequence of the
    UV-IR mixing: integrating out high energy in the loop produces
    non-trivial effects at low external momenta [ 20 ] - [ 21 ] .

    A perturbative analysis of the action (our eq. 4.4 of chapter 4 ) :

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.6)
                                    @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

    is presented in Ref. [ 29 ] . It shows that the action given by
    eq. ( 8.6 ) does not reproduce the commutative continuum limit. This
    result was obtained from a expansion to two loops. Our results show
    that the UV-IR mixing is presented for all values of @xmath .

-    Following Refs. [ 22 ] and [ 29 ] ¹ ¹ 1 To be precise, in ref. [ 29
    ] discusses @xmath . the action ( 8.6 ) should be corrected by
    modifying the action.

    This modification in the action is equivalent to reinforcing the
    fuzzy kinetic term and it can be achieved adding a term @xmath where
    @xmath is a momentum cutoff.

-    We compare our results to those obtained in a numerical study of
    the @xmath potential on a non-commutative torus (see Ref. [ 35 ] - [
    36 ] ). Our results are in agreement if the parameters @xmath and
    @xmath are scaled appropriately.

-    The axes cannot be chosen consistently for all regimes to lead to a
    stable phase diagram for large @xmath . This is a significant
    difference to the @xmath -dimensional formulation which has the
    “privileged” property of leading to a phase diagram.

-    We compare our results at large coupling @xmath to those of the
    chain of matrices at the large @xmath -limit in Refs. [ 47 ] - [ 64
    ] (where this model is known as the @xmath model in string theory).
    Our simulation results fully agree. The disordered to ordered
    non-uniform phase transition in this regime obeys the predicted
    transition in the model @xmath in the large @xmath -limit.

## Part II Scalar Field Theory on @xmath

### Chapter 9 From fuzzy @xmath to a fuzzy @xmath

@xmath is an especially important example since it is the most natural
replacement of @xmath in studies of Euclidean quantum field theory.
Therefore our motivation to propose a fuzzy approximation to @xmath ,
namely @xmath . Nevertheless @xmath cannot be quantised in the strict
sense since it is not a phase space. It is important to clarify how we
can we obtain a matrix approximation to it.

#### 9.1 @xmath in analogy to @xmath

Having in mind the seminal example of fuzzy space, we search for five
matrix coordinates , @xmath , @xmath , which fulfil a matrix equation of
a @xmath -sphere in @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

We propose

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath the Dirac matrices including @xmath . They obey the algebra:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Eq. ( 9.1 ) follows directly from eqs. ( 9.2 ) and ( 9.3 ).

The next step is to propose a sequence of matrices approximating @xmath
. To achieve this we note that @xmath (which are @xmath -dimensional
matrices) give the representation @xmath of @xmath . We can therefore
consider the irreducible representation obtained from the @xmath fold
symmetric tensor product of this representation i.e. the @xmath
representation @xmath . It will contain a set of five matrices: @xmath ,
@xmath which can be realised as the symmetrisation of @xmath copies of
the @xmath matrices in the @xmath fundamental representation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The subscript @xmath indicates that we are projecting onto the
irreducible totally symmetrised representation. The dimension of the
matrices defined in eq. ( 9.4 ) is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath . They satisfy the relation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now we can generalise the definition of the matrix coordinates ( 9.2 )
to eq. ( 9.7 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The definition of the matrix coordinates ( 9.7 ) guarantees that the
matrix equation of a @xmath -sphere ( 9.5 ) is fulfilled for matrices of
dimension @xmath . In the limit @xmath the matrix coordinates in eq. (
9.7 ) commute. In this limit we recover the algebra of function of
continuous @xmath , @xmath .

However, a substantial difference to the fuzzy @xmath -sphere case is
that for finite @xmath the matrix coordinates @xmath do not provide a
complete basis for the algebra of functions, i.e. @xmath cannot provide
a basis for @xmath .

To clarify this point we analyse the lowest approximation, @xmath . We
define @xmath proportional to the commutators of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

If @xmath is a matrix representing a function on @xmath , it will be of
the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

However, a matrix product of two functions of the type in eq. ( 9.9 )
will involve non-zero coefficients of @xmath , the matrices in ( 9.8 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath coefficients @xmath in eq. ( 9.10 ) have no corresponding
counterparts in the expansion of functions on commutative @xmath . In
the language of Statistical Physics these coefficients constitute a set
of extra degrees of freedom . On one hand, if we exclude them the
involved algebra is not associative. On the other hand, if we included
them, the approximated space is not exactly @xmath .

The first option, advocated by Ramgoolam [ 13 ] , is to project out such
terms, in which case one is left with a non-associative algebra. This
involves additional complications and does not seem particularly suited
to numerical work. In addition the necessary projector must be
constructed. We will return to this point in chapter 11 where we will,
in fact, give the projector.

An alternative is to include arbitrary coefficients of @xmath (demanding
an associative algebra) and attempt to suppress such coefficients of
unwanted terms, by making their excitation improbable in the dynamics.
In this approach our algebra will be a full matrix algebra and obviously
associative.

Including the extra degrees of freedom will lead us to work in a bigger
space. This bigger space is @xmath , in section 9.2 will review its
construction.

#### 9.2 Review of the construction of @xmath

The fuzzy version of @xmath denoted by the subindex “ @xmath ”, @xmath ,
is a matrix approximation to the continuous @xmath . In this section we
review the construction of @xmath following Ref. [ 18 ] .

A standard definition on @xmath is the space of all norm-1 vector in
@xmath modulo the phase. For any unit vector @xmath we can define a
rank-one projector,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then @xmath can be defined as the space of all rank-one projectors

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

To construct the set of global coordinates for @xmath we need a set of
@xmath hermitian matrices @xmath , @xmath . The set @xmath is a basis
for the Lie algebra of @xmath , normalised as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

For our case of @xmath we start with @xmath . Let @xmath , @xmath be the
@xmath generators. They are equivalent to the generators @xmath of
@xmath . As a basis for our algebra we take the set @xmath , @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

their algebra is:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.16)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

@xmath is defined as a two indexes Kronecker symbol,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The algebra given by eq. ( 9.16 ) admits representations of dimension
@xmath for @xmath integer. For the lowest non-trivial level @xmath we
have the explicit form of the generators in appendix E .

A projector @xmath can be expanded in terms of the basis given by eq. (
9.16 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath are fifteen real coordinates.

@xmath implies that @xmath obeys the restrictions:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.19)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Taking contractions of eqs. ( 9.19 ) and ( 9.20 ) we get the three
identities:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Eqs. ( 9.19 )-( 9.20 ) describe how @xmath is embedded on @xmath . The
global coordinates @xmath allow us to describe the geometry of @xmath .
Following Ref. [ 18 ] we have the geometrical structures

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath is the Kähler structure , @xmath is the complex structure and
@xmath is the metric .

From eq. ( 9.16 ) we get the explicitly form of the normalisation
constants, eq. ( 9.28 ), and the structure constants, eq. ( 9.29 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.28)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.29)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

From here to the end of the thesis, we used the Kronecker’s delta to
arise and low indexes unless the opposite is indicated. A simplification
for eqs. ( 9.25 )-( 9.27 ) is the following:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

###### Some properties of the metric @xmath and the complex structure
@xmath.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.33)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.35)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.37)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.38)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.39)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are projectors, their ranks are given in
eqs. ( 9.40 )-( 9.42 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.40)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.41)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.42)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath projects on to the tangent space of @xmath and @xmath onto the
orthogonal compliment in @xmath .

##### 9.2.1 @xmath as orbit under @xmath.

Now we want to perform an explicit construction for @xmath , we will
analyse the induced line element . @xmath can be obtained taking one
fiducial projector @xmath and rotating it with and element of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

We choose @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.44)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Now we are interested on calculating the line element, @xmath , at the
north pole , defined by eq. ( 9.44 ).

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath rotates @xmath as a tensor,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

The sum @xmath in eq. ( 9.45 ) can be written in terms of an
infinitesimal rotation @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the matrix of coefficients @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 9.48 ) is known as the Maurer-Cartan forms for the group of
rotations on @xmath dimensions. @xmath are the generators of this
representation.

The line element turns out to be:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.49)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

From eq. ( 9.49 ) we corroborate that @xmath is a @xmath -dimensional
space.

###### Tangent forms

We define the tangent forms as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

At the north pole in eq. ( 9.44 ) we have the non-vanishing coordinates
are @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and permutation of them. The tangent forms
at the north pole turn out to be:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.51)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.52)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.53)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.54)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.55)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.56)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.57)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.58)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.59)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We note from eq. ( 9.49 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we define the (anti)-holomorphic forms

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.61)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

At the north pole:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.62)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.63)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.64)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.65)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.66)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.67)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.68)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.69)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.70)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.71)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.72)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.73)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.74)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.75)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.76)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

From eqs. ( 9.62 )-( 9.76 ) we note that only @xmath holomorphic forms
are independent:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.77)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.78)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.79)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The line element can also be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . At the north pole

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.81)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Eq. ( 9.81 ) reduces exactly to eq. ( 9.60 ).

##### 9.2.2 @xmath as orbit under @xmath.

Note that @xmath , @xmath generate the @xmath subalgebra of @xmath while
@xmath transforms as a vector under @xmath .

We define @xmath so we can write the projector ( 9.18 ) as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

The projector ( 9.43 ) takes the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here we have an extra restriction: under @xmath rotations the norm of
the vector @xmath is not affected. From eq. ( 9.83 ) we have @xmath .

The induced line element is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

the constants @xmath are arbitrary numbers until know. We will come back
to this point at the end of this chapter.

@xmath rotates @xmath as a tensor:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

and it rotates @xmath as a vector:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

In analogy to eq.( 9.47 ), @xmath but now the trace runs over the
sub-indices @xmath . For the vector part, @xmath we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath represents the matrix of coefficients @xmath and @xmath the
vector @xmath . Now we can use the Maurer-Cartan forms for the group of
rotations on @xmath -dimension: @xmath where @xmath are the generators
of this representation. For more details of these calculations see
appendix F .

Finally, the line element at the north pole is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 9.49 ) reduces to eq. ( 9.88 ) if we ignore the rotations @xmath
and we choose @xmath , @xmath . Then if we choose as a particular case
@xmath in eq. ( 9.88 ) we recover the @xmath symmetry.

From eq. ( 9.88 ) we obtain geometrical information of @xmath . We focus
into the following two points:

1.   Isotropy group of the orbit.

2.   Local form of @xmath .

###### 1) The isotropy group of the orbit

To find the isotropy group of the orbit, we have to identify the
rotations that do not affect the projector given by eq. ( 9.83 ). Such
rotations must be given by the orthogonal forms:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.90)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.91)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.92)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.93)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.94)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.95)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.96)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.97)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.98)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

From eqs. ( 9.90 )-( 9.98 ) we have to restrict to rotations on @xmath
-dimensions. The forms @xmath , @xmath are related to rotations
exclusive on @xmath -dimensions.

From the remaining combination of coefficients we construct the
corresponding generators of the isotropy of the orbit, @xmath , @xmath
as follows

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.99)
     @xmath      (9.100)
     @xmath      (9.101)
     @xmath      (9.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The components @xmath do not affect the fiducial projector in eq. ( 9.83
) since:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath fulfil the @xmath -subalgebra

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath generates @xmath .

The orbit turns out to be:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that both prescriptions, developed in sections 9.2.1 and 9.2.2 ,
give the same orbit, @xmath , since we can rotate any point of @xmath as
@xmath orbit and then unrotate it using an element of @xmath .

If we follow the construction of @xmath demanding a @xmath -symmetry we
obtain a rounded version of @xmath . Demanding the less restrictive
@xmath -symmetry we have a squashed version of @xmath .

###### 2) @xmath is locally of the form @xmath.

As a second observation, in eq. ( 9.88 ) we distinguish that the line
element is composed by two parts:

-    A four dimensional part: @xmath . We identify it as a @xmath -line
    element. Then @xmath is related to the square of the radius of the
    @xmath , namely @xmath . It can be re-written in terms of the
    (anti)-holomorphic forms as

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    A two dimensional part: @xmath or in terms of the
    (anti)-holomorphic forms

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Using the same procedure we used in the calculation of the isotropy
    group, now we look at the combination of indices @xmath that
    appeared in eq. ( 9.88 ). We associated @xmath with the
    corresponding combination of generators:

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    @xmath is obtained by demanding that @xmath , @xmath obeys @xmath .

    Summarising the above

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.106)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.107)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.108)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

    generate a sphere @xmath .

    Then the constant @xmath in eq. ( 9.88 ) is related to the square of
    the radius of the @xmath , @xmath . @xmath is proportional to the
    square of the radius of the @xmath , @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In eq. ( 9.88 ) the radius of @xmath , @xmath is @xmath . Summarising,
eq. ( 9.109 ) reflects that locally @xmath .

It is known that @xmath is a fibre bundle with @xmath as a fibre and
@xmath as a base space [ 51 ] , in terms of diagrams we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The construction of @xmath as an orbit under @xmath allows us to
corroborate this fact.

As we mentioned in the introduction, in order to specify the geometry in
fuzzy spaces we have to give a prescription for the Laplacian. In
chapter 10 we will get the exact relation between radius of the fibre
@xmath and a penalisation parameter @xmath appearing in the scalar
theory of @xmath .

### Chapter 10 Decoding the geometry of the squashed @xmath

Ref. [ 39 ] presents a prescription for a scalar field theory on a fuzzy
@xmath -sphere.     However, this theory depends on an additional
parameter @xmath and it is defined on a larger ¹ ¹ 1 @xmath is a @xmath
-dimensional space. space, @xmath , instead @xmath .

The motivation for this chapter is to explore the feature of fuzzy
spaces, to reflect the geometrical properties, and to explain why the
prescription in [ 39 ] works.

This chapter is divided into two parts: in section 10.1 we present a
review of the results in [ 39 ] . In section 10.2 we extract the
geometrical information from the Laplacian via the tensor metric.

#### 10.1 Scalar field theory on fuzzy @xmath-sphere

In this section we will summarise the prescription for working with a
scalar field on @xmath following Ref. [ 39 ] . The action for the scalar
field on a rounded @xmath is given by eq. ( 10.1 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the @xmath generators defined in chapter 9.2 . The
constant in front of the trace, @xmath represents the volume of @xmath .

Since we are interested on retaining just the @xmath -symmetry, we add
to eq. ( 10.1 ) a @xmath non-invariant but @xmath invariant term given
by eq. ( 10.2 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

so that we have the overall action for a squashed @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

The expression for the overall Laplacian, @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

or equivalently

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which gives a stable theory for all @xmath if @xmath .

This form ( 10.5 ) is an interpolation between @xmath and @xmath
Casimirs. As a particular case, the Laplacian is proportional to the
@xmath Casimir for @xmath and the @xmath Casimir for @xmath .

The probability of any given matrix configuration has the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.6)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.7)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the partition function of the model.

The values of @xmath of interest to us are those large and positive
since in the quantisation of the theory, following Euclidean functional
integral methods, the states unrelated to @xmath then become highly
improbable.

Note that we have not specified the potential of the model since the
above prescription is independent of the potential. The most obvious
model to consider would be a quartic potential, since this is relevant
to the Higgs sector of the standard model.

#### 10.2 Analysing the geometry encoded in the Laplacian

##### 10.2.1 Mapping the fuzzy Laplacians to the continuum

The non-commutative product of matrices induces a non-commutative
product on functions, this is the @xmath -product . This useful tool
allows us to access the continuum limit. Let @xmath , @xmath be two
matrices of dimension @xmath , and @xmath , @xmath are the corresponding
functions obtained by the mapping:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.8)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is called the projector at @xmath -level and it is contracted
taking the @xmath -fold tensor product of @xmath defined in ( 9.18 ).
@xmath carries the coordinates @xmath .

The definition of the @xmath -product is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.9)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath the @xmath -product can be written as a sequences of
derivatives on the coordinates @xmath . For our proposes we will just
follow the prescription given in Ref. [ 18 ] . Now we present the formal
definitions of the set of coordinates @xmath in eq. ( 9.18 ):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.10)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are proportional to @xmath as in eq. ( 9.14 ). Note eq. (
10.10 ) is consistent with eq. ( 9.18 ) via eq. ( 9.16 ).

A first interesting fact is that the commutator of @xmath maps into the
covariant derivative:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.11)
              @xmath   @xmath      (10.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The quadratic Casimir operators are defined as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

What we want to calculate is the image of @xmath , eq. ( 10.5 ), under
the @xmath -product map. First we define the image of eqs. ( 10.13 )-(
10.13 ) in eqs. ( 10.15 )-( 10.16 ):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.15)
     @xmath      (10.16)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we can rewrite @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.17)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.19)
              @xmath   @xmath      (10.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

A very useful expression to simplify the calculations is the contraction
of the complex structure to the partial derivative

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.22)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We are interested in extracting the metric tensor @xmath comparing the
relevant continuous Laplacian with the general form:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.23)
              @xmath   @xmath      (10.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

For the case when we retain the full @xmath -symmetry we have the
Laplacian @xmath . The associated metric tensor is just @xmath as it can
be verify from a straightforward calculation for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.25)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For the @xmath -symmetry case the corresponding image to the Laplacian
eq. ( 10.4 ) is defined proportional to @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.26)
  -- -------- -- ---------

then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.27)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Our guess for the tensor metric related to @xmath can be decomposed into
a pure @xmath -symmetry part (given by @xmath ) plus a @xmath invariant
part denoted by @xmath as in eq. ( 10.28 ):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.28)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath is related to @xmath , the term that breaks the @xmath symmetry.

After a straightforward calculation we get:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.29)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The tensor @xmath is obtained comparing the terms with second
derivatives in eq. ( 10.29 ) to @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (10.30)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (10.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

We can rewrite @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.32)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.33)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Some properties of @xmath and @xmath are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.35)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Now the traces amount to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (10.38)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (10.39)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Notice @xmath is a rank- @xmath projector while @xmath is a rank- @xmath
projector.

In order to invert the tensor metric we calculate the products between
projectors @xmath , @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.40)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.41)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.42)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.43)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.44)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.45)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The metric fulfils:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.46)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now we assume the covariant tensor metric to take the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.47)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a constant to determine.

From eq. ( 10.46 ) we distinguish two cases:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (10.48)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Comparing eq. ( 10.48 ) to eq. ( 10.46 ) we get ² ² 2 We have to demand
@xmath in order to invert the tensor covariant metric tensor @xmath .
@xmath .

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.49)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (10.50)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

From eq. ( 10.50 ) we observe that for this case @xmath does not depend
on @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.51)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Finally we summarise the results in eqs.( 10.49 )-( 10.51 ) in eq. (
10.52 ):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.52)
  -- -------- -- ---------

##### Observations

Eq. ( 10.45 ) suggested that @xmath and @xmath project onto separated
spaces. As we demonstrate in section 9.2.2 , @xmath is locally of the
form @xmath .

@xmath projects onto a 2-dimensional space that should be the fibre
@xmath while @xmath projects onto a 4-dimensional that should be the
base @xmath . This information can be precisely obtained analysing the
contributions to line element @xmath due to the tensors @xmath and
@xmath . This will be achieved in the subsequent section 10.2.2 .

Let us define @xmath , the symplectic structure as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.53)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is clear when @xmath (full @xmath -symmetry case) @xmath . In general
we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.54)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.55)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

##### 10.2.2 The induced line element @xmath.

The line element, @xmath at the north pole is defined as follows:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.56)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are defined as the coefficients of infinitesimal rotations
under @xmath , i.e. the Maurer-Cartan forms, @xmath , where @xmath are
generators for rotations in 5 dimensions.

Note that in the case @xmath (full @xmath -symmetry) eq. ( 10.56 )
reduces to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.57)
  -- -------- -- ---------

as it was expected.

At the north pole we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.58)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.59)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

From eqs. ( 10.58 )-( 10.59 ) we verify that @xmath projects to the base
space @xmath and @xmath projects to the fibre @xmath . The line element
at the north pole depending on the parameter @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.60)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We can compared eq. ( 10.60 ) to eq. ( 9.88 ). We identify the radius of
@xmath and @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.61)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.62)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

As we saw in section 10.1 , @xmath takes values in the interval @xmath .
We analyse some particular cases of eq. ( 10.60 ):

1.  @xmath . We recover the @xmath symmetry. The radius of the rounded
    @xmath is @xmath .

2.  @xmath . In this limit

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    then, the limit @xmath corresponds to shrinking the @xmath fibres to
    zero size. The radius of @xmath remains finite:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.  @xmath . Note that @xmath cannot take the exact value @xmath since
    for @xmath the tensor metric @xmath in eq. ( 10.28 ) cannot be
    inverted. For this limit we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    This limit corresponds to making the size of the fibre infinitely
    large.

### Chapter 11 Conclusions from part Ii

-    We reviewed the prescription given in Ref. [ 39 ] of the scalar
    field theory on a fuzzy @xmath -sphere.

-    Since @xmath is not a phase space the construction of its fuzzy
    version has some complications. The construction starts defining the
    matrix coordinates @xmath as

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath belong to the @xmath representation of Spin(5). They
    are matrices of dimension @xmath with @xmath an integer number. From
    @xmath follows an equation which holds for the matrix coordinates of
    a @xmath -sphere

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    In the limit @xmath the matrix coordinates commute, then we have a
    matrix approximation to @xmath at algebraic level.

-    The complications emerge for a finite @xmath where the five matrix
    coordinates @xmath , @xmath do not provide a complete basis for the
    algebra of functions. To circumvent this problem we have two
    options:

    1.   To include more generators to complete the basis. This leads us
        to include more coefficients in the expansion of a function that
        are not related to degrees of freedom of @xmath , i.e. extra
        degrees of freedom . Then the constructed space is not @xmath ,
        it turns out to be @xmath . To recover a scalar theory on @xmath
        . We implemented a penalisation method for all the non- @xmath
        modes in @xmath .

    2.   A second alternative consists of projecting out the non- @xmath
        modes. This leads us to deal with a non-associative algebra. We
        found that following the previous alternative we got the
        projector of the non- @xmath modes required in this second
        option.

-    The penalisation method introduced in the previous point consists
    of the following:

    -    We start defining an initial action on @xmath , @xmath .

        Then we modify @xmath by adding a term @xmath . @xmath gives a
        positive value for those field configurations associated to the
        non- @xmath modes and it is zero for those of @xmath .

    -    Then we construct the overall action as

          -- -------- -- --------
             @xmath      (11.1)
          -- -------- -- --------

        where @xmath is a penalisation parameter in the interval @xmath
        .

    -    The probability of any given matrix configuration has the form:

          -- -------- -- --------
             @xmath      (11.2)
          -- -------- -- --------

        where @xmath is the partition function. For @xmath the states
        unrelated to @xmath become highly improbable.

-    The resulting action is

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (11.3)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (11.4)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

    is written in terms of quadratic Casimir operator of the groups
    @xmath and @xmath , @xmath and @xmath respectively. @xmath is the
    square of the radius of @xmath .

-    Since the defined action @xmath for @xmath large and positive
    contains only @xmath modes, the resulting model describes a scalar
    field theory for @xmath .

-    The fuzzy spaces can well retain the geometrical properties of the
    discretised space. This nice feature allowed us to provide a exact
    geometrical interpretation why the penalisation procedure described
    above works. The Laplacian is given in eq. ( 11.4 ).

-   @xmath can be constructed either as a @xmath orbit or as a @xmath
    orbit. The Laplacian in eq. ( 11.4 ) corresponds to @xmath with
    @xmath symmetry. We restore the @xmath symmetry in a particular case
    of eq. ( 11.4 ) with @xmath .

-    It is known in the literature that @xmath is a non-trivial fibre
    bundle over @xmath with @xmath as the fibre. The construction of
    @xmath as @xmath orbit clarified this fact.

-    Using coherent states techniques we extracted the covariant tensor
    metric in eq. ( 11.4 ). Once we inverted the tensor metric we found
    the line element @xmath in terms of the parameter @xmath as

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (11.5)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath are the Maurer-Cartan forms for @xmath . @xmath is a
    rank-2 projector and @xmath is a rank-4 projector.

-   @xmath projects to the fibre @xmath and @xmath projects to the base
    space @xmath . The line element in eq. ( 11.5 ) shows that locally
    @xmath .

-    We identified the radius of the fibre and base space as

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (11.6)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (11.7)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

-    As @xmath we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    The meaning is that the @xmath fibres shrink to zero size while the
    radius of @xmath remains finite.

-    The suppression of the non- @xmath states in the field theory on
    @xmath corresponds to a Kaluza-Klein type reduction of @xmath to
    @xmath .

-    As we mentioned in section 9.1 , following our construction of
    @xmath as a @xmath orbit we are able to give the prescription for
    the projector to @xmath modes

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (11.8)
                           @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

### Chapter 12 General conclusions and perspectives

In this thesis we have presented a study of scalar field theory on fuzzy
spaces. The main motivation of our work was to explore the fuzzy
approach as a non-perturbative regularisation method of Quantum Field
Theories. For this purpose we chose a hermitian scalar field theory in a
three dimensional space, with @xmath potential. This model is
perturbatively super-renormalisable (i.e. there are only a finite number
of perturbative diagrams that require renormalisation). Our
non-perturbative regularisation consisted of a fuzzy two sphere for
space and a lattice for Euclidean time. We performed Monte Carlo
simulations and obtained the phase diagram of the model. The study of
such model via a standard lattice regularisation leads to a phase
diagram consists of a disordered and a uniformly ordered phase separated
by a continuous second order phase transition that is governed by the
Ising universality class. In contrast to the standard lattice
regularisation [ 9 ] , in this new model we found three phases, two are
the disordered and uniformly ordered phases but they are separated by a
third new phase of non-uniform ordering. This third phase is a property
of the non-commutativity of the regularised model and has arisen in
other studies in the literature and has variously been called a striped
phase (Gubser and Shondi [ 26 ] , Ambjørn and Catterall [ 28 ] ,
Bietenholz et al. [ 35 ] - [ 37 ] ) or a matrix phase by Martin [ 30 ] .
We find that the three phases meet at a triple point characterised by
@xmath , see section 7 , which inevitably runs to the origin as the
matrix size is sent to infinity. The implication is that the model we
have studied in the end does not capture the non-perturbative physics of
the flat-space @xmath field theory. This was not unexpected since
perturbative studies [ 29 ] found that this fuzzy sphere model suffers
from Ultraviolet-Infrared (UV/IR) mixing, and the non-uniformly ordered
phase is a non-perturbative manifestation of this phenomenon in the
neighbourhood of the ordering transition. It is conjectured (but still
has not been demonstrated in numerical studies) that the introduction of
another term into the action will suppress UV/IR mixing and bring the
model into the Ising Universality class. We have not pursued this issue
in this thesis as the introduction of this additional term involves an
additional parameter in the phase diagram and it was necessary to
proceed in steps. First it was essential to understand the phase
structure of this three parameter model before studying how the phase
diagram is deformed by the additional parameters.

The new model is naturally a non-commutative model and is of interest
also as it is a non-perturbative regularization of a non-commutative
field theory, that of a scalar field theory on the Moyal-Groenewold
plane. The new phase seems to be a characteristic feature of such
non-commutative theories. On the fuzzy sphere it is characterise by the
dominance of non zero angular momenta (i.e. @xmath ) in the ground state
of the model and implies that even though rotational invariance is
preserved in the regularisation process it is spontaneously broken by
the ground state.

An advantage of the study is also that different limiting spaces (e.g.
the commutative sphere, the Moyal plane and the commutative flat space)
can be obtained scaling @xmath as a power on @xmath and taking @xmath .
Our analysis shows that in all the limits we have considered so far the
phase of non-uniform ordering survives. In particular (as mentioned
above) the commutative flat model is not in the Ising universality
class. However, we expect that a normal ordering in the vertex, i.e. the
introduction of a counter-term to cancel the tadpole diagrams, would
return the model to the Ising universality class. This modification in
the action is equivalent to reinforcing the fuzzy kinetic term and can
be achieved more simply adding a term @xmath where @xmath is a momentum
cutoff to the action. An analogous prescription of adding higher
derivative terms to the quadratic terms should be applied to all fuzzy
models, in such a manner that all diagrams are rendered finite, if the
commutative theory is required in the infinite matrix limit.

This three dimensional model is amenable to an alternative treatment as
a Hamiltonian on the fuzzy sphere where the Hamiltonian would be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath .

At strong coupling @xmath it is expected that the model effectively
depends on less parameters. We found that our simulations in that regime
reproduce the predictions for the chain of matrices [ 47 ] where the
contribution of the fuzzy kinetic term is neglected. This model is
interesting from the String Theory point of view, it has been studied in
Refs. [ 64 ] - [ 65 ] where it is known as @xmath model .

At the technical level, the simulations of scalar theories on fuzzy
spaces are slower than in their lattice counterparts since the fuzzy
models are intrinsically non-local . Nevertheless we have found that the
simulations quickly converge as the matrix size is increased and we can
capture the characteristic behaviour of the observables at very small
matrix size. It is, however, expected that true advantages of the fuzzy
approach only emerges with the simulations involve a fermionic sector or
the models of interest are supersymmetric.

A second, theoretical aspect of the thesis was the presentation of four
dimensional models on a round fuzzy approximation to @xmath , via a
Kaluza-Klein reduction of @xmath . Though we did not perform numerical
studies in this case, from the studies that we have done so far, we are
in a position to conjecture the structure of the phase diagram for the
@xmath and @xmath models. Since, the disordered-non-uniform ordered
transition line seems to be universal in the class of models where
space-time is modelled by a fuzzy space, we expect it to arise in theses
models also. It corresponds to the dominance of the potential term and
the models become pure potential one matrix models (with, in our case, a
@xmath potential). The large @xmath limit of these models are solved in
terms of the density of eigenvalues. This density undergoes a transition
from a connected to a disconnected density as the potential well is
deepened by making the mass parameter, @xmath , more negative. It is
this separation of the eigenvalue spectrum that occurs at the
disordered-non-uniform order transition line. In the pure potential
model (see eq. ( 6.50 )) the transition curve is given by @xmath where
@xmath is the total coefficient of the quadratic potential term and
@xmath that of the quartic term. This disordered phase should give rise
to a uniform ordered phase as the mass parameter is furthered decreased.
Again all these models should exhibit UV/IR mixing. The study of @xmath
adds further complications due to the need to squash @xmath . A further
complication is the need to introduce the additional UV/IR suppressing
term. However the principal conclusion of this thesis is that we see no
insurmountable difficulty to the implementation of the scheme
implemented in this thesis and the extensions outlined above as a
regularisation scheme for quantum field theories. It has the distinct
advantage that it is also a natural regular method for non-commutative
field theories. This constitutes an interesting numerical experiment for
the Kaluza-Klein reductions in the fuzzy context.

Although there is still a lot to do to reach the high acceptance status
of Lattices Field Theories, to the date the fuzzy approach have overcome
the very first tests. We may take the present work as a starting point
to continue the exploration of this possible alternative in future
studies on fuzzy spaces.

### Appendix A A small description of the Monte Carlo method

Let @xmath be a configuration of the relevant field. The probability for
to this configuration is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Euclidean action of the system in the configuration
@xmath . @xmath is called the partition function ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the integration over all field configurations. The
expectation value of the observable @xmath is define by the expression:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The idea of the Monte Carlo method is to produce a sequence of
configurations @xmath , @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 @xmath : Monte Carlo time and
evaluate the average of the observables over that set of configurations.
In this way the expectation value is approximated as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the value of the observable @xmath evaluated in the
@xmath -sampled configuration, @xmath , i.e. @xmath .

The sequence of configurations obtained by Monte Carlo have to be
representative of the configuration space at the given parameters.

#### a.1 The Metropolis algorithm

The concrete way that the Metropolis algorithm works is the following:

-    Start with a configuration @xmath and generate another
    configuration @xmath .

-    Compute @xmath .

    -    If @xmath then @xmath is accepted, i.e:

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

    -    Otherwise the number @xmath is compared to a random number,
        @xmath ; if @xmath the configuration @xmath is accepted, in the
        other case it is rejected, i.e. @xmath .

-    Set @xmath and compare it with another configuration @xmath .

Before we measure it is necessary to perform a number of steps, in order
to obtain stable values for the observables of interest. This is called
thermalisation time . In our study the thermalisation time was estimated
from the history of the action ² ² 2 The picture obtained plotting the
Monte Carlo step @xmath vs. the action at the configuration @xmath ,
@xmath . .

###### The standard way to propose the following configuration

The variation of the configuration @xmath is performed element by
element,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a random number. ³ ³ 3 In general the real and imaginary
part are different random numbers. Its real and imaginary part are in
the interval @xmath and the @xmath are chosen so that we preserve
hermiticity of the field, i.e.

@xmath .

One Monte Carlo step correspond to updating all entries of each @xmath ,
@xmath sequentially once.

##### a.1.1 Modifying the Metropolis algorithm

The standard Metropolis algorithm works well when the observable
fluctuates around one value. In our study we found that the value of the
observable fluctuates around several values. ⁴ ⁴ 4 We call it multilevel
behaviour , some examples of it appears in appendix C . This was
interpreted in the sense that the effective potential of the system has
several local minima. It was also observed that for certain values of
the parameters there is no tunnelling between the different minima for a
very long history. Then the result depends on which minimum the system
falls in, and this typically strongly depends on the starting
conditions.

###### Independent simulations

As a first try to handle this dependence on the starting conditions we
perform many independent simulations. The algorithm described in A.1
changes as follow:

-    Divide the @xmath -Metropolis steps into @xmath parts.

-    Choose a starting configuration and thermalise .

-    Perform the loop describe in A.1 @xmath times.

-    Repeat the previous steps @xmath times until you collect @xmath
    -configurations.

This method is useful to check if the results do not depend on the
starting conditions, but in some cases this method fails because the
expectation values of the observables depend on the way that the @xmath
different initial conditions are chosen.

Let us characterise each minimum by the expectation value of the energy.

In figure 5.17 of chapter 5 we showed that there is a clear difference
between results with cold start vs. hot start . Between simulations with
a hot start no tunneling is observed, as figure A.1 illustrates.

[]

In figure A.1 we observe the history of the energy for @xmath
independent simulations. We observe @xmath different mean values in the
sense of ( A.4 ). This indicates that the space of configurations is
divided into separated subspaces since we do not observe tunnelling in
the same simulation.

According to the mean value of the energy, in the second and third
simulation the system falls in the same minimum, characterised by the
central value @xmath . We have a similar situation for the fourth and
sixth simulation where the expectation value of the energy is @xmath .

If a history begins with a random hot start, the probability to be
trapped for a very long period in a specific action minumum is what we
denoted as the ”size of the minimum” in Chapter 5 . In this situation it
is obviously problematic to rely on a single run, or on the average over
a few runs.

##### a.1.2 An adaptive method for independent simulations

A second attempt to sample the configurations takes into account the
size of the minima . To do this we stick the independent simulations in
the following way:

-    Divide the @xmath -Metropolis steps into @xmath parts

-    Choose a starting configuration and then do the loop described in
    section A.1 for @xmath times. Keep the last configuration, this will
    be the @xmath for the next loop.

-    Choose a new starting configuration and thermalize to get @xmath ,
    and test it as in A.1 with @xmath obtained from the previous
    independent simulation.

Figure A.2 shows the Specific Heat for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath obtained
by the three different methods of measurement discussed in this
appendix.

[]

As we can observe, different methods give different results and this is
because the value of the observables strongly depends on the way of
measuring. As an example of the statement above we present in figure A.3
the histogram for the action at @xmath of the figure A.2 :

[]

Figure A.4 shows the histogram for @xmath with the same setting as in
figure A.3 .

[]

The thermalisation problems reflect the fact that there exist a large
potential barrier between the different subspaces. As consequence we
cannot sweep all the space of configurations, therefore the expectation
values of the observables are not reliable.

#### a.2 Methods to estimate the error

In this section we give a brief explanation of the methods we used to
estimate the statistical errors in our simulations.

We start by defining the mean @xmath over a subset of @xmath of @xmath
elements ( @xmath )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The standard deviation is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

If the samples are statistically independent eq. ( A.7 ) gives a good
estimation of the error. If this is not fulfilled, then the correct
expression for @xmath is (see Ref. [ 52 ] ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the autocorrelation time and @xmath is the Monte Carlo
time interval at which the samples were taken. It is related to the
total number of samples by the expression @xmath .

For large @xmath and @xmath , eq. ( A.8 ) turns into eq. ( A.9 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now the problem is to estimate the autocorrelation time. The formal
expression for the autocorrelation time (see Ref. [ 53 ] ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### a.2.1 Binning method

This method is also called blocking method. The idea behind this method
is to divide the vector of measurements @xmath into @xmath blocks (also
called bin number), then we evaluate the observable for each block to
obtain a new vector of measurements @xmath . The error is estimated as
if these new measurements were statistically independent, then it is
obtained via eq. ( A.7 ) replacing @xmath by @xmath . The principal
disadvantage of this method is that the error may strongly depends on
the choice of @xmath . Then one should test several values of @xmath and
keep the one where the error is maximal.

##### a.2.2 Jackknife method

This procedure can be consider a re-sampling method. It also starts by
dividing the vector of measurements into @xmath blocks. Then one forms
@xmath large blocks cointaining all data but one of the previous binning
blocks

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the average in the @xmath block. @xmath is the number of
samples in each block. The error is then calculated as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### a.2.3 Sokal-Madras method

This method is based on the estimation of the autocorrelation time given
by eq. ( A.10 ), see [ 54 ] . The error is given by eq. ( A.9 ). In the
case that the autocorrelation time turns out to be below @xmath (the
samples are decorrelated), we take the standard error given by eq. ( A.7
).

In our simulations we compare the error given by these three methods. In
the case of the observables @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath – eqs. (
4.27 ), ( 4.30 ), ( 4.32 ) and ( 4.34 ) respectively – the errors given
by the three methods are compatible.

For the Specific Heat (or the susceptibilities of the different modes)
the most careful estimate was given by the Sokal-Madras method (largest
errors).

#### a.3 Technical notes

The runs were performed on two different clusters:

-    Berlin cluster :

    -   @xmath MHz Athlon (pha4-pha9)

    -   @xmath MHz (pha15-pha19)

    -    2.66GHz P-4 (pha30-pha33).

-    Dublin cluster

    -   @xmath GHz Intel Xeons-dual (cluster0-cluster15)

    -   @xmath GHz Intel Xeon-dual (Gibbs)

    -    1.5Ghz P-4 (schrodinger, hamilton, oraifertaigh, lanczos)

The code is written in @xmath and uses the Message Passing Interface
(MPI).

### Appendix B Polarisation tensors for @xmath

In this section we want to describe some generalities of the
polarisation tensors @xmath , which form a basis for the matrices @xmath
in eq. ( 4.13 ). They are the eigenvectors of the operator defined in
eq. ( 3.9 ) –the fuzzy version of the angular momentum operator @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . So we have the set @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Following Ref. [ 55 ] , their algebra is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.4)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

@xmath are the Wigner 3mj-symbols –see Ref. [ 56 ] - [ 57 ] – and @xmath
are the Clebsch-Gordan coefficients.

Their normalisation is ¹ ¹ 1 In fact the operators defined in [ 55 ] ,
@xmath , are essentially our polarisation tensors up to a factor:

@xmath

chosen as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### b.1 Explicit form of the generators of @xmath IRR of dimension
@xmath

As we mentioned in section 3.2 , @xmath are the generators of the @xmath
irreducible representations (IRR) of dimension @xmath . They satisfy the
Casimir constraint:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

There is a well established procedure to construct these generators in
an arbitrary representation. It operates in the Cartan basis where we
work with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Note that @xmath .

The commutation relations read:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

#### b.2 Explicit construction of the polarisation tensors

@xmath can be constructed as traceless polynomials of order @xmath on
@xmath , for example, for @xmath , @xmath . Demanding @xmath , we arrive
at @xmath (also see Ref. [ 58 ] ).

For @xmath we have @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The normalisation can be
found calculating the trace of the squared of @xmath . Following our
definitions ( B.7 )- ( B.9 ) we found @xmath , @xmath . Then we choose
@xmath and so on for the remaining @xmath ’s. The phase @xmath has to be
fixed demanding eq. ( B.3 ) to hold.

Summarising:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

### Appendix C Aside results

#### c.1 Criteria to determine the phase transition

To sketch the phase diagram we compare the following two criteria:

-    The criteria of the susceptibilities. The first phase diagram was
    revealed by searching for the values of @xmath where the two-point
    function of the zero mode has its peak for a given value of @xmath .

-    Specific Heat Criterion. A second phase diagram was found searching
    for the values of @xmath where the specific heat peaks.

We found that for values of @xmath for @xmath fixed both criteria
roughly coincide, as it can be seen in the figure C.1 for @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath

[] []

We observe that the specific heat an the zero mode susceptibility @xmath
in eq. ( 4.31 ) roughly peak at the same value of @xmath . This can be
explainrd analysing the partial contributions to the action:

[]

We observe that the main contribution comes from the kinetics terms. The
kinetic fuzzy term selects the configuration where the zero mode is
leading.

[]

#### c.2 Free field results

In the case @xmath , following Ref. [ 29 ] the expression for the space
correlator ( 4.22 ) for @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Figure C.4 shows that our simulation results agree with this formula.

[]

### Appendix D Tables

Table D.1 is organised as follows:

1.   For each pair @xmath it gives the maximal value of @xmath simulated
    —for several values of @xmath — free of thermalisation problems
    around the phase transition.

2.   Next it indicates the critical value, @xmath . This is done with
    the purpose of having a reference of the magnitude of the simulated
    values of @xmath .

3.   Then it contains the corresponding parameters @xmath and @xmath
    defined in eqs. ( 7.13 )-( 7.15 ) (see chapter 7 for more details).

4.   Finally it present the proposed fit for the transition curve @xmath
    - @xmath of the form ( 6.45 ) (in some cases it indicates the range
    of @xmath for the proposed fit).

### Appendix E Representations and Casimir operators

#### e.1 Explicit form of the generators of @xmath in the @xmath
dimensional IRR

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The generators of @xmath in the fundamental representation are
proportional to the former @xmath , @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### e.2 Gell-Mann matrices of @xmath

As @xmath we can find the relations between both bases. Before we give
the matrix of transformation between the bases we introduce the explicit
form of the Gell-Mann matrices for @xmath .

The fundamental representation of @xmath is given by the fifteen
matrices @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the matrix of transformation between Gell-Man matrices and
@xmath generators such that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath has the form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### e.3 @xmath Casimir operators

Following Refs. [ 59 ] - [ 61 ] the @xmath -order Casimir operator is
defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath denote the highest weight vector of the involved representation.
@xmath is a matrix associated to @xmath .

For classical Lie groups we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

@xmath , @xmath are given in Table E.1 .

The fold symmetric representations of @xmath are labelled by highest
weight vector

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

their @xmath -order Casimir operator is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The quadratic Casimir operator reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### @xmath Casimirs operators

@xmath is a rank- @xmath algebra. For @xmath we have @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (E.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (E.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (E.10)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

###### Fold symmetric case representations of @xmath

For @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.11)
     @xmath      (E.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

###### @xmath Casimir operators

@xmath is a rank- @xmath . For @xmath we have @xmath .The Casimir
operator reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The involved representations in chapter 9 are @xmath @xmath IRR; their
Casimir takes the value

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### e.4 Dimension of representations of @xmath and @xmath

Following Ref. [ 62 ] we have

##### @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

##### @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

To calculate the dimension of IRR of @xmath we follow the Young tableau
algorithm —see Ref. [ 63 ] . As an example we have for the @xmath IRR of
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The representation is denoted by the number of boxes at each line. The
representation in the example in eq. ( E.19 ) is shown in figure E.1 .

Since @xmath we conclude

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

### Appendix F Calculation of the induced metric of @xmath as @xmath
orbit

In chapter 9 we introduce the expression for the induced line element of
@xmath as a @xmath orbit (see eq. ( 9.84 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the constants @xmath are arbitrary numbers.

We start the construction of the orbit choosing a fiducial projector
@xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can place the coordinates of the projector in eq. ( F.2 ) in a matrix
of coefficients, @xmath , for @xmath and a vector @xmath for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath rotates the coordinates of the fiducial projector as follows

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### 1. @xmath

For @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      (F.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Using @xmath and @xmath we have @xmath . In eq. ( F.4 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

A rotation in @xmath -dimensions has the form @xmath . @xmath are the
generators and @xmath the coefficients of the rotations as they were
defined in eq. ( 9.48 ). @xmath are the generators in the fundamental
representation with the explicit form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The expression for @xmath involves the Maurer-Cartan forms

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Substituting eq. ( F.7 ) in eq. ( F.5 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### 2. @xmath

For @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (F.10)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Substituting eq. ( F.7 ) in eq. ( F.10 ) we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Some intermediate steps for eq. ( F.11 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting eqs. ( F.12 ) ( F.13 ) in eq.( F.11 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally we arrive at

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --