The recent development of sensitive, multiplexed near infra-red
instruments has presented astronomers the unique opportunity to survey
mass/magnitude complete samples of galaxies at Cosmic Noon , a time
period where @xmath of the observed baryonic mass is generated and
galaxies are actively star-forming and evolving rapidly. This thesis
takes advantage of the recently commissioned MOSFIRE spectrograph on
Keck, to conduct a survey (ZFIRE) of galaxies at @xmath to measure
accurate spectroscopic redshifts and basic galaxy properties derived
from multiple emission lines.

The majority of the thesis work involved survey planning, observing,
data reduction, and catalogue preparation of the ZFIRE survey and is
described in detail in this thesis. Using the ZFIRE spectroscopic
redshifts, I show why spectroscopy is instrumental to determine
fundamental galaxy properties via SED fitting techniques and to probe
gravitationally bound structures in the early universe. The thesis
further presents basic properties of the ZFIRE data products publicly
released for the benefit of the astronomy community.

The high mass-completeness of the ZFIRE spectroscopic data at @xmath
makes it ideal to study fundamental galaxy properties such as, star
formation rates, metallicities, inter-stellar medium properties, galaxy
kinematics, and the stellar initial mass functions in unbiased
star-forming galaxies. This thesis focuses on one such aspect, the IMF.
By using a mass-complete ( @xmath ) sample of 102 galaxies at @xmath in
the COSMOS field from ZFIRE, I investigate the IMF of star-forming
galaxies by revisiting the classical Kennicutt ( 1983 ) technique of
using the H @xmath equivalent widths and rest-frame optical colours. I
present a thorough analysis of stellar population properties of the
ZFIRE sample via multiple synthetic stellar population models and
stellar libraries.

Due to an excess of high H @xmath -EW galaxies that are up to 0.3–0.5
dex above the Salpeter locus, the H @xmath -EW distribution is much
broader (10-500Å) than can be explained by a simple monotonic SFH with a
standard Salpeter-slope IMF. This result is robust against uncertainties
in dust correction and observational bias, and no single IMF (i.e.
non-Salpeter slope) can explain the distribution. Starburst models
cannot explain the H @xmath -EW distribution because: 1) spectral
stacking still shows an excess H @xmath -EW in composite populations and
2) Monte Carlo burst models show that the timescale for high H @xmath
-EW is too short to explain their abundance in the ZFIRE sample. Other
possible physical mechanisms that could produce excess ionising photons
for a given star-formation rate, and hence high equivalent widths,
including models with variations in stellar rotation, binary star
evolution, metallicity, and upper mass cutoff of the IMF are
investigated and ruled out.

IMF variation is one possible explanation for the high H @xmath -EWs.
However, the highest H @xmath -EW values would require very shallow
slopes ( @xmath ) and no single IMF change can explain the large
variation in H @xmath -EWs. Instead the IMF would have to vary
stochastically. Therefore, currently there is no simple physical model
to explain the large variation in H @xmath -EWs at @xmath , but the
distinct differences of the @xmath sample with that of local galaxies
are found to be intriguing. Further study is required to fully constrain
the stellar population parameters of actively star-forming galaxies at
the epoch of maximum star-formation. Probing multiple rest-frame UV and
optical features of galaxies simultaneously along with galaxy dynamical
studies via integral field spectroscopy will be vital to understand
stellar and ionized gas properties of these galaxies. Furthermore, low-
@xmath analogues of galaxies at @xmath will provide vital clues to
constrain galaxy evolution models aided by the ability to probe galaxies
in high resolution to low surface brightness limits.
