#### What physically should drive IMF variations

Theoretically, we expect the IMF to vary since a galaxy’s metallicity,
SFRs, and environment can change dramatically with time (eg.,
Schwarzschild & Spitzer, 1953 ; Larson, 1998 , 2005 ; Weidner et al.,
2013 ; Chattopadhyay et al., 2015 ; Ferreras et al., 2015 ; Lacey
et al., 2016 ) . Typically lower metallicities and higher SFRs at high
redshift leads to lower cooling and higher heating efficiencies
(Schwarzschild & Spitzer, 1953 ; Larson, 1998 ) , which may increase the
mass of the fragmented molecular clouds leading to a redshift dependant
IMF slope (Chattopadhyay et al., 2015 ) . However, we do not know how
this affects the IMF since the physics governing fragmentation is
complex and poorly understood (eg., Larson, 1973 , 2006 ) .

Environmental variations to the IMF can occur due to interactions
between gas clumps in galaxies can lead to extra UV flux, strong winds,
and powerful outflows, which suppresses the formation of low mass stars.
Theoretical simulations show that with increasing cloud surface
densities the fragmentation favours the formation of higher mass stars
(Krumholz et al., 2010 ) .

Radial variations of the IMF can occur due to dynamical mass segregation
that will lead to massive stars to occupy the centre regions of a galaxy
(eg., Binney & Tremaine, 1987 ) .

Narayanan & Davé ( 2012 ) used hydrodynamical simulations to investigate
how the Jeans mass of fragmenting molecular clouds vary as a function of
SFR. The Jeans mass showed a power law increase with SFR driven by the
warming up of dust that thermally couples with gas in high radiation
fields prominent in high SFR regions. Therefore, the actual SFRs of
galaxies should be less than observed values, with higher fraction of
high mass stars being formed in high SFR scenarios. With cosmic
evolution, the SFR of galaxies drop, which allows the ISM to cool due to
the lack of cosmic rays resulting in the preferential formation of low
mass stars (Narayanan & Davé, 2013 ) .

Physically motivated models of ETGs suggest similar scenarios to
Narayanan & Davé ( 2013 ) , where star formation occurs in different
periods giving rise to variability in the mass of the stars formed
(Vazdekis et al., 1996 ; Weidner et al., 2013 ; Ferreras et al., 2015 )
. Such models assume that galaxies start their SFR with high efficiency,
reaching a high SFR in a short period of time producing a high fraction
of high mass stars that lasts @xmath Myr. These episodes build @xmath of
the total galaxy stellar population by mass and results in a metal-rich
ISM. Another star-formation episode immediately follows, where a bulk of
the mass is formed with a high fraction of low mass stars. The change in
mass is physically motivated by the changes in the ISM, which is
expected to be highly turbulent after a sustained period of high SFR
resulting in enhanced fragmentation of molecular clouds due to the high
velocity dispersions (Hopkins et al., 2013 ) . However, the exact
physics that drive these variations are arguable.

A somewhat similar model was presented by Bekki & Meurer ( 2013 ) .
Following the physically motivated IMF model by Marks et al. ( 2012 ) ,
Bekki & Meurer ( 2013 ) used a chemodynamical evolution code with an IMF
that varies with local density and metallicity of the ISM, to show that
starburst galaxies triggered by galaxy interactions form stars with
preference towards higher masses. Supernovae feedback were expected to
play a dominate role in setting the IMF slope by suppressing the
formation of high mass stars. Simulations further suggested the IMF
slope to vary as a function of star-formation rate surface density of
the galaxies, with higher values forming higher fractions of high mass
stars. IMF also show radial variations within galaxies, with inner
regions of galaxies having a higher fraction of low mass stars. Radial
variations were evident in the pre, during, and post burst phases. Local
ETGs have been shown to have a higher fraction of low mass stars in the
centre of the galaxy (Martín-Navarro et al., 2015a ) . However, radial
IMF studies of star-forming galaxies and detailed modelling of M @xmath
/M @xmath @xmath stars, whose formation is dependent upon physical
properties of the ISM are warranted to further constrain IMF variation
models. Driven by observational results and physically motivated models,
recent semi-analytical models allow users to vary the IMFs in different
star-forming episodes (Lacey et al., 2016 ) .

##### IMF at @xmath

In spite of IMF being fundamental to galaxy evolution, our understanding
of it at higher redshifts ( @xmath ) is extremely limited. IMF studies
of strong gravitational lenses at @xmath have shown no deviation from
Salpeter IMF (Pettini et al., 2000 ; Steidel et al., 2004 ; Quider
et al., 2009 ) . However, Martín-Navarro et al. ( 2015d ) investigated
the IMF of @xmath ETGs between @xmath using the IMF sensitive TiO @xmath
absorption lines obtained via stacking of galaxy spectra. The high mass
sample of the stacked galaxy spectra showed an enhanced amount of low
mass stars compared to the lower mass stacked bin. Therefore, these
results at high- @xmath were in agreement with the local ETG studies
showing a dwarf enhanced stellar populations as a function of galaxy
mass suggesting a direct link between ETGs at @xmath to those at @xmath
.

Using a local analogue to @xmath galaxies (NGC 1277), Martín-Navarro
et al. ( 2015b ) found evidence for an abundance of low mass stars in
the early universe. Radial studies of the IMF showed that the relic
galaxy shows weaker variation compared to Martín-Navarro et al. ( 2015a
) . Given the galaxy formed most of its stars within a short starburst
at @xmath with centrally concentrated star-formation, the dry merging of
such galaxies would explain the abundance of centrally concentrated low
mass stars in locals ETGs.

Understanding the relic IMF at high redshift requires populations of
quiescent galaxies (which are relatively rare at high redshift),
extremely long integration times to obtain absorption line/kinematic
features, and complicated modelling of stellar absorption line features.
Since IMF defines the mass distribution of formed stars at a given time,
in the context of understanding the role of IMF in galaxy evolution, it
should be investigated in situ in an era when most galaxies are in their
star forming phase and evolving rapidly to produce large elliptical
galaxies found locally. Furthermore, as discussed in Section 1.3.4 ,
high mass stars are rare in ETGs and therefore star-forming galaxies are
imperative to study the high mass end of the IMF. Simulations have shown
that @xmath universe is ideal for such studies (Hopkins & Beacom, 2006 )
. Rest-frame optical spectra of high redshift galaxies are dominated by
strong emission lines produced by nebulae associated with high mass
stars ( @xmath 15 M @xmath ) and therefore provide a direct tracer of
the high mass end of the IMF (Bastian et al., 2010 ) . Due to the recent
development of sensitive near NIR imagers and multiplexed spectrographs
that take advantage of the Y, J, H, and K atmospheric windows, the
@xmath universe is ideal to study rest-frame optical features of
galaxies.

#### 1.3.5 Probing the IMF of star-forming galaxies at @xmath

The method implemented in this thesis to study the IMF at @xmath is an
improvement of the recipe which was first implemented by Kennicutt (
1983 ) and subsequently used by Hoversten & Glazebrook ( 2008 ) and
Gunawardhana et al. ( 2011 ) to study the IMF at @xmath . This method
takes advantage of the IMF dependence of the H @xmath EW and rest-frame
optical colour parameter space of star-forming galaxies to constrain the
IMF, and can be explained as follows.

The total flux of a galaxy at H @xmath emission wavelength is the sum of
the H @xmath emission flux, the continuum level at the same wavelength
minus the H @xmath absorption. H @xmath absorption for galaxies at
@xmath is @xmath 3% of its flux level (Reddy et al., 2015 ) and
therefore can be ignored. In case B recombination (Brocklehurst, 1971 )
, following the Zanstra principle (Zanstra, 1927 ) explained in Section
1.1.3 , the H @xmath flux of a galaxy is directly related to the number
of Lyman continuum photons emitted by massive young O and B stars with
masses @xmath 10 M @xmath (see Section 1.1.3 ). The continuum flux at
the same wavelength is dominated by red giant stars with masses between
@xmath M @xmath . Therefore, H @xmath EW, which is the ratio of the
strength of the emission line to the continuum level, can be considered
as the ratio of massive O and B stars to @xmath M @xmath stars present
in a galaxy. Figure 1.8 illustrates the different physical origins of H
@xmath flux and its associated continuum level.

The evolution of rest-frame optical colours of a galaxy with a monotonic
SFH shows a similar trend to the evolution of H @xmath EW (Kennicutt,
1983 ; Hoversten & Glazebrook, 2008 ) . The H @xmath EW probes the
specific-SFR (sSFR) of the shorter lived massive stars, while the
optical colours probe the sSFR of the longer lived less massive stars.
Therefore, in a smooth exponentially declining SFH, the optical colour
of a galaxy will transit from bluer to redder colours with time due to
the increased abundance of older less massive red stars. Similarly, with
declining SFR the H @xmath flux will decrease and the relative continuum
contribution of the older redder stars will increase, which will act to
decrease the H @xmath EW in a similar SFH.

The H @xmath EW and optical colours parameter space is degenerated in
such a way that the slope is equivalent to lowering the fraction of
highest mass stars that are formed and/or an increasing the fraction of
intermediate-mass stars. Furthermore, the change in galaxy evolutionary
tracks due to IMF is largely orthogonal to the changes in tracks due to
effects of dust extinction. Figure 1.9 shows the distribution of
galaxies used by Kennicutt ( 1983 ) in his analysis. In monotonic SFH
scenarios, galaxies evolve along these tracks from the top right with
high EWs and bluer colours to become low EW red galaxies to eventually
be quiescent galaxies. In constant SFH scenarios, the decrease in H
@xmath EW is driven by the rise of the continuum level due to the longer
lifetimes of the lower mass stars that contribute to the continuum at
6565 Å. Along with change in the IMF, sudden star-bursts or cease of
star-formation (gasps), and changes to dust sight-lines may influence
the evolution of galaxies in these tracks (see Section 5.1 and 5.2 ). If
all galaxies follow a universal Salpeter-like IMF, galaxies should be
distributed around the middle shaded area in Figure 1.9 , which is seen
in the Kennicutt ( 1983 ) sample. However, effects of AGN, underlying H
@xmath absorption, narrow band imaging that blends H @xmath with [N ii
], and dust extinction were not fully considered in that analysis, which
could have affected the conclusions. Studies by Hoversten & Glazebrook (
2008 ) and Gunawardhana et al. ( 2011 ) at @xmath had multiple emission
line diagnostics and higher spectral resolutions which enabled them to
improve on the classical Kennicutt ( 1983 ) method, and discovered
evidence hinting at non-universal IMFs.

Figure 1.10 shows the main result of Hoversten & Glazebrook ( 2008 ) .
Even though the SDSS galaxy sample as a whole showed good correlation
with a Salpeter-IMF, when the sample was divided into R band high and
low luminous galaxies, the low luminous sample showed a large scatter
with a large vertical distribution. Due to non-uniform SFHs in galaxies
through cosmic time, individual measurements of the IMF slope could not
be performed. However, due to the large number of galaxies in the
Hoversten & Glazebrook ( 2008 ) sample, this suggested that the low
luminous galaxies were not consistent with a universal IMF, with a
possibility that they preferentially form stars with a high fraction of
low mass stars.

The GAMA sample used by Gunawardhana et al. ( 2011 ) to study the IMF is
shown by Figure 1.11 . The sample is divided into three SFR bins to show
that galaxies with high SFR show a higher locus in the H @xmath EW vs
optical colour parameter space than the low SFR sample. However, it is
important to note that both the SFR and the IMF slope is determined
using H @xmath nebular emission. Given that galaxies at high- @xmath
have higher SFRs, the authors argue that the IMF slope of galaxies at
high- @xmath should be flatter.

### 1.4 Plan of thesis

Next, in Chapter 2 , I introduce the ZFIRE survey, a spectroscopic
survey of star-forming galaxies in rich environments at @xmath carried
out using the MOSFIRE instrument in Keck I telescope. Chapter 3 shows an
analysis of spectroscopic/photometric properties of ZFIRE galaxies and
demonstrates the high quality of photometric data and .

In Chapters 4 and 5 , I use the NIR spectra of galaxies obtained as a
part of the ZFIRE survey (Nanayakkara et al., 2016 ) along with
multi-band photometric data from the ZFOURGE survey (Straatman et al.,
2016 ) to study the IMF of a mass complete sample of star-forming
galaxies at @xmath . Galaxies follow nearly the same locus in H @xmath
EW, optical colour as long as their SFHs are smoothly increasing or
decreasing (Kennicutt, 1983 ) . Furthermore, the change in galaxy
evolutionary tracks due to IMF is largely orthogonal to the changes in
tracks due to effects of dust extinction. This method is an improvement
of the recipe which was first implemented by Kennicutt ( 1983 ) and
subsequently used by Hoversten & Glazebrook ( 2008 ) and Gunawardhana
et al. ( 2011 ) to study the IMF at @xmath . Observational data is
compared to galaxy models with various physical and chemical properties
created via synthetic stellar populations such as PEGASE, Starburst99,
and BPASS.

The final conclusions of this thesis are provided in Chapter 6 . I
further discuss my plans for future direction of research in Section 6 .

## Chapter 2 ZFIRE Survey I: A KECK/MOSFIRE Spectroscopic Survey of
Galaxies in Rich Environments at @xmath

In this chapter, I present the ZFIRE survey, which utilizes MOSFIRE to
observe galaxies in rich environments at @xmath with a complementary
sample of field galaxies. A mass/magnitude complete study of rich galaxy
environments is essential to overcome selection-bias. Galaxy clusters
are the densest galaxy environments in the universe and are formed via
multiple physical processes (eg., Kravtsov & Borgani, 2012 ) . They are
a proxy for the original matter density fields of the universe and can
be used to constrain fundamental cosmological parameters. Focusing on
these rich environments at high-redshift provides access to numerous
galaxies with various physical conditions that are rapidly evolving and
interacting with their environments. These galaxies can be used to study
the formation mechanisms of local galaxy clusters in a period where they
are undergoing extreme evolutionary processes. Such environments are
rare at @xmath (eg., Gobat et al., 2011 ; Newman et al., 2014 ; Yuan
et al., 2014 ) : for example, we target the Spitler et al. ( 2012 )
cluster at @xmath , which was the only such massive structure found in
the 0.1 deg @xmath ZFOURGE survey (and that at only 4% chance, (Yuan
et al., 2014 ) ). Hence, a pointed survey on such clusters and their
environs is highly complementary to other field surveys being performed
with MOSFIRE.

### 2.1 ZFIRE Observations and Data Reduction

The MOSFIRE spectrograph (McLean et al., 2008 , 2010 , 2012 ) operates
from 0.97–2.41 microns (i.e. corresponding to atmospheric @xmath bands,
one band at a time) and provides a 6.1 @xmath field of view with a
resolving power of @xmath @xmath 3500. It is equipped with a cryogenic
configurable slit unit that can include up to 46 slits and be configured
in @xmath 6 minutes. MOSFIRE has a Teledyne H2RG HgCdTe detector with
2048 @xmath 2048 pixels ( @xmath /pix) and can be used as a multi-object
spectrograph and a wide-field imager by removing the masking bars from
the field of view. ZFIRE utilizes the multi-object spectrograph
capabilities of MOSFIRE.

The galaxies presented in this paper consist of observations of two
cluster fields from the COSMOS field (Scoville et al., 2007 ) and the
Hubble UDS Field (Beckwith et al., 2006 ) . These clusters are the Yuan
et al. ( 2014 ) cluster at @xmath =2.095 and IRC 0218 cluster (Papovich
et al., 2010 ; Tanaka et al., 2010 ; Tran et al., 2015 ) at @xmath
=1.62. Yuan et al. ( 2014 ) spectroscopically confirmed the cluster,
which was identified by Spitler et al. ( 2012 ) using photometric
redshifts and deep Ks band imaging from ZFOURGE. The IRC 0218 cluster
was confirmed independently by Papovich et al. ( 2010 ) and Tanaka
et al. ( 2010 ) . Field galaxies neighbouring on the sky, or in redshift
shells, are also observed and provide a built-in comparison sample.

#### 2.1.1 ZFIRE Survey Goals and Current Status

The primary science questions addressed by the ZFIRE survey are as
follows:

1.  What are the ISM physical conditions of the galaxies? We test the
    Mappings IV models by using H @xmath , [N ii ], H @xmath , [O ii ],
    [O iii ], and [S ii ] nebular emission lines to study the evolution
    of chemical enrichment and the ISM as a function of redshift (Kewley
    et al., 2016 ) .

2.  What is the IMF of galaxies? We use the H @xmath equivalent width as
    a proxy for the IMF of star-forming galaxies at @xmath (Nanayakkara
    et al., 2017 ) .

3.  What are the stellar and gas kinematics of galaxies? Using H @xmath
    rotation curves we derive accurate kinematic parameters of the
    galaxies. Using the Tully-Fisher relation (Tully & Fisher, 1977 ) we
    track how stellar mass builds up inside dark matter halos to provide
    a key observational constraint on galaxy formation models (Alcorn
    et al., 2016 , C. Straatman et al., in preparation) .

4.  How do fundamental properties of galaxies evolve to @xmath ? Cluster
    galaxies at z @xmath 2 include massive star-forming members that are
    absent in lower redshift clusters. We measure their physical
    properties and determine how these members must evolve to match the
    galaxy populations in clusters at @xmath 1 (Tran et al., 2015 ;
    Kacprzak et al., 2015 ) .

Previous results from ZFIRE have already been published. Yuan et al. (
2014 ) showed that the galaxy cluster identified by ZFOURGE (Spitler
et al., 2012 ) at @xmath is a progenitor for a Virgo like cluster.
Kacprzak et al. ( 2015 ) found no significant environmental effect on
the stellar MZR for galaxies at @xmath . Tran et al. ( 2015 )
investigated H @xmath SFRs and gas phase metallicities at a lower
redshift of @xmath and found no environmental imprint on gas metallicity
but detected quenching of star formation in cluster members. Kewley
et al. ( 2016 ) investigated the ISM and ionization parameters of
galaxies at @xmath to show significant differences of galaxies at @xmath
with their local counterparts. Here the data used to address the above
questions in past and future papers is presented.

#### 2.1.2 Photometric Catalogues

Galaxies in the COSMOS field are selected from the ZFOURGE survey
(Straatman et al. in press) which is a 45 night deep Ks band selected
photometric legacy survey carried out using the 6.5 meter Magellan
Telescopes located at Las Campanas observatory in Chile. The survey
covers 121 arcmin @xmath each in COSMOS, CDFS, and UDS cosmic fields
using the near-IR medium-band filters of the FourStar imager (Persson
et al., 2013 ) . All fields have HST coverage from the CANDELS survey
(Grogin et al., 2011 ; Koekemoer et al., 2011 ) and a wealth of
multi-wavelength legacy data sets (Giacconi et al., 2002 ; Capak et al.,
2007 ; Lawrence et al., 2007 ) . For the ZFIRE survey, galaxy selections
were made from the v2.1 of the internal ZFOURGE catalogues. A catalogue
comparison between v2.1 and the the updated ZFOURGE public data release
3.1 is provided in the Appendix A.2 . The v2.1 data release reaches a
@xmath limiting depth of @xmath in FourStar imaging of the COSMOS field
(Spitler et al., 2012 ) which is used to select the ZFIRE K-band galaxy
sample. HST WFC3 imaging was used to select the ZFIRE H-band galaxy
sample.

EAZY (Brammer et al., 2008 ) was used to derive photometric redshifts by
fitting linear combinations of nine SED templates to the observed SEDs ¹
¹ 1 An updated version of EAZY is used in this analysis compared to what
is published by Brammer et al. ( 2008 ) . Refer Skelton et al. ( 2014 )
Section 5.2 for further information on the changes. The updated version
is available at https://github.com/gbrammer/eazy-photoz . . With the use
of medium-band imaging and the availability of multi-wavelength data
spanning from UV to Far-IR (0.3-8 @xmath m in the observed frame),
ZFOURGE produces photometric redshifts accurate to @xmath (Straatman et
al., in press; Kawinwanichakij et al., 2014 ; Tomczak et al., 2014 ) .

Galaxy properties for the ZFOURGE catalogue objects are derived using
FAST (Kriek et al., 2009 ) with synthetic stellar populations from
Bruzual & Charlot ( 2003 ) using a @xmath fitting algorithm to derive
ages, star-formation time-scales, and dust content of the galaxies. Full
information on the ZFOURGE imaging survey can be found in Straatman et
al. (in press).

The IRC 0218 cluster is not covered by the ZFOURGE survey. Therefore
publicly available UKIDSS imaging (Lawrence et al., 2007 ) of the UDS
field is used for sample selection. The imaging covers 0.77 deg @xmath
of the UDS field and reaches a @xmath limiting depth of @xmath (DR10;
Almaini, 2015 ) . Similar to ZFOURGE, public K-band selected catalogues
of UKIDSS were used with EAZY and FAST to derive photometric redshifts
and galaxy properties (Quadri et al., 2012 ) .

#### 2.1.3 Spectroscopic Target Selection

In the first ZFIRE observing run, the COSMOS field between redshifts
@xmath @xmath @xmath was surveyed to spectroscopically confirm the
overdensity of galaxies detected by Spitler et al. ( 2012 ) . The main
selection criteria were that the H @xmath emission line falls within the
NIR atmospheric windows and within the coverage of the MOSFIRE filter
set. For each galaxy, H and K filters were used to obtain multiple
emission lines to constrain the parameters of interest.

Nebular emission lines such as H @xmath are strong in star-forming
galaxies and hence it is much quicker to detect them than underlying
continuum features of the galaxies. Therefore, rest frame UVJ colour
selections (Williams et al., 2009 ) were used to select primarily
star-forming galaxies in the cluster field for spectroscopic follow up.
While local clusters are dominated by passive populations, it is known
that high- @xmath clusters contain a higher fraction of star-forming
galaxies (eg., Wen & Han, 2011 ; Tran et al., 2010 ; Saintonge et al.,
2008 ) . This justifies our use of K band to probe strong emission lines
of star-forming galaxies, but due to the absence of prominent absorption
features, which fall in the K band at @xmath , we note that our survey
could be incomplete due to missing weak star-forming and/or quiescent
cluster galaxies.

The primary goal was to build a large sample of redshifts to identify
the underlying structure of the galaxy overdensity, therefore,
explicitly choosing star-forming galaxies increased the efficiency of
the observing run. Quiescent galaxies were selected either as fillers
for the masks or because they were considered to be the brightest
cluster galaxies (BCG). Rest-frame U @xmath V and V @xmath J colours of
galaxies are useful to distinguish star-forming galaxies from quenched
galaxies (Williams et al., 2009 ) . The rest-frame UVJ diagram and the
photometric redshift distribution of the selected sample is shown in the
left panel of Figure 2.1 . All rest-frame colours have been derived
using photometric redshifts using EAZY with special dustier templates as
per Spitler et al. ( 2014 ) . Out of the galaxies selected to be
observed by ZFIRE, @xmath 83% are (blue) star-forming. The rest of the
population comprises @xmath 11% dusty (red) star-formers and @xmath 6%
quiescent galaxies. For all future analysis in this paper, the Spitler
et al. ( 2014 ) EAZY templates are replaced with the default EAZY
templates in order to allow direct comparison with other surveys. More
information on UVJ selection criteria is explained in Section 3.1.4 .

The COSMOS sample at @xmath requires K-band observations from MOSFIRE to
detect H @xmath emission lines. A subset of the K-band selected galaxies
are then followed up in H-band to retrieve H @xmath and [O iii
] emission lines. During the first observing run, object priorities for
the galaxies in the COSMOS field were assigned as follows.

1.  K-band observations for rest frame UVJ selected star-forming K
    @xmath 24 galaxies with 2.0 @xmath @xmath @xmath 2.2.

2.  K-band observations for rest frame UVJ selected star-forming K
    @xmath 24 galaxies with 2.0 @xmath @xmath @xmath 2.2.

3.  K-band observations for rest frame UVJ selected non-star-forming
    galaxies with 2.0 @xmath @xmath @xmath 2.2.

4.  Galaxies outside the redshift range to be used as fillers.

In subsequent observing runs, the following criteria were used to assign
priorities.

1.  H-band observations for galaxies with H @xmath and [N ii
    ] detections from K-band.

2.  H-band observations for galaxies with only H @xmath detection for
    follow up spectroscopic redshift verification with H @xmath and/or
    [O iii ] emission lines.

3.  K-band observations for galaxies with only H @xmath emission lines
    for deeper spectroscopic redshift verification and gas phase
    metallicity study with deeper [N ii ] emission lines.

The UDS sample was selected from the XMM-LSS J02182-05102 cluster
(Papovich et al., 2010 ; Tanaka et al., 2010 ) in order to obtain [O iii
], H @xmath and [N ii ] emission lines. At @xmath , these nebular
emission lines are redshifted to J and H-bands. Cluster galaxies were
specifically targeted to complement with the Keck Low Resolution Imaging
Spectrometer (LRIS) observations (Tran et al., 2015 ) . Y-band spectra
were obtained for a subset of galaxies in the cluster in order to detect
Mg ii absorption features and the D4000 break. The UVJ diagram and the
photometric redshift distribution of the selected sample is shown by the
right panel of Figure 2.1 . In the selected sample, @xmath 65% of
galaxies are star-forming while dusty star-forming and quiescent
galaxies are each @xmath 17%. The highest object priorities for the UDS
sample were assigned as follows.

1.  BCGs of the Papovich et al. ( 2010 ) cluster.

2.  LRIS detections with @xmath @xmath 1.6 by Tran et al. ( 2015 ) .

3.  Grism spectra detections with @xmath (3DHST Momcheva et al., 2015 )

4.  Cluster galaxy candidates within R @xmath Mpc and @xmath @xmath
    (Papovich et al., 2010 ) .

For further information on target selection, refer to Tran et al. ( 2015
) .

#### 2.1.4 Slit Configurations with MAGMA

MOSFIRE slit configurations are made through the publicly available
MAGMA ² ² 2 http://www2.keck.hawaii.edu/inst/mosfire/magma.html slit
configuration design tool. The primary purpose of MAGMA is to design
slit configurations to be observed with MOSFIRE and to execute the
designed slit configurations in real time at the telescope. Once the
user specifies a target list and priorities for each of the objects, the
software will dither the pointing over the input parameters (which can
be defined by the user) to determine the most optimized slit
configuration.

The slit configurations can then be executed during MOSFIRE observing.
With MAGMA, the physical execution of the slit configurations can be
done within @xmath 15 minutes. For the objects in the COSMOS field
@xmath 10,000 iterations were used to select objects from a target list
compromising of @xmath 2000 objects. van der Wel et al. ( 2012 ) used
HST imaging to derive position angles of galaxies in the CANDELS sample
using GALFIT (Peng et al., 2010 ) . The number of slits within @xmath of
the galaxy major axis were maximized using position angles of van der
Wel et al. ( 2012 ) catalogue by cross-matching it with ZFOURGE.

Due to the object prioritization, a subset of galaxies was observed in
multiple observing runs. These galaxies were included in different masks
and hence have different position angles. When possible, position angles
of these slits were deliberately varied to allow coverage of a different
orientation of the galaxy.

#### 2.1.5 MOSFIRE Observations

Between 2013 and 2016 15 MOSFIRE nights were awarded to the ZFIRE
program by a combination of Swinburne University (Program IDs-
2013A_W163M, 2013B_W160M, 2014A_W168M, 2015A_W193M, 2015B_W180M),
Australian National University (Program IDs- 2013B_Z295M, 2014A_Z225M,
2015A_Z236M, 2015B_Z236M), and NASA (Program IDs- 2013A_N105M,
2014A_N121M) telescope time allocation committees. Data for 13 nights
observed between 2013 and 2015 are released with this paper, where six
nights resulted in useful data collection. Observations during 2013
December resulted in two nights of data in excellent conditions, while
four nights in 2014 February were observed in varying conditions.
Exposure times and observing conditions are presented in Table 2.1 .
With this paper, data for 10 masks observed in the COSMOS field and four
masks observed in the UDS field are released. An example of on-sky
orientations of slit mask designs used for K-band observations in the
COSMOS field is shown in Figure 2.2 . Standard stars were observed at
the beginning, middle, and end of each observing night.

The line spread functions were calculated using Ne arc lamps in the
K-band, and were found to be @xmath 2.5 pixels. The partial first
derivative for the wavelength (CD1_1) in Y, J, H, and K-bands are
respectively 1.09 Å/pixel, 1.30 Å/pixel, 1.63 Å/pixel, and 2.17 Å/pixel.

@xmath width slits were used for objects in science masks and the
telluric standard, while, for the flux standard star a slit of width
@xmath was used to minimize slit loss. On average, @xmath 30 galaxies
were included per mask. A flux monitor star was included in all of the
science frames to monitor the variation of the seeing and atmospheric
transparency. In most cases only frames that had a FWHM of @xmath was
used for the flux monitor stars. A standard 2 position dither pattern of
ABBA was used. ³ ³ 3 For more information, see:
http://www2.keck.hawaii.edu/inst/mosfire/dither_patterns.html#patterns

#### 2.1.6 MOSFIRE Spectroscopic Reduction

The data were reduced in two steps. Firstly, a slightly modified version
of the publicly available 2015A MOSFIRE DRP release ⁴ ⁴ 4 A few bug
fixes were applied along with an extra function to implement barycentric
corrections to the spectra. This version is available at
https://github.com/themiyan/MosfireDRP_Themiyan . was used to reduce the
raw data from the telescope. Secondly, a custom made IDL package was
used to apply telluric corrections and flux calibrations to the data and
extract 1D spectra. Both are described below.

Extensive tests were performed to the MOSFIRE DRP while it was in a beta
stage, and multiple versions of the DRP were used to test the quality of
the outputs. The accuracy of the error spectrum generated by the DRP was
investigated by comparing the noise we expect from the scatter of the
sky values with the DRP noise. The following steps are currently
performed by the modified MOSFIRE DRP.

1.  Produce a pixel flat image and identify the slit edges.

2.  For K-band: remove the thermal background produced by the telescope
    dome.

3.  Wavelength calibrate the spectra. This is performed using the sky
    lines. For K-band: due to the lack of strong sky lines at the red
    end of the spectra, a combination of night sky lines along with Neon
    and/or Argon ⁵ ⁵ 5 As of version 2015A, using both Ar and Ne lamps
    together with sky line wavelength calibration is not recommended.
    See the MOSFIRE DRP github issues page for more details. arc lamp
    spectra are used to produce per pixel wavelength calibration.

4.  Apply barycentric corrections to the wavelength solution.

5.  Remove the sky background from the spectra. This is done in two
    steps. Firstly, the different nod positions of the telescope are
    used to subtract most of the background. Secondly, any residual sky
    features are removed following the prescription by Kelson ( 2003 ) .

6.  Rectify the spectra.

All the spectra from the DRP were calibrated to vacuum wavelengths with
a typical residual error of @xmath 0.1 Å.

The customized IDL package was used to continue the data reduction
process using outputs of the public DRP. The same observed standard star
was used to derive telluric sensitivity and flux calibration curves to
be applied to the science frames as follows.

1.  The 1D standard star spectrum was extracted from the wavelength
    calibrated 2D spectra.

2.  Intrinsic hydrogen absorption lines in the stellar atmosphere were
    removed from the telluric A0 standard by fitting Gaussian profiles
    and then interpolating over the filled region.

3.  The observed spectrum was ratioed to a theoretical black body
    function corresponding to the temperature of the star.

4.  The resulting spectrum was then normalised and smoothed to be used
    as the sensitivity curve, i.e., the wavelength-dependent sensitivity
    that is caused by the atmosphere and telescope-instrument response.

5.  The sensitivity curve was used on the flux standard star to derive
    the flux conversion factor by comparing it to its 2MASS magnitude
    (Skrutskie et al., 2006 ) .

These corrections are applied to the 2D science frames to produce
telluric corrected, flux calibrated spectra. Further information is
provided in Appendix A.1 . The derived response curves that were applied
to all data include corrections for the MOSFIRE response function, the
telescope sensitivity, and atmospheric absorption. If the mask was
observed in multiple nights, the calibrated 2D spectra were co-added by
weighting by the variance spectrum. Extensive visual inspections were
performed to the 2D spectra to identify possible emission line-only
detections and to flag false detections due to, e.g. sky line residuals.

To extract 1D spectra, Gaussian extractions were used to determine the
FWHM of the spatial profile. If the objects were too faint compared to
the sky background, the profile from the flux monitor star of the
respective mask was used to perform the extraction. The same extraction
procedure was performed for any secondary or tertiary objects that fall
within any given slit. Depending on how object priorities were handled,
some objects were observed during multiple observing runs in different
masks. There were 37 such galaxies. Due to variations in the position
angles between different masks, these objects were co-added in 1D after
applying the spectrophotometric calibration explained in Section 2.1.7 .

#### 2.1.7 Spectrophotometric Flux Calibration

##### COSMOS Legacy Field

Next zero-point adjustments were derived for each mask to account for
any atmospheric transmission change between mask and standard
observations. Synthetic slit aperture magnitudes were computed from the
ZFOURGE survey to calibrate the total magnitudes of the spectra, which
also allowed us to account for any slit-losses due to the @xmath
slit-width used during the observing. The filter response functions for
FourStar (Persson et al., 2013 ) were used to integrate the total flux
in each of the 1D calibrated spectra.

For each of the masks in a respective filter, first, all objects with a
photometric error @xmath mag were removed. Then, a background subtracted
Ks and F160W (H-band) images from ZFOURGE were used with the seeing
convolved from @xmath to @xmath to match the average Keck seeing.
Rectangular apertures, which resemble the slits with various heights
were overlaid in the images to integrate the total counts within each
aperture. Any apertures that contain multiple objects or had bright
sources close to the slit edges were removed. Integrated counts were
used to calculate the photometric magnitude to compare with the
spectroscopy. A slit-box aligned with similar PA to the respective mask
with a size of @xmath was found to give the best balance between the
spectrophotometric comparison and the number of available slits with
good photometry per mask.

Next, the median offset between the magnitudes from photometry and
spectroscopy were calculated by selecting objects with a photometric
magnitude less than 24 in the respective filters. This offset was used
as the scaling factor and was applied to all spectra in the mask.
Typical offsets for K and H bands were @xmath mag. We then performed
1000 iterations of bootstrap re-sampling of the objects in each mask to
calculate the scatter of the median values. We parametrized the scatter
using normalized absolute median deviation ( @xmath ) which is defined
as 1.48 @xmath median absolute deviation. The median @xmath scatter in K
and H-bands for these offsets are @xmath 0.1 and @xmath 0.04 mag,
respectively.

The median offset values per mask before and after the scaling process
with its associated error is shown in the top panel of Figure 2.3 .
Typical offsets are of the order of @xmath mag which are consistent with
expected values of slit loss and the small amount of cloud variation
seen during the observations. The offset value after the scaling process
is shown as green stars with its bootstrap error.

The scaling factor was applied as a multiple for the flux values for the
2D spectra following Equation 2.1 ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.1a)
     @xmath      (2.1b)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are, respectively, the flux and error per pixel
before scaling and scale @xmath is the scaling factor calculated.

1D spectra are extracted using the same extraction aperture as before.
The bootstrap errors after the scaling process is @xmath 0.08 mag
(median) for the COSMOS field, which is considered to be the final
uncertainty of the spectrophotometric calibration process. Once a
uniform scaling was applied to all the objects in a given mask, the
agreement between the photometric slit-box magnitude and the
spectroscopic magnitude increased.

As aforementioned, if an object was observed in multiple masks in the
same filter, first the corresponding mask scaling factor was applied and
then co-added optimally in 1D such that a higher weight was given to the
objects, which came from a mask with a lower scaling value (i.e. better
transmission). The procedure is shown in equation 2.2 ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.2a)
     @xmath      (2.2b)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the 1/scale value, @xmath is the pixel number, and
@xmath is the observing run. Further examples for the spectrophotometric
calibration process are shown in Appendix A.1 .

##### UDS Legacy Field

The filter response functions for WFCAM (Casali et al., 2007 ) was used
to integrate the total flux in each of the 1D calibrated spectra in the
UDS field. The total photometric fluxes from the UKIDSS catalogue were
used to compare with the integrated flux from the spectra since images
were not available to simulate slit apertures. To calculate the median
offset a magnitude limit of 23 was used. This magnitude limit was
brighter than the limit used for COSMOS data since the median
photometric magnitude of the UDS data are @xmath 0.5 mag brighter than
COSMOS.

Typical median offsets between photometric and spectroscopic magnitudes
were @xmath 0.4 magnitude. The lower panel of Figure 2.3 shows the
median offset values per mask before and after the scaling process with
its associated error. The median of the bootstrap errors for the UDS
masks after scaling is @xmath 0.06 mag.

Comparing with the COSMOS offsets, the UDS values are heavily biased
toward a positive offset. This behaviour is expected for UDS data
because the broadband total fluxes from the UKIDSS data are used, and
therefore the flux expected from the finite MOSFIRE slit should be less
than the total flux detected from UKIDSS. Since UDS objects are not
observed in multiple masks in the same filter, only Equation 2.1 is
applied to scale the spectra.

#### 2.1.8 Measuring Emission Line Fluxes

A custom made IDL routine was used to fit nebular emission lines on the
scaled 1D spectra. This was done by fitting Gaussian profiles to user
defined emission lines. The code identifies the location of the emission
line in wavelength space and calculates the redshift.

In emission line fitting, if there were multiple emission lines detected
for the same galaxy in a given band, the line centre and velocity width
were kept to be the same. Emission lines with velocity structure were
visually identified and were fit with multiple component Gaussian fits.
If the line was narrower than the instrumental resolution, the line
width was set to match the instrument resolution. The code calculated
the emission line fluxes (f) by integrating the Gaussian fits to the
emission lines. The corresponding error for the line fluxes ( @xmath
(f)) were calculated by integrating the error spectrum using the same
Gaussian profile. The code further fits a 1 @xmath upper level for the
flux values (f @xmath ). The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the line
fluxes was defined as the line flux divided by the corresponding error
for the line flux.

Next, in Chapter 3 I provide a thorough analysis of the ZFIRE
spectroscopic sample and investigate the role of spectroscopic redshift
in determining galaxy properties via SED fitting techniques. Redshift
accuracies of other photometric and grism redshift surveys are also
investigated using the ZFIRE spectroscopic data.

### 2.2 Summary of ZFIRE publications

Apart from the work presented in this thesis, ZFIRE data catalogue
produced as a result of my work has been used in numerous publications
by the ZFIRE team and their collaborators. A complete list of
publications are provided in the declaration. Here, I present a brief
summary of ZFIRE publications that I have directly contributed to.

Yuan et al. ( 2014 ) used the ZFIRE redshifts to spectroscopically
confirm the @xmath overdensity discovered by Spitler et al. ( 2012 ) .
ZFIRE masks which were designed to spatially cover this region to high
completeness resulted in over 50 confirmed cluster members with a
cluster velocity dispersion of @xmath kms @xmath . The spatial coverage
and the velocity dispersions of the cluster members are shown by Figure
2.4 . @xmath CDM hydrodynamical simulations further showed that this
structure would evolve into a Virgo like cluster at @xmath . Considering
the ZFOURGE survey area of 0.1 deg @xmath the probability of finding
such a structure at @xmath was determined to be @xmath .

Tran et al. ( 2015 ) used the H @xmath emission lines from the XMM-LSS
J02182-05102 cluster observed at @xmath by ZFIRE in the UDS field to
study the galaxy kinematics, star-formation rates, and metallicities.
The velocity dispersion of the galaxy cluster was found to be one of the
lowest measured for a @xmath cluster with an elevated SFR towards the
core, which is shown by Figure 2.5 (top panel). Extinction values
derived via SED fits were inconsistent with values derived via Balmer
decrements and showed a large scatter consistent with other work at
@xmath (eg., Reddy et al., 2015 ) . Furthermore, the MZR showed no
environmental dependence for this cluster, which is shown by Figure 2.5
(bottom panel).

Tran et al. ( 2017 ) probed the galaxy scaling relations of the @xmath
Yuan et al. ( 2014 ) cluster to find that environment had no
statistically significant effect on galaxy SFRs, stellar masses, sizes,
and SFR densities. However, galaxies with high IR luminosity showed
@xmath more stellar mass and 60% larger sizes compared to low IR
luminous galaxies. Analysis of the SFR main sequence showed that
galaxies above the main sequence have smaller radii, higher Sersic
indices, younger ages, and higher star-forming surface densities
suggesting that galaxies grow from their stellar cores.

Kacprzak et al. ( 2015 ) investigated the MZR of the Yuan et al. ( 2014
) cluster and ruled out environmental variances at the @xmath level
between cluster and field galaxies. Hydrodynamical simulations showed
that cluster galaxies should be marginally metal rich compared to field
galaxies, which could be attributed to the removal of gas from galaxy
outskirts or shorter gas recycling time-scales in rich environments.
Kacprzak et al. ( 2016 ) further analysed the MZR relation to find that
at a fixed mass, low SFR galaxies show higher metallicities compared to
their higher SFR counterparts. The stacked galaxy sample with associated
errors to the fit is shown by Figure 2.6 . The difference in the MZR was
attributed to the cold-mode gas accretion, where galaxies with high SFRs
are actively accreting pristine gas from the inter-galactic medium, thus
driving their gas phase metallicities to lower values compared to the
low SFR counterparts.

Kewley et al. ( 2016 ) studied the ISM properties of the @xmath ZFIRE
COSMOS sample and found no statistically significant differences between
the [N ii ]/H @xmath and [O iii ]/H @xmath emission line ratios in the
cluster and field galaxies, thus ruling out environmental variations in
the ISM pressure and ionization parameter at @xmath . However, as shown
by Figure 2.7 , Kewley et al. ( 2016 ) found that these emission line
ratios were significantly higher than local star-forming galaxies due to
the ionization parameter being up to @xmath dex higher than local
galaxies.

Straatman et al., (submitted) used the H @xmath emission lines to probe
the Tully & Fisher ( 1977 ) relation at @xmath and found a gradual
evolution of the Tully-Fisher stellar mass zero-point from @xmath to
@xmath . The results of this study indicated that a higher fraction of
galaxies are pressure supported at these redshifts and that the
evolution of the stellar mass zero-point was partly due to the
conversion of gas to stars during cosmic time.

Alcorn et al. ( 2016 ) performed a kinematic analysis of the @xmath
COSMOS galaxies using H @xmath emission line widths. Emission line
kinematic scaling relations showed no environmental dependence and
derived stellar mass to velocity dispersion relationships were found to
be similar to other IFU studies at @xmath . The derived baryonic and
virial mass estimates for the galaxies were similar to each other
suggesting that baryonic matter dominated the ZFIRE sample within one
effective radius, which is shown by Figure 2.8 .

## Chapter 3 ZFIRE Survey II: Analysis of spectroscopic/photometric
properties of ZFIRE galaxies

In this chapter, I present observational properties of the first ZFIRE
data release, which includes a discussion of the observing completeness
and a comparison of the accuracy of photometric redshifts of various
photometric surveys and investigate the role of spectroscopic redshifts
in determining fundamental galaxy properties via SED fitting techniques.

### 3.1 Properties of ZFIRE Galaxies

#### 3.1.1 Spectroscopic Redshift Distribution

Using nebular emission lines, 170 galaxy redshifts were identified for
the COSMOS sample and 62 redshifts were identified for the UDS field. A
combination of visual identifications in the 2D spectra and emission
line fitting procedures explained in Section 2.1.8 were used to identify
these redshifts. The redshift quality is defined using three specific
flags:

-   Q @xmath Flag @xmath 1: These are objects with no line detection
    with SNR @xmath . These objects are not included in our final
    spectroscopic sample.

-   Q @xmath Flag @xmath 2: These are objects with one emission line
    with SNR @xmath 5 and a @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath .

-   Q @xmath Flag @xmath 3: These are objects with more than one
    emission line identified with SNR @xmath 5 or one emission line
    identified with SNR @xmath 5 with a @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
    @xmath @xmath .

The redshift distribution of all ZFIRE Q @xmath =2 and Q @xmath =3
detections are shown in Figure 3.1 . 62 galaxy redshifts were detected
in the UDS field, out of which 60 have a Q @xmath of 3 and 2 have a Q
@xmath of 2. Similarly, for the COSMOS field, there are 161 Q @xmath =3
objects and 9 Q @xmath =2 objects.

The systematic error of the redshift measurement was estimated by
comparing Q @xmath =3 objects with a SNR @xmath 10 in both H and K-bands
in the COSMOS field. Yuan et al. ( 2014 ) showed that the agreement
between the redshifts in the two bands is @xmath (median) = 0.00005 with
a rms of @xmath (rms) = 0.00078. Therefore, the error in redshift
measurement is quoted as @xmath (rms) = 0.00078/ @xmath = 0.00055, which
corresponds to @xmath at @xmath . This is @xmath 2 times the spectral
resolution of MOSFIRE, which is @xmath (Yuan et al., 2014 ) . However,
for the Yuan et al. ( 2014 ) analysis barycentric corrections were not
applied to the redshifts and H and K masks were observed on different
runs. Once individual mask redshifts were corrected for barycentric
velocity, the rest-frame velocity uncertainty decreased to @xmath .

A few example spectra are shown in Figure 3.2 . Object 5829 is observed
in both H and K-bands with strong emission lines detected in both
instances. Object 3622 has strong H-band detections, while 3883 has only
one emission line detection. Therefore, 3883 is assigned a Q @xmath of
2. The 2D spectrum of object 3633 shows two emission line detections
around H @xmath at different y pixel positions, which occur due to
multiple objects falling within the slit. Object 9593 shows no emission
line or continuum detection. Objects 7547 and 5155 have strong continuum
detections with no nebular emission lines. These galaxies were selected
to be the BCGs of the D and A substructures by Yuan et al. ( 2014 ) and
Spitler et al. ( 2012 ) , respectively, and have absorption line
redshifts from Belli et al. ( 2014 ) .

The ZFIRE data release catalogue format is given in Table 3.1 . An
overview of the data presented is provided in the table, along with the
1D spectra, which is available online at zfire.swinburne.edu.au . Galaxy
stellar mass and dust extinction values are from ZFOURGE, but for Q
@xmath galaxies these values are rederived using the spectroscopic
redshifts with FAST. The ZFIRE-COSMOS galaxy sample comprises both field
and cluster galaxies selected in the Ks band with an 80% mass
completeness down to @xmath M @xmath /M @xmath @xmath (Figure 3.5 ).

The survey selection for this data release was done using the ZFOURGE
internal catalogues, and therefore the results presented here onwards
could vary slightly from the ZFOURGE public data release. For the 2016
ZFOURGE public data release, the catalogue was upgraded by including
pre-existing public K-band imaging for the source detection image. This
increased the amount of galaxies in the COSMOS field by @xmath 50%,
which was driven by the increase of fainter smaller mass galaxies. In
Appendix A.2 , a comparison between the internal ZFOURGE catalogue and
the public data release version is shown.

#### 3.1.2 Spectroscopic Completeness

The main sample of galaxies in the COSMOS field were selected in order
to include H @xmath emission in the MOSFIRE K-band, which corresponds to
a redshift range of @xmath @xmath @xmath . Due to multiple objects in
the slits and object priorities explained in Section 2.1.4 , there were
nine galaxies outside this redshift range.

We assess completeness against an expectation computed using the
photometric redshift likelihood functions ( @xmath ) from EAZY, i.e. the
expected number of galaxies with H @xmath within the bandpass in the
ZFIRE-COSMOS sample, taking account of the slightly different wavelength
coverage of each slit. There were 203 galaxies targeted in the K-band.
Of the galaxies, 10 had spectroscopic redshifts that were outside the
redshift range of interest ( @xmath @xmath @xmath ). The remaining 193
@xmath s of the detected and non-detected galaxies were stacked. Figure
3.3 shows the average @xmath of the stacked 193 galaxies. If the H
@xmath emission line falls on a sky line, the emission line may not be
detected. Therefore, in the @xmath of each of the galaxies’ sky line
regions parametrized by the MOSFIRE K-band spectral resolution was
masked out ( @xmath 5.5Å). We then calculate the area of the @xmath that
falls within detectable limits in K-band of the object depending on the
exact wavelength range of each slit. Since each @xmath is normalized to
1, this area gives the probability of an H @xmath detection in K-band
for a given galaxy. The probability to detect all 193 galaxies is
calculated to be @xmath 73%. 141 galaxies are detected with H @xmath SNR
@xmath which is a @xmath 73% detection rate. As seen by the overlaid
histogram in Figure 3.3 , the detected redshift distribution of the
ZFIRE-COSMOS sample is similar to the expected redshift distribution
from @xmath .

Figure 3.4 shows the H @xmath luminosity (left) and SNR distribution
(middle) of the ZFIRE-COSMOS galaxies with H @xmath detections. The
detection threshold is set to SNR @xmath 5 which is shown by the
vertical dashed line in the centre panel. There are 134 galaxies in the
Q @xmath =3 sample, 7 in the Q @xmath =2 sample.

The H @xmath luminosity in Figure 3.4 (left panel) is peaked @xmath
ergs/s. From the SNR distribution it is evident that the majority of
galaxies detected have a H @xmath SNR @xmath , with the histogram
peaking @xmath SNR of 20. Normally astronomical samples are dominated by
low SNR detections near the limit. It is unlikely that objects with SNR
@xmath 20 are missed. Our interpretation of this distribution is that
because the sample is mass-selected the drop off of low flux H @xmath
objects is because the region below the stellar mass-SFR main sequence
(Tomczak et al., 2014 ) at @xmath is probed. This is shown in Figure 3.4
where we make a simple conversion of H @xmath to SFR assuming the
Kennicutt ( 1998b ) conversion and stellar extinction values from FAST
which we convert to nebula extinction using the Calzetti et al. ( 2000 )
prescription with @xmath . It is indeed evident that the ZFIRE-COSMOS
sample limits do probe the limits of the galaxies in the star-forming
main sequence at @xmath with a @xmath H @xmath SFR detection threshold
at @xmath M @xmath /yr. A more detailed analysis of the H @xmath main
sequence will be presented in a future paper (K. Tran et al. in
preparation).

#### 3.1.3 Magnitude and Stellar Mass Detection Limits

The ZFIRE-COSMOS detection limits in Ks magnitude and stellar mass are
estimated using ZFOURGE photometry. Out of 141 objects with H @xmath
detections (Q @xmath =2 or Q @xmath =3) and @xmath @xmath @xmath ,
galaxies identified as UVJ quiescent are removed since the spectroscopic
sample does not significantly sample these (see Section 3.1.4 ). The
remaining sample comprises 140 UVJ blue (low dust attenuation) and red
(high dust attenuation) star-forming galaxies. Similarly, galaxies from
the ZFOURGE survey are selected with redshifts between @xmath @xmath
@xmath and all UVJ quiescent galaxies are removed. The Ks magnitude and
the stellar mass distributions of the remaining 1106 ZFOURGE galaxies
with the selected ZFIRE sample are compared in Figure 3.5 .

The top panel of Figure 3.5 demonstrates that the H @xmath detected
galaxies reach Ks @xmath 24. 80% of the detected ZFIRE-COSMOS galaxies
have Ks @xmath 24.11. The ZFOURGE input sample reaches deeper to Ks
@xmath 24.62 (80%-ile). The photometric detection completeness limit of
ZFOURGE is discussed in detail in Straatman et al. (2014), but we note
that at @xmath , 97% of objects are detected. It is important to
understand if the distribution in Ks of the spectroscopic sample is
biassed relative to the photometric sample. A two-sample K-S test for Ks
@xmath 24.1 is performed to find a @xmath value of 0.03 suggesting that
there is no significant bias between the samples.

Similarly, the mass distribution of the H @xmath detected sample is
investigated in the bottom panel of Figure 3.5 . Galaxies are detected
down to @xmath M @xmath /M @xmath @xmath . 80% of the H @xmath detected
galaxies have a stellar masses @xmath M @xmath /M @xmath @xmath . A K-S
test on the two distributions for galaxies @xmath M @xmath /M @xmath
@xmath gives a @xmath value of 0.30 and therefore, similar to the Ks
magnitude distributions, the spectroscopic sample shows no bias in
stellar mass compared to the ZFOURGE photometric sample.

This shows that the ZFIRE-COSMOS detected sample of UVJ star-forming
galaxies has a similar distribution in magnitude and stellar mass as the
ZFOURGE distributions except at the very extreme ends. Removing UVJ
dusty galaxies from the star-forming sample does not significantly
change this conclusion.

A final test is to evaluate the photometric magnitude at which continuum
emission in the spectra can be typically detected. To estimate this, a
constant continuum level is fit to blank sky regions across the whole
@xmath -band spectral range. This shows that the @xmath spectroscopic
continuum detection limit for the ZFIRE-COSMOS sample is Ks @xmath (
@xmath ). More detailed work on this is presented in Chapter 4 .

#### 3.1.4 Rest frame UVJ colours

The rest-frame UVJ colours are used to assess the stellar populations of
the detected galaxies. In rest frame U @xmath V and V @xmath J colour
space, star-forming galaxies and quenched galaxies show strong bimodal
dependence (Williams et al., 2009 ) . Old quiescent stellar populations
with strong 4000Å and/or Balmer breaks show redder U @xmath V colours
and bluer V @xmath J colours, while effects from dust contribute to
redder V @xmath J colours.

Figure 3.6 shows the UVJ selection of the COSMOS sample, which lies in
the redshift range between @xmath @xmath @xmath . The selection criteria
are adopted from Spitler et al. ( 2014 ) and are as follows. Quiescent
galaxies are selected by (U @xmath V) @xmath 1.3 , (V @xmath J) @xmath
1.6, (U @xmath V) @xmath 0.867 @xmath (V @xmath J) @xmath 0.563.
Galaxies which lie below this limits are considered to be star-forming.
These star-forming galaxies are further subdivided into two groups
depending on their dust content. Red galaxies with (V @xmath J) @xmath
1.2 are selected to be dusty star-forming galaxies, which correspond to
A @xmath 1.6. Blue galaxies with (V @xmath J) @xmath 1.2 are considered
to be relatively unobscured. MOSFIRE detected galaxies are shown as
green stars while the non-detections (selected using @xmath values) are
shown as black filled circles.

The total sampled non-detections are @xmath 23% for this redshift bin.
@xmath 82% of the blue star-forming galaxies and @xmath 70% of the dusty
star-forming galaxies were detected, but only 1 quiescent galaxy was
detected out of the potential 12 candidates in this redshift bin.
Galaxies in the red sequence are expected to be quenched with little or
no star formation and hence without any strong H @xmath features;
therefore the low detection rate of the quiescent population is
expected. Belli et al. ( 2014 ) has shown that @xmath 8 hours of
exposure time is needed to get detections of continua of quiescent
galaxies with J @xmath 22 using MOSFIRE. The prominent absorption
features occur in the H-band at @xmath . ZFIRE currently does not reach
such integration times per object in any of the observed bands and none
of the quiescent galaxies show strong continuum detections. We note that
this is a bias of the ZFIRE survey, which may have implications on the
identification of weak star-forming and quiescent cluster members by
Yuan et al. ( 2014 ) .

For comparison MOSDEF and VUDS detections in the COSMOS field with
matched ZFOURGE candidates are overlaid in Figure 3.6 . All rest-frame
UVJ colours for the spectroscopic samples are derived from photometry
using the spectroscopic redshifts. The MOSDEF sample, which is mainly
H-band selected, primarily includes star-forming galaxies independently
of the dust obscuration level. VUDS survey galaxies are biased toward
blue star-forming galaxies, which is expected because it is an optical
spectroscopic survey. This explains why their spectroscopic sample does
not include any rest-frame UVJ selected dusty star-forming or quiescent
galaxies.

#### 3.1.5 Spatial distribution

The COSMOS sample is primarily selected from a cluster field. The
spatial distribution of the field is shown in Figure 3.7 . (The ZFOURGE
photometric redshifts are replaced with our spectroscopic values where
available.) A redshift cut between @xmath is used to select galaxies in
the cluster redshift range. Using necessary ZFOURGE catalogue quality
cuts there are 378 galaxies within this redshift window. Following
Spitler et al. ( 2012 ) , these galaxies are used to produce a seventh
nearest neighbour density map. Similar density distributions are
calculated to the redshift window immediately above and below @xmath .
These neighbouring distributions are used to calculate the mean and the
standard deviation of the densities. The density map is plotted in units
of standard deviations above the mean of the densities of the
neighbouring bins similar to Spitler et al. ( 2012 ) . Similar density
maps were also made by Allen et al. ( 2015 ) .

The figure shows that ZFIRE has achieved a thorough sampling of the
underlying density structure at @xmath in the COSMOS field. Between
@xmath , in the COSMOS field the sky density of ZFIRE is 1.47
galaxies/arcmin @xmath . For MOSDEF and VUDS it is 1.06 galaxies/arcmin
@xmath and 0.26 galaxies/arcmin @xmath , respectively. A detailed
spectroscopic analysis of the cluster from ZFIRE redshifts has been
published in Yuan et al. ( 2014 ) .

Figure 3.8 shows the relative density distribution of the @xmath @xmath
@xmath galaxies. The MOSDEF sample is overlaid on the left panel and a
Gaussian best-fitting functions are fit for both ZFIRE (cluster and
field) and MOSDEF samples. It is evident from the distributions, that in
general ZFIRE galaxies are primarily observed in significantly higher
density environments (as defined by the Spitler et al. metric) compared
to MOSDEF. Because of the explicit targeting of ‘cluster candidate’
fields, this is expected. In the right panel, the density distribution
of the confirmed cluster members of Yuan et al. ( 2014 ) is shown.

### 3.2 Comparing ZFIRE Spectroscopic Redshifts to the Literature

The new spectroscopic sample, which is in well-studied deep fields, is
ideal to test the redshift accuracy of some of the most important
photometric redshift surveys, including the ZFOURGE survey from which it
is selected.

#### 3.2.1 Photometric Redshifts from ZFOURGE and UKIDSS

The comparison of photometric redshifts and the spectroscopic redshifts
for the ZFIRE-COSMOS sample is shown by the left panel of Figure 3.9 .
The photometric redshifts of the v3.1 ZFOURGE catalogue are used for
this purpose because they represent the best calibration and
photometric-redshift performance of the imaging. For the 42 detected
secondary objects in the slits, 25 galaxies are identified with Ks
selected ZFOURGE candidates. Deep HST F160W band selected catalogues
from ZFOURGE show probable candidates for eight these galaxies. Five
galaxies cannot be confidently identified. HST imaging shows unresolved
blends for four of these galaxies, which are listed as single objects in
ZFOURGE. Only galaxies uniquely identified in ZFOURGE are shown in the
figure.

Straatman et al. ( 2016 ) has determined that photometric redshifts are
accurate to @xmath 2% based on previous spectroscopic redshifts. Results
from ZFIRE agree within this estimate. This error level is shown as a
grey shaded region in Figure 3.9 . Defining @xmath (which will be used
throughout this paper) galaxies with @xmath /(1+ @xmath ) @xmath 0.2 are
considered to be “drastic outliers”. There is one drastic outlier in the
Q @xmath =3 sample. The advantage of medium-band NIR imaging relies on
probing the D4000 spectral feature at @xmath by the J1, J2, and J3
filters, which span @xmath 1–1.3 \micron . Drastic outliers may arise
due to blue star-forming galaxies having power-law-like SEDs, which do
not have a D4000 breaks (van den Bergh, 1963 ) , leading to uncertain
photometric redshifts at @xmath and also from confusion between Balmer
and Lyman breaks. Furthermore, blending of multiple sources in ground
based imaging can also lead to drastic outliers.

The inset in Figure 3.9 is a histogram that shows the residual for the Q
@xmath =3 sample. A Gaussian best-fitting is performed for these
galaxies (excluding drastic outliers). The @xmath of the Gaussian fit is
considered to be the the accuracy of the photometric redshift estimates
for a typical galaxy. The Q @xmath =3 sample is bootstrapped 100 times
with replacement and the @xmath scatter is calculated, which is defined
as the error on @xmath . The photometric redshift accuracy of the
ZFOURGE-COSMOS sample is @xmath which is very high. The bright Ks @xmath
Q @xmath =3 galaxies show better redshift accuracy, but are within error
limits of the redshift accuracy of the total sample. Furthermore, the Q
@xmath =3 blue and red star-forming galaxies (as shown by Figure 3.6 )
also show similar redshift accuracy within error limits. The Q @xmath =2
ZFOURGE-COSMOS sample comprises 8 galaxies with a redshift accuracy of
14 @xmath 12%.

In Figure 3.10 , a similar redshift analysis is performed to investigate
the accuracy of the UKIDSS photometric redshift values with the
ZFIRE-UDS spectroscopic sample. For the Q @xmath =3 objects, there are
four drastic outliers (which give a rate of @xmath ) and the accuracy is
calculated to be 1.4 @xmath 0.8%. There are 12 Q @xmath =2 objects with
one drastic outlier (which gives a rate of @xmath ) and an accuracy of
@xmath . UKIDSS, which does not contain medium-band imaging has a
comparable accuracy to the ZFOURGE medium-band survey. This is likely to
arise from the lower redshifts probed by UKIDSS compared to ZFOURGE.

#### 3.2.2 Photometric Redshifts from NMBS and 3DHST

Figure 3.11 and 3.12 shows a redshift comparison for the 3DHST
photometric redshift input sample NMBS (Whitaker et al., 2011 ) and
3DHST (Skelton et al., 2014 ) surveys with the ZFIRE Q @xmath =3
spectroscopic redshifts. 3DHST comes from the photometric data release
of Skelton et al. ( 2014 ) . The catalogues are compared to ZFOURGE by
matching objects within a 0 @xmath .7 radius. The ZFOURGE survey is much
deeper than NMBS, so comparison to NMBS is only possible for a smaller
number of brighter objects. 3DHST and ZFOURGE are similarly deep, with
much better overlap. The residuals between the photometric redshifts and
spectroscopic redshifts are calculated using the same methods as for
ZFOURGE.

Table 3.2 shows the Gaussian best-fitting values, redshift accuracies,
and the drastic outlier fractions of all comparisons. All surveys
resulted in high accuracy for the photometric redshifts. In particular,
at @xmath some comparisons can be made between the ZFOURGE, 3DHST, and
NMBS surveys. NMBS has the worst performance, both in scatter, bias, and
outlier fraction, presumably because of the shallower data set, which
also includes fewer filters (no HST-CANDELS data). NMBS samples brighter
objects, and in ZFOURGE such bright objects have better photometric
redshift performance compared to the main sample (for galaxies with
@xmath photometric redshift accuracies for ZFOURGE and NMBS are
respectively, @xmath and @xmath ). 3DHST fares better in all categories.
ZFOURGE performs the best of the three in this comparison. This is
attributed to the much better seeing and depth of ZFOURGE NIR
medium-band imaging, which is consistent with the findings of Straatman
et al. ( 2016 ) .

#### 3.2.3 Grism Redshifts from 3DHST

3DHST grism data is used to investigate the improvement of redshift
accuracy with the introduction of grism spectra to the SED fitting
technique. Momcheva et al. ( 2015 ) uses a combination of grism spectra
and multi-wavelength photometric data to constrain the redshifts of the
galaxies. Momcheva et al. ( 2015 ) states that 3DHST grism data quality
has been measured by two independent users. All objects, which are
flagged to be of good quality by both of the users are selected to
compare with the ZFIRE sample. This gives 175 common galaxies out of
which 123 have Q @xmath =3 and 64 of them pass the 3DHST grism quality
test. The @xmath vs. @xmath distributions of these 64 galaxies are shown
in Figure 3.13 . There are three drastic outliers, which have been
identified as low-redshift galaxies by 3DHST grism data with @xmath
@xmath . ZFIRE @xmath of these outliers are @xmath 2.

Comparing with the 3DHST redshifts derived only via pure photometric
data, it is evident that the introduction of grism data increases the
accuracy of the redshifts by @xmath @xmath 3 to an accuracy of @xmath %.
The @xmath accuracy is lower than the @xmath 0.4% accuracy computed by
Bezanson et al. ( 2016 ) for grism redshifts. We note that Bezanson
et al. ( 2016 ) is performed for galaxies with @xmath and that the
ZFIRE-COSMOS sample probes much fainter magnitudes.

#### 3.2.4 Spectroscopic Redshifts from MOSDEF and VUDS

The final comparison is with other public spectroscopic redshifts in
these fields. Galaxies from MOSDEF (Kriek et al., 2015 ) and VUDS
(Cassata et al., 2015 ) surveys are matched with the ZFIRE sample within
a 0 @xmath .7 aperture.

The MOSDEF overlap comprises 84 galaxies in the COSMOS field with high
confidence redshift detections, out of which 74 galaxies are identified
with matching partners from the ZFOURGE survey. In the ZFOURGE matched
sample, 59 galaxies are at redshifts between 1.90 @xmath @xmath @xmath .
7 galaxies are identified to be in common between ZFIRE and MOSDEF
detections. The RMS of the scatter between the spectroscopically derived
redshifts is @xmath 0.0007. This corresponds to a rest frame velocity
uncertainty of @xmath 67 km s @xmath , which is attributed to
barycentric redshift corrections not being applied for the MOSDEF
sample. We note that barycentric velocities should be corrected as a
part of the wavelength solution by the DRP for each observing night, and
therefore we are unable to apply such corrections to the MOSDEF data.
Considering ZFIRE data, once the barycentric correction is applied we
find, by analysing repeat observations in K band, that our redshifts are
accurate to @xmath km s @xmath .

Similarly, the VUDS COSMOS sample comprises 144 galaxies with redshift
detections @xmath confidence, out of which 76 galaxies have ZFOURGE
detections. In the ZFOURGE matched sample, 43 galaxies lie within @xmath
@xmath @xmath . There are two galaxies in common between ZFIRE and VUDS
detections and redshifts agree within 96 km s @xmath and 145 km s @xmath
. The redshift confidence for the matched two galaxies are @xmath in the
VUDS survey, while the ZFIRE has multiple emission line detections for
those galaxies. Furthermore, the VUDS survey employs VIMOS in the
low-resolution mode ( @xmath ) in its spectroscopy leading to absolute
redshift accuracies of @xmath km s @xmath . Therefore, we expect the
ZFIRE redshifts of the matched galaxies to be more accurate than the
VUDS redshifts.

Figure 3.14 shows the distribution of the redshifts of the ZFIRE sample
as a function of Ks magnitude and stellar mass. ZFIRE detections span a
wide range of Ks magnitudes and stellar masses at @xmath . The subset of
galaxies observed at @xmath are fainter and are of lower mass. MOSDEF
and VUDS samples are also shown for comparison. VUDS provides all
auxiliary stellar population parameters, which are extracted from the
CANDELS survey and hence all data are included. However, MOSDEF only
provides the spectroscopic data and thus, only galaxies with identified
ZFOURGE counterparts are shown in the figure, which is @xmath 90% of the
MOSDEF COSMOS field galaxies with confident redshift detections.

In Figure 3.14 , MOSDEF detections follow a similar distribution to
ZFIRE. Since both the surveys utilize strong emission lines in narrow
NIR atmospheric passbands, similar distributions are expected. VUDS,
however, samples a different range of redshifts as it uses optical
spectroscopy. We note the strong @xmath =2.095 overdensity due to the
cluster in the ZFIRE sample, but not in the others.

### 3.3 Broader Implications

The large spectroscopic sample presented can be used to assess the
fundamental accuracy of galaxy physical parameters (such as stellar
mass, SFR, and galaxy SED classification) commonly derived from
photometric redshift surveys. It can also be used to understand the
performance of the previous cluster selection that was done.

#### 3.3.1 Galaxy Cluster Membership

The completeness and purity of galaxy cluster membership of the @xmath
cluster based on photometric redshifts is next investigated and compared
with spectroscopic results. First, photometric redshifts are used to
compute a seventh nearest neighbour density map as shown in Figure 3.7 .
Any galaxy that lies in a region with density @xmath is assumed to be a
photometric cluster candidate. From the ZFOURGE photometric redshifts in
the COSMOS field (coverage of @xmath ) for @xmath @xmath @xmath , there
are 66 such candidates. All of these galaxies have been targeted to
obtain spectroscopic redshifts. Yuan et al. ( 2014 ) cluster galaxies
are chosen to be within @xmath of the Gaussian fit to the galaxy peak at
@xmath . Only 25 of the photometric candidates are identified to be a
part of the Yuan et al. ( 2014 ) cluster, which converts to @xmath 38%
success rate. The other 32 spectroscopically confirmed cluster galaxies
at @xmath from Yuan et al. are not selected as cluster members using
photometric redshifts, @xmath membership identification based on
photometric redshifts and seventh nearest neighbour is @xmath 56%
incomplete.

Yuan et al. ( 2014 ) finds the velocity dispersion of the cluster
structure to be @xmath km s @xmath , while the photometric redshift
accuracy of ZFOURGE at @xmath is @xmath km s @xmath . Therefore, even
high-quality photometric redshifts such as from ZFOURGE, we are unable
to precisely identify cluster galaxy members, which demonstrates that
spectroscopic redshifts are crucial for identifying and studying cluster
galaxy populations at @xmath .

#### 3.3.2 Luminosity, Stellar Mass, and Star Formation Rate

An important question in utilising photometric redshifts is whether
their accuracy depends on key galaxy properties such as luminosity,
stellar mass, and/or SFR. This could lead to biases in galaxy evolution
studies. The Ks total magnitudes and stellar masses from ZFOURGE (v2.1
catalogue) are used for this comparison, which is shown in Figure 3.15 .
The redshift error is plotted as a function of Ks magnitude and stellar
mass for all Q @xmath =3 ZFIRE galaxies. The sample is binned into
redshift bins and further subdivided into star-forming, dusty
star-forming, and quiescent galaxies depending on their rest-frame UVJ
colour.

The least squares best-fitting lines for the Ks magnitude and stellar
mass are
@xmath and @xmath , respectively. Therefore, it is evident that there is
a slight trend in stellar mass in determining the accuracy of
photometric redshifts with more massive galaxies showing positive
offsets for @xmath @xmath @xmath . However, the relationship of @xmath
@xmath @xmath with Ks magnitude is not statistically significant. The
typical @xmath of @xmath @xmath @xmath is 0.022 with a median of 0.009.
Note that the @xmath @xmath @xmath scatter parametrized here is
different from the @xmath vs. @xmath comparison in Figure 3.9 for the
ZFOURGE sample. We use the ZFOURGE catalogue version 2.1 for the @xmath
@xmath @xmath vs. mass, magnitude comparison while for the @xmath vs.
@xmath comparison, we use v3.1. Furthermore, the scatter here is
calculated using @xmath , while in Figure 3.9 a Gaussian function is fit
to the @xmath @xmath @xmath after removing the drastic outliers. The
changes in @xmath between v2.1 and v3.1 is driven by the introduction of
improved SED templates. This comparison is expanded on in Appendix A.2 .

There should be a dependency of galaxy properties derived via SED
fitting techniques on @xmath . Figure 3.16 shows the change of stellar
mass and SFR (both calculated using FAST using either photometric or
spectroscopic redshifts) as a function of @xmath . To first order, an
analytic calculation of the expected residual can be made. SED fitting
techniques estimate galaxy stellar masses from luminosities and
mass-to-light ratios. The luminosity calculated from the flux will
depend on the redshift used, and hence the mass and redshift change
should correlate. Ignoring changes in mass to light ratios and
K-correction effects, from the luminosity distance change we expect

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -- --------
                                                                                                                                   @xmath      (3.1a)
  where @xmath is the stellar mass of the galaxy and @xmath is the luminosity distance. Evaluating for @xmath , with @xmath Gpc:               
                                                                                                                                   @xmath      (3.1b)
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -- --------

Equation ( 3.1b ) is plotted in Figure 3.16 . The top panel of the
figure shows that the mass and redshift changes correlate approximately
as expected with a @xmath of 0.017 dex. SED SFRs are also calculated
from luminosities, albeit with a much greater weight to the UV section
of the SED, and thus should scale similarly to mass. The @xmath scatter
around this expectation is 0.086 dex, which is higher than the mass
scatter with a much greater number of outliers. To fully comprehend the
role of outliers in the scatter, we fit a Gaussian function to the
deviation of @xmath (Mass) and @xmath (SFR) for each galaxy from its
theoretical expectation. The @xmath (SFR) shows a larger scatter of
@xmath in the Gaussian fit compared to the @xmath of @xmath (Mass). It
is likely that the higher scatter in @xmath (SFR) is because the
rest-frame UV luminosity is much more sensitive to the star formation
history and dust extinction encoded in the best-fitting SED than the
stellar mass.

It is evident that photometric-redshift derived stellar masses are
robust against the typical redshift errors, however, caution is
warranted when using SED based SFRs with photometric redshifts because
they are much more sensitive to small redshift changes (in our sample
@xmath 26% of galaxies have @xmath SFR @xmath even though the
photometric redshifts have good precision). Studies that investigate
galaxy properties solely relying on photometric redshifts may result in
inaccurate conclusions about inherent galaxy properties and therefore,
it is imperative that they are supported by spectroscopic studies. It
should be noted that previous ZFOURGE papers have extensively used
photometric redshift derived stellar masses (for example, the mass
function evolution of Tomczak et al. ( 2014 ) ), which we find to be
reliable, but not SED-based SFRs. Most commonly, the best-fitting SEDs
are used to derive the UV+IR fluxes in order to derive SFRs, since SFRs
derived directly via FAST templates (eg., Maraston et al., 2010 ) are
degenerated with age, metallicity, and dust law. See Conroy ( 2013 ) for
a review on this topic.

#### 3.3.3 Rest-Frame UVJ Colours

ZFOURGE rest frame UVJ colours are derived using photometric redshifts.
UVJ colours from @xmath are commonly used to identify the evolutionary
stage of a galaxy (Williams et al., 2009 ) . Here we investigate the
effect of photometric redshift accuracy on the UVJ colour derivation of
galaxies.

Figure 3.6 shows the rest frame UVJ colours of Q @xmath =3 objects
re-derived using spectroscopic redshifts from the same SED template
library. Figure 3.17 shows the change of location of the galaxies in
rest frame UVJ colour when ZFIRE redshifts are used to re-derive them
(the lack of quiescent galaxies overall is a bias in the ZFIRE sample
selection as noted earlier). Only one to two galaxies change their
classifications from the total sample of 149. The inset histograms show
the change of (U @xmath V) and (V @xmath J) colours. Gaussian functions
are fit to the histograms to find that the scatter in (U @xmath V)
colours ( @xmath =0.03) to be higher than that of (V @xmath J) colours (
@xmath =0.02) and (U @xmath V) has a greater number of outliers. The
conclusion is that the U @xmath V rest-frame colours are more sensitive
to redshift compared to V @xmath J colours by @xmath 50%, which may
contribute to a selection bias in high-redshift samples. This
sensitivity of the UV part of the SED is in accordance with the results
of Section 3.3.2 .

To further quantify the higher sensitivity of U magnitude on redshift,
Gaussian fits are performed on the @xmath U, @xmath V, and @xmath J
magnitudes of the ZFIRE galaxies, by calculating the difference of the
magnitudes computed when using @xmath and @xmath . @xmath U shows a
larger scatter of @xmath , while @xmath V and @xmath J show a scatter of
@xmath . This further validates our conclusion that the UV part of the
SED has larger sensitivity to redshift.

### 3.4 Summary

Here we present the ZFIRE survey of galaxies in rich environments and
our first public data release. A detailed description of the data
reduction used by ZFIRE is provided. The use of a flux standard star
along with photometric data from ZFOURGE and UKIDSS has made it possible
to flux calibrate the spectra to @xmath % accuracy. The ZFIRE-COSMOS
sample spans a wide range in Ks magnitude and stellar mass and secures
redshifts for UVJ star-forming galaxies to Ks=24.1 and stellar masses of
@xmath M @xmath /M @xmath @xmath . We show that selecting using
rest-frame UVJ colours is an effective method for identifying H @xmath
-emitting galaxies at @xmath in rich environments. Redshifts have been
measured for 232 galaxies of which 87 are identified as members of the
rich clusters we have targeted in COSMOS and UDS fields.

Photometric redshift probability density functions from EAZY are used to
show that the expected H @xmath detections are similar to the ZFIRE
detection rate in the COSMOS field. In the COSMOS field, the ZFIRE
survey has detected @xmath 80% of the targeted star-forming galaxies. We
also show that the density structure discovered by Spitler et al. ( 2012
) has been thoroughly sampled by ZFIRE.

Using spectroscopic redshifts from ZFIRE with ZFOURGE and other public
photometric survey data, we investigated the accuracies of photometric
redshifts. The use of medium-band imaging in SED fitting techniques can
result in photometric redshift accuracies of @xmath . ZFIRE calculations
of photometric redshift accuracies are consistent with the expectations
of the ZFOURGE survey (Straatman at al., in press) but are slightly less
accurate than the NMBS (Whitaker et al., 2011 ) and 3DHST (Skelton
et al., 2014 ) survey results. The higher redshift errors can be
attributed to sampling differences, which arises from the deeper NIR
medium-band imaging in ZFOURGE compared to the other surveys (i.e.
overlapping galaxies tend to be fainter than typical in the respective
galaxies in NMBS). If we select a brighter subset of NMBS (Ks @xmath )
we find that the redshift accuracy increases by 30%.

Using UKIDSS, Quadri et al. ( 2012 ) shows that the photometric redshift
accuracy is dependent on redshift and that at higher redshifts the
photometric redshift error is higher. Between UKIDSS at @xmath and
ZFOURGE at @xmath the photometric redshift accuracies are similar.
Therefore, the use of medium-band imaging in ZFOURGE has resulted in
more accurate redshifts at @xmath , due to finer sampling of the D4000
spectral feature by the J1, J2, and J3 NIR medium-band filters. The
introduction of medium-bands in the K band in future surveys may allow
photometric redshifts to be determined to higher accuracies at @xmath .

The importance of spectroscopic surveys to probe the large-scale
structure of the universe is very clear. For the COSMOS Yuan et al. (
2014 ) cluster, we compute a 38% success rate (i.e., 38% of galaxies in
@xmath overdensity regions are identified spectroscopically as cluster
galaxies) and a 56% incompleteness (56% of spectroscopic cluster
galaxies are not identified from data based on purely photometry) using
the best photometric redshifts (with seventh nearest neighbour
algorithms) to identify clustered galaxies.

We find a systematic trend in photometric redshift accuracy, where
massive galaxies give higher positive offsets up to @xmath 0.05 for
@xmath ) values as a function of galaxy stellar mass. However, it is not
evident that there is any statistically significant trend for a similar
relationship with galaxy luminosity. Results also suggest that the
stellar mass and SFR correlates with redshift error. This is driven by
the change in the calculated galaxy luminosity as a function of the
assigned redshift and we show that the values correlate approximately
with the theoretical expectation. SFR shows larger scatter compared to
stellar mass in this parameter space, which can be attributed to the
stronger weight given to UV flux, which is very sensitive to the
underlying model, in the derivation of the SFR.

This stronger correlation of the UV flux with redshift error is further
evident when comparing the change in (U @xmath V) and (V @xmath J)
colour with change in redshift. When rest-frame U,V, and J colours are
re-derived using spectroscopic redshifts, our results show a stronger
change in (U @xmath V) colour compared to the (V @xmath J) colour.
Therefore, a redshift error may introduce an extra selection bias on
rest-frame UVJ selected galaxies. Further studies using larger samples
of quiescent and dusty star-forming galaxies at @xmath are needed to
quantify this bias.

Clearly the use of photometric redshifts can lead to biases even when
using the same SED template set. However, it is important to acknowledge
the underlying uncertainties that lie in deriving galaxy properties even
with spectroscopic redshifts. Future work could consider the role of SED
templates used in SED fitting techniques. Generally the templates used
are empirically derived, which limits the capability to understand the
inherent properties of the observed galaxies. With the use of physically
motivated models such as MAGPHYS (da Cunha et al., 2008 ) , more
statistically meaningful relationships between different physical
parameters of the observed galaxies could be obtained. Improving such
models to include photo-ionization of galaxies the in future will allow
us to directly make comparisons of star-forming galaxies at @xmath ,
which will be vital to study the inherent galaxy properties.

Furthermore, the accuracy of underlying assumptions used in SED fitting
techniques such as the IMF, dust properties, and star formation
histories at @xmath should be investigated. These assumptions are
largely driven by observed relationships at @xmath , and if the galaxies
at higher redshifts are proven to be inherently different from the local
populations, results obtained via current SED fitting techniques may be
inaccurate. Future work should focus on the physical understanding of
the galaxy properties at @xmath with large spectroscopic surveys to
better constrain the galaxy evolution models. The recent development of
sensitive NIR integral field spectrographs with multiplexed capabilities
will undoubtedly continue to add a wealth of more information on this
topic over the next few years.

The ZFIRE survey will continue focusing on exploring the large
spectroscopic sample of galaxies in rich environments at @xmath to
investigate galaxy properties in rich environments. Upcoming papers
include analyses of the IMF (Nanayakkara et al., 2017 ) , kinematic
scaling relations (Alcorn et al., 2016 ; Straatman et al., 2017 ) , the
mass–metallicity fundamental plane (Kacprzak et al., 2016 ) , and galaxy
growth in cluster and field samples (Tran et al., 2017 ) .

## Chapter 4 The Stellar Initial Mass Function Observational Data &
Synthetic Stellar Population Models

In this chapter, I describe the procedures used to select a galaxy
sample from ZFIRE survey to examine the IMF. This includes an analysis
of sample completeness and a thorough description of the H @xmath flux
calculations and continuum fitting techniques. Furthermore, the
synthetic stellar population models used to analyse the observed data
are also presented in this chapter.

### 4.1 Observations & Data

#### 4.1.1 Galaxy Sample Selection

The sample used in this study was selected from the ZFIRE (Nanayakkara
et al., 2016 ) spectroscopic survey, which also consists of photometric
data from the ZFOURGE survey (Straatman et al., 2016 ) . In this
section, we describe the sample selection process from the ZFIRE survey
for our analysis.

ZFIRE is a spectroscopic redshift survey of star-forming galaxies at
@xmath , which utilized the MOSFIRE instrument (McLean et al., 2012 ) on
Keck-I to primarily study galaxy properties in rich environments. ZFIRE
has observed @xmath galaxy redshifts with typical absolute accuracy of
@xmath and derived basic galaxy properties using multiple emission line
diagnostics. Nanayakkara et al. ( 2016 ) give full details on the ZFIRE
survey. In this study we use the subset of ZFIRE galaxies observed in
the COSMOS field (Scoville et al., 2007 ) based on a stellar mass
limited sample reaching up to 5 @xmath emission line flux limits of
@xmath selected from deep NIR data @xmath obtained by the ZFOURGE
survey.

ZFOURGE ¹ ¹ 1 http://zfourge.tamu.edu (PI I. Labbé) is a Ks selected
deep 45 night photometric legacy survey carried out using the purpose
built FourStar imager (Persson et al., 2013 ) in the 6.5 meter Magellan
Telescopes located at Las Campanas observatory in Chile. The survey
covers 121 arcmin @xmath in each of the COSMOS, UDS (Beckwith et al.,
2006 ) , and CDFS (Giacconi et al., 2001 ) legacy fields. Deep FourStar
medium band imaging (5 @xmath depth of Ks @xmath 25.3 AB ) and the
wealth of public multi-wavelength photometric data (UV to Far infra-red)
available in these fields were used to derive photometric redshifts with
accuracies @xmath using EAZY (Brammer et al., 2008 ) . Galaxy masses,
ages, SFRs, and dust properties were derived using FAST (Kriek et al.,
2009 ) with a Chabrier ( 2003 ) IMF, exponentially declining SFHs, and
Calzetti et al. ( 2000 ) dust law. At @xmath the public ZFOURGE
catalogues are 80% mass complete to @xmath M @xmath (Nanayakkara et al.,
2016 ) . Refer to Straatman et al. ( 2016 ) for further details on the
ZFOURGE survey.

ZFIRE and ZFOURGE are ideal surveys to use in this study since both
provide mass complete samples. The total ZFIRE sample in the COSMOS
field contains 142 H @xmath detected ( @xmath , redshift quality flag (Q
@xmath )=3 ) star-forming galaxies that is mass complete down to @xmath
@xmath (at 80% for @xmath ). Thus, our H @xmath selected sample contains
no significant systematic biases towards star formation history, stellar
mass, and magnitude. Furthermore, ZFIRE contains a large cluster at
@xmath containing 51 members with @xmath H @xmath detections (Yuan
et al., 2014 ) and therefore we are able to examine if the IMF is
affected by the local environment of galaxies.

For this study, we apply the following additional selection criteria to
the 142 H @xmath detected galaxies.

@xmath We remove AGN using photometric (Cowley et al., 2016 ) and
emission line
( @xmath (f([N ii ])/f(H @xmath )) @xmath ; Coil et al. ( 2015 ) )
criteria resulting in identifying 26 AGN with our revised sample
containing @xmath galaxies. We note that all galaxies selected as AGN
from ZFOURGE photometry by Cowley et al. ( 2016 ) are flagged as AGN by
the Coil et al. ( 2015 ) selection. 100% of the BPT identified AGN from
MOSDEF are flagged as AGN from this selection by Coil et al. ( 2015 ) .
We further discuss contamination to H @xmath from sub-dominant AGN in
Appendix B.2 .

@xmath Galaxies must have a matching ZFOURGE counterpart such that we
can obtain galaxy properties, resulting in N=109 galaxies.

@xmath We compute the total spectroscopic flux for these galaxies and
remove 4 galaxies with negative fluxes resulting in N=105 galaxies. We
perform stringent H @xmath emission quality cuts to the spectra for
these 105 galaxies and remove 2 galaxies due to strong sky line
subtraction issues. We further remove 1 galaxy due to an overlap of the
galaxy spectra with a secondary object that falls within the same slit.

Our final sample of galaxies used for the IMF analysis in this paper
comprise of 102 galaxies. Henceforth we refer to this sample of galaxies
as the ZFIRE stellar population (SP) sample.
The redshift distribution for the ZFIRE-SP sample is shown by Figure 4.1
. The ZFIRE-SP sample is divided into continuum detected and
non-detected galaxies as described in section 4.1.3 . Galaxies in our
sample lie within redshifts of @xmath corresponding to a @xmath Myr.

#### 4.1.2 Completeness

In order to determine any significant detection biases in our ZFIRE-SP
sample, we evaluate the completeness of the galaxies selected in this
analysis. We define a redshift window for analysis between @xmath (
@xmath Gpc), which corresponds to the redshifts that H @xmath emission
will fall within the MOSFIRE K band. Note that here we discuss galaxies
with H @xmath detections and Q @xmath , while in Section 4.1.1 we
discussed the Q @xmath H @xmath detected sample.

In the ZFOURGE catalogues used for the ZFIRE sample selection (see
Nanayakkara et al. ( 2016 ) for details), there were 1159 galaxies
(including star-forming and quiescent galaxies) in the COSMOS field with
photometric redshifts ( @xmath ) within @xmath . 160 of these galaxies
with @xmath were targeted in K band out of which 128 ² ² 2 Note that
this is different from the 142 galaxies mentioned in Section 4.1.1
because the sample of 142 galaxies has a Q @xmath , includes galaxies
with no ZFOURGE counterparts (see Nanayakkara et al. ( 2016 ) for
further details) and galaxies with non-optimal ZFOURGE photometry (see
Straatman et al. ( 2016 ) for further details). were detected with at
least one emission line with SNR @xmath . None of the H @xmath detected
galaxies had spectroscopic redshifts outside the considered redshift
interval. However, 3 additional galaxies (1 object with Q @xmath , 2
objects with Q @xmath ) fell within @xmath due to inaccurate photometric
redshifts. There were 8 galaxies targeted in K band that did not have H
@xmath detections but do have other emission line detections (i.e. No H
@xmath but have [N ii ], [O iii ], H @xmath etc). Furthermore, there
were no galaxies that were targeted in K band expecting H @xmath but
resulted in other emission line detections.

There were 151 objects within @xmath with H @xmath detections (Q @xmath
) and 26 of them were flagged as AGN following selection criteria from
Coil et al. ( 2015 ) and Cowley et al. ( 2016 ) . In the remaining 125
galaxies, 8 galaxies did not have matching ZFOURGE counterparts and 8
galaxies had low confidence for redshift detection (Q @xmath ) from
Nanayakkara et al. ( 2016 ) . We removed those 16 galaxies from the
sample. Out of the 109 remaining galaxies, seven are removed due to the
following reasons: four galaxies due to negative spectroscopic flux, one
galaxy due to multiple objects overlapping in the spectra, and two
galaxies due to extreme sky line interference.

Our sample constitutes of the remaining 102 galaxies out of which, 46
have continuum detections (see Section 4.1.3 ). Furthermore, 38 (out of
which, 16 are continuum detected) galaxies are confirmed cluster members
(Yuan et al., 2014 ) and the remaining 64 (out of which, 30 are
continuum detected) galaxies comprise of field galaxies. 32 galaxies
targeted with photometric redshifts between @xmath show no H @xmath
emission detection. We divide our sample into 3 mass bins with masses
between @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and show the corresponding data as
described above in Table 4.1 .

We define observing completeness as the percentage of detected galaxies
(Q @xmath ) with photometric redshifts between @xmath and calculate it
to be @xmath . However, it is possible that the 32 null detections with
photometric redshifts within @xmath to have been detected if the ZFIRE
survey was more sensitive. We stack the the photometric redshift
likelihood functions ( @xmath ) of the ZFIRE targeted galaxies within
this redshift range, to compute the expectation of detections based of
photometric redshift accuracies (See Nanayakkara et al. ( 2016 ) Section
3.2 to further details on how @xmath stacking is performed) . The
calculated expectation for H @xmath to be detected within K band is
@xmath , which is extremely similar to the observed completeness.
Therefore, non-detections rate is consistent with uncertainties in the
photometric redshifts. To further account for any detection bias, we
employ a stacking technique of the non-detected spectra in order to
calculate a lower-limit to the stacked EW values. This is further
discussed in Section 5.2.2 .

#### 4.1.3 Continuum fitting and H@xmath EW calculation

In this section, we describe our continuum fitting method for our 102 H
@xmath detected galaxies selected from the ZFIRE survey. Fitting a
robust continuum level to a spectrum requires nebular emission lines and
sky line residuals to be masked. Furthermore, the wavelength interval
used for the continuum fit should be sufficient enough to perform an
effective fit but should be smaller enough to not to be influenced by
the intrinsic SED shape. After extensive testing of various measures
used to fit a continuum level, we find the method outlined below to be
the most effective to fit a continuum level for our sample.

By visual inspection and spectroscopic redshift of the galaxies in our
sample, we mask out the H @xmath and [N ii ] emission line regions and
in the spectra. We further mask all known sky-lines by selecting a
region @xmath the spectral resolution ( @xmath Å) of MOSFIRE K band. We
then use the astropy (Astropy Collaboration et al., 2013 )
sigma-clipping algorithm to mask out remaining strong features in the
spectra. These spectra are then used to fit an inverse variance weighted
constant level fit, which we consider as the continuum level of the
galaxy. Three objects fail to give a positive continuum level using this
method and for these we perform a @xmath clip with two iterations
without masking nebular emission lines and sky lines. Using this method
we are able to fit positive continuum levels to all galaxies in our
sample. We further investigate the robustness of our measures continuum
levels in Appendix B.1 using ZFOURGE photometric data and conclude that
our measured continuum level is consistent (or in agreement) with the
photometry.

We use two approaches to calculate the H @xmath line flux: 1) direct
flux measurement and 2) Gaussian fit to sky-line blended and
kinematically unresolved emission-lines. Our two methods provide
consistent results for emission-lines that are not blended with sky
lines (see Appendix B.1 ). By visual inspection, we selected
kinematically resolved (due to galaxy rotation etc.) H @xmath
emission-lines that were not blended with sky-lines and computed the EW
by integrating the line flux. Within the defined emission-line region,
we calculated the H @xmath flux by subtracting the flux at each pixel (
@xmath ) by the corresponding continuum level of the pixel ( @xmath ).
For the remaining sample, which comprises of galaxies with no strong
velocity structure and galaxies with H @xmath emission with little
velocity structure and/or H @xmath contaminated by sky lines, we perform
Gaussian fits to the emission lines, to calculate the H @xmath flux
values. We then subtract the continuum level from the computed H @xmath
line flux.

Next, we use the calculated H @xmath flux along with the fitted
continuum level to calculate the observed H @xmath EW ( @xmath ) as
follows:

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -- --------
                                                                                                                                                                                                       @xmath      (4.1a)
  where @xmath is the increment of wavelength per pixel. Finally, using the spectroscopic redshift ( @xmath ) we calculate the rest frame H @xmath EW ( @xmath ), which we use throughout the paper:               
                                                                                                                                                                                                       @xmath      (4.1b)
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -- --------

We calculate EW errors by bootstrap re-sampling the flux of each spectra
randomly within limits specified by its error spectrum. We re-calculate
the EW iteratively 1000 times and use the 16 @xmath and 84 @xmath
percentile of the distribution of the EW measurements as the lower and
upper limits for the EW error, respectively. Since the main uncertainty
arises from the continuum fitting, we do not consider the error of the H
@xmath flux calculation in our bootstrap process.

The robustness of an EW measurement relies on the clear identification
of the nebular emission line and the underlying continuum level. The
latter becomes increasingly hard to quantify at high redshift for faint
star forming sources due to the continuum not being detected. Therefore
we derive continuum detection limits to identify robustly measured
continua from non-detections.

In order to establish the limit to which our method can reliably measure
the continuum, we select 14 2D slits with no continuum or nebular
emission line detections to extract 1D spectra. We define extraction
apertures using a representative profile of the flux monitor star and
perform multiple extractions per slit depending on their spatial size. A
total of 93 1D sky spectra are extracted and their continuum level is
measured by masking out sky lines and performing a sigma-clipping
algorithm. The error of the sky continuum fit is calculated by bootstrap
re-sampling of the sky fluxes 1000 times. We consider the @xmath scatter
of the bootstrapped continuum values to be the error of the sky
continuum fit and @xmath scatter of the flux values used for the
continuum fit as the RMS of the flux.

The comparison between the flux continuum level for the sky spectra with
the ZFIRE-SP sample spectra are shown in Figure 4.2 . The median and the
2 @xmath standard deviation for the continuum levels of the sky spectra
are @xmath and @xmath respectively. We consider the horizontal blue
dashed line in the Figure 4.2 , which is @xmath above the median sky
level, to be our lower limit for the continuum detections in our sample.
The 46 galaxies in our ZFIRE-SP sample with continuum levels above this
flux level detections are considered to have a robust continuum
detection. For the remaining 56 galaxies we consider the continuum
measurement as a limit and use it to calculate a lower limit to the H
@xmath EW values. The redshift distribution of these galaxies is shown
by Figure 4.1 .

#### 4.1.4 Calculating optical colours

Rest frame optical colours for the ZFIRE-SP sample are computed using an
updated version of EAZY ³ ³ 3 Development version:
https://github.com/gbrammer/eazy-photoz/ (Brammer et al., 2008 ) , which
derives the best-fitting SEDs for galaxies using high quality ZFOURGE
photometry to compute the colours. We investigate the robustness of the
rest-frame colour calculation of EAZY in Appendix D.1.3 . The main
analysis of our sample is carried out using optical colours derived
using two idealized, synthetic box car filters, which probes the bluer
and redder regions of the rest-frame SEDs. We select these filters to
avoid regions of strong nebular emission lines as explained in Section
4.2 and Appendix D.1 .

In order to allow direct comparison between ZFIRE @xmath galaxies with
@xmath SDSS galaxies from HG08, we further calculate optical colours for
the ZFIRE-SP sample at @xmath using blue-shifted SDSS g and r filters.
Blue shifting the filters simplifies the (g @xmath r) colour calculation
at @xmath ( @xmath ) by avoiding additional uncertainties, which may
arise due to K corrections if we are to redshift the galaxy spectra to
@xmath from @xmath .

### 4.2 Galaxy Spectral Models

In this section, we describe the theoretical galaxy stellar spectral
models employed to investigate the effect of IMF, SFHs, and other
fundamental galaxy properties in H @xmath EW vs optical colour parameter
space. We use PEGASE.2 detailed in Fioc & Rocca-Volmerange ( 1997 ) as
our primary spectral synthesis code to perform our analysis and further
employ Starburst99 (Leitherer et al., 1999 ) and BPASSv2 (Eldridge &
Stanway, 2016 ) models to investigate the effects of other exotic
stellar features.

PEGASE is a publicly available spectral synthesis code developed by the
Institut d’Astrophysique de Paris. Once the input parameters are
provided, PEGASE produces galaxy spectra for varying time steps, which
can be used to evaluate the evolution of fundamental galaxy properties
over cosmic time.

#### 4.2.1 Model Parameters

In this paper, we primarily focus on the effect of varying the IMF, SFH,
and metallicity on H @xmath EW and optical colour of galaxies. A
thorough description of the behaviour of PEGASE models in this parameter
space can be found in Hoversten & Glazebrook ( 2008 ) . The parameters
we vary are as follows.

-    The IMF : We follow HG08 and use an IMF with a single power law as
    shown by Equation 1.1 . Models were calculated with varying IMF
    slopes ( @xmath ) ranging between -0.5 to -2.0 in logarithmic space.
    The lower and upper mass cutoffs were set to 0.5M @xmath and 120M
    @xmath , respectively. The IMF indication method used in this
    analysis is dependant on the ability of a star with a specific mass
    to influence the H @xmath emission and the optical continuum level.
    Stars below 1M @xmath cannot strongly influence the optical
    continuum and hence this method is not sensitive to probe the IMF
    below 1M @xmath . Furthermore stars below @xmath M @xmath gives no
    significant variation to the parameters investigated by this method
    (Hoversten & Glazebrook, 2008 ) . Therefore we leave the lower mass
    cutoff at 0.5M @xmath . The higher mass cutoff of 120M @xmath used
    is the maximum mass allowed by PEGASE. Though the high mass end has
    a stronger influence on the IMF identified using this method we
    justify the 120M @xmath cutoff due to the ambiguity of the stellar
    evolution models above this mass. Varying the upper mass cutoff has
    a strong effect on H @xmath EW and optical colours. As HG08 showed
    this is strongly degenerated with changing @xmath . In this work we
    focus on @xmath parametrization, noting that changing the cutoff
    could produce similar effects. We further discuss the degeneracy
    between the high mass cutoff and the H @xmath EW vs optical colours
    slope in Section 5.3.4 .

-    The SFH : Exponentially increasing/declining SFHs, constant SFHs,
    and starbursts are used. Exponentially declining SFHs are in the
    form of @xmath , with p @xmath varying from 500 to 1500 Myr. Star
    bursts are used on top of constant SFHs with varying burst strength
    and time scales. Further details are provided in Section 5.2.3 .

-    Metallicity : Models with consistent metallicity evolution (closed
    box models with recycling of gas) and models with fixed metallicity
    of 0.02 are used.

The other parameters we use for the PEGASE models are as follows. We use
Supernova ejecta model B from Woosley & Weaver ( 1995 ) with the stellar
wind option turned on. The fraction of close binary systems are left at
0.05 and the initial metallicity of the ISM is set at 0. We turn off the
galactic in-fall function and the mass fractions of the substellar
objects with star formation are kept at 0. Galactic winds are turned
off, nebular emissions are turned on and we do not consider extinction
as we extinction correct our data.

As a comparison with HG08, in Figure 4.3 we show the evolution of 4
model galaxies from PEGASE in the H @xmath EW vs @xmath colour space.
The models computed with exponentially declining SFHs with p @xmath Myr,
varying IMFs, and nebular emission lines agrees well with the SDSS data.
However, the evolution of the @xmath colour shows strong dependence on
the nebular emission contribution, specially for shallower IMFs. HG08
never considered the effect of emission lines in @xmath colours and the
significant effect at younger ages/bluer colours are likely to be
important for @xmath galaxies.

Figure 4.4 shows an example of a synthetic galaxy spectra generated by
PEGASE. The galaxy is modelled to have an exponentially declining SFH
with @xmath Myr and a @xmath IMF. Due to the declining nature of the
SFR, the stellar and nebular contribution of the galaxy spectra
decreases with cosmic time. We overlay the filter response functions of
the @xmath and @xmath filters used in the analysis by HG08. As evident
from the spectra, this spectral region covered by the @xmath and @xmath
filters includes strong emission lines such as [O iii ] and H @xmath .
Therefore, the computed @xmath colours will have a strong dependence on
photo-ionization properties of the galaxies.

To mitigate uncertainties in photo-ionization models in our analysis, we
employ synthetic filters specifically designed to avoid regions with
strong nebular emission lines. We design two box-car filters centred at
3400Å and 5500Å with a width of 450Å. The rest-frame wavelength coverage
of these filters corresponds to a similar region covered by the FourStar
@xmath and @xmath filters in the observed frame for galaxies at @xmath
and therefore requires negligible K corrections. Further details on this
filter choice is provided in Appendix D.1.1 . Henceforth, we refer to
the blue filter as [340], the redder filter as [550], and the colour of
blue filter - red filter as @xmath . The @xmath colour evolution of a
galaxy is independent of the nebular emission lines.

We also compare results using Starburst99 (S99) (Leitherer et al., 1999
) models in Appendix C.1 . We find that PEGASE and S99 models show
similar evolution and find that our choice of SSP model (PEGASE or S99)
to interpret the IMF of the ZFIRE-SP sample at @xmath to be largely
independent to our conclusions. However, stellar libraries that
introduce rotational and/or binary stars used in these models do have an
influence of the H @xmath EWs and @xmath colours, which we discuss in
detail in Section 5.5.4 .

#### 4.2.2 Comparison to H@xmath EW & optical colours at @xmath

We explore the IMF of @xmath star-forming galaxies using H @xmath EW
values from ZFIRE spectra and rest-frame optical colours from ZFOURGE
photometry. Our observed sample used in our analysis is shown in Figure
4.5 . The left panel shows the distribution of H @xmath EW and @xmath
colours of the ZFIRE-SP sample before dust corrections are applied. We
overlay model galaxy tracks generated by PEGASE for various IMFs. All
models are computed using an exponentially declining SFH, but with
varying time constants (p @xmath ) as shown in the figure caption. For a
given IMF, smoothly varying monotonic SFHs have very similar loci in
this parameter space. The thick set of models (third from top) shows a
slope with @xmath , which is similar to the Salpeter slope. Galaxies
above these tracks are expected to contain a higher fraction of higher
mass stars in comparison to the mass distribution expected following a
Salpeter IMF. Similarly galaxies below these tracks are expected to
contain a lower fraction of high mass stars. Galaxies have a large
spread in this parameter space but we expect this scatter to decrease
when dust corrections are applied to the data as outlined in Section
5.1.1 .

We note the large scatter of the H @xmath EW values with respect to the
Salpeter IMF, especially the large number of high EW objects ( @xmath
dex above the Salpeter locus). Could this simply be due to the ZFIRE-SP
sample only detecting H @xmath emissions in bright objects? i.e. a
sample bias. First, we note our high completeness of @xmath for H @xmath
detections (Section 4.1.2 ). Secondly, our H @xmath flux limits are
actually quite faint. To show this explicitly, we define H @xmath flux
detection limits for our sample using @xmath detection thresholds for
each galaxy parametrised by the integration of the error spectrum within
the same width as the emission line. Figure 4.5 (right panel) shows the
H @xmath EW calculated using H @xmath flux detection limits, which
illustrates the distribution of the ZFIRE-SP sample if the H @xmath flux
was barely detected. The H @xmath EW of the continuum detected galaxies
decrease by @xmath dex which suggest that our EW detection threshold is
not biased towards higher H @xmath EW values.

Similar to IMF, there are a number of effects that may account for the
clear disagreement between the observed data and models. In subsequent
sections we explore effects from
@xmath dust (Section 5.1 ),
@xmath observational bias (Section 5.1.5 ),
@xmath star bursts (Section 5.2 ),
@xmath stellar rotation (Section 5.3.1 ),
@xmath binary stellar systems (Section 5.3.2 ),
@xmath metallicity (Section 5.3.3 ), and
@xmath high mass cutoff (Section 5.3.4 )
in SSP models to explain the distribution of H @xmath EW vs optical
colours of the ZFIRE-SP sample without invoking IMF change.

## Chapter 5 The Stellar Initial Mass Function Analysis

This Chapter performs a thorough analysis of the factors that effect the
distribution of galaxies in the H @xmath EW vs optical colour parameter
space. By analysing the effects from dust, star bursts, stellar
rotation, binaries, metallicity, and upper mass cutoff, strong
constraints are made on the stellar IMF of the ZFIRE-SP sample. I
further discuss implications of a non-universal IMF for high- @xmath
star-forming galaxies in this chapter.

### 5.1 Is Dust the Reason?

As summarized by Kennicutt ( 1983 ) , the dust vector is nearly
orthogonal to the IMF change vector, and therefore, we expect the tracks
in the H @xmath EW vs optical colour parameter space to be independent
of galaxy dust properties. In this section, we describe galaxy dust
properties. We explain how dust corrections were applied to the data and
their IMF dependence and explore the difference in reddening between
stellar and nebular emission line regions as quantified by Calzetti
et al. ( 2000 ) for @xmath star-forming galaxies.

We use FAST (Kriek et al., 2009 ) with ZFIRE spectroscopic redshifts
from Nanayakkara et al. ( 2016 ) and multi-wavelength photometric data
from ZFOURGE (Straatman et al., 2016 ) to generate estimates for stellar
attenuation (Av) and stellar mass for our galaxies. FAST uses SSP models
from Bruzual & Charlot ( 2003 ) and a @xmath fitting algorithm to derive
ages, star-formation time-scales, and dust content of the galaxies. All
FAST SED templates have been calculated assuming solar metallicity,
Chabrier ( 2003 ) IMF, and Calzetti et al. ( 2000 ) dust law. We refer
the reader to Straatman et al. ( 2016 ) for further information on the
use of FAST to derive stellar population properties in the ZFOURGE
survey.

#### 5.1.1 Applying SED derived dust corrections to data

We use stellar attenuation values calculated by FAST to perform dust
corrections to our data. First, we consider the dust corrections for
rest frame H @xmath EWs and then we correct the @xmath colours.

By using Cardelli et al. ( 1989 ) and Calzetti et al. ( 2000 )
attenuation laws to correct nebular and continuum emission lines,
respectively, we derive the following equation to obtain dust corrected
H @xmath EW ( @xmath ) values:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the observed EW, @xmath is the SED derived continuum
attenuation, and @xmath is the difference in reddening between continuum
and nebular emission lines.

Calzetti et al. ( 2000 ) found a @xmath for @xmath star-forming
galaxies, which we use for our analysis under the assumption that the
actively star forming galaxies at @xmath are analogues to star-forming
galaxies at @xmath . Henceforth, for convenience we refer to @xmath
Calzetti et al. ( 2000 ) value as @xmath . We further show key plots in
this analysis using a dust correction of @xmath to consider equal dust
extinction between stellar and ionized gas regions. This is driven by
the assumption that A and G stars that contribute to the continuum of
@xmath star-forming galaxies are still associated within their original
birthplaces similar to O and B stars due to insufficient time for the
stars to move away from the parent birth clouds within the @xmath Gyr
time scale.

Similarly, using Calzetti et al. ( 2000 ) attenuation law we obtain dust
corrected fluxes for the [340] and [550] filters as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.2a)
     @xmath      (5.2b)
  -- -------- -- --------

A complete derivation of the dust corrections presented here are shown
in Appendix D.2.2 .

Figure 5.1 shows the distribution of our sample before and after dust
corrections are applied. In the left panels we show our sample before
any dust corrections are applied, with arrows in cyan denoting dust
vectors for varying @xmath values. It is evident from the figure that
the galaxies in this parameter space are very dependent on the @xmath
value used. For @xmath values of 1 and 2, the effect of dust is
orthogonal to IMF change, while values above 2 may influence the
interpretation of the IMF. We note that @xmath makes the problem of high
H @xmath EW objects worse, so we do not consider such values further.

Figure 5.1 right panels show the dust corrections applied to both H
@xmath EW and the @xmath colours for the ZFIRE-SP sample. Without the
effect of dust, we expect the young star forming galaxies to show
similar bluer colours and therefore, the narrower @xmath colour space
occupied by our dust corrected sample is expected. With a dust
correction of @xmath , majority of the galaxies lie below the @xmath IMF
track with only @xmath th of galaxies showing higher H @xmath EWs.
However, with @xmath dust correction, there is a significant presence of
galaxies with extremely high H @xmath EW values for a given @xmath
colour inferred from a @xmath IMF and @xmath 60% of the galaxies lie
above this IMF track.

Even @xmath larger errors for the individual H @xmath EW measurements
cannot account for the galaxies with the largest deviations from the
Salpeter tracks. The change of @xmath from @xmath decreases the median H
@xmath EW value by @xmath dex. However, galaxies still show a large
scatter in H @xmath EW vs @xmath colour parameter space with points
lying well above the Salpeter IMF track.

The form of the attenuation law of galaxies at @xmath show conflicting
results between studies. Observations from the Atacama Large Millimeter
Array (ALMA) have indicated the presence of galaxies with low infra-red
(IR) luminosities suggesting galaxies with attenuation similar to the
Small Magellanic Cloud (SMC., Capak et al., 2015 ; Bouwens et al., 2016
) . Reddy et al. ( 2015 ) showed a SMC like attenuation curve for @xmath
galaxies at @xmath Å and a Calzetti et al. ( 2000 ) like attenuation
curve for the shorter wavelengths. However, HST grism and SED fitting
analysis of galaxies at @xmath has shown no deviation in the attenuation
law derived by Calzetti et al. ( 2000 ) for local star-forming galaxies.
Such conflicts are also apparent in simulation studies, where Mancini
et al. ( 2016 ) showed evidence for SMC like attenuation with clumpy
dust regions while Cullen et al. ( 2017 ) have shown that galaxies
contain similar dust properties as inferred by Calzetti et al. ( 2000 )
.

In order to understand the role of dust laws in the H @xmath EW vs
@xmath colour parameter space we compare the results using other dust
laws such as Pei ( 1992 ) SMC dust law and Reddy et al. ( 2015 ) @xmath
dust law to correct the stellar contributions (H @xmath continuum and
optical colours). A comparison between the distribution of galaxies
obtained with different dust laws for a given @xmath are shown by Figure
5.2 . The fraction of galaxies with @xmath EW @xmath from the @xmath IMF
track with @xmath dust corrections are @xmath and @xmath for Calzetti
et al. ( 2000 ) , Pei ( 1992 ) SMC, and Reddy et al. ( 2015 ) dust laws,
respectively. However, we refrain from interpreting the differences in
the distributions of the sample between the considered dust laws because
the attenuation values used in the ZFIRE/ZFOURGE surveys have been
derived from SED fitting by FAST using a Calzetti et al. ( 2000 ) dust
law. Compared to the adopted dust law, the change in the value of @xmath
has a stronger influence on the galaxies in our parameter space and can
significantly affect the EW values, which is discussed further in
Section 5.1.4 .

To investigate differences between our @xmath sample with HG08 @xmath
sample, we derive dust corrections to the @xmath colours. Using the
following equations to apply dust corrections to g @xmath and r @xmath
fluxes we recalculate the @xmath colours for the ZFIRE-SP sample.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.3a)
     @xmath      (5.3b)
  -- -------- -- --------

We show the H @xmath EW vs @xmath colour comparison between ZFIRE and
SDSS samples in Figure 5.3 . The dust corrections for the ZFIRE-SP
sample has been performed using a @xmath and @xmath . Similar to the
@xmath colour relationship, there is a significant presence of galaxies
with extremely high H @xmath EW values and @xmath 60%of the galaxies lie
above the Salpeter IMF track when dust corrections are applied with a
@xmath . Furthermore, the @xmath sample shows much bluer colours
compared to HG08 sample, which we attribute to the younger ages ( @xmath
Myr inferred from tracks with a Salpeter IMF) and the higher SFRs of
galaxies at @xmath .

In Figure 5.4 we use the @xmath IMF tracks to compute the deviation of
observed H @xmath EW values from a canonical Salpeter like IMF. For each
@xmath galaxy colour we calculate the expected H @xmath EW using the
standard PEGASE model computed using an exponential decaying SFH with a
p @xmath Myr. We then calculate the deviation between the observed
values to the expected values. Only the @xmath scenario is considered
here to be consistent with the dust corrections applied by HG08. Our
results suggest that the ZFIRE sample exhibits a log-normal distribution
with a mean and a standard deviation of 0.090 and 0.321 units,
respectively. Similarly for the HG08 sample, the values are distributed
with a mean and a standard deviation of -0.032 and 0.250 units. Compared
to HG08, the ZFIRE-SP sample shows a larger scatter and favours higher H
@xmath EW values for a given Salpeter like IMF. A simple two sample K-S
test for the ZFIRE-SP sample and HG08 gives a Ks statistic of 0.37 and a
P value of @xmath , which suggests that the two samples are
distinctively different from each other. In subsequent sections, we
further explore whether the differences between the @xmath and @xmath
populations are driven by IMF change or other stellar population
parameters.

#### 5.1.2 IMF dependence of extinction values

Dust corrections applied to the ZFIRE-SP sample, as explained in Section
5.1.1 , are derived from FAST (Kriek et al., 2009 ) using best-fitting
model SEDs to ZFOURGE photometric data. FAST uses a grid of SED template
models to fit galaxy photometric data to derive the best-fitting
redshift, metallicity, SFR, age, and Av values for the galaxies via a
@xmath fitting technique. Even though these derived properties may show
degeneracy with each other (see Conroy ( 2013 ) for a review), in
general FAST successfully describes observed galaxy properties of deep
photometric redshift surveys (Whitaker et al., 2011 ; Skelton et al.,
2014 ; Straatman et al., 2016 ) . FAST has a limited variety of stellar
templates, and therefore, we cannot explore the effect of varying IMFs
on the FAST derived extinction values.

In order to examine the role of IMF on derived extinction values, we
compare the distribution of ZFIRE rest-frame UV and optical colours with
PEGASE model galaxies. Following the same procedure used to derive the
[340] and [550] filters, we design two boxcar filters centred at
1500Å ([150]) and 2600Å ([260]) with a length of 675Å. The wavelength
regime covered by these two filters approximately correspond to the B
and I filters in the observed frame for galaxies at @xmath (further
information is provided in Appendix D.1.2 ). Therefore, K corrections
are small and the computed values are robust.

By binning galaxies in stellar mass, we find massive galaxies to be
dusty than their less massive counterparts. We show the distribution of
our sample in the rest-frame UV vs rest-frame optical parameter space in
Figure 5.5 (top panel). PEGASE model galaxies with @xmath and varying
SFHs are shown by the solid model tracks. When we apply a @xmath =1
extinction, the models show a strong diagonal shift due to reddening of
the colours in both axes. For each set of tracks, we perform a
best-fitting line to the varying SFH models. The dust vector (shown by
the arrow) joins the two best-fitting lines drawn to the models with
@xmath =0 and @xmath =1 at time @xmath . We define @xmath to be the
correction needed for each individual galaxy to be brought down parallel
to the dust vector to the best-fitting line with @xmath =0, and is
parametrized by the following equation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Our simple method of dust parametrization is similar to the technique
used by FAST, which fits SED templates to the UV continuum to derive the
extinction values. The @xmath colour probes the UV continuum slope,
which is ultra sensitive to dust, while the @xmath probes the optical
continuum slope which is less sensitive to dust. H @xmath emission does
not fall within these filters, and hence, is not strongly sensitive to
the SFR of the galaxies.

In the bottom panel of Figure 5.5 , we compare the derived extinction
values from our method ( @xmath ) with the extinction values derived by
FAST ( @xmath ). Since Chabrier ( 2003 ) IMF at @xmath is similar to the
slope of Salpeter IMF ( @xmath ), the comparison is largely independent
of the IMF. The median and @xmath scatter of the Av values derived via
FAST and our method is @xmath and @xmath respectively. Therefore, the
values agree within @xmath . There is a systematic bias for @xmath to
overestimate the extinction at lower @xmath values and underestimate at
higher @xmath values. We attribute this residual pattern to age
metallicity degeneracy, which is not considered in the derivation of
@xmath .

The choice of IMF will affect dust corrections derived from UV
photometry (using FAST or our empirical method) as there is a modest
dependence of the rest-frame UV continuum slope on IMF for star-forming
populations. We are primarily interested in IMF slopes shallower than
Salpeter slope ( @xmath ) to explain our population of high H @xmath EW
galaxies. For @xmath we find the best-fitting model line in the top
panel of Figure 5.5 shifts down by @xmath 0.1 mag. This increases the
magnitude of dust corrections and extends the arrows in Figure 5.1 to
bluer colours and higher EWs and does not explain the presence of high H
@xmath EW objects. For the purpose of comparing with our default
hypothesis (Universal IMF with @xmath ) we adopt the FAST derived dust
corrections.

#### 5.1.3 Balmer decrements

Stellar attenuation values computed by fitting a slope to galaxy SEDs in
UV, estimates the extinction of old stellar populations that primarily
contributes to the galaxy continuum. Nebular emission lines originates
from hot ionized gas around young and short-lived O and B stars. Given
their short life-time ( @xmath Myr), O and B stars are not expected to
move far from their birthplace (dusty clouds), thus, the nebular
emission-lines are expected to have high levels of extinction. Next, we
investigate the dust properties of the stars in different star-forming
environments using the luminosity ratios of nebular hydrogen lines and
observed UV colours.

Luminosity ratios of nebular hydrogen lines are insensitive to the
underlying stellar population and IMF parameters for a fixed electron
temperature (Osterbrock, 1989 ) . These line ratios are governed by
quantum mechanics, and therefore, can be used to probe the reddening of
nebular emission lines and dust geometry under the assumption that
ionized gas attenuation resembles that of the underlying stellar
population.

With the recent development of sensitive NIR imagers and multi-object
spectrographs, studies have now started to investigate the properties of
dust at @xmath (Shivaei et al., 2015 ; Reddy et al., 2015 ; De Barros
et al., 2016 ) . These studies show conflicting results on the fraction
of stellar to nebular attenuation of galaxies at @xmath . Here we show
Balmer decrement results for a sub-sample of our ZFIRE-SP sample which
shows SNR @xmath detections for both H @xmath and H @xmath . The data
presented herein are a combination of data released by the ZFIRE data
release Nanayakkara et al. ( 2016 ) and additional MOSFIRE observations
carried out during January 2016. Our sample comprises of 42 galaxies
with both H @xmath and H @xmath emissions line detections with a SNR
@xmath and 35 galaxies are part of the ZFIRE-SP sample. Further details
on H @xmath detection properties are explained in Appendix D.2.1 .

We show the H @xmath flux vs H @xmath flux for our total ZFIRE galaxies
Figure 5.6 (top panel). The diagonal dashed line of the left panel shows
the Balmer decrement for Case B recombination models with H @xmath /H
@xmath = 2.86 (Osterbrock, 1989 ) . Galaxies that fall below this
criteria are expected to have realistic dust models. In Figure 5.6
(bottom panel) we show the comparison between extinction computed for
stars by FAST with the extinction computed for ionized gas regions using
the Balmer decrement. The colour excess is computed from the Balmer
decrement using:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The distribution of our sample in these panels is similar to Reddy
et al. ( 2015 ) results as shown by the 2D density histogram. Therefore,
both studies highlight the complicated dust properties of @xmath
star-forming galaxy populations.

#### 5.1.4 The difference in extinction between stellar and nebular
regions

In this section, we investigate how the differences in dust properties
between stellar and ionized gas regions can affect the distribution of
our galaxies in H @xmath EW vs @xmath colour space. Calzetti et al. (
2000 ) showed that, for @xmath star-forming galaxies, the nebular lines
are @xmath more attenuated than the continuum regions, but at @xmath
studies show conflicting results (Shivaei et al., 2015 ; Reddy et al.,
2015 ; De Barros et al., 2016 ) . Using ZFIRE data in Figure 5.6 , we
show that galaxies occupy a large range of @xmath values in our H @xmath
detected sample. We attribute the scatter in extinction to the
properties of sight-lines of the nebular line regions.

The galaxies in our sample are at @xmath and are actively forming stars.
Therefore, the dusty molecular gas regions are actively collapsing to
sustain the ongoing star-formation. Straatman et al. ( 2017 ) showed
that the velocity dispersion of the ZFIRE sample is @xmath . In a 1 Pc
molecular cloud, stars will take @xmath Myr to move away from their
parent birth clouds. Therefore, with active star-formation all massive
stars and non-negligible fractions of smaller mass stars will be within
these dusty regions, giving rise to varying extinction between nebular
and stellar regions. Additionally, Reddy et al. ( 2015 ) showed SFR to
be a dominant factor in determining the dust geometries within @xmath
galaxy populations. Differences in the dust geometries in old and young
stars regions that arise due to these reasons in ionizing clouds may
result in non-uniform dust sight-lines for galaxies at @xmath .

By varying the value of @xmath as a free parameter, we calculate the
@xmath values required for our galaxies to be consistent with a
universal IMF with slope @xmath . For each dust corrected @xmath colour,
we compute the H @xmath EW of the PEGASE @xmath IMF track with p @xmath
Myr. We then use the observed and required H @xmath EW values to compute
the @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where log @xmath is the H @xmath EW of the PEGASE model galaxy for dust
corrected @xmath colours of our sample and log @xmath is the observed H
@xmath EW.

In Figure 5.7 , we show the @xmath values required for our galaxies to
agree with a universal IMF with a slope of @xmath . For the 46 continuum
detected galaxies, @xmath show @xmath . It is extremely unlikely that
galaxies at @xmath would have @xmath , which suggests that ionizing dust
clouds where the nebular emission lines originate from are less dusty
than regions with old stellar populations. Furthermore, galaxies that
lie above the Salpeter track (log @xmath (H @xmath EW) @xmath ) requires
@xmath and therefore, even a varying @xmath hypothesis cannot account
for the high EW galaxies. @xmath of continuum detections have @xmath
which is not physically feasible since it requires dust to have the
opposite effect to attenuation. Therefore, we reject the hypothesis that
varying @xmath values could explain the high H @xmath EWs of our
galaxies.

#### 5.1.5 Observational bias

The ZFIRE-SP sample spans a large range of H @xmath EWs, suggesting a
considerable variation in the sSFRs of the ZFIRE galaxies at @xmath .
High H @xmath EW can result due to two reasons:

1.  High line flux: suggests a higher SFR in time scales of @xmath 10
    Myr.

2.  Lower continuum level: suggests lower stellar mass for galaxies.

These two scenarios should be considered together: i.e., a higher line
flux with lower continuum level would suggest the galaxy to be going
through an extreme star-formation phase. We investigate any detection
bias that could explain our distribution of H @xmath EWs.

In Nanayakkara et al. ( 2016 ) , we show that the ZFIRE COSMOS K band
detections are mass complete to @xmath . In Figure 5.8 we show the
distribution of the H @xmath flux and continuum levels of our sample. It
is evident from Figure 5.8 (top panel) that our galaxies evenly sample
the star-forming main-sequence described by Tomczak et al. ( 2014 )
without significant bias towards extreme H @xmath flux values.
Therefore, we conclude that the H @xmath fluxes we detect are typical of
star-forming galaxies at @xmath .

In Figure 5.8 (bottom panel), we compare our H @xmath flux values with
the derived continuum levels. Continuum detected galaxies show continuum
levels that are in the order of @xmath mag smaller compared to the H
@xmath fluxes, and therefore, the higher H @xmath EWs in our sample are
primarily driven by the low continua. Note that our continuum detection
level is @xmath log flux units. Therefore, for galaxies with only line
detection, the difference between H @xmath flux and continuum level is
much higher, which suggests much larger H @xmath EWs.

Several studies investigated the H @xmath EW of galaxies at higher
redshifts ( @xmath ) (Erb et al., 2006b ; Shim et al., 2011 ; Fumagalli
et al., 2012 ; Kashino et al., 2013 ; Stark et al., 2013 ; Masters
et al., 2014 ; Sobral et al., 2014 ; Speagle et al., 2014 ;
Mármol-Queraltó et al., 2016 ; Rasappu et al., 2016 ) using SED fitting
techniques and/or grism spectra. We find that our H @xmath EWs show good
agreement with EWs expected at @xmath (Mármol-Queraltó et al., 2016 )
and conclude that our observed H @xmath EW values are typical of @xmath
galaxies.

However, there are no studies that use high quality spectra to study the
H @xmath EW at @xmath . Even though our H @xmath fluxes and EWs are
typical of @xmath galaxies, in the H @xmath EW vs @xmath colour space, a
large fraction of our galaxies show high EWs for a given @xmath colour
compared to the expectation by a Salpeter like IMF. Our high EWs are
driven by lower continuum levels, for which we consider two possible
explanations.

1.  Most galaxies have quenched their starburst phase in a time-scale of
    @xmath Myr. Therefore, the old stellar populations are still being
    built up explaining the lack of continuum level from the older
    stars.

2.  Stars are being formed continuously at @xmath with a higher fraction
    of high mass stars.

In Section 5.2 , we investigate the effects of starbursts on our study
to examine how probable it is for @xmath rd of our galaxies to have
quenched their star-formation within a time-scale of @xmath Myr.

### 5.2 Can star bursts explain the high H@xmath-EWs?

Galaxies at @xmath are at the peak of their star formation history
(Hopkins & Beacom, 2006 ) . We expect these galaxies to be rapidly
evolving with multiple stochastic star formation scenarios within their
stellar populations (eg., Pacifici et al., 2015 ) . If our sample
consists of a significant population of starburst galaxies, it may cause
significant systemic biases to our IMF analysis.

In this section, we investigate the effects of bursts on the SFHs of the
galaxies. We study how the distribution of galaxies in H @xmath EW vs
@xmath colour space may be affected by such bursts and how we can
mitigate their effects. We demonstrate that our final conclusions are
not affected by starbursts.

#### 5.2.1 Effects of starbursts

A starburst event would abruptly increase the H @xmath EW of a galaxy
within a very short time scale ( @xmath Myr). The increase in ionizing
photons is driven by the extra presence of O and B stars during a
starburst which increases the amount of Lyman continuum photons.
Assuming that a constant factor of Lyman continuum photons get converted
to H @xmath photons via multiple scattering events, we expect the number
of H @xmath photons to increase as a proportion to the number of O and B
stars. Furthermore, the increase of the O and B stars would drive the
galaxy to be bluer causing the @xmath colours to decrease.

The ability of a starburst to drive the points away from the monotonic
Salpeter track is limited. The deviations are driven by the burst
fraction, which we define as the burst strength divided by the length of
the starburst. If the burst fraction is small, it has a small effect.
However if it is very large it dominates both the H @xmath and the
optical light, the older population is ‘masked’, and it heads back
towards the track albeit at a younger age, i.e. one is seeing the
monotonic history of the burst component. The maximum deviation in our
study occurs for burst mass fractions of 20–30% occurring in time-scales
of 100-200 Myr or fractions thereof, which can cause excursions of up to
@xmath dex. However as we will see this only occurs for a short time.

We show the effect of a starburst on a PEGASE model galaxy with a
monotonic SFH in Figure 5.9 . A starburst with a time-scale of @xmath
Myr and a strength @xmath (fraction of mass at @xmath Myr generated
during the burst) is overlaid on the constant SFH model at time = 1500
Myr. The starburst drives the increase of H @xmath EW which occurs in a
very short time scale. In Figure 5.9 the galaxy deviates from the
constant SFH track as soon as the burst occurs and reaches a maximum H
@xmath EW within 4 Myr. At this point, the extremely high-mass stars
made during the burst will start to leave the main sequence. This will
increase the number of red-giant stars resulting in higher continuum
level around the H @xmath emission line. Therefore, the H @xmath EW
starts to decrease slowly after @xmath Myr. Once the burst stops the H
@xmath EW drops rapidly to values lower than pre-burst levels. The
galaxy track will eventually join the @xmath smooth SFH track at a later
time than what is expected by a smooth SFH model.

We further investigate the effect of starbursts with smaller time-scales
( @xmath Myr) and find that the evolution of H @xmath EW in the
aftermath of the burst to be more extreme for similar @xmath values.
This is driven by more intense star-formation required to generate the
same amount of mass within @xmath th of the time scale. Since both H
@xmath EW and @xmath colours are a measure of sSFR we expect the
evolution to strongly dependent on @xmath and @xmath of the burst and to
be correlated with each other.

In our analysis, we do not consider star-bursts with time scales @xmath
Myr. This is driven by the assumption that stars are formed within
star-forming clumpy regions, and therefore time-scales of switching on
and off star-bursts should occur in times comparable to the life-time of
these clumps ( @xmath Myr (eg., Elmegreen et al., 2009 ; Newman et al.,
2012 ; Genzel et al., 2011 ) ).

To consider effects of bursts, we adopt two complimentary approaches.
First, we stack the data in stellar mass and @xmath colour bins. Stellar
populations are approximately additive and by stacking we smooth the
stochastic SFHs in individual galaxies and also account the effect from
galaxies with no H @xmath detections. Second, we use PEGASE to model
starbursts to generate Monte Carlo simulations to predict the
distribution of the galaxies in H @xmath EW vs @xmath colour space.
Using the simulations we investigate whether it is likely that the
observed discrepancy is driven by starbursts and also double check
whether the stacking of galaxies would generate smooth SFH models.

#### 5.2.2 Stacking

In order to remove effects from stochastic SFHs of individual galaxies
in our sample, we employ a spectral stacking technique. We first divide
the galaxies into three mass and dust corrected @xmath colour bins as
follows.

-   Mass bins: log @xmath @xmath , @xmath log @xmath , log @xmath

-   @xmath colour bins: ( @xmath ) @xmath , @xmath ( @xmath ) @xmath , (
    @xmath ) @xmath

We select a wavelength interval of @xmath 1500Å centred around the H
@xmath emission for each spectra and mask out the sky lines with
approximately @xmath the spectral resolution. In order to avoid
systematic biases arisen from narrowing down the sampled wavelength
region in the rest-frame, we instead redshift all spectra to a common
@xmath around which most of the galaxies reside. We sum all the spectra
at this redshift, in their respective bins. The error spectra are
stacked in quadrature following standard error propagation techniques.

We mask out the nebular emission-line regions of the stacked spectra and
use a sigma-clipping algorithm to fit a continuum (c1). The error in the
continuum is assigned as the standard deviation of the continuum values
of 1000 bootstrap iterations.

We visually inspect the stacked spectra to identify the H @xmath
emission line profiles to calculate the integrated flux. Stacked H
@xmath EW is calculated following equations 4.1a and 4.1b .

To estimate the error on the stack due to the stochastic variations
between galaxies, we use a bootstrapping technique to calculate the
error of the stacked H @xmath EW values. We bootstrap galaxies with
replacement in each bin to produce 1000 stacked spectra for each of
which we calculate the H @xmath EW. The standard deviation of the
logarithmic EW values for each bin is considered as the error of the H
@xmath EW of the stacked spectra. We expect the bootstrap errors to
include stochastic variations in the SFHs between galaxies. If our
sample comprises of galaxies undergoing extreme starbursts, the effects
from such bursts should be quantified within these error limits.

We stack the individual [340] and [550] fluxes of the galaxies in
similar mass and @xmath colour bins. The average extinction value of the
galaxies in each bin is considered as the extinction of the stacked
spectra. We use this extinction value to dust correct the H @xmath EW
and @xmath colours of the stacked spectra, following recipes explained
in Section 5.1.1 .

Figure 5.10 shows the distribution of the stacked spectra in H @xmath EW
vs @xmath colour space before and after dust corrections are applied. We
consider dust corrections with @xmath and @xmath . For @xmath dust
correction scenario the bluest colour bin and the medium and high mass
stacked data points agree with the @xmath track. However, the redder
colours bins and lowest mass galaxies on average prefer shallower IMFs.
With @xmath dust correction, the distribution of stacked data points
even with bootstrap errors suggest values @xmath dex above the Salpeter
IMF, if interpreted as an IMF variation. In both scenarios, redder
galaxies show larger deviation from the canonical Salpeter IMF. If
starbursts drive the distribution of the galaxies, we expect the bluer
galaxies on average to show larger deviation from the @xmath tracks.

To further account for any detection bias arisen from H @xmath
undetected galaxies, we use the ZFIRE COSMOS field K band targeted
galaxies with no H @xmath emission detections to compute a continuum
(c2) contribution to the stacked spectra. We use the photometric
redshifts to select 37 galaxies within @xmath , which is the redshift
interval the H @xmath emission line falls within the MOSFIRE K band.
Next we perform a cut to select galaxies with similar stellar masses (
@xmath ) and @xmath colours ( @xmath ( @xmath ) @xmath ) to the galaxies
in the ZFIRE-SP sample. The final sample comprises of 21 galaxies which
we use to stack the 1D spectra in mass and @xmath colour bins.

In order to stack the spectra, first we mask out the sky regions and
assume that all galaxies are at a common @xmath . We mask out H @xmath
and [N ii ] emission line regions and fit a continuum similar to how c1
was derived. We add c1+c2 to re-calculate the H @xmath EW for each of
the mass and colour bins. Since the continuum level is increased by the
addition of c2, the H @xmath EW of the spectra reduces. We note that the
highest mass bin contains no H @xmath undetected galaxies. Figure 5.11
shows the change in stacked data points when the H @xmath non-detected
continuum is considered with a dust correction of @xmath and @xmath .
The maximum deviation of the stacked H @xmath EW values is @xmath 0.2
dex and the lowest mass and the reddest @xmath colour bins show the
largest deviation. This is driven by the higher number of lower mass
redder galaxies which have been targeted but not detected by the ZFIRE
survey. The magnitude of the deviations are independent of the @xmath
value used for the dust corrections and for both @xmath and @xmath , the
galaxies that show an excess of H @xmath EW compared to @xmath tracks
still show an excess when the added c2 continuum contribution is
considered. For @xmath dust corrections, even with considering the
effect of non-detected continuum levels, majority of the stacked
galaxies in our sample are significantly offset from the canonical
Salpeter like IMF value.

#### 5.2.3 Simulations of starbursts

By employing spectral stacking and bootstrap techniques, we showed in
Section 5.2.2 , that our galaxies on average favour shallower IMFs than
the universal Salpeter IMF. In this section, we use PEGASE SSP models to
generate simulations with starbursts to calculate the likelihood for
half of the ZFIRE-SP sample to be undergoing simultaneous starbursts at
@xmath . Furthermore, by randomly selecting galaxies from the simulation
at random times, we stack the galaxies in mass and @xmath colour bins to
make comparisons with the stack properties of the ZFIRE-SP sample.

We empirically tune our burst parameters to produce the largest number
of galaxies above the Salpeter track. A single starburst with time
scales of @xmath Myr and with @xmath are overlaid on constant SFH models
with the starburst occurring at any time between @xmath Myr of the
galaxies’ lifetime. Simulation properties and the evolution of H @xmath
EW and @xmath colours during starbursts are discussed next.

##### PEGASE simulations of starburst galaxies

Here we describe the PEGASE simulations discussed in Section 5.2.3 to
model the effects of starbursts in H @xmath EW vs @xmath colour
parameter space. We tune burst empirical parameters to maximize the
number of high H @xmath EW objects. We consider 4 scenarios in our
simulations as shown in Table 5.1 . For each scenario we model 100
galaxies and superimpose a single starburst on PEGASE model tracks with
an IMF slope of @xmath and a constant SFH.

PEGASE model galaxies are generated from an initial gas reservoir of 1M
@xmath . Therefore, we normalize the total mass generated by the
constant SFH and the star burst to 1M @xmath in order to calculate the
SFR for each time step. These values are used to calculate SSPs with a
IMF slope of @xmath and upper and lower mass cutoffs set at 0.5M @xmath
and 120M @xmath respectively. We use a constant metallicity of 0.02 for
all our simulations. The other parameters are kept similar at their
default values as described in Section 4.2 . Following this recipe we
generate the simulated galaxies with finer sampling of the time steps
around the time of burst to better resolve the effects of the bursts.

We use the simulated galaxies from Scenario 1 (Table 5.1 ) to further
investigate the evolution of H @xmath EW and @xmath colour of galaxies
during a starburst phase. 40 galaxies are chosen at random from the
simulations in Figure 5.12 to show the deviation of the H @xmath EW
values from the @xmath IMF track. In a smooth SFH, the @xmath colours
are correlated with the age of the galaxies due to stellar populations
moving away from the main sequence making the galaxy redder with time.
However, galaxies undergo bursts at random times resulting them to
deviate from the smooth SFH track at random times. Galaxies with higher
burst fractions per unit time ( @xmath ), show larger deviations due to
the extreme SFRs required to generate higher amount of mass within a
shorter time period. The time scale galaxies populate above the
reference IMF track is small (in the order of @xmath Myr) compared to
the total observable time window of the galaxies at @xmath Gyr). The H
@xmath EW increase significantly soon after a burst within a short time
scale (in order of few Myr) and decreases rapidly to be deficient in H
@xmath EW compared to the reference constant SFH model. Afterwards, the
H @xmath EW increases at a slower phase until the tracks join the smooth
SFH model after the burst has past.

In Figure 5.12 (top right panel), we select all simulated galaxies to
calculate the amount of time galaxies spend with higher H @xmath EW
values ( @xmath ) compared to models with smooth SFHs. We bin the
galaxies according to the burst fraction per unit time to find that
there is no strong dependence of it on @xmath Time.

##### Large bursts

Our final simulation grid contains 8337 possible time steps, which we
use to randomly select galaxies within @xmath (similar to the time
window where our observed sample lies) to perform a density distribution
study and a stacking technique similar to the method described in
Section 5.2.2 .

To quantify the probability of starbursts dominating the scatter in the
H @xmath EW vs @xmath colour space, we select 10,000 galaxies randomly
from the simulated sample to calculate the relative probability galaxies
occupy in H @xmath EW vs @xmath colour space. Figure 5.13 (top panels)
shows the density distribution of the selected galaxy sample. The
relative probability is calculated by normalizing the highest density
bin to 100%. To generate real values for the logarithmic densities we
shift the distribution by 0.01 units. As evident from the figure, for
both @xmath and @xmath dust corrections, there is a higher probability
for galaxies to be sampled during the pre or post burst phase due to the
very short time-scale the tracks take to reach a maximum H @xmath EW
value during a starburst. @xmath of the galaxies in the ZFIRE-SP
sample lie in regions with @xmath probability. Therefore, we conclude
that it is extremely unlikely that @xmath th ( @xmath ) and @xmath rd (
@xmath ) of the galaxies in the ZFIRE-SP sample to be undergoing a
starburst simultaneously and rule out the hypothesis that starbursts
could explain the distribution of the ZFIRE-SP sample in the H @xmath EW
vs @xmath colour parameter space.

In Figure 5.14 , we use our burst machinery to validate our stacking
method. We select 100 galaxies randomly with replacement from the parent
population of 100 galaxies. For each galaxy we select a random time to
extract the galaxy spectra at the closest sampled time to retrieve
stellar population parameters. We then stack the selected galaxies in
stellar mass and @xmath colour bins. The bins are generated in such a
way that the selected galaxies are distributed evenly across the bins.
We repeat the galaxy selection and stacking process 100 times to
calculate bootstrap errors for the stacked data points.

Galaxies containing SFHs with bursts stacked in mass and @xmath colour
show similar distribution to galaxy tracks with constant SFHs. Even with
large @xmath values, the time scale the tracks deviate significantly
above the @xmath is in the order of 1–5 Myr, and therefore it is
extremely unlikely ( @xmath selected in the stacked sample of 100
galaxies) to preferentially select a large number of galaxies during
this phase. Furthermore, stacked errors from bootstrap re-sampling do
not deviate significantly from the @xmath tracks. This further
strengthens the point that repetitive sampling of galaxies does not
yield stacks with higher H @xmath EW values for a given @xmath colour.

##### Smaller bursts

Galaxies at @xmath appear to be clumpy (eg., Tadaki et al., 2013 ) .
Therefore, it is possible for a single clump to have a high SFR that
will add a significant contribution to the ionizing flux of a galaxy
resulting in higher H @xmath EW values. To account for such scenarios,
we perform starburst simulations with smaller burst time-scales ( @xmath
Myr) and large burst strengths ( @xmath ) and allow the galaxies to
commence their constant SFH at a random time between @xmath Myr. We
further constrain the bursts to redshifts between @xmath corresponding
to a @xmath Myr, which is similar to the redshift distribution of our
galaxies.

As described previously, we randomly select 10,000 galaxies from our
simulated sample, but constraining the selection to the redshift window
of @xmath . We show the density distribution of our randomly selected
sample with the observed ZFIRE-SP sample in Figure 5.13 (bottom panels).
A large fraction of galaxies are now selected during the post-burst
phase, thus with lower H @xmath EWs compared to the reference IMF track,
specially with @xmath dust corrections. Since the star-bursts are now
short lived but have to generate the same fraction of stellar masses as
the longer lived bursts, the fraction of mass generated by the burst per
unit time is extremely high. Therefore, changes in H @xmath EW and
optical colour are much more drastic as a function of time and makes it
further unlikely to select galaxies with high H @xmath EWs. We further
test scenarios including smaller bursts within short time-scales (see
Table 5.1 ) and find the distribution of selected galaxies to be similar
to 5.13 (top panels). We conclude that, even limiting the starbursts to
a narrow redshift window, does not yield a distribution of galaxies that
would explain our high H @xmath EW sample.

### 5.3 Considering Other exotica

In the previous sections we have shown that the distribution of the
ZFIRE-SP sample galaxies in the H @xmath EW vs @xmath colour cannot
solely be described by dust or starbursts within a universal IMF
framework. In this section, we investigate whether other exotic
parameters related to SSP models such as stellar rotations, binary
stars, metallicity, and the high mass cutoff could influence the
distribution of the galaxies in our parameters to impersonate a varying
IMF.

#### 5.3.1 Stellar rotation

First, we consider effects of implementing stellar rotation in SSP
models. Rotating stellar models produce harder ionizing spectra with
higher amounts of photons that are capable of ionizing Hydrogen. This is
driven by rotationally induced larger Helium surface abundances and high
luminosity of stars (Leitherer & Ekström, 2012 ) , which results in
@xmath higher ionizing photon output by massive O stars at solar
metallicity (Leitherer et al., 2014 ) and can be @xmath towards the end
of the main sequence evolution (Szécsi et al., 2015 ) . The minimum
initial mass necessary to form W-R stars is also lowered by stellar
rotation resulting in longer lived W-R stars (Georgy et al., 2012 )
increasing the number of ionizing photons. Therefore, stars with
rotation shows higher H @xmath fluxes compared to systems with no
rotation, resulting in higher H @xmath EW values. Additionally, stellar
rotation also leads to higher mass loss in stars, which results in bluer
stars in the red supergiant phase (Salasnich et al., 1999 ) .
Furthermore, stellar models with rotation results in longer life-times
by @xmath (eg., Levesque et al., 2012 ; Leitherer et al., 2014 ) . This
allows a larger build up of short lives O and B stars compared with
similar IMF and SFH models with no rotation resulting in higher H @xmath
flux values and bluer stellar populations.

S99 supports stellar tracks from the Geneva group (explained in detail
in Ekström et al. ( 2012 ) and Georgy et al. ( 2013 ) and references
therein), which allows the user to compute models with and without
invoking stellar rotation. Models with stellar rotation assumes an
initial stellar rotation velocity ( @xmath ) of 40% of the break up
velocity of the zero-age main-sequence ( @xmath ).

Leitherer et al. ( 2014 ) notes that, @xmath @xmath @xmath for stellar
systems is of extreme nature and should be considered as an upper
boundary for initial stellar rotation values. @xmath is defined as the
rotational velocity the star possess when it enter the zero-age
main-sequence. Depending on stellar properties and interactions with
other stars (eg., de Mink et al., 2013 ) the initial rotational velocity
of the star will be regulated with time (see Figure 12 of Szécsi et al.
( 2015 ) , where the evolution of stellar rotation has been investigated
as a function of time for models with different stellar masses and
initial velocities).

A realistic stellar population will contain a distribution of @xmath /
@xmath values. Levesque et al. ( 2012 ) investigated galaxy models with
70% of stars with stellar rotation following @xmath =0.4 @xmath and 30%
with no stellar rotation, thus allowing more realistic conditions. They
found that such models show @xmath dex less Hydrogen ionizing photons
compared to a stellar population with all stars with @xmath =0.4 @xmath
stellar rotation and @xmath dex higher number of Hydrogen ionizing
photons compared to a stellar population with no stellar rotation.

The extent of stellar rotation required to describe observed properties
of stellar populations is not well understood. Gravitational torques
have been shown to prevent stars from rotating @xmath of its breakup
velocity during formation (Lin et al., 2011 ) . Martins & Palacios (
2013 ) showed that Geneva models with stellar rotation does not
reproduce the distribution of massive, evolved stars accurately and
requires less amounts of convective overshooting thus lowering the
required @xmath . However, recent studies demonstrate the requirement
for populations of stars with extreme rotation in low-metallicity
scenarios to explain the origin of narrow He emission in galaxies
(Gräfener & Vink, 2015 ; Szécsi et al., 2015 ) and long Gamma-ray bursts
(Woosley & Heger, 2006 ; Yoon et al., 2006 ) . Stellar populations of
the Large Magellanic Cloud have shown to be distributed following a two
peak rotational velocity distribution with @xmath of galaxies rotating
at @xmath of their critical velocities while @xmath of the population
having near-critical velocities (Ramírez-Agudelo et al., 2013 ) .
Furthermore, populations of Be stars (Secchi, 1866 ; Rivinius et al.,
2013 ) , which are near-critically rotating main-sequence B stars
observed in local stellar populations (Lin et al., 2015 ; Yu et al.,
2016 ; Bastian et al., 2017 ) , have shown evidence for the existence of
rapidly rotating stars in massive stellar clusters (eg., Bastian et al.,
2017 ) .

We show the evolution of galaxy properties in the H @xmath EW vs @xmath
colour in Figure 5.15 (top panels). Due to limitations in rotational
stellar tracks, the metallicity of the stars are kept at @xmath , but
the stellar atmospheres are kept at @xmath . Invoking stellar rotation
increases the H @xmath EW by @xmath 0.1 dex for similar IMFs and shows
slightly bluer colours for a given time t . Further analysis of the
sub-components shows us that these changes in the H @xmath EW vs @xmath
colours are driven by the increase in H @xmath flux and bluer optical
colours.

Implementing stellar rotation results in similar effects of a shallower
IMF ( @xmath ), but the deviations are not sufficient to explain the
@xmath dust corrected ZFIRE-SP sample within a universal IMF scenario.
However, with @xmath dust corrections, only @xmath of the sample lie
above the @xmath track with stellar rotation models with a majority of
galaxies showing steeper IMFs.

Having a large fraction of stars with extreme rotation will lead to a
higher number of ionizing photons and bluer colours and could
potentially explain the high-EW objects in our sample. Sustaining such
high rotation requires extremely low metallicities, which we further
discuss in Section 5.3.3 . Even though we expect the actual variation of
the H @xmath EW and @xmath colours due to stellar rotation at near-solar
metallicity to be much smaller than what is shown in Figure 5.15 , we
cannot rule out extreme stellar rotation dominant in at low
metallicities (Z @xmath ). Therefore, extreme stellar rotation may
provide one explanation independent of the IMF to describe the
distribution of our galaxies in the H @xmath EW and @xmath colour space
(see Section 5.3.3 ). Furthermore, stellar rotation can introduce
fundamental degeneracies to IMF determination which we discuss further
in Section 5.5.4 .

#### 5.3.2 Binary system evolution

We consider the effect of implementing the evolution of binary stellar
systems on our study. All SSP models described thus far only considered
single stellar populations, i.e. there were no interactions between
stars in a stellar population. However, recent observational studies in
our Galaxy have shown that @xmath 50% of massive O stars are in binary
systems and that the environment may have a strong influence on the
dynamical and/or stellar evolution (Langer, 2012 ; Sana et al., 2012 ,
2013 ) . Only a minority of O stars would have undisturbed evolution
leading to supernovae (Leitherer et al., 2014 ) , thus introducing
additional complexities to SSP models and strong implications for
studies using these models to infer observed stellar properties.
Furthermore, Steidel et al. ( 2016 ) demonstrated the necessity of
invoking models with massive star binaries to fit rest-frame UV and
optical features of star-forming galaxies at @xmath .

We use the BPASS v2.0 models (Stanway et al., 2016 ) to investigate the
effects of invoking stellar binary evolution in the H @xmath EW vs
@xmath colour space. The computed models have been released by the BPASS
team only for a limited set of IMF models. We use IMF models with Z=0.02
and @xmath with a lower and upper mass cutoff at 0.5M @xmath and 100M
@xmath ,respectively. The IMF slope for stellar masses between 0.1M
@xmath @xmath 0.5M @xmath is kept at @xmath for all the models. We
remind the reader that stars with @xmath have negligible effect on the H
@xmath EW vs optical colour parameter space. Figure 5.15 (bottom panels)
compares the effect of considering stellar binary system evolution in
this parameter space. Binary rotation with simple prescriptions for
stellar rotation slightly increases the H @xmath EW (max increase for a
given time is @xmath 0.2dex) and make galaxies look bluer for a given
IMF at a time t . These changes are more prominent for galaxies with
steeper IMFs and are driven by the H @xmath flux and optical colours of
the galaxies. Furthermore, unlike effects of rotation, we see a trend on
which the steeper IMFs show larger changes (up to @xmath ) in H @xmath
flux and @xmath colours compared to shallower IMFs.

Due to higher ionizing flux and longer lifetimes of massive O type stars
in binary systems, galaxies look bluer at an older age compared to what
is predicted by single-star models (Eldridge & Stanway, 2016 ) . The
increase in ionizing flux is driven by transfer of mass between stars
causing rejuvenation, generation of massive stars via stellar mergers,
and stripping of Hydrogen envelope to form more hot Helium or W-R stars.
Mass transfer and mergers between stars also result in larger, bluer
stars at later times contributing to the stellar population to be bluer.
The change of H @xmath EW and @xmath colours due to binary system
evolution at Z=0.02 is not sufficient to explain the distribution of the
ZFIRE-SP sample galaxies and is significantly smaller than the
contribution from stellar rotation.

Note that BPASS single stellar evolutionary models do not consider any
form of stellar rotation. BPASS binary models do consider stellar
rotation, but only if a secondary star accretes material from a
companion. In such scenarios at Z @xmath the secondary star is spun up,
fully mixed, and is rejuvenated resulting it to be a zero-age
main-sequence star. However, it is assumed that the star is spun down
quickly and stellar rotation is not considered for the rest of it’s
evolution (Eldridge & Stanway, 2012 ; Stanway et al., 2016 , J.J.
Elridge., private communication) . Since the current version of BPASS
binary models does not consider aspects of stellar rotation in the
context of reduction in surface gravity and the driving of extra-mixing
beyond the expectations from the standard mixing-length theory as
discussed in Section 5.3.1 (also see papers in the series by Meynet &
Maeder ( 2000 ) and Potter et al. ( 2012 ) ), comparisons between S99
Geneva models and BPASS cannot be performed to constrain the net effect
of introducing stellar binary stellar evolution to SSP models that
consider stellar rotation.

#### 5.3.3 Stellar metallicity

Hoversten & Glazebrook ( 2008 ) showed that the evolution of galaxies H
@xmath EW vs optical colour parameter space was largely independent of
the metallicity of the galaxies. All PEGASE models in this thesis are
generated using a fixed metallicity. We also tested models with
consistent metallicity evolution and found to have no significant effect
to the conclusions of this study. However, PEGASE models does not
account for the increase in mass loss via stellar winds and increase in
ionizing flux predicted in low metallicity scenarios, which are
considered by models that include stellar rotation and binary
interactions.

The lack of elements such as Fe that dominate the opacity in
radiation-driven stellar winds, stellar interiors, and atmospheres in
low metallicity stars results in the generation of higher amount of
ionizing photons (eg., Pauldrach et al., 1986 ; Vink & de Koter, 2005 ;
Steidel et al., 2016 ) . Furthermore, at lower metallicities due to
weaker stellar winds the mass loss is rate is low, thus most massive
stars retain their luminosity and continue to shine for an extended
time.

When stellar rotation is introduced to single stellar population models,
due to the higher fraction of W-R stars in higher metallicity
environments, rotational stellar models with higher metallicity show a
larger increment ( @xmath EW) in ionization flux compared to the
increment seen in lower metallicity models (Leitherer et al., 2014 ) .
However, at @xmath Myr low metallicity rotating stellar models on
average show higher amount of ionising flux compared to higher
metallicities.

When binary interactions are considered, the mass transfer between the
binaries result in the increase of angular momentum of the stars causing
an increase in stellar rotation (de Mink et al., 2013 ) . Additionally,
at Z @xmath if stars with M @xmath /M @xmath @xmath M @xmath has
accreted @xmath of its original mass, BPASS assumes that the star
maintains its rapid rotation throughout its main-sequence lifetime
(Stanway et al., 2016 ) . This is driven by weaker stellar winds that
allow the stars to maintain their rapid rotations for a prolonged
period. Furthermore, rotationally induced mixing of stellar layers
causes Hydrogen burning to be efficient resulting in rejuvenation of the
main sequence stars. As we show in Section 5.3.1 , stellar rotation
increases the production of ionizing photons and therefore lower
metallicity systems with binary interactions show higher H @xmath EW
values. Lower cooling efficiencies prominent in lower metallicity
environments, also result in the stars to be bluer and brighter.
Comparisons between S99 Geneva models with Z=0.002 and Z=0.014 suggest
metallicity to have a prominent effect in increasing the H @xmath -EWs
compared to stellar rotation. BPASS models also show metallicity effects
to be prominent compared to effects by stellar rotation and binary
interactions.

Therefore, we conclude that within the scope of current stellar models,
metallicity to be the prominent driver in increasing the H @xmath -EWs
with stellar rotation and binary interactions contributing to a lesser
degree.

In Figure 5.16 (top panels), we show the evolution of a @xmath IMF
constant SFH stellar tracks from BPASS with varying metallicities. The
variation in metallicity in the H @xmath EW vs @xmath colour is
degenerated with IMF variation. Models with lower metallicities favour
higher EWs and bluer colours compared to their higher metallicity
counterparts.

Next, we explore whether gas phase metallicities computed for our
galaxies (Kacprzak et al., 2015 , 2016 ) suggest sufficiently low
stellar metallicities to produce ionising flux to explain the high-EW
galaxies within a @xmath IMF scenario. Converting gas-phase oxygen
abundance to stellar iron abundance in high-z galaxies is nontrivial.
First, there are considerable systematic uncertainties in the gas phase
metallicities measured using [N ii ]/H @xmath ratios. There are
uncalibrated interrelations between ionization parameter, electron
density and radiation field hardness at @xmath (Kewley et al., 2013 ) .
For example, at a fixed metallicity, the [N ii ]/H @xmath ratio can be
enhanced by a lower ionization parameter or the presence of shocks (eg.,
Yuan et al., 2012 ; Morales-Luis et al., 2013 ) and it is unknown
whether the N/O ratio evolves with redshifts (Steidel et al., 2014 ) .
From Kacprzak et al. ( 2015 ) , the gas-phase oxygen abundance of our
sample at @xmath is @xmath Z @xmath , however, the systematic
uncertainty can be a factor of @xmath 2 because of the unknown
calibrations. Because of this, we emphasize that metallicity can be
compared reliably in a relative sense, but not yet on an absolute scale
(Kewley & Ellison, 2008 ) .

Second, there is limited knowledge on how iron abundances relative to
@xmath element (e.g, O, Mg, Si, S and Ca) abundance change over cosmic
time and in different galactic environments (eg., Wolfe et al., 2005 ;
Kobayashi et al., 2006 ; Yuan et al., 2015 ) . In addition, there is a
lack of consistency in abundance scale used in stellar atmosphere
modelling, stellar evolutionary tracks and nebular models (Nicholls
et al., 2016 ) . There are considerable variations in the [O/Fe] ratios
that are not well-calibrated at the low metallicity end. For example, at
[Fe/H] @xmath the extrapolated [O/Fe] ratio based on Milky Way data is
0.5 (Nicholls et al., 2016 ) , with a @xmath dex uncertainty in
conversions of individual values (eg., Stoll et al., 2013 ) . Steidel
et al. ( 2016 ) argued an average [O/Fe] ratio of 0.74 for @xmath UV
selected galaxies at oxygen nebular metallicity of @xmath Z @xmath ,
suggesting a substantially lower stellar metallicity of [Fe/H] @xmath .
If we adopt the [O/Fe] ratio of Steidel et al. ( 2016 ) , then we would
reach the same conclusion as Steidel et al. ( 2016 ) that our stellar
abundance is [Fe/H] @xmath . In this case, we cannot completely rule out
extremely low metallicity scenarios to explain the distribution of
galaxies in the H @xmath EW vs @xmath colour space. With @xmath ( @xmath
) dust corrections between BPASS binary models with stellar metallicity
of Z=0.02 to Z=0.002, the amount of objects that lie @xmath above the
reference @xmath track changes from @xmath ( @xmath ) to @xmath ( @xmath
).

Given all the uncertainties mentioned above, we think it is premature to
convert our gas-phase oxygen abundance to stellar iron abundance and
draw meaningful conclusions. We further note that there are significant
uncertainties in massive star evolution in SSP codes and the treatment
of stellar rotation and binary stars, which we discuss further in
Section 5.5.4 .

#### 5.3.4 High mass cutoff

Hoversten & Glazebrook ( 2008 ) showed that the high mass cutoff is
degenerated with IMF in the H @xmath EW vs @xmath colour. In Figure 5.16
(bottom panels) we show various IMF slopes with constant SFHs computed
for varying values of high mass cutoff. The deviation between tracks
with 80M @xmath and 120M @xmath high mass cutoff varies as a function of
IMF slope. Shallower IMFs will have a larger effect when the high mass
cutoff is increased due to the high number of stars that will populate
the high mass regions.

The maximum deviation for the high mass cutoffs for the @xmath tracks is
0.17 dex, which cannot describe the scatter we notice in H @xmath EWs of
our sample. Furthermore, at @xmath we expect the molecular clouds
forming the stars to be of low metallicity (Kacprzak et al., 2016 ) ,
which favours the formation of high mass stars. Therefore, we require
the high mass cutoff to increase, but we are limited by the maximum
individual stellar mass allowed by PEGASE. BPASSv2 does allow stars up
to 300M @xmath , however, we do not employ such high mass limits due to
our poor understanding of evolution of massive stars. We conclude that
it is extremely unlikely that the high mass cutoff to have a strong
influence on the distribution of the ZFIRE-SP sample galaxies in the H
@xmath EW vs @xmath colour parameter space.

### 5.4 Dependencies with other observables

In this section, we investigate if the H @xmath EW vs @xmath colour
distribution show any relationship with environment, stellar mass, SFR,
and metallicity of the galaxies.

ZFIRE surveyed the Spitler et al. ( 2012 ); Yuan et al. ( 2014 )
structure to great detail to probe the effects on environment on galaxy
evolution. To date, there are 51 spectroscopically confirmed cluster
candidates with ZFOURGE counterparts out of which 38 galaxies are
included in our IMF analysis. The other 13 galaxies are removed from our
analysis due to the following reasons: eight galaxies are flagged as
AGN, two galaxies do not meet the @xmath quality cut for our study, two
galaxies give negative spectroscopic flux values and one object due to
extreme sky line interference. We perform a 2-sample K-S test on the H
@xmath EW values and @xmath colours for the continuum detected cluster
and field galaxies in our ZFIRE-SP sample and find the cluster and field
samples to have similar parent properties. Therefore, we conclude that
there are no strong environmental effects on the distribution of
galaxies in our parameter space.

For the 22 continuum detected galaxies in common between Kacprzak et al.
( 2015 ) sample and ZFIRE-SP sample, we find no statistically
significant differences between high and low metallicity samples for H
@xmath EWs and @xmath colours.

We further use the Salpeter IMF tracks with constant SFHs to compare the
EW excess of our continuum detected sample with stellar mass and SFR. In
Figure 5.17 (left panels) we show the EW excess as a function of stellar
mass. We divide the sample into low mass ( @xmath ) and high mass (
@xmath ) bins and compute the scatter in EW excess to find that there is
a greater tendency for low mass galaxies to show larger scatter in EW
offsets.

Looking for IMF change as a function of SFR is inherently problematic,
especially if SFR is itself computed from the H @xmath flux assuming a
universal IMF. Nevertheless in order to compare with Gunawardhana et al.
( 2011 ) we show this in Figure 5.17 (centre panels) and confirm the
trend they found of EW offset for higher “SFR” objects. However we
refrain from interpreting this as a systematic trend for IMF variation.
By using best-fitting SEDs from ZFOURGE, we compute the UV+IR SFRs
(Tomczak et al., 2014 ) and find that there is a greater tendency for
low UV+IR SFR galaxies to show larger EW offsets, which is shown by
Figure 5.17 (right panels).

### 5.5 Discussion

#### 5.5.1 Comparison with local studies

Our study follows a method first outlined by Kennicutt ( 1983 ) and
later implemented on large data sets by Hoversten & Glazebrook ( 2008 )
and Gunawardhana et al. ( 2011 ) to study the IMF of star-forming
galaxies. We find that, the distribution of H @xmath EWs and optical
colour at @xmath to be unlikely to be driven by a sample of galaxies
with a universal Salpeter like IMF. Hoversten & Glazebrook ( 2008 )
found a trend with galaxy luminosity with low luminosity galaxies in
SDSS favouring a steeper IMF and the highest luminosity ones showing a
Salpeter slope. Gunawardhana et al. ( 2011 ) found a systematic variance
in IMF as a function of SFR in GAMA galaxies with the highest-SFR
galaxies lying above the Salpeter track. However, we note that the use
of @xmath colour by the @xmath studies may have given rise to additional
complexities in the analysis, by introducing significant emission line
contamination, and the use of SFR as a variable in IMF change is
problematic as its calculation depends on IMF and H @xmath luminosity.

Comparing our results with the local galaxies of HG08 show distinctive
differences in the H @xmath EW vs @xmath colour distribution. Since
galaxies at @xmath had only @xmath Gyr to evolve, we observe younger,
bluer stellar populations giving rise to tighter @xmath colours
(distributed around 0.082 mag with a standard deviation of 0.085 mag).
However, HG08 galaxy sample comprise of much redder colours with a
larger scatter in @xmath . In a smooth star-formation scenario, we
interpret the large scatter of the HG08 sample in @xmath colour space to
be driven by the large variety of ages of the galaxies.

Galaxies at @xmath show a large range in H @xmath EWs compared to @xmath
results. In our analysis, we investigated several key factors that may
contribute to the large scatter of H @xmath EW at @xmath . Compared to
@xmath galaxy populations, we expect galaxies at @xmath to be young,
actively star-forming in various environments and physical conditions
that may be distinctively different from local conditions. Therefore,
effects such as starbursts may be prominent and dust properties may have
significant variation, which can influence the observed H @xmath EW
values. Galaxy mergers and multiple starburst phases in the evolutionary
history of @xmath galaxies add additional layers of complexity.
Furthermore, the presence of old stellar populations requires H @xmath
absorption to be corrected, which we expect to be negligible at @xmath .
Due to the limited evolutionary time-scale at @xmath (only 3 Gyr), we
consider most of these effects to have no significant influence on our
analysis. However, we cannot completely rule out effects of dust
sight-lines to our analysis, which we discuss further in Section 5.5.3 .

The development of much advanced stellar tracks and greater
understanding of stellar properties allow us to explore uncertainties
related to stellar modelling that may significantly influence the
observed parameters of galaxies at @xmath .

#### 5.5.2 What do we really find?

In Section 5.1.5 , we showed that our ZFIRE selected sample was not
preferentially biased towards extremely high star-forming galaxies and
that our mass-complete @xmath sample is sensitive to quite low EWs.
Since observational bias appears not to be the explanation we can
investigate physical factors that drive the difference in the ZFIRE-SP
sample from universal Salpeter like IMF scenarios in the H @xmath EW vs
@xmath colour plane.

H @xmath flux is a direct probe of the SFR on time scales of @xmath Myr,
the continuum level at 6563Å provides an estimate of the mass of the old
stellar populations, and therefore, H @xmath EW is a proxy for the sSFR.
Similarly, for monotonic SFHs, the optical colours change smoothly with
time, so the @xmath colour is a second proxy for the sSFR, but with
different IMF sensitivity. Of the two sSFR measures the H @xmath EW is
the most sensitive to the highest mass stars, so one way to express our
result is to state that there is an excess of ionising photons (i.e. H
@xmath ) at a given SFR compared to a Salpeter-slope model. A similar
result was found by Steidel et al. ( 2016 ) for a stacked galaxy
spectrum, however the excess of ionising photons was attributed to the
effects of binary stars.

Shivaei et al. ( 2015 , 2016 ) found that the Calzetti et al. ( 2000 )
dust law with a @xmath gives the best agreement between H @xmath derived
SFRs and UV+IR derived SFRs. Given the excess in ionising photons that
is observed by H @xmath flux is also transferred to higher UV flux and
higher dust processed IR flux, such agreements are not in contradiction
with our result.

In our sample, with @xmath dust corrections, @xmath 50% galaxies have an
excess of high mass stars for a given sSFR compared to the expectation
by a Salpeter like IMF. By stacking galaxies in mass and @xmath colour
bins, we can average out stochastic variations in SFHs between galaxies.
Our stacking results further confirmed that on average, for all masses
and sSFR values, a universal IMF cannot produce the observed galaxy
distribution in the H @xmath EW vs @xmath colour space. We performed
further analysis to understand other mechanisms that may drive this
excess in H @xmath EW for a given sSFR.

#### 5.5.3 Dust and starbursts

The dust extinction values in our analysis were derived using FAST,
which uses underlying assumptions of IMF and SFH to produce best-fitting
stellar parameters to galaxy observables. Our own analysis of dust
showed SED derived extinction values from the UV slope to have a strong
dependence on the assumed IMF. However for the purposes of testing
consistency with a universal Salpeter-slope this suffices.

We further found that differential extinction in dust between the
stellar continuum and nebular emission line regions can introduce
significant scatter to galaxies in the H @xmath EW vs @xmath colour
parameter space. By analysing Balmer decrement values for a subset of
galaxies in our sample, we found that, there was significant scatter in
the relation between extinction of nebular and stellar continuum regions
( @xmath ), which can be attributed to differences in dust sight-lines
between galaxies. Reddy et al. ( 2015 ) showed that this scatter in
extinction to be a function of H @xmath SFR, where galaxies with higher
star-forming activity shows larger nebular extinction compared to
galaxies with low SFRs. We test this by allowing @xmath values to vary
as a free parameter in the H @xmath EW vs @xmath colour space for each
galaxy to force agreement with a universal Salpeter like IMF. Our
results showed extreme values for the distribution of @xmath , including
unphysical negative values, suggesting that it is extremely unlikely
that the scatter in the H @xmath EW vs @xmath colour space is driven
solely by the variation of @xmath values.

Starbursts in galaxies can introduce significant scatter in the H @xmath
EW vs @xmath colour space. We implemented a stacking procedure for the
galaxies in mass and colour bins to remove stochastic SFHs of individual
galaxies, treating them as an ensemble stellar population with a smooth
SFH prior to @xmath . We found that, our stacks on average ( @xmath of
the @xmath stacks and @xmath of the @xmath stacks) favour shallower IMF
slopes compared to the traditional @xmath values from Salpeter. By
performing Monte Carlo simulations of starbursts using PEGASE SSP models
we found that time-scales of bursts makes it extremely unlikely for them
to account for the galaxies which lie significantly above the @xmath
track.

#### 5.5.4 Dependencies on SSP models and stellar libraries

We compared the evolution of model galaxies in the H @xmath EW vs @xmath
colours using PEGASE and Starburst99 SSP codes to conclude that the
evolution of these parameters are largely independent of the SSP models
used for a given stellar library. The @xmath colours were designed in
order to avoid strong emission lines regions in the rest-frame optical
spectra which averts the need of complicated photo-ionization codes to
generate nebular emission lines. H @xmath flux is generated using a
constant value to convert Lyman continuum photons to H @xmath photons,
which is similar between PEGASE and S99.

We found that, stellar libraries play a vital role in determining the
evolutionary tracks of galaxies in the H @xmath EW vs @xmath colour
parameter space. Stellar libraries with rotation show higher amounts of
ionizing flux which results in higher H @xmath EW values for a given
@xmath colour. Leitherer et al. ( 2014 ) further showed that rotation
leads to larger convective cores in stars increasing the total
bolometric luminosity, which can mimic a shallower IMF. At @xmath =
0.61, introducing stellar rotation via Geneva stellar tracks with
Z=0.014 results in @xmath . Therefore, we found that rotation cannot
itself account for the scatter of our sample in H @xmath EW vs @xmath
colour parameter space at near solar metallicities.

Consideration of binary stellar systems is imperative to understand the
stellar properties of @xmath galaxies (Steidel et al., 2016 ) . However,
added complexity arises due to angular momentum transfer during binary
star interactions. This may influence the rotation of the galaxies and
therefore it is necessary to consider the evolution of binary stars with
detailed prescriptions of stellar rotation. Metallicity of the stars
become important in such scenarios, which is a strong factor that
regulates the evolution of stellar rotation. However, adding additional
degrees of freedom for SSP models makes it harder to constrain their
values, thus resulting in extra uncertainties (Leitherer et al., 2014 )
. At @xmath = 0.61, introducing the effect of binaries via BPASS models
resulted in @xmath . Comparing results between S99 (single stellar
population stellar tracks with and without rotation) and BPASS (single
and binary stellar tracks with rotation), we found stellar rotation to
have a larger contribution to the @xmath EW compared to binaries. Direct
comparisons require further work to investigate differences in the
evolution of stellar systems between S99 and BPASS SSP codes.

We found low stellar metallicities (Z @xmath 0.002) to have a strong
influence in increasing the H @xmath EWs for a given @xmath colour. At
@xmath = 0.61, reducing the metallicity of BPASS binary models from
Z=0.02 to Z=0.002 resulted in @xmath . This was largely driven by the
increase in the number of ionization photons in the stellar populations
due to lower opacities, lower mass loss via stellar winds, and sustained
stellar rotation. Interactions between stars also contribute to an
increase in ionising flux. When considering the ionization energy
generated by a stellar population, effects of stellar rotation is
degenerated with the abundance of high mass stars (see Figure 16 of
Szécsi et al. ( 2015 ) ). Therefore, we cannot completely rule out
effects of stars with extremely low metallicities to describe the
distribution of our galaxies in the H @xmath EW vs @xmath colour
parameter space. In Section 5.3.3 , we provided a thorough analysis of
the gas phase metallicities derived for the ZFIRE sample by Kacprzak
et al. ( 2015 ) and Kacprzak et al. ( 2016 ) and inferred the metal
abundances of stellar systems, which is a primary regulator of ionising
photons. However, uncertainties in deriving gas phase abundances of
elements via nebular emission line ratios (driven by our limited
understanding of the ionization parameter at low metallicities),
uncertainties in computing relative abundances of @xmath elements in
stellar systems, and our limited understanding on linking gas phase
metallicities to stellar metallicities in @xmath stellar populations
constrains our ability to distinguish between effects of metallicity and
IMF.

#### 5.5.5 Case for the IMF

So far we have investigated various scenarios (summarised in Table 5.2 )
that could explain the distribution of the ZFIRE-SP sample galaxies in
the H @xmath EW vs @xmath colour without invoking changes in the IMF.
However, none of the scenarios by itself could best describe the
distribution of our galaxies.

The galaxies in our sample have stellar masses between @xmath and we
expect these galaxies to grow in stellar mass during cosmic time to be
galaxies with stellar masses of @xmath at @xmath (De Lucia & Blaizot,
2007 ; van Dokkum et al., 2013 ; Genel et al., 2014 ; Papovich et al.,
2015 ) . Recent studies of ETGs with physically motivated models have
shown the possibility for a two phase star-formation (eg., Ferreras
et al., 2015 ) . Furthermore recent semi-analytic models have shown that
a varying IMF best reproduces observed galaxy chemical abundances of
ETGs (eg., Lacey et al., 2016 ; Fontanot et al., 2017 , and references
therein) . According to these models, ETGs, during their starburst
phases at high-redshift are expected to produce higher fraction of high
mass stars (shallower IMFs). Gunawardhana et al. ( 2011 ) showed that
@xmath star-forming galaxies also show an IMF dependence, where highly
star-forming galaxies prefer shallower IMFs.

If we consider a varying IMF hypothesis, our results are consistent with
a scenario where star-forming galaxies form stars with a high fraction
of high mass stars compared to their local ETG counterparts. With lower
metallicities and higher SFRs prominent at @xmath , we expect the
fragmentation of molecular clouds to favour the formation of larger
stars due to lower cooling efficiencies and higher heating efficiencies
due to radiation from the young massive stars (Larson, 2005 ) . Krumholz
et al. ( 2010 ) showed that radiation trapping prominent in high
star-forming regions of dense gas surface density can also favour the
formation of massive stars. If we allow the IMF to vary in our analysis,
the distribution of the ZFIRE-SP sample in H @xmath EW vs @xmath colour
space can be explained, however values as shallow as @xmath could be
required. This could be problematic for chemical evolution models and
have implications to how galaxies form and evolve (Romano et al., 2005 )
. We note that invoking extremely shallow IMFs can have a significant
influence on the inferred evolution of the universe. Therefore, it is
imperative to fully understand these observations and test alternate
explanations.

#### 5.5.6 Effect of IMF variation on fundamental quantities

If the IMF does vary, we need to consider the potential effect on the
basic parameters in our input ZFIRE survey, which were calculated using
a Chabrier IMF (Chabrier, 2003 ) . First we consider possible effects on
the calculation of our rest frame @xmath colours. This should not have a
significant effect for several reasons: first we are only using the
spectral models as an interpolator, and by design we are interpolating
only across a small redshift range. At @xmath the interpolated and
observed colours agree well as discussed in Appendix B. Second we note
that the main effect is an increased scatter in the EW axis (Figure 5.3
), once dust corrected the colours are quite tight. Finally we note that
at these young ages everything is quite blue, hence quite flat spectra
are being interpolated.

Next is the effect on SFR and stellar mass, which have been used in many
of the previous ZFIRE papers (Yuan et al., 2014 ; Tran et al., 2015 ;
Kacprzak et al., 2015 ; Alcorn et al., 2016 ; Kacprzak et al., 2016 ;
Kewley et al., 2016 ; Nanayakkara et al., 2016 ) , and here in our own
mass selection. To quantify the change in mass we run PEGASE for @xmath
and constant SFH models and estimate the change in @xmath -band
mass-to-light ratio ( @xmath K-band at @xmath ) for ages 1–3 Gyr. We
find for @xmath the change in mass-to-light is @xmath dex, with
shallower IMFs resulting in a lower stellar mass. Thus we conclude that
our stellar mass selection is only slightly effected by the possible IMF
variations we have identified.

The effect is much more severe for H @xmath derived star-formation rates
(Tran et al., 2015 , 2017 ) as these directly count the number of the
most massive stars, a sensitivity we have exploited in this paper to
measure IMF. For @xmath the change is @xmath dex. UV and far-IR derived
SFRs are more complicated. The rest-frame UV is more sensitive to
intermediate mass stars, at 1500Å the change in flux is @xmath dex for
@xmath . The far-IR is from younger stars in deeper dust-enshrouded
regions, at least in local galaxies (Kennicutt, 1998b ) . It is common
at high-redshift to use an indicator that combines UV and far-IR (eg.,
Tomczak et al., 2014 ) . These are often calibrated using stellar
population models with idealized SFHs, and traditional IMFs and for a
fixed dust mass the balance between UV and IR luminosities will depend
on dust geometry, IMF, and SFH (Kennicutt, 1998b ; Calzetti, 2013 ) .
Therefore, IMF change could lead to difficulties in predicting the true
underlying SFR of stellar populations.

### 5.6 Summary & Future Work

We have used data from the ZFIRE survey along with multi-wavelength
photometric data from ZFOURGE to study properties of a sample of
star-forming galaxies in cluster and filed environments at @xmath . By
using the H @xmath EW and rest-frame optical colour of the galaxies we
performed a thorough analysis to understand what physical properties
could drive the distribution of galaxies in this parameter space. We
have improved on earlier analysis by deriving synthetic rest-frame
filters that remove emission line contamination. We analysed effects
from dust, starbursts, metallicity, stellar rotation, and binary stars
in order to investigate whether the distribution of the ZFIRE-SP
sample galaxies could be explained within a universal IMF framework.
We found that:

-   ZFIRE-SP sample galaxies show a large range of H @xmath EW values,
    with @xmath rd of the sample showing extremely high values compared
    to expectation from a @xmath Salpeter like IMF. Compared to the HG08
    SDSS sample, galaxies at @xmath show bluer colours with a larger
    scatter in H @xmath EW values.

-   The difference in extinction between nebular and stellar emission
    line regions ( @xmath ) in galaxies can have a strong influence in
    determining the distribution of galaxies in the H @xmath EW vs
    @xmath colour space. Our Balmer decrement studies for a sub-sample
    of galaxies showed a large scatter in @xmath values. However, we
    showed that considering @xmath value as a free parameter cannot
    describe the distribution of galaxies in the H @xmath EW vs @xmath
    colour space.

-   Starbursts can increase the H @xmath EW to extreme values providing
    an alternative explanation to IMF for a subset of our galaxies with
    high H @xmath EW values. By implementing a stacking technique to
    remove stochastic SFHs of individual galaxies we concluded that on
    average our ZFIRE-SP sample still shows higher H @xmath EW values
    for a given @xmath colour compared to a @xmath Salpeter like IMF. We
    further used Monte Carlo simulations to study time scales of
    starbursts to conclude that it was extremely unlikely that
    starbursts could explain the H @xmath EW vs @xmath colour
    distribution of a large fraction of our galaxies.

-   Stellar rotation, binaries, and the high mass cutoff of SSP models
    could influence the distribution of galaxies in the H @xmath EW vs
    @xmath colour parameter space. However, the individual effects of
    these were not sufficient to explain the distribution of the
    observed galaxies.

-   Considering multiple effects together can describe the galaxies in
    our parameter space. We showed that the fraction of galaxies above
    the @xmath tracks reduces to @xmath when considering stellar tracks
    with high initial rotations ( @xmath =0.4 @xmath ) and equal dust
    extinction between nebular and stellar regions.

-   Including single or binary stars with stellar rotation in extreme
    low metallicity scenarios can significantly increase the H @xmath
    EWs and is also one explanation to describe the distribution of our
    galaxies in H @xmath EW vs @xmath colour parameter space. However,
    gas phase metallicity analysis of the ZFIRE sample by Kacprzak
    et al. ( 2015 ) and Kacprzak et al. ( 2016 ) rules our such low
    metallicities for our sample. We note that calibration of emission
    line ratios and differences between stellar and ionized gas
    metallicities at @xmath are uncertainties that may impact our
    inference about the stellar metallicity of our sample.

-   A non-universal high-mass IMF, varying between galaxies, could
    explain the distribution of galaxies in this parameter space. The H
    @xmath excess shows a broad trend with larger offsets for the less
    massive @xmath galaxies. We also confirm the same systematic trend
    in IMF slope with Chabrier-derived SFR as shown by Gunawardhana
    et al. ( 2011 ) but we refrain from interpreting this.

-   Within the scope of our study, for @xmath the variation in high-mass
    IMF slope can lead to changes in mass-to-light ratios of up to
    @xmath dex. Furthermore, ignoring calibration offsets we compute
    that H @xmath SFRs can show deviations up to @xmath dex.

## Chapter 6 Conclusions

This thesis has focused on enhancing our understanding of galaxies at a
time period when the universe was actively star-forming producing most
of the currently observed baryonic matter (stellar matter). To
understand the true nature of galaxies during such intense evolutionary
times, it is imperative to probe galaxies in mass and/or magnitude
complete samples. Photometry and colours of galaxies provide us with
vital clues about their fundamental properties. By observing galaxies
using multi-wavelength photometry, astronomers derived SEDs to study
galaxies in the distant universe. However, photometric studies do not
give us the full story. There are inherent degeneracies associated with
SED fitting techniques, coupled with our lack of understanding of the
accuracy of model templates used in SED fitting for high- @xmath
galaxies that may lead to complications in photometric studies.
Furthermore, most inherent galaxy properties are probed via emission and
absorption lines of nebular and stellar content of galaxies and even
narrow band photometry cannot resolve such individual features.
Therefore, at any redshift, spectroscopic observations of galaxies are
vital to accurately understand fundamental galaxy properties.

Traditionally, spectroscopic surveys at @xmath have been biased towards
high star-forming galaxies and thus have been unable to draw strong
conclusions on galaxy evolution properties at high- @xmath by allowing
direct comparisons with local galaxy populations. This bias has been
driven by two main reasons.

1.  Astronomers were unable to accurately select non-biased samples of
    galaxies from photometry for spectroscopic follow-up.

2.  Most well know properties of galaxies in local galaxy populations
    are probed via rest-frame UV and optical emission/absorption lines
    that are redshifted to the NIR, thus requiring sensitive,
    multiplexed NIR detectors to observe galaxies, which were lacking in
    large telescopes.

This thesis take advantage of the new generation of NIR instruments and
sophisticated SED fitting techniques to probe galaxy samples at @xmath
to study:

1.  The importance of spectroscopic redshifts in determining galaxy
    properties.

2.  The stellar initial mass function of galaxies.

In Chapter 2 , an introduction to the ZFIRE survey was provided. By
taking advantage of high quality photometry from ZFOURGE, which used
state-of-the-art medium-band imaging from FourStar and the wealth of
public legacy data, ZFIRE survey was designed to probe regions of
interest between @xmath with spectroscopy using the newly commissioned
MOSFIRE instrument. Even though there were fundamental uncertainties
with regard to IMFs, SFHs, dust parametrizations, metallicities, and
nebular emission lines in the SED fits used by ZFOURGE, spectral
features important to derive photometric redshifts occurred around the
NIR wavelengths allowing high quality photometric redshifts to be
determined. ZFOURGE being a mass complete survey at @xmath along with
the exceptionally accurate photometric redshifts, enabled ZFIRE survey
to select galaxies to lower stellar masses and low luminosities with
very high accuracy. A detailed description of the sample selection
process, observing strategy, and data reduction methods were outlined in
Chapter 2 .

Chapter 3 investigated basic properties of the observed galaxy samples
of ZFIRE survey. Data for two legacy fields, COSMOS and UDS were
analysed here to show the redshift distribution and completeness of the
first ZFIRE data release. The COSMOS field was further analysed to
investigate detection limits of the ZFIRE survey, assess the rest-frame
UVJ completeness, and probe the spatial coverage of the @xmath density
structure spectroscopically confirmed by Yuan et al. ( 2014 ) .
Furthermore, photometric legacy surveys such as ZFOURGE, UKIDSS, NMBS,
and 3DHST were used to compute photometric and grism redshift
accuracies. It was evident at @xmath , the deep imaging of ZFOURGE
survey in the NIR medium band filters resulted in high quality
photometric redshifts. However, even photometric redshift accuracies of
@xmath such as from ZFOURGE, was still not sufficient to probe
gravitationally bound structures at @xmath , thus asserting the need for
spectroscopy. The high spectroscopic completeness of the ZFIRE
detections in the K band COSMOS field at @xmath allowed me to study the
importance of spectroscopic redshifts in determining galaxy properties
via SED fitting techniques. Analysis of SFR and mass showed that they
correlate with redshift error. SFR had a large scatter with redshift
error, which was attributed to the strong dependence of UV flux in
determining the SFR by SED fitting codes. The rest-frame UVJ selection
of galaxies also showed a dependence in redshift, with (U @xmath V)
colours showing stronger dependence to redshift error. Therefore,
spectroscopic redshifts provided greater accuracy in determining
fundamental galaxy properties via SED fitting codes.

However, it is important to note the underlying assumptions of SED
templates that may have significantly influenced derived galaxy
properties. One such assumed parameter is the stellar IMF. Chapters 4
and 5 discussed the analysis of the IMF of a sample of @xmath
star-forming galaxies using the ZFIRE survey. By removing AGN and strong
sky line contaminants form the ZFIRE K band sample, the H @xmath EWs
were derived for 102 galaxies, out of which 46 had strong continuum
detections. This sample was shown to be a representative of @xmath
star-forming galaxies that probe the SFR-Main Sequence without any bias
towards extremely high star-forming galaxies. Using the H @xmath EW vs
optical colour parameter space, which has been used extensively to probe
the IMF of @xmath star-forming populations, Chapter 5 showed that
galaxies at @xmath show a significant amount of scatter with 1/3rd of
the population showing high H @xmath EW values compared to a Salpeter
IMF for a given @xmath colour. Multiple avenues were explored to explain
the scatter in this parameter space, with change in IMF slope being one
of them. Effects of dust sight lines were shown to have an effect on
determining the scatter in this parameter space, however, by varying the
factor that determined the difference in extinction between stellar and
nebular regions, it was shown that dust sight-lines could not explain
the high H @xmath EW galaxies. Monte Carlo simulations of PEGASE models
with star-bursts and stacking analysis of the ZFIRE-SP sample ruled out
star-bursts to be a driver for the observed high H @xmath EW galaxies.
Stellar rotation, binary stars, metallicity, and upper mass cutoff of
the IMF were explored and ruled out to be viable to explain the observed
population. Therefore, the analysis concluded that the change in IMF to
be the strongest contender to explain the large scatter in H @xmath EW,
specially for galaxies with high EWs compared to Salpeter IMF
expectations.

The scatter in H @xmath EW vs optical colours for the ZFIRE-SP
sample showed no statistically significant difference for the cluster
and field sample. Metallicity, probed via [N ii ]/H @xmath ratios showed
no dependence on environments either. By computing the EW excess in
comparison to a Salpeter IMF, it was found that low mass galaxies tend
to show larger offsets compared to high mass galaxies. H @xmath SFRs
showed a similar trend to Gunawardhana et al. ( 2011 ) , with high
star-forming galaxies showing larger positive offsets in H @xmath EW
from the Salpeter Slope compared to low star-forming galaxies. However,
due to the inherent circular nature of probing systematic offsets of the
IMF using the same proxy that is used to determine the SFR, this
observed trend is difficult to interpret.

IMF change is an important topic as the IMF determines basic parameters
such as stellar mass and star-formation rate, which are used to derive
broad conclusions about galaxy evolution. An example set of rest-frame
UV spectra are shown in Figure 6.1 . As evident, for shallower IMFs, the
rest-frame UV flux is extremely prominent compared to redder
wavelengths. Therefore, change in IMF has significant influence to
galaxy properties derived using UV spectral values. By considering a
change in IMF slope between @xmath to @xmath , it was found that the
mass-to-light ratio in the R band can change up to @xmath dex, where
galaxies with shallower IMFs will result in lower mass galaxies for an
observed R band luminosity. H @xmath derived SFRs showed larger
dependence in IMF slope, where changes were up to @xmath dex between
@xmath and @xmath . However, SFR measures are calibrated using an
assumed IMF, and thus introduces added complexity if IMF is treated as a
varying parameter.

What was observed by ZFIRE was a population of galaxies with high H
@xmath equivalent widths, i.e. an excess of ionising photons for a given
colour, with intermittent starbursts and alternate stellar population
models ruled out as explanations. Such high-EW objects appear to become
more common at high-redshift, for example similar observations have been
reported at @xmath by multiple studies (eg., Malhotra & Rhoads, 2002 ;
Finkelstein et al., 2011 ; McLinden et al., 2011 ; Hashimoto et al.,
2013 ; Stark et al., 2013 ) and have even been invoked at @xmath as an
explanation for cosmological re-ionisation (Labbé et al., 2013 ; Labbé,
2015 ; Schenker, 2015 ; Stark et al., 2017 ) . It seems reasonable to
hypothesize that the abundance of high-EW objects is evolving towards
high-redshift and this study observed this at @xmath .

Is IMF change responsible? This currently seems to be the only
explanation that is not ruled out, but it is not yet determined what
would drive it to vary between individual galaxies. Since the IMF
directly influences the cosmic star-formation history and the chemical
evolution of the universe, any variations in the IMF should concurrently
agree with observational values of such quantities. For example, any
change in IMF should allow the cosmic star-formation history to be lower
than the upper limits allowed by the diffuse supernovae neutrino
background and higher than the lower limits allowed by observed
supernovae rates (Hopkins & Beacom, 2006 ) .

Recent hydrodynamical simulations and physically motivated models
suggest that galaxies during their peak star-formation episodes produce
stars with a preferential bias towards high mass stars (Marks et al.,
2012 ; Narayanan & Davé, 2012 ; Bekki & Meurer, 2013 ; Narayanan & Davé,
2013 ; Weidner et al., 2013 ; Chattopadhyay et al., 2015 ; Ferreras
et al., 2015 ) . However, caution is warranted when treating IMF as a
variable parameter during cosmic evolution. In order to observationally
confirm such models, further study is required to fully comprehend the
stellar population parameters of the @xmath galaxies to resolve whether
IMF is the main driver for the distribution of galaxies in the H @xmath
EW vs rest-frame optical colour parameter space.

### 6.1 Ideas for future work

This thesis outlined a typical research project, one that concludes with
more open questions than its beginning. However, astronomers now have
access to sensitive multiplexed NIR instruments that can be used
efficiently to probe galaxy populations at @xmath via photometric and
spectroscopic techniques.

The ZFOURGE survey has been a strong example in exhibiting the
accomplishments of NIR @xmath @xmath , and @xmath medium band filters in
determining high quality photometric redshifts up to @xmath . Prominent
spectral features such as the D4000 break used by SED fitting techniques
fall to the K band beyond this redshift, and therefore by breaking the
classical broadband K filter in to medium bands will allow high quality
photometric redshifts and to be probed up to @xmath and will enable
astronomers to determine fundamental galaxy properties of these galaxies
to high accuracy via SED fitting techniques.

It is imperative to acknowledge the underlying uncertainties that may
contribute to errors in galaxy properties derived via SED fitting
techniques, and therefore, future work should also consider the role of
SED templates used in SED fitting techniques. Comparisons between
empirically derived templates that are commonly used in SED fitting
codes such as FAST, with physically motivated models, such as from
MAGPHYS (da Cunha et al., 2008 ) will outline systematic effects in
determining galaxy properties. Physically motivated models may lead to
statistically robust values for dust, mass, SFRs, ages, and
metallicities of galaxies. Furthermore, templates currently used in SED
fitting codes does not include robust emission lines, which when
included will provide more meaningful results in determining galaxy
properties for active star-forming galaxies that are abundant in the
high redshift universe.

Our analysis of stellar population properties of the ZFIRE-SP sample has
shown that galaxies at @xmath are inherently different from local
star-forming populations. Therefore, future spectroscopic surveys should
probe galaxy properties via rest-frame UV and optical features along
with integral field spectrography to determine the true nature of
galaxies at these redshifts. Probing the nebular and stellar content of
galaxies with the capability to spatially resolve them in statistically
meaningful samples will allow better constrains to be made for
fundamental galaxy properties such as IMF, mass, SFR, dust, metallicity,
ISM conditions, gas fractions and will contribute to enhance our galaxy
evolution models.

Future work on stellar models is warranted to include stellar rotation
and binary stars as variable parameters along with sophisticated models
for stellar rotation and further detailed modelling of higher mass stars
in order to accurately determine stellar population properties of high-
@xmath galaxies. Surveys such as Gaia (Gaia Collaboration et al., 2016 )
will be instrumental to identify stars with various physical properties
in our Milky Way and will enable more robust stellar templates to be
built.

Furthermore, future studies should investigate the IMF by probing direct
stellar spectral signatures of galaxies, i.e., observations of
rest-frame UV flux will provide vital observational signatures to
indicate the presence of W-R stars, which contribute to excesses in
ionized He photons and is a proxy for the presence of short lived
massive stars, and therefore, can be used to further constrain the upper
end IMF. Additionally, the UV to optical flux ratios can also be used to
constrain the extreme upper end of the IMF (Meurer et al., 2009 ) as
well.

As shown by Figure 6.2 , stellar and ISM absorption features such as NV,
CIV show stronger absorption and P Cigni profiles for shallower IMFs.
The difference of these features between single and binary stellar
populations are subtle, however, binary populations always show higher
UV flux. The strength of the features vary as a function of stellar
metallicity and therefore, adds further complexities when determining
stellar population properties. Future work should consider a more
thorough statistical analysis using all the broad-band colour
information and multiple spectral diagnostics including simultaneous
modelling of effects of dust, starbursts, metallicity, stellar rotation,
binary star evolution, and high mass cutoff of stellar systems together
with systematic variances of the IMF. Rest-frame optical line ratios
such as [O iii ], H @xmath , [O ii ], and [S ii ] will allow properties
of the ionized gas to be determined to greater accuracy, while modelling
of rest-frame UV and optical features together will allow stronger
constraints to be made on the stellar and ionized gas properties of
galaxies (Steidel et al., 2016 ) . Through better understanding of the
differences between stars and ionized gas in galaxy spectra, exotic
stellar features such as stellar rotation, binaries, and stellar
metallicity effects can be probed into greater detail. A new generation
of stellar models are allowing many of these parameters to be varied and
tested.

Additionally, flexible SED fitting codes such as Prospector- @xmath
(Leja et al., 2016 ) has shown to be effective in predicting spectral
properties of local galaxies purely from photometric data. Prospector-
@xmath takes advantage of FIR emissions and UV slope obtained through
the photometry to fit non-parametric SFHs to galaxies via flexible
stellar population synthesis (Conroy et al., 2009 ; Conroy & Gunn, 2010
) code. The accuracy of predicted emission line features for @xmath
galaxies can be evaluated using spectra from surveys like ZFIRE and
using different stellar libraries the effects of stellar
rotation/binaries can be quantified to a greater depth.

Due to limitations in atmospheric windows, IR instruments can only probe
limited redshift intervals to probe rest-frame optical nebular emission
line properties. The launch of the James Webb Space Telescope in 2018
will provide the opportunity to probe rest-frame optical and
near-infrared stellar populations via high signal/noise absorption lines
and will revolutionise our understanding of the processes of
star-formation in the @xmath universe. Rest-frame NIR IMF sensitive
features such as [Ne iii ] /[Ne ii ]  ratios (see Rigby & Rieke ( 2004 )
) can be probed at higher redshifts through JWST. Furthermore, H @xmath
nebular emission lines can be probed beyond @xmath and will be
complemented by the large aperture and IFS capabilities of JWST, which
will allow SFR/IMF along with dust properties (via H @xmath /H @xmath )
to be probed in sub-galactic scales. Furthermore, ALMA observations can
be used to probe the molecular gas properties and obtain independent
measurements of the SFR via emission lines such as C ii of these galaxy
populations (Capak et al., 2015 ) . Therefore, combining observations of
JWST with ALMA will provide stronger constraints to be made on
star-formation conditions of the high redshift galaxy populations.

Local analogues can also be used to determine high- @xmath galaxy
properties. Surveys such as DYnamics of Newly-Assembled Massive Objects
(DYNAMO., Fisher et al., 2017 ) has shown the existence of a highly
selective population of local star-forming galaxies that resemble the
properties of high- @xmath galaxies with extremely high SFR surface
densities (Fisher et al., 2017 ) , high gas fractions (Fisher et al.,
2014 ) , and high H @xmath velocity dispersions (Green et al., 2010 ;
Bassett et al., 2014 ) . The high resolution IFS data available in such
surveys can be used to probe comparable properties to high- @xmath
galaxies with many observational advantages such as significantly less
exposure times, ability to probe with high angular and spatial
resolutions to deeper surface brightness limits, and also has the
inherent advantage of the optical wavelength regime, which has less
observational constraints compared to the NIR (Steidel et al., 2004 ) .

DYNAMO data could be used to probe the IMF via stellar population and
dynamical analysis allowing stronger constrains on stellar population
parameters. Furthermore, the high spatial resolution will allow the IMF
to be determined within star-forming regions in sub-kPc scales enabling
radial variations to be studied in gas phase metallicity, ionizing
radiation field, and ionization parameter and linking them with star
formation rates and clump stellar masses enhancing the understanding of
high- @xmath galaxy properties.

Studies of the stellar populations in local LSB galaxies can provide
stronger constraints on galaxy formation models. LSBs generally live in
low density environments and their H i rich disks and the lack of
molecular gas suggest extremely low interactions with their local
environments. Furthermore, most LSBs show normal bulges suggesting
normal SFHs in their past. Therefore, further detailed studies of LSBs
can provide unique insight into galaxy and stellar formation and
evolution models. Instruments such as DRAGONFLY (Abraham & van Dokkum,
2014 ) and KCWI (Morrissey et al., 2012 ) , that can probe low surface
brightness regions of galaxies will be crucial for such studies.

The future is looking bright for high- @xmath studies. JWST, along with
the new next generation of 30m class telescopes will allow astronomers
to probe galaxies in the deeper universe within the first 100 Myr of its
birth. Robust statistical samples of galaxies at @xmath that probes
fainter magnitudes and lower stellar masses will further improve our
understanding of galaxies in the low mass regime, how the first
generation of galaxies were formed, the fuelling and conditions of
star-formation, and answer the deep mysteries of the universe such as
the existence of young mature massive galaxies in the early universe.