##### Contents

-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 Scattering Amplitudes in Theory and Experiment
        -    1.1.1 Background Processes at the LHC
        -    1.1.2 Approaching Quantum Gravity?
    -    1.2 Scattering Amplitudes in the Complex Plane
        -    1.2.1 The Unitary and Analytic @xmath -Matrix
        -    1.2.2 Generalizing from Loops to Trees
        -    1.2.3 Full Amplitudes from Trees
    -    1.3 About This Thesis
        -    1.3.1 Omissions
        -    1.3.2 Outline
    -    1.4 Conclusion and Outlook
        -    1.4.1 A Competitor in the Calculation Race
        -    1.4.2 Understanding Quantum Field Theories
-    2 Preliminaries
    -    2.1 Colour Ordering
    -    2.2 Spinor Helicity Notation
    -    2.3 Tree-Level Structure of Yang–Mills Theory
        -    2.3.1 MHV Amplitudes
        -    2.3.2 Supersymmetry
        -    2.3.3 Limit Behaviour
    -    2.4 Gravity as a Quantum Field Theory
        -    2.4.1 The KLT Relations
        -    2.4.2 The @xmath Relation
-    3 Tree Level Methods
    -    3.1 Earlier Methods
    -    3.2 MHV Rules
        -    3.2.1 Basic Construction
        -    3.2.2 Gravity: A Puzzling Failure
        -    3.2.3 Fermions, Higgses, and Vector Bosons
    -    3.3 On-Shell Recursion Relations
        -    3.3.1 Using Cauchy’s Theorem on Yang–Mills Amplitudes
        -    3.3.2 Three-Point Amplitudes (and an Example)
        -    3.3.3 Asymptotic Behaviour of the Deformed Amplitude
        -    3.3.4 Some Consequences of BCFW on-shell recursion
        -    3.3.5 Extension to Other Theories and Deformations
-    4 MHV Rules from Recursion
    -    4.1 MHV Rules in Light of Recursion Relations
    -    4.2 The NMHV Case
    -    4.3 The NNMHV and General Cases
    -    4.4 MHV Rules for Gravity
    -    4.5 Large @xmath Properties of the MHV Rule Shift
-    5 Loop-Level Methods
    -    5.1 Structure of One-Loop Amplitudes
        -    5.1.1 Integral Reduction
        -    5.1.2 Massless Integral Basis in Four Dimensions
        -    5.1.3 Supersymmetric Decomposition
        -    5.1.4 Limits and Singularities
    -    5.2 Unitarity Cuts
        -    5.2.1 Ordinary @xmath Unitarity Cuts
        -    5.2.2 Generalized Unitarity
        -    5.2.3 Unitarity in @xmath
    -    5.3 MHV Rules for Loops: The BST Prescription
    -    5.4 Quadruple Cuts
        -    5.4.1 Basic idea in @xmath
        -    5.4.2 A Simple Example
        -    5.4.3 Box Coefficients in Other Theories
        -    5.4.4 Generalized Unitarity in Complexified Minkowski Space
    -    5.5 Recursion at Loop Level
        -    6 One-Loop Amplitudes in @xmath Super-Yang–Mills
            -    6.1 MHV Constructibility
            -    6.2 NMHV Amplitudes
                -    6.2.1 3 Mass Boxes, Gluons Only
                -    6.2.2 NMHV SWIs
                -    6.2.3 3 Mass Boxes with Two Fermions
                -    6.2.4 Beyond Two Fermions
                -    6.2.5 Beyond Three-Mass Boxes
                    -    7 One-Loop Amplitudes in @xmath Supergravity
                        -    7.1 One-Loop Structure of Maximal
                            Supergravity
                        -    7.2 Evidence for the No-Triangle Hypothesis
                            -    7.2.1 Box Coefficients and Soft
                                Divergences
                            -    7.2.2 Ruling Out Bubbles
                            -    7.2.3 Ruling Out Three-Mass Triangles
                            -    7.2.4 Factorization and Rational Terms
                        -    7.3 Conclusions
                            -    8 Amplitude with a Higgs
                                -    8.1 Higgs in the Large Top Mass
                                    Limit
                                -    8.2 A One-Loop Higgs Amplitude
                                    -    8.2.1 Cut-Constructible Pieces
                                    -    8.2.2 Rational Pieces
                                    -    8.2.3 Tests
                                        -    A Integral Functions
                                        -    B Solutions of Quadruple
                                            Cut Constraints
                                        -    C Passarino–Veltman
                                            Reduction of Cuts

## Chapter 1 Introduction

### 1.1 Scattering Amplitudes in Theory and Experiment

Ever since Physics arose as an empirical science, one of its main
objectives has been the identification and understanding of the
fundamental principles and constituents of Nature. Over time,
fundamental principles have changed or been extended, and constituents
regarded as fundamental have been found to contain even more fundamental
parts. For the last 100 years, this hunt for the fundamental has been
tied to the principles of quantum mechanics which governs Nature at the
fundamental level.

Particle physics as we know it today studies objects which are so small
and intangible that they can rarely be held in one place for study,
either because they are massless and move at the speed of light, or
because they simply decay too fast. At the same time, the measurement
apparatus cannot possibly be small enough to explore a fundamental
particle without being a particle itself. Thus, the only viable method
of exploration is to study the interactions between pairs of particles
that collide by identifying the consequences of this collision: What
comes out where, and how fast.

The physical quantity that describes this is the scattering cross
section. It specifies the area within which one particle must hit the
other for a specific process to take place, or rather, the area where
the particles do collide times the quantum mechanical probability
(density) that the given process will occur if the particles collide.
Such quantum mechanical probability densities always arise as the
absolute value squared of a quantum mechanical amplitude, which is in
this case called a scattering amplitude.

A scattering amplitude can receive contributions from different
processes which are indistinguishable in the quantum sense, that is,
processes which look the same to the measurement apparatus. To form a
scattering cross section, all these processes have to be summed before
squaring. Thus, if we wish to say something meaningful about a theory
with certain particles but not all of those we know to exist, we should
not start squaring the amplitude as we would be missing interference
terms from the other processes. This point is made to argue that the
scattering amplitude is the furthest one can calculate in a theory
without taking into account other physical processes or experimental
conditions. In that sense, the scattering amplitude is the most proper
way to describe a result in any reductionist approach to particle
physics.

Scattering amplitudes are normally calculated by perturbation theory as
power series in coupling constants. The lowest order results are easily
accessible with today’s methods, but already the next order is an
analytical and numerical challenge. This is unfortunate because, as we
shall see, more precise (approximate or exact) results are in high
demand.

#### 1.1.1 Background Processes at the LHC

For the next many years, particle physics will be dominated by the
experimental programme at CERN, where the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) is
being built. This machine will collide (for the most part) protons on
protons with a center-of-mass energy of 14 TeV. This is hoped to produce
an array of novel particles, such as supersymmetric partners of all the
known particles, and expected to produce decisive statistical evidence
for the existence of the Higgs boson.

These interesting results will, however, be hiding behind massive
amounts of particle reactions that we already know and love from earlier
investigations of QCD and electroweak interactions. A good knowledge of
the production rates of these well-known events is essential because
they contaminate the interesting events and need to be subtracted.
Knowing only these background processes to the lowest order in the
coupling constants is likely to introduce large theoretical
uncertainties, some of them prohibitively large.

Theorists and phenomenologists working on the LHC have issued a
prioritized wishlist of next-to-leading order calculations they want
done before the LHC turns on [ 65 ] (scheduled for Spring 2008 at the
time of writing) included as table 1.1 . At the time of writing, only
the first and the last seem to be close to solved [ 70 , 75 , 106 ] . In
principle, it is known how to calculate all these, but the conventional
methods seem to have hit a roadblock; the calculational complexity of
the required calculations is rising faster than the available resources,
be they human or electronic. Decisive progress in this area must come
from both improved methods of calculation and a strengthened effort.

#### 1.1.2 Approaching Quantum Gravity?

Apart from the prosaic undertaking of extracting useful results from a
multi-billion Euro experiment, scattering amplitudes also play a role in
the theoretical understanding of quantum field theories. Amplitudes
express and reveal both the internal symmetries of a theory and its
internal inconsistencies.

One inconsistency plays a special role in the problems defining a
quantum theory of gravity, namely that of non-renormalizability. In
contrast to other quantum field theories where infinities that pop up in
intermediate results can be arranged to vanish in physical quantities,
gravity theories normally require more and more new terms in their
defining equations to counter the infinities which necessarily appear.

However, it so happens that the maximally supersymmetric ( @xmath )
quantum field theory of gravity does not seem to have such infinities.
Calculation of the necessary scattering amplitudes in this theory (and
others) of gravity are unfortunately extremely cumbersome and evidence
is only accumulating slowly that this may indeed be the case.

This understanding is driven by new methods of calculating amplitudes.
Thus, it may just be that such new methods can give a glimpse of
something which, without being a true description of all known particles
and interactions, can be called a consistent quantum theory of gravity.

### 1.2 Scattering Amplitudes in the Complex Plane

Scattering amplitudes are usually calculated perturbatively using
Feynman rules. Feynman rules are derived directly from an action
principle, are understood by all particle physicists alike, and have
well-studied mathematical properties. A calculation done with Feynman
rules is rarely called in question, save for the pointing out of simple
algebraic errors. This makes Feynman rules the preferred choice of
almost everyone in the community, and with good reason.

Unfortunately, there are some issues with Feynman rules that make them
unfit in several situations. The first is the issue of complexity: Since
the rules work by summing over contributions from all graphs of certain
kinds, the complexity of the calculation is factorial in the number of
participating particles. When going beyond leading order in coupling
constants, there are integrals whose complexities are also factorial in
the number of particles. This leads to the roadblock mentioned earlier.
The second issue is that of unphysical singularities: The results of the
calculation are most often quoted in a form where some singularities
have to cancel between terms. When evaluating such expressions
numerically, roundoff error may introduce apparent effects which are not
really there.

A contributing factor to these problems is that Feynman rules throw out
information in exchange for more mechanical calculations. The prime
example of this is non-abelian gauge theories, where gauge invariance
enforces a particular structure of the three and four-point
interactions. In the actual calculations, however, no reference is made
to the gauge invariance, which might as well not have been there. In the
end, the constrained form of the Feynman rules ensure that the amplitude
is gauge invariant, but this has been obscured by the intermediate
calculation. This is just one of several pieces of information which may
be used to circumvent Feynman rules and obtain amplitudes faster, in
more compact forms, and with fewer unphysical singularities.

#### 1.2.1 The Unitary and Analytic @xmath-Matrix

The focus of this thesis will be the use of methods of complex analysis
and methods derived from such considerations. Although most of the
methods described here have been developed since 2004, the idea itself
is by no means new. In some sense, it can be traced back to the
so-called @xmath -matrix programme of the 60’s.

The @xmath -matrix is the evolution operator and is conventionally
decomposed into a unit piece (which describes no scattering) and into
the rest (which describes the actual scattering).

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The scattering operator @xmath sandwiched between a state of particles
coming in from the infinite past and a state of particles coming out at
infinite future, gives the scattering amplitude (also known as an @xmath
-matrix element if the unit matrix is included). Requiring that the
@xmath -matrix be unitary imposes a relation for the @xmath operator
commonly known as the optical theorem,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

If we insert a complete set of states between @xmath and @xmath on the
right side, we get the formal diagrammatic expression

  -- -- -- -------
           (1.3)
  -- -- -- -------

where the sum is over all possible insertions of internal states and the
integral is over their on-shell momenta. In perturbation theory, the
left side could correspond to a one-loop amplitude and the right could
correspond to a product of two tree amplitudes.

If we also view the @xmath -matrix as an analytic function of the
kinematical variables, we can gain more information. In general, a
one-loop amplitude as a complex function of one of the kinematic
variables will have a branch cut at real positive values of the
variable. The optical theorem can then be twisted to give the
discontinuity across the branch cut in terms of the insertions of all
possible states between two tree amplitudes, and the hope would be to
reconstruct the one-loop amplitude from its branch cut discontinuities.
The really interesting thing would then be if this information could
somehow be used to bootstrap amplitudes to all orders in perturbation
theory.

This was the goal of the @xmath -matrix programme: to produce a theory
for the strong interactions (and, in the long run, all of particle
physics) from unitarity and analyticity constraints on the @xmath
-matrix. That programme failed, partly because a host of other
assumptions turned out to be needed for the full reconstruction of the
@xmath -matrix, partly because QCD, a Lagrangian quantum field theory,
became established as the correct theory of the strong interactions. A
review of the methods and motivations of the @xmath -matrix programme
can be found in [ 83 ] .

In the 90’s, it was realized that some of the tools of @xmath -matrix
theory were more powerful than public opinion in the community had
assumed. The power, however, came from the input of facts known from
Feynman rules and dimensional regularization, two concepts which were
absent in the original @xmath -matrix theory. Bern, Dixon, Dunbar,
Kosower and others used the known structure of certain one-loop
amplitudes to write them in a form where the discontinuities across
branch cuts could be expressed easily so that a (not even complete)
computation of the right side of ( 1.3 ) would almost completely
determine the amplitude [ 33 , 34 , 26 , 35 ] . We return to a detailed
describtion of these methods in chapter 5 .

Although this so-called “unitarity cut technique” produced results which
were unthinkable to compute with Feynman graph techniques, and attempted
to use all known information as efficiently as possible, it did lack in
generality only being useful for some particular cases (some of which
were nevertheless relevant to experiment). A central point in these
methods is that only on-shell tree amplitudes are used as input for the
method, and this hints that we may, after all, be able to bootstrap our
way through the perturbative expansion.

This is not as far fetched as it may sound, because there are already
results that indicate that this is feasible in principle. The Feynman
Tree Theorem [ 87 , 100 ] gives exactly such a construction. It works by
using retarded propagators @xmath in all propagators in a loop, which
set the amplitude to zero because of time ordering. By using that the
retarded propagator is the Feynman propagator plus a delta function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

the expression can be rewritten as a sum of ordinary Feynman diagrams
where some number of propagators are Feynman and others are set on-shell
by the delta function. This construction shows directly that the
all-orders perturbative @xmath -matrix can be written as some
complicated convolution of the tree-level @xmath -matrix. The Feynman
Tree Theorem is discussed in more detail in [ 55 ] .

#### 1.2.2 Generalizing from Loops to Trees

As we saw above, the use of complex momentum space methods is not a new
invention, and at one-loop level, it has been used for some time as a
tool for the most efficient evaluation of scattering amplitudes. Most
tree-level calculations were still being conducted in real Minkowski
space using Feynman diagrams (or related methods) at the turn of the
century. The change in affairs would, however, come from a completely
different direction.

It had been known since the mid-80’s that a certain class of tree
amplitudes were considerably simpler than a Feynman diagram calculation
would suggest when using the spinor helicity formalism, to which we will
turn in chapter 2 . These were the so-called Maximally Helicity
Violating (MHV) amplitudes where (when all gluons are considered
outgoing) two gluons have negative helicity and any number have positive
helicity. Building on some critical earlier insight by Nair [ 115 ] ,
Witten [ 133 ] was able, in 2003, to describe gluon tree-amplitudes from
the topological B-model string theory in twistor space, a type of theory
not commonly associated to the nuts-and-bolts of scattering
calculations. Soon after it was realized that in the same sense that MHV
amplitdes are lines in twistor space, tree-amplitudes with more negative
helicity gluons were collections of intersecting lines in twistor space.
From this, it was only a small leap to conjecture that there existed a
formalism for calculating gluon amplitudes whose vertices were MHV
amplitudes.

That this was indeed the case was shown by Cachazo, Svrček and Witten in
the beginning of 2004 [ 69 ] . The construction is commonly known as
either MHV rules or CSW rules. This thesis will use the first, knowing
that it may cause a bit of confusion (Feynman rules generate Feynman
amplitudes; MHV rules do not just generate MHV amplitudes). A
description of MHV rules and some extensions can be found in chapter 3 .
A good deal of calculations followed which verified the MHV rules [ 102
, 136 , 91 , 135 ] . Brandhuber, Spence and Travaglini were then able to
use them for one-loop calculations [ 57 ] which was slightly surprising
at the time.

All of these events were directly related to the twistor picture of
gauge amplitudes, which in itself did not involve complex momenta, but
to some extent it did involve momenta in @xmath dimensions. In that
metric signature, Britto, Cachazo and Feng [ 59 ] realized that the
unitarity cut technique described above can be extended to insert four
on-shell internal states rather than just two, basically because the
on-shell demand is easier to satisfy with two time directions. When
there are four on-shell constraints in a loop integral it becomes
trivial because the four coordinates of loop momentum are fixed. This
so-called “Quadruple Cut Technique” allowed e.g. the conversion of the
calculation of one-loop amplitudes in maximally supersymmetric ( @xmath
) Yang–Mills to a purely algebraic one in terms of products of tree
amplitudes. It was also realized that the constraint of being in 2+2
dimensions could effectively be removed by assuming to be in 4 complex
dimensions. We return to this technology in chapter 5 .

Since there are relations between tree and one-loop amplitudes in @xmath
super-Yang–Mills [ 92 , 71 , 105 , 31 ] , this allowed a quartic
recursion relation for on-shell tree-level Yang–Mills amplitudes [ 128 ]
, but with complex momenta. Britto, Cachazo and Feng [ 60 ] were then
able to rewrite this as a quadratic recursion relation, but they also
showed together with Witten [ 61 ] that it resulted from taking the
external momenta seriously as complex and using simple complex analysis.
Moreover, they showed that these recursion relations could be iterated
such that only complex three-point amplitudes contributed; in other
words, the four-point vertex in Yang–Mills can be thought of purely as
an artifact of gauge invariance necessary for Feynman rule calculations.
These results will be presented in chapter 3 .

The remarkable developments described here have presented a completely
new view on the calculation of scattering amplitudes, and tie together
concepts across loop order in ways which are still not properly
understood. The consequences of treating scattering amplitude
calculations as complex analysis is, at its essence, the topic of this
thesis.

#### 1.2.3 Full Amplitudes from Trees

The concept of on-shell recursion relations derived from
complex-momentum methods have numerous applications. Most obvious are
concrete tree-level calculations which come out in a form which is more
compact than the form from Feynman rules. Another tree-level application
is to show how the MHV rules mentioned above can be viewed from
recursion as a particular reorganization of the Feynman rule
calculation. The connection between MHV rules and on-shell recursion
will be explored in detail in chapter 4 .

Another use of on-shell recursion is for the calculation of one-loop
amplitudes. Parts of one-loop amplitudes can be computed using the
unitarity cut technique, and exactly the parts that are missed in that
technique are rational ones which have similarities to tree amplitudes.
This means that they are also computable by recursion relations [ 39 ,
40 , 38 ] although in a slightly more involved form. Such a
determination of a one-loop amplitude from unitarity cuts and recursion
is presented in chapter 8 .

Numerous developments of unitarity combined with recursion have
accumulated over the last years and have improved one-loop calculation.
Interestingly, some results extend to a higher number of loops, although
they are primarily unitarity based. Founded on earlier insight by
Anastasiou, Bern, Dixon and Kosower [ 2 ] , Bern, Dixon and Smirnov [ 41
] have been able to propose a closed form result for the all-loops
@xmath four and five-point amplitudes. Similarly, there have been
calculations up to three loops in @xmath supergravity which lends
credibility to the notion that it is perturbatively UV finite, and hence
a (comparably) well-defined theory of gravity outside string theory. The
input into the calculations are tree amplitudes and the results are
consequences of their structure. These multi-loop results continue to
attract attention from outside the circle of specialists.

### 1.3 About This Thesis

#### 1.3.1 Omissions

The purpose of this thesis is to review some of the central complex
momentum methods developed in recent years and to convey the results of
the authors own works in this area. As the reader will notice, the
review part already takes up a large part of the thesis, but still the
topics that are relevant and interesting in this context are so numerous
and complex that many of these things have had to be omitted.

Twistors are omitted completely, a choice which could be percieved as
radical when the field has such close connections to twistor string
theory. In the approach taken here, however, this connection is more
historical since complex momentum methods has managed to outrun the
twistor methods in many cases, in particular those cases chosen here.
Twistor string theory has been well reviewed by Cachazo and Svrček [ 67
] to which the reader is referred. Gauge theories in twistor spaces have
been developed by e.g. [ 52 ] .

Another area which is not covered is that dealing with MHV rules as
derived from ordinary Yang–Mills in light-cone gauge. In this approach [
113 , 93 ] , the light-cone Lagrangian is rewritten in a form where the
MHV rules appear naturally, and this permits extensions to loop
calculations. Some important works in this area are [ 86 , 56 ] . The
viewpoint taken on MHV rules here is that MHV rules are a special case
of recursion relations, a viewpoint which is admittedly too narrow.

There have also been refinements of many of the unitarity and recursions
mentioned here which would lead us too far if they were to be explained
in detail. These are mentioned in the relevant connections. Within more
traditional calculational approaches, there have also been recent
advances which will not be covered.

#### 1.3.2 Outline

The thesis is roughly divided in two parts, having to do with tree-level
and one-loop level, and is not in historical order. It starts out by
explaining some basic results in Yang–Mills theory, some notation, and
the concept of gravity as a quantum field theory in chapter 2 . Armed
with those methods, we can take a look at the two important tree-level
developments, namely the MHV rules and on-shell recursion in chapter 3 .
Based primarily on the articles [ 126 ] by the author and [ 49 ]
together with Bjerrum-Bohr, Dunbar, Ita and Perkins, chapter 4 describes
how MHV rules can appear as a special case of recursion relations, and
how that can be used to derive MHV rules for a gravitational theory.
This highlights some of the similarities between gravity and Yang–Mills
that are obscure in their Lagrangian formulation.

The purpose of chapter 5 is to introduce the loop level methods that
will guide us through the rest of the thesis, as well as some related
ones, and the remaining three chapters present some more concrete
one-loop calculations which serve different purposes. The calculations
of chapter 6 serve to explain how amplitudes in @xmath super-Yang–Mills
are computed using a variety of techniques. The part of the calculation
which regards amplitudes with other external field content than gluons
is based on [ 127 ] together with Bidder and Perkins. Chapter 7 contains
calculations which elucidate the one-loop structure of maximal ( @xmath
) supergravity, which is necessary for the understanding of the all-loop
structure. As such, it serves to support the notion that @xmath
supergravity is UV finite, and is based on [ 50 ] together with
Bjerrum-Bohr, Dunbar, Ita and Perkins. The thesis ends on a more prosaic
note with the calculation in chapter 8 of the amplitude for a Higgs
going to four gluons of particular helicities in the limit where the top
mass is large. It is based on work together with Badger and Glover [ 10
] , but the treatment is slightly different from the article.

### 1.4 Conclusion and Outlook

Rather than ending the thesis with a conclusion, we will sum up the main
points that the thesis will support, and give an outlook for the future.

#### 1.4.1 A Competitor in the Calculation Race

The combined methods of unitarity and recursion have provided some
extremely effective means of calculating one-loop scattering amplitudes.
More specifically, they have allowed for the calculation of hitherto
unknown six-parton QCD amplitudes, and hold the promise of making the
progression to seven-parton QCD amplitudes smoother. As demonstrated in
chapter 8 , they have also allowed for calculations with fewer external
particles to be sufficiently simplified that compact algebraic
expressions for amplitudes can be generated without the use of computer
algebra. Thus, it has opened up a new frontier for the specialists, and
hopefully provided tools for the many smaller groups of physicists with
simpler calculations in mind. New twists on these methods seem to keep
coming in.

This is not to say that these methods are the only game in town. A
purely Lagrangian approach is still favoured by the broad community, and
there have been several refinements of conventional technology, both
semi-numerical and algebraic, which are reaching a comparable level. One
can only hope that a combined effort of all the methods on the market
can have the results in place when they are needed in the near future.

#### 1.4.2 Understanding Quantum Field Theories

The use of complex momentum methods have shown us that perturbative
quantum field theory is still far from understood. The investigation of
scattering amplitudes as complex functions gives several puzzles. At
tree level, the simplest version of on-shell recursion described in
chapter 3 is known to work for both Yang–Mills theories and gravity, but
more complicated versions, such as those used in chapter 4 , are not
proven but seem extremely likely to hold. Superficially, the existence
of on-shell recursion seems related to the UV behaviour of tree
amplitudes, a relation which is not clear either.

Equally, if not more, interesting are the relations between loop orders.
Using unitarity, statements about loop amplitudes seem to be
reformulable as statements about tree amplitudes. In chapter 7 , we will
see how the existence of on-shell recursion for tree gravity amplitudes
comes close to proving that the one-loop structure of @xmath
supergravity is the same as @xmath super-Yang–Mills. Putting such
relations on a firm footing would contribute greatly to both our
fundamental understanding of perturbative quantum field theory, as well
as our ability to do calculations.

Together with the understanding of the full perturbative expansion of
@xmath Yang–Mills and the prospects for a UV finite theory of gravity,
this makes the topic of this thesis most exciting, an excitement that I
hope that you, dear reader, will share.

Enjoy!

## Chapter 2 Preliminaries

### 2.1 Colour Ordering

One of the more annoying aspects of doing gauge theory calculations is
the proliferation of indices, both for colour and for space-time. A
strategy to avoid this is to specify quantum numbers (such as colour) as
early as possible in the calculation. This can provide expressions with
less index mess, compensated by more expressions to compute. The two
chief methods for doing this are colour ordering as described in this
section and spinor helicity notation described in the next. The contents
of sections 2.1 to 2.3 are also reviewed in [ 76 ] .

The strategy inherent in colour ordering is to identify the possible
colour structures we can obtain when we have finished an on-shell
calculation. If we consider adjoint particles only, the colour
structures are products of structure constants, @xmath , which can be
written in terms of traces of @xmath fundamental colour matrices,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we normalise the matrices as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

By using contraction identities such as (for @xmath )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

we can write all colour structures in terms of traces of fundamental
colour matrices. Note that when we are contracting structure constants
only, the last term of ( 2.3 ) will always drop out. Thus, we can write
the completeness relation as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where M and N are arbitrary matrix strings.

At the end of the calculation, (the tree-level part of) an amplitude can
be written as a linear combination of the distinct trace structures,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

the simplest examples being

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.7)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The coefficients of the trace structures are called colour ordered
amplitudes, because they correspond to a particular ordering of the
colour matrices. Instead of calculating the amplitude, using ( 2.1 ) to
( 2.4 ), and deducing the colour ordered amplitudes we can calculate
them directly by using colour ordered Feynman rules. A diagram then
contributes to a colour ordered amplitude if the cyclic ordering of the
external particles corresponds to that of the wanted colour ordered
amplitude.

If we are dealing with particles in the fundamental representation, the
strings of matrices will not be traced, because the colour indices of
the fundamental particles are free. It is still possible to define a
colour ordering, e.g. ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

If we work in an @xmath gauge theory, we now have to take the last term
of ( 2.3 ) into account. This corresponds to subtracting at each vertex
the contribution of a @xmath gauge boson.

At loop level, we will also encounter multi-trace terms which we need to
compute. At one-loop level, however, it can be shown that all two-trace
terms are permutations of the (“planar”) single-trace terms [ 33 ] .

### 2.2 Spinor Helicity Notation

After trading the colour information for more diagrams, we can now trade
the use of polarization vectors for yet more diagrams. This consists of
writing the amplitudes completely (or rather, to the extent possible) in
terms of Weyl spinors of massless particles. We will find that in this
notation we can write down explicit polarization vectors corresponding
to positive and negative helicity gluons.

We start by deriving some basic facts about Weyl spinors. The Weyl
spinors corresponding to a massless momentum can be found by solving the
massless Dirac equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a four component vector and @xmath is a vector of @xmath
matrices obeying

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

We use “Peskin and Schroeder” conventions [ 122 ] where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Switching now to Weyl–van der Waerden notation the Dirac spinor can be
written as two two-component spinors

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose indices are raised and lowered with @xmath , @xmath , etc. , using
southwest-northeast contraction. We define antisymmetric inner products
between spinors,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

thus we are working with the “QCD” sign convention rather than the
“string” sign convention. In this notation ( 2.9 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can further be elucidated by noting that @xmath can be decomposed
into a product of two two-component spinors because @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is solved by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the above properties of the two-component spinors it follows
immediately that the Dirac spinors satisfying the Dirac equation are
spanned by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose conjugate spinors are

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.21)
  -- -- -- --------

The definitions of @xmath , @xmath etc. , ensure that @xmath and @xmath
thereby helping to simplify the algebra significantly. In terms of
momenta, the antisymmetric inner products are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

which obey

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

We will often encounter these spinors strung together using gamma
matrices. The following identities can be shown by using standard Dirac
algebra:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last two have equivalent forms with @xmath . We will suppress
Feynman slashes in general unless possibilities of misunderstandings
arise. In fact, we will quite often write momenta as their slashed
versions rather than their vector versions, as the whole point of spinor
helicity notation is to get rid of explicit vectors. When we write
massless momenta in matrix form we should really write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

but since only one of them avoids being projected out in spinor strings
such as @xmath or @xmath , we will allow ourselves the sloppiness of
writing

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now know how to treat expressions with Weyl spinors and momenta. The
last objects which may occur in a colour ordered scattering amplitude
are polarization vectors. We use the two explicit realizations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

In both of these, @xmath is some massless reference momentum. Using the
rules above it is quite straightforward to verify the standard
properties of polarization vectors,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can argue that @xmath is an arbitrary (apart from @xmath ) gauge
vector by considering the difference beween two different choices of
@xmath :

  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------
                 @xmath      (2.35)
        @xmath   @xmath      (2.36)
        @xmath   @xmath      (2.37)
        @xmath   @xmath      (2.38)
        @xmath   @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------

Thus, the two choices give the same results due to the Ward identity.
Finally, we note that the polarization sum is that of a lightlike axial
gauge with gauge vector @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

This particular gauge is ghost-free, which will extremely helpful in
later chapters when we deal with loops.

Recently, a Mathematica package for manipulations with spinors in this
context called S@M has been published [ 109 ] , but using slightly
different conventions.

### 2.3 Tree-Level Structure of Yang–Mills Theory

This section collects some facts of Yang–Mills theory that we will need
in the future, and is not intended as a review of the subject. We will
return to the one-loop structure of Yang–Mills amplitudes in section 5.1
.

#### 2.3.1 MHV Amplitudes

It has already been mentioned that Yang–Mills scattering amplitudes take
on very simple forms in spinor helicity notation. The most striking
example of this was conjectured by Parke and Taylor [ 120 ] and proven
by Berends and Giele [ 16 ] , and states that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes any number of positive helicity gluons. The last of
these is called the “Maximally Helicity Violating” amplitude, or MHV
amplitude for short. There is a simiar expression for the amplitude with
two positive and the rest negative helicity obtained by complex
conjugation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

called the ‘‘googly MHV amplitude’’ ¹ ¹ 1 The word “googly” is a cricket
reference often used in twistor theory. In cricket it denotes a ball
bowled with the opposite spin of the normal, thrown by a right-handed
bowler. . These formulas determine all gluon amplitudes up to and
including five points, since all those amplitudes are either zero, MHV
or googly-MHV.

It should be noted that the “Maximally” in MHV becomes a misnomer at
loop level since the two first equations of ( 2.3.1 ) cease to hold in
non-supersymmetric theories.

#### 2.3.2 Supersymmetry

Tree-level amplitudes in Yang–Mills theory have an apparent
supersymmetry [ 119 , 104 ] because, say, a gluino and any adjoint
fermion have the same Feynman rules. Also, at the level of individual
colour ordered amplitudes fundamental and adjoint fermions are really
indistinguishable since their colour ordered Feynman rules are the same.
The difference only shows when we compute amplitudes with non-adjacent
fermions where the fundamental fermion amplitude must vanish. The actual
supersymmetry only reveals itself at loop level where the number of
particle species becomes important.

The tree-level supersymmetry can be exploited to constrain tree
amplitudes by “Supersymmetric Ward Identities”, SWI’s [ 96 , 95 ] ,
which relate amplitudes of different external particle content but with
the same momenta and the same sum of helicities. Following [ 76 ] ,
SWI’s are obtained by writing the amplitude as a string of operators
@xmath cretaing helicity eigenstates by acting on the vacuum

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now introduce the spinorial supercharge @xmath and contract it as
@xmath where @xmath is a Grassmann parameter and @xmath is the Dirac
spinor of some lightlike momentum. The inclusion of @xmath makes @xmath
a bosonic operator. Since @xmath annihilates the vacuum, we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last expression must represent a sum over amplitudes where
@xmath has exchanged one particle with another. If one computes all the
commutators, one will get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This permits us to prove the two first formulas of ( 2.3.1 ). The second
can be proven by acting on @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

and choosing @xmath to eliminate the first term. Notice that the
amplitudes with two @xmath ’s are zero because of the requirement of
conservation of fermion helicity.

We can also extend the formula for MHV gluon amplitudes to amplitudes
with a fermion pair by acting on an amplitude with two negative helicity
gluons at 1 and @xmath and a positive helicity fermion at @xmath and the
rest positive helicity gluons. This gives the SWI

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

and choosing @xmath reduces this to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

This can be explained as moving a half unit of negative helicity from
@xmath to @xmath , thereby exchanging a factor of @xmath with a factor
of @xmath .

SWI’s can be extended to describe other supersymmetries. For example,
@xmath supersymmetry would contain a scalar and thus allow ( 2.48 ) to
be extended to include those. The @xmath supersymmetry algebra will be
of special importance to us since that theory enters at both tree and
loop level in several places below. It has a gluon @xmath , four
fermions @xmath , six real scalars @xmath , and the algebra

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Notice that we might as well have used @xmath . Using these, we can
deduce SWI’s for theories with several different fermions and scalars,
as well as SWI’s for @xmath amplitudes to any loop order. In particular,
we can deduce the exact form of all tree-level MHV amplitudes in @xmath
SYM by a procedure like ( 2.48 ).

#### 2.3.3 Limit Behaviour

We will also briefly touch on the behaviour of Yang–Mills tree
amplitudes in different limits. In a limit where a multi-particle
kinematic invariant (and thus a propagator) goes on-shell, the residue
factorizes into two on-shell amplitudes, summed over possible internal
states. In the pure-glue case we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

as @xmath . This factorization is present in most theories described by
Feynman rules and not just Yang–Mills.

When two-particle kinematic invariants go on-shell the situation is
different in massless Yang–Mills theory. Because of kinematics we should
really be looking at the limit where two colour adjacent momenta become
collinear. In this limit, the amplitude factorizes into the amplitude
with one fewer external state times a so-called splitting amplitude
which depends on the particles going collinear and the internal state
which is going on-shell. Again, considering only gluons we have, when
@xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The splitting amplitudes for gluons are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

from which the remaining can be deduced by pariaty. Similarly, one can
deduce splitting functions involving fermions and scalars from the
corresponding MHV amplitudes. The one-loop limits and simgularities will
be considered in section 5.1.4 .

### 2.4 Gravity as a Quantum Field Theory

It is well known that General Relativity has serious problems when
implemented as a quantum field theory. It has a dimensionful coupling
which means that it is non-renormalizable. At each loop order one has to
introduce new counterterms to cancel divergences, and since nothing
prevents finite parts of those counterterms, we automatically introduce
infinitely many coupling constants into the theory.

Because of this, the “conventional wisdom” is that a QFT version of GR
is non-sensical. The situation, however, is not as bad as one may think.
Gravity can be treated as an effective field theory [ 131 ] , where the
theory is only renormalized to the loop order needed. This is legal
because we know that an all-orders renormalized calculation can still be
Taylor expanded around zero coupling. As long as the coupling constant
is small, we can expect tree-level computations to be close to the
actual result, and even at loop level the counterterms contribute to
local interactions but not to e.g. long range corrections to the
gravitational potential [ 79 , 78 , 47 ] . One could also remark that
Yang–Mills theory in more than four dimensions is also
non-renormalizable, a fact which neither does nor should deter people
from working with the theory.

Another problem plaguing quantum gravity theories is that of algebra.
When the Einstein–Hilbert action,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

is written out in terms of a perturbation around flat

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

space, it contains vertices to all orders, and even the lowest order
terms suffer from severe congestion of indices. The three-point Feynman
vertex takes up about half a page in condensed notation, the four point
requires one or two. This means that only amplitudes where gravitons
enter in the simplest manner can be calculated analytically. The only
computational point we will make here is that of polarization tensors:
Gravitons are spin 2 particles which have two on-shell helicity states
with traceless polarization tensors @xmath . It so happens that one can
use products of gluon polarization,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

With the choices of polarization vectors described in section 2.2 , we
may even choose different reference momenta for @xmath and @xmath .

#### 2.4.1 The KLT Relations

What one can do to compute tree-level amplitudes in quantum gravity is
to use a result from string theory by Kawai, Lewellen and Tye [ 99 ] ,
the KLT relations. These are obtained by rewriting the string
computation for closed string scattering in terms of products of open
string scatterings, and by taking the @xmath limit, they make a
statement about a relation between graviton and gluon scattering
amplitudes. The relation is valid on-shell at tree-level in any number
of dimensions. The first three are (setting irrelevant factors to 1)

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.56)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The @xmath ’s are graviton amplitudes and the @xmath and @xmath are
colour ordered gauge amplitudes. In fact, there are many forms of these
relations since an (irrelevant) relabeling on the gravity side gives
another combination of orderings on the gauge side. The simplest
non-trivial example is the four graviton amplitude in four dimensions
which is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.57)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The KLT relations also imply that graviton states decompose into a
tensor product of two gluon states. Since the proof of the KLT relations
does not rely on the particular string theory in question, we may
imagine that there are more states than gravitons on the gravity side
and gluons on the gauge side and that the gravity states are tensor
products of two gauge states. The two gauge theories need not be the
same. If we imagine the gravity side to be a heterotic string theory,
the one gauge theory corresponds to the right moving sector and the
other corresponds to the left moving sector [ 22 ] .

#### 2.4.2 The @xmath Relation

At this point we can take a closer look at one of the main themes of
this thesis, namely the relation between the maximally supersymmetric
gravity and gauge theories in four dimensions. At tree level, the KLT
relations give us a correspondence between the two theories both at the
level of the states of the two theories (something which is independent
of the loop order) and between the actual amplitudes.

The spectrum (and Lagrangian) of @xmath supergravity [ 72 , 73 ] can be
derived by dimensionally reducing 11 dimensional @xmath supergravity [
74 ] and contains a graviton, eight Rarita–Schwinger gravitini, 28
vectors, 56 Majorana fermions and 70 real scalars, a total of 256 states
when helicities are taken into account. The @xmath multiplet has a
gluon, four (Majorana or Weyl) fermions and six real scalars, a total of
16 states. By the KLT relation, any state in @xmath supergravity can be
seen as a tensor product of two @xmath states such that the sum of the
two @xmath state helicities add up to the @xmath state helicity.
Supergravity can have the same construction as we saw for supersymmetric
gauge theories above where the states are related by supersymmetry
charges. In that sense, four of the @xmath charges map to the charges of
one of the @xmath theories and the remaining four to the other.

This, however, does not account for all the symmetry on the gauge side.
The symmetry of Yang–Mills theory at tree level is the same as @xmath
SYM at loop level, namely the superconformal symmetry. Since the
spectrum, the supersymmetry and the amplitudes are directly related to
tree-level @xmath supergravity, one might guess that there is an
additional symmetry in gravity theories which mirrors the additional
conformal symmetry in Yang–Mills. We will return to the relations
between @xmath and @xmath at loop level in chapter 7 .

## Chapter 3 Tree Level Methods

### 3.1 Earlier Methods

Calculation of tree-level scattering amplitudes is normally done by
applying the Feynman rules. This procedure is completely safe, in the
sense that it is completely mechanical and results are trusted. The
expressions generated in this way are known not to be the most compact,
but they also avoid unphysical singularities which may cause problems
for numerical evaluation. For calculations by hand, however, they become
impractical beyond five-particle processes because the number of
diagrams becomes too big. Taking as an example the @xmath point gluon
amplitude, the number of diagrams increases factorially, as shown in the
table below [ 112 , 101 ] .

The problem of the number of diagrams can, to a large extent, be solved
by implementing Feynman rules (or an equivalent recursive formulation)
on a computer, where the running time for generating an amplitude and
evaluating it at a specific kinematical point is not prohibitively long
even for a number of points of the order of 15. There are several
programs that can do such calculations [ 110 , 123 , 103 , 111 , 98 ] .

Problems may still arise if we want to generate a large number of events
with many final states, since reevaluating the amplitude many times is
time consuming. On the other hand, deriving the amplitude analytically
and subsequently inserting numbers is also problematic since the
analytic expressions from Feynman rules are extremely large. What we
would ideally like to have is some means of computing the amplitude in a
form which is compact and well suited for insertions of numerical
values.

One method for this, based on Feynman rules, is Berends–Giele recursion
[ 16 ] . It uses colour ordering and the spinor helicity formalism and
in addition keeps as little off-shell information as possible. In this
way it takes advantage of gauge invariance and other on-shell conditions
to simplify intermediate results instead of waiting till the end.
Berends–Giele recursion for gluon amplitudes works by introducing the
off-shell @xmath -point gluon current @xmath which is the (gauge
dependent) off-shell amplitude for @xmath -gluon scattering with @xmath
legs taken on-shell by multiplying in polarization vectors and using
@xmath . By looking back into the way @xmath was calculated, we see that
the off-shell leg had to be attached to either a three or a four vertex.
Whatever was at the other legs of that vertex would sum up exactly to
some @xmath where @xmath . This allows us to write down a cubic
recursion relation for @xmath , which can be terminated by setting the
momentum of the off-shell leg on-shell and multiplying by the
polarization. We can either try to solve the recursion relation exactly
or implement it on a computer. A good description of Berends–Giele
recursion can be found in [ 76 ] .

Even though this sort of recursion can speed up the calculation of
amplitudes, it still suffers from very long expressions, although less
severely than the traditional application of Feynman rules. 2004 saw the
invention of two methods which, in their separate ways, have contributed
to both more compact results and theoretical insight into the structure
of gauge theory amplitudes. We now turn to them in historical order.

### 3.2 MHV Rules

#### 3.2.1 Basic Construction

As described in the introduction, the analysis of Yang–Mills amplitudes
in twistor space led to an intuitive picture of MHV vertices connected
by propagators. The MHV vertex, however, was not a well defined concept
since it is only well defined on-shell where the momenta are all
light-like. To make the MHV picture concrete, it was necessary to
construct an off-shell continuation of the MHV amplitude. This was
achieved by Cachazo, Svrček, and Witten [ 69 ] in March of 2004. The
rules presented below were not derived as such, but rather proposed and
subsequently motivated. For multi-gluon amplitudes, the rules state:

1.  Draw all possible graphs (“MHV diagrams”)

    -   where external lines represent external gluons and have their
        helicity marked,

    -   where internal lines have opposite helicities ( @xmath ) at each
        end,

    -   where each vertex has exactly two edges of negative helicity—and
        at least one of positive helicity—attached,

    -   and which is planar and respects the colour ordering of the
        external gluons.

2.  For each graph, assign

    -   to each external line the outgoing momentum of the respective
        gluon,

    -   off-shell momenta @xmath to the internal lines by assuming
        conservation of momentum at each vertex,

    -   holomorphic spinors to internal lines as

          -- -------- -- -------
             @xmath      (3.1)
          -- -------- -- -------

        where the same (almost arbitrary) anti-holomorphic spinor @xmath
        must be used for all internal lines of all graphs.

3.  For each graph, multiply,

    -   for each internal line of momentum @xmath ,

          -- -------- -- -------
             @xmath      (3.2)
          -- -------- -- -------

    -   for each vertex, the MHV formula using @xmath for the
        holomorphic spinors of the internal lines.

4.  Add the contributions of all graphs.

The combinatorics of these rules are similar to that of Feynman rules,
but with a somewhat gentler sprawl of diagrams. It is simple to show
that an MHV diagram with @xmath negative helicity external gluons will
have @xmath MHV vertices and @xmath propagators; significantly fewer
than for Feynman rules. For fixed @xmath , the number of diagrams grows
polynomially in the number of external gluons, thus presenting a
significant simplification over Feynman rules, but if we need all
helicity configurations (and thus all @xmath up to half the number of
gluons) e.g. for computing an unpolarized cross section, the asymptotic
behaviour of the number of MHV diagrams is again factorial, thus not
providing a significant advantage over Feynman rules for many external
gluons.

For few gluons, however, the simplification is remarkable. By taking
advantage of parity, a six gluon amplitude can be computed with the use
of only 32 diagrams (depending on how you count) three of which are MHV
and thus trivial.

To gain some familiarity with the rules, let us consider the simplest
non-trivial case of @xmath . It is of course slightly trivial because it
is a googly-MHV amplitude, but it will be a welcome first check to
verify that the rules obey parity. Having three negative helicity
gluons, this amplitude is called “Next-to-MHV”, or NMHV, and the
diagrams must have two vertices and one propagator. There are four
permitted diagrams,

[] [] [] []

Following the rules above, we get the contribution of the first diagram,

  -- -- -------- -------- -- -------
                 @xmath      (3.3)
        @xmath   @xmath      (3.4)
        @xmath   @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- -------

At this point we can make a choice of @xmath if we like. The choice
@xmath will immediately set the diagram to zero, where as the choices
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath will render it undefined. The latter three
correspond to unphysical poles which cancel among the diagrams. If we
continue with @xmath , the three other diagrams contribute

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

and,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

which adds up to the expected result,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Though the result of this calculation was already known to be fairly
simple, it is remarkable that we can compute a five point amplitude
using only three contributing diagrams of such limited complexity.

A comment on the choice of the off-shell extension ( 3.1 ) is in order
here. Because internal lines must have opposite helicities at each end,
every diagram is invariant under scaling of internal spinors. In other
words, the requirement ( 3.1 ) should really read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

As noted by Kosower [ 102 ] such a relation can be achieved by defining

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

and choosing @xmath such that @xmath is lightlike. This results in

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the Yang–Mills MHV rules, only the holomorphic spinor is used, so in
a sense, the above rewriting adds information which is not used in
practise.

#### 3.2.2 Gravity: A Puzzling Failure

The success of MHV rules for Yang–Mills theory immediately raised the
question of whether MHV rules existed for gravity. Even though such
rules were not directly implied by the KLT relationship, the possibility
was not excluded by them, nor by any other known principle. The main
obstacle, however, was that graviton MHV amplitudes were not holomorphic
( cf. ( 2.56 )) and thus the extension @xmath was insufficient. As an
example, take the graviton equivalent of the diagram treated in detail
above. MHV rules would give that this diagram was

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the graviton amplitudes can be obtained from the KLT relations.
For that we would need @xmath or, equivalently, @xmath , but these are
not obviously the same because we are now “inside the MHV vertex” where
we must use @xmath rather than @xmath . For this to be consistent, we
must have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.15)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.17)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.18)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The last requirement states that @xmath must be a lightlike momentum
orthogonal to the time-like momentum @xmath . By going to the rest frame
of @xmath it can be seen clearly that no such (non-zero) @xmath exists.
Thus, any gravitational attempt at MHV rules along these lines seems
impossible.

Although it seems that the problem at hand is rooted in the
non-holomorphic character of graviton MHV amplitudes, it is in fact much
deeper. The amplitude @xmath is ill-defined because we have taken @xmath
away from its real value without compensating in other places; the
amplitude isn’t just off-shell, it disobeys conservation of momentum.
Had this been an amplitude proper, the implicit delta function in the
momenta would have set it to zero before we even started. And this
argument relates as much to Yang–Mills as to gravity.

In this light, the fact that Yang–Mills MHV rules do work becomes even
more puzzling. It gives the impression of being an inherently
ill-defined procedure which magically becomes meaningful for theories
with holomorphic MHV amplitudes. The missing ingredient to understand
why the situation is significantly brighter than this, will appear in
section 3.3 , and the puzzle will be resolved in the next chapter.

#### 3.2.3 Fermions, Higgses, and Vector Bosons

Meanwhile, we can turn to some of the additional successes of MHV rules.
As described above, the success of the MHV rules seemed to rely somewhat
on the holomorphic nature of MHV amplitudes, so similar theories with
holomorphic MHV amplitudes ought to have associated MHV rules.

The primary example of this is Yang–Mills theory with coloured (adjoint
or fundamental) massless scalars and fermions [ 91 , 135 , 134 , 90 ] .
As described in section 2.3.2 , replacing gluons with fermions or
scalars in an MHV amplitude only changes the numerator, and there is
nothing preventing us from extending the MHV rules with fermionic and
scalar internal lines. Particles in the fundamental representation are
handled by requiring them to be adjacent at all times. If, for instance,
we wanted to compute the NMHV amplitude @xmath , the diagrams would be
similar to those of our previous example, just with some of the gluons
being replaced by fermions denoted by dashed lines,

[] [] [] []

The contribution of the second diagram would be

  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------
                 @xmath      (3.20)
        @xmath   @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------

which differs from the corresponding gluon diagram by the factor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we now try to compute @xmath we will again have four diagrams similar
to those above and for the one treated we would obtain the factor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

relative to the gluon result.

Another case where MHV rules apply is one to which we will turn in
chapter 8 , namely that of a massive, uncoloured particle @xmath (such
as a Higgs) which couples to a gauge field through the term @xmath in
the Lagrangian.

The last case is that of the coupling of gauge fields to electroweak
vector boson currents. The formalism is somewhat involved, and rather
than trying to explain it here, we refer the reader to the original
article on the matter [ 44 ] .

### 3.3 On-Shell Recursion Relations

As was discussed in the introduction, a decisive turn came with the
realization that spinors could be taken away from 3+1 dimensions, in
which @xmath and @xmath are related by complex conjugation, to
complexified Minkowski space @xmath where they are complex and
independent. This allows for the use of standard methods of complex
analysis, in particular Cauchy’s Theorem. Although on-shell recursion
relations were first discovered as the combined consequence of @xmath IR
consistency conditions and the quadruple cut method [ 60 ] , we will
take the complex analysis viewpoint introduced by Britto, Cachazo, Feng,
and Witten (BCFW) [ 61 ] . We will, however, also touch on the
connection with IR consistency conditions in later chapters.

#### 3.3.1 Using Cauchy’s Theorem on Yang–Mills Amplitudes

BCFW on-shell recursion works by deforming a tree-level amplitude @xmath
by a complex parameter @xmath to @xmath by choosing two external
particles @xmath and @xmath and deforming their spinors

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

This deformations obeys conservation of momentum since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

so @xmath is a well defined amplitude in @xmath .

For now, we assume that @xmath as @xmath . This allows us to use
Cauchy’s Theorem to write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The poles of tree amplitudes are well known; they correspond to the
Feynman propagators of internal momenta going on-shell, and the
“residue” is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath and @xmath (or vice versa) there will be a corresponding pole
in @xmath because

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The residue of this pole is

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (3.30)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

Combining this with ( 3.26 ) leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In human language, the conditions under the sum state that we must sum
over all internal momenta affected by the deformation. We can draw this
as a diagram consisting of two deformed amplitudes and an internal
propagator, together with the sum,

@xmath []

@xmath is on-shell and has the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Very often this recursion relation is used with @xmath and @xmath
adjacent, e.g. @xmath in an @xmath -point amplitude. This simplifies the
above relation to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Before we can go and apply this decomposition on poles to the
calculation of real gluon amplitudes, there are two subtleties to
consider, having to do with three-point amplitudes and the behaviour of
@xmath as @xmath .

#### 3.3.2 Three-Point Amplitudes (and an Example)

In real Minkowski space, three-point gauge amplitudes are zero. This
basically stems from the fact that in order for the three momenta to be
light-like, they must also be orthogonal,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

When we move away from real Minkowski space, however, the restriction
that @xmath is lifted and the on-shell constraints have two solutions,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

These each allow one of the two helicity configurations to be non-zero
because the expressions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

respectively, are well-defined and contribute to ( 3.3.1 ).

We can illustrate the method and the considerations about three-point
amplitudes with the calculation of the googly-MHV five-point amplitude
@xmath . We define the deformation by taking

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

The internal momenta affected by this deformation are @xmath and @xmath
each corresponding to a pole in @xmath at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Summing also over internal helicities gives four diagrams

[] [] [] []

with the contributions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Two of these contributions can be discarded immediately. Number 2 and 3
contain an amplitude of the form @xmath which is zero. In contribution
number 1, @xmath is found by requiring that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

so the three-point MHV amplitude in that contribution is zero, even in
complex momenta. The corresponding condition in the last contribution is
@xmath which kills the googly-MHV three-point but not the MHV
three-point we need. Thus it gives the only contribution, for which we
need the solutions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

This allows us to compute

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (3.44)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

which is, of course, the known expression for a five-point googly-MHV
amplitude.

#### 3.3.3 Asymptotic Behaviour of the Deformed Amplitude

Until now we postponed the issue of whether @xmath . For certain choices
of the spinors to deform we can immediately argue that this must be the
case by looking at the calculation from Feynman diagrams and tracking
the dependence on @xmath . Every propagator in a Feynman diagram
affected by the deformation must asymptotically contribute @xmath , and
every three vertex affected by the deformation must contribute @xmath .
The “worst case scenario” for the asymptotic @xmath dependence will be
when the deformation only affects three-vertices. Before multiplying by
the external polarizations, such a diagram will go as @xmath .

If we make the deformation ( 3.24 ) the dependences of @xmath and @xmath
on @xmath will depend on their helicities. For @xmath the reaction to
the deformation is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

and for @xmath the asymptotic behaviour is the opposite. This leads us
to conclude that the worst behaviour of @xmath as @xmath for helicities
@xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

This tells us that using BCFW on-shell recursion relations is always
justified when we deform the antiholomorphic spinor of a negative
helicity particle and the holomorphic spinor of a positive helicity
particle.

In practice, however, the behaviour may be more benign. If we consider
the MHV amplitude @xmath , the choice @xmath goes as @xmath and so does
e.g. the choice @xmath while @xmath and @xmath go as @xmath . This shows
us that we can often expect an actual behaviour which is a few powers of
@xmath better than the worst case. This is another expression of the
fact that Feynman rules are not taking advantage of all the available
symmetries of the theory.

#### 3.3.4 Some Consequences of BCFW on-shell recursion

Two points are worth making at this point. First, since we have
rigorously proven that we can always perform on-shell recursion with the
choice @xmath it follows that any tree amplitude can, by successive
recursion, be reduced to three-amplitudes. In this perspective, the four
gluon vertex can be completely neglected for practical calculations, and
its presence in the Lagrangian is only required for gauge invariance.

Second, the existence of on-shell recursion shows that other formalisms
that claim to reproduce Yang–Mills amplitudes are correct if they have
the right singularity structure ( 3.27 ) and Lorentz covariance. This
was proven together with the proposal of the MHV rules [ 69 ] , thus,
BCFW recursion provides an indirect proof that the MHV rules are
correct.

Both of these points are elaborated on in the original article [ 61 ] .

#### 3.3.5 Extension to Other Theories and Deformations

The deformation ( 3.24 ) chosen by BCFW is by no means unique. For
instance, one may choose three gluons @xmath and deform them to [ 39 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

which also obeys momentum conservation for any @xmath . In general one
will have to redo the derivations of section 3.3.1 , but most features
of the relations persist. Using extended deformations may be helpful for
improved @xmath behaviour and for constructing relations to the MHV
rules as done in the next chapter.

The methods of deriving on-shell recursion relations are clearly very
generic, relying mostly on the fact that the theory at hand is an
ordinary quantum field theory. Gauge invariance or colour ordering may
be practical tools for obtaining simpler expressions, but are not
required as such for doing on-shell recursion in this way. One extension
is to allow other states than gluons to participate, such as charged
scalars and fermions (massless, massive, @xmath -dimensional) [ 108 ,
107 , 7 , 9 , 125 ] , another is to take a completely different theory,
such as QED [ 117 ] , gravity [ 12 , 68 ] , or more exotic theories [ 15
] . The challenge in most of these cases is to prove the appropriate
@xmath behaviour, which is sometimes done and sometimes left to faith.
Especially in gravity, where the “worst case scenario” analysis gives
very bad asymptotic behaviour, the on-shell recursion relations were
used for quite some time on this faith until a proof appeared [ 14 ] .

The applications to loop-level calculations will be reviewed in section
5.5 .

## Chapter 4 MHV Rules from Recursion

In the present chapter we will connect the two subjects of the previous
chapter and show how MHV rule constructions follow from on-shell
recursion. The original articles are [ 126 ] for the Yang–Mills case and
[ 49 ] for the gravity case.

### 4.1 MHV Rules in Light of Recursion Relations

The MHV rules as described in section 3.2 distance themselves from
recursion relations in one obvious way: recursion relations have one
unshifted propagator, while the MHV rules have several. This immediately
tells us that a simple derivation of the MHV rules from recursion is not
obtainable, but also that the NMHV case can serve as an initial test
case. With this in mind, we can note four features of MHV rules that
will guide us:

1.  An internal momentum is shifted on-shell in a manner close to that
    of recursion relations. Setting

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (4.1)
      -- -------- -- -------

    is practically the same as shifting @xmath as

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (4.2)
      -- -------- -- -------

    setting @xmath , and solving for @xmath .

2.  The asymmetry between holomorphic and anti-holomorphic spinors is
    deeply rooted. The attempt to construct MHV rules for gravity by
    choosing @xmath failed because it produced non-Lorentz invariant
    results, thereby providing a hint that @xmath is a complex momentum
    whose holomorphic and anti-holomorphic spinors are unrelated.
    Admittedly, there is a bit of hindsight in this argument, since the
    existence of MHV rules for gravity was not guaranteed.

3.  If @xmath is a complex momentum, we might as well continue all
    momenta. If we do that, all the anti-holomorphic spinors of the
    external momenta are unspecified by the MHV rules, just as @xmath .
    In fact, @xmath may even differ between different internal momenta.

4.  The MHV rules contain MHV three-point vertices and no googly
    three-point vertices. The easiest way of ensuring this would be to
    shift only anti-holomorphic spinors. This fits well the fact that
    these do not show up in the MHV rules anyway.

This leads us to conclude that if MHV rules can be proven from recursion
relations, the proof must involve a non-minimal shift of
anti-holomorphic spinors, and all these shifts must be proportional to
the (otherwise unspecified) @xmath .

### 4.2 The NMHV Case

We first apply the above considerations to the calculation of the
amplitude @xmath where the @xmath have helicity @xmath . If we choose to
shift only the three negative helicity gluons, the shift is unique up to
a constant,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where conservation of momentum follows from the Schouten identity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

We will postpone the proof of the legality of this shift to section 4.5
. With the above shift, the @xmath dependent internal momenta are those
that have at least one of @xmath at each end, e.g.

[]

The opposite helicity assignment for the inner line does not contribute,
so we have split the amplitude into two (shifted) MHV amplitudes. The
solution for @xmath is found by setting

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

It should now be clear that we have reproduced the NMHV version of the
MHV rules for Yang–Mills: We must sum over all diagrams that split the
amplitude into two MHV vertices. For the external momenta we must use
the shifted spinors (but because the MHV amplitude only involves
holomorphic spinors, it makes no difference) and for the internal we
must use @xmath .

We have, however, obtained more than just the Yang–Mills MHV rules. We
have obtained the full expression for the shifted momenta, allowing us
to construct MHV rules for theories with other MHV amplitudes than
Yang–Mills; most notably gravity. We will return to the MHV rules for
gravity in section 4.4 after treating the general case with more than
three negative helicity particles.

### 4.3 The NNMHV and General Cases

From the above discussion, it should be clear that setting up a
recursion by shifting the anti-holomorphic spinors of all negative
helicity gluons by the same reference spinor @xmath allows a description
where a) the left and right amplitudes both have fewer negative helicity
gluons than the full amplitude, b) there are no three-point googly
amplitudes, and c) the spinor to be used for the internal line is the
same as in the MHV rules. The remaining problem is that there are
several propagators in each MHV diagram while the recursion relations
can only provide one.

The solution will be to perform similar shifts one after the other and
to reach a reperesentation which can subsequently be proven to be
equivalent to the MHV rules. Starting with an NNMHV amplitude, we can
choose a set @xmath and shift

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

For conservation of momentum, the @xmath ’s must be chosen such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we label the possible internal lines by @xmath , we can write the
result of the recursion as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , and there is an implicit summation over helicities where
relevant. The two sub amplitudes are MHV and NMHV, respectively. Such
contributions can be depicted as

[]

To uncover a second propagator, we can set up a similar recursion for
each term in the above sum. However, we have the constraint on those
recursions that we should not uncover the same propagator @xmath again,
or we would not have progressed. Thus, for each @xmath we choose a set
@xmath and set up the recursion as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that @xmath . This gives one additional constraint on the @xmath
apart from conservation of momentum. Performing the recursion for all
terms in the sum ( 4.11 ), we arrive at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the terms in the sum can be drawn as (placement of @xmath ’s and
@xmath ’s can differ)

[]

Since our recursion cannot split MHV amplitudes, it is clear that all
three amplitudes in the numerator must be MHV and thus that the
helicities of the internal lines are fixed by the external helicities.
Moreover, if we write the twice shifted @xmath ’s as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

and remind ourselves that the coefficients were constructed to obey
momentum conservation and @xmath we can fix the @xmath uniquely as a
function of @xmath and @xmath . This solution is independent of which of
these was uncovered first, so we can collect terms in ( 4.13 ) two by
two and write it as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.16)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath means @xmath shifted using @xmath as to put @xmath
on-shell. The last factor, however, is exactly what we would get if we
took

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

and did recursion on it using @xmath . In terms of diagrams, what we are
arguing is that

[]

+ []

= []

Thus, we can write the amplitude as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is exactly the MHV rules for NNMHV amplitudes.

It should now be clear how to proceed with the general case. To uncover
the first propagator in an N @xmath MHV amplitude, @xmath , use the
shift

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

For each @xmath , uncover the next propagator @xmath by using the shift

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is chosen such that @xmath . The third propagator @xmath
can now be uncovered by using the shift

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is chosen such that @xmath . We can evidently continue in
this way until we have uncovered @xmath propagators, at which point we
have shifted the @xmath to @xmath and required that the shifted momenta
of the uncovered propagators are on-shell. The latter, together with
conservation of momentum, fixes @xmath independently of the order in
which the propagators were uncovered. Writing the amplitude formally as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

this allows the formal rewriting

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.23)
  -- -- -- --------

The last sum is exactly what one would get by considering

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

and applying recursion, first using @xmath , then, depending on which
propagator was uncovered, applying recursion using @xmath and then
(depending on @xmath and @xmath ) applying recursion using @xmath , etc.
In other words,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can now state what we have derived: To compute an amplitude,

1.  Draw all permitted MHV diagrams,

2.  For each diagram, shift the negative helicity particles according to

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.26)
      -- -------- -- --------

    and solve for @xmath under the condition that all shifted internal
    momenta @xmath are on-shell, and under the condition of conservation
    of momentum,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.27)
      -- -------- -- --------

3.  For each MHV vertex, multiply by the amplitude as a function of the
    shifted momenta.

4.  For each internal line with unshifted momentum @xmath , multiply by
    @xmath .

For pure Yang–Mills, step 2 is irrelevant because it only provides
information on the anti-holomorphic spinors. For internal momenta,
@xmath is independent of the actual values of the @xmath . In the
gravity application of these rules, to which we now turn, this step
becomes crucial.

### 4.4 MHV Rules for Gravity

Postponing again the question of the required large @xmath behaviour, we
can apply the above version of the MHV rules to gravity amplitudes. We
will do so through the example of the amplitude @xmath , which is N
@xmath MHV, but also googly MHV, a fact which will not concern us here.
This amplitude has a total of 90 MHV diagrams that are permutations of
six basic ones,

[] [] [] [] [] []

To compute the contribution of a representative of the first basic
diagram,

[]

we first write down the conditions for the on-shell’ness of the shifted
internal momenta,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.28)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Two additional conditions can be obtained by hitting the conservation of
momentum equation with two spinors (here we choose 3 and 4):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The solution is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.32)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.33)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

such that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The contribution of this diagram is thus

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------
                 @xmath            (4.38)
                          @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath            (4.40)
                 @xmath   @xmath   
                          @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath            (4.41)
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------

Though the procedure to obtain one out of six contributions to the
amplitude is in itself quite complicated, it is nothing in comparison to
the Lagrangian approach. But again, the on-shell recursion relations for
gravity will produce results faster.

Rather than computational speed, the interesting thing here is that it
is possible to formulate MHV rules for a gravity theory. This highlights
one of the mysterious connections between Yang–Mills theory and gravity
which is not properly understood. In this case, the MHV rules for YM
drop out of a description in twistor space, and such a description does
not seem likely for gravity, although there have been attempts which
reproduce the correct spectrum [ 1 ] but not the correct dynamical
theory [ 116 ] . Thus, an explanation outside of on-shell recursion
relations is still an outstanding problem.

### 4.5 Large @xmath Properties of the MHV Rule Shift

The question of the @xmath behaviour of deformed amplitudes should now
be addressed. To see what behaviour we need, consider the very last step
of the successive recursions where, for an N @xmath MHV amplitude, we
have uncovered @xmath propagators. To uncover the last propagator, the
last shift must have the amplitude go as @xmath . When we get to this
point, the antiholomorphic spinors have already been shifted many times,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the consequences of all the previous shifts and the
@xmath impose conservation of momentum and the vanishing of the @xmath
dependence of all propagator terms we have already uncovered. Had we not
imposed this, every propagator already uncovered would have contributed
@xmath to the large @xmath limit. In other words, had the @xmath been
unconstrained (apart from momentum conservation) the large @xmath
behaviour of the final shift would be @xmath . The dependence on the
@xmath is subleading in @xmath and mainly a consequence of the @xmath ’s
chosen along the way, so their presence should not disturb this
conclusion for generic external momenta. This leads us to conclude that
the condition for the MHV rules to hold as described here is that under
the shift

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath impose momentum conservation but are otherwise free, an N
@xmath MHV amplitude must go as @xmath as @xmath .

For gluon amplitudes in Yang–Mills this can be proven directly by
looking at the worst possible Feynman diagram. In such a diagram, the
@xmath external negative helicity gluons must be connected by some
number @xmath of three-vertices and @xmath propagators. Since
three-vertices go as @xmath and propagators go as @xmath , these
internal parts of the diagram go as @xmath . The dependence of the
polarizations is @xmath each, because we are shifting the
antiholomorphic spinor of a negative helicity gluon, so the
polarizations together go as @xmath . In total the whole amplitude goes
as @xmath which is one power better than required. This forms the last
ingredient of the on-shell recursive proof of the MHV rules for gluons.

For gravitons it is a different story. If we do the same analysis as
above, we find that the @xmath vertices contribute @xmath , the
propagators contribute @xmath and the external polarizations contribute
@xmath . This gives in total @xmath . The maximal number of vertices
that may have @xmath dependence in an @xmath -point amplitude is @xmath
, so the worst possible Feynman diagram has the behaviour @xmath where
we require @xmath . An analysis using the above result for Yang–Mills
together with the KLT relations gives the same estimate.

Luckily, these types of arguments are known to be way off for gravity.
If we do the same analysis for the BCFW shift ( 3.24 ) of an @xmath
-point amplitude we would obtain @xmath , where the real result is known
to be @xmath [ 14 , 5 ] . Cancellations of this order of magnitude in
the shifts used here should in general ensure that the MHV rules for
gravity are justified. In the original article on gravity MHV rules [ 49
] , the NMHV six and seven point amplitudes were found to go as @xmath
which is two powers better than needed, and four and five powers,
respectively, better than the worst expectation. If we allow ourselves
some speculation, this hints that the actual @xmath behaviour is @xmath
, implying that @xmath powers are removed by obscure symmetries in the
gravity theory.

## Chapter 5 Loop-Level Methods

Until now we have mostly concerned ourselves with tree-level amplitudes.
For most practical applications though, amplitudes at one or more loops
are required for interesting results. This chapter will review four
general tools out of strict historical order. For loop-level
calculations it is often necessary (or just useful) to use combinations
of them.

### 5.1 Structure of One-Loop Amplitudes

First, however, we will start out by reviewing what is known in general
about one-loop amplitudes, mostly in Yang–Mills theory, but also more
generally.

#### 5.1.1 Integral Reduction

When doing one-loop calculations with Feynman rules, one will encounter
integrals with arbitrary numbers of propagators and tensors depending on
the loop momentum of arbitrary rank. In Yang–Mills theory, an @xmath
-point calculation will give up to @xmath loop propagators and up to
rank @xmath tensors, while e.g. a gravity calculation will give up to
@xmath loop propagators and rank @xmath tensors in the loop momentum.
Such integrals are impossible to do directly, so one will normally do
some sort of integral reduction.

The most important of these is Passarino–Veltman reduction [ 121 ] ,
which reduces the powers of loop momentum appearing in the numerator by
using the knowledge that the result must be writable as a Lorentz
tensor, together with the knowledge of which Lorentz tensors it can
depend on. As a simple example, take the integral

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since this integral can only depend on @xmath and @xmath , it must be
writable as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

By contracting with @xmath and @xmath on both sides of this equation and
using similar results from simpler integrals, one can find expressions
for @xmath and @xmath in terms of integrals fewer powers of loop
momentum in the numerator and the same number of, or fewer, loop
propagators. Iterating this procedure can remove all dependence on the
loop momentum in the numerator and leave us with scalar integrals only.

Depending on the dimension of spacetime, the scalar integrals may be
reduced further. Take for instance the massless hexagon integral in four
dimensions (with implicit @xmath ’s)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Because the external momenta are “twice” linearly dependent in four
dimensions, we can always adjust constants @xmath through @xmath such
that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

which allows us to split the hexagon integral into six pentagons. Notice
that this depends on the dimension in which the external momenta live;
dimensionally regulating the loop momentum does not change this.

By using these types of integral reduction, one can arrive at
expressions for the wanted amplitudes which contain a reduced set of
integrals that are possible to compute, or more often, look up.

#### 5.1.2 Massless Integral Basis in Four Dimensions

For four dimensional theories with massless states running in the loop,
there is an additional identity that allows pentagons to be written in
terms of lower point integrals [ 36 ] . This leaves a basis for all
one-loop amplitudes consisting of scalar box integrals, triangle
integrals, bubble integrals, and 1 ¹ ¹ 1 Remember that massless tadpoles
vanish in dimensional regularization . The integrals are defined as
(implicit @xmath ’s)

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

These integrals (and 1) have coefficients which are rational functions
of the external spinors and momenta. In addition, box and triangle
integrals come out as expressions of mass dimension @xmath , divided by
their respective Gram determinants which may or may not be rational.
This prompts us to define the box and triangle integral functions @xmath
and @xmath where the Gram determinant is taken into the coefficient
instead, where we will often find that it is cancelled.

Box and triangle integrals are classified according to which of their
external momenta are massless. For triangles there are zero-mass through
three-mass ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ) while for boxes there
zero-, one-, three-, and four-mass together with the so-called
two-mass-easy ( @xmath ) and two-mass-hard ( @xmath ) configurations
where the massless corners are opposite and adjacent, respectively. The
integral functions and Gram determinants are given in appendix A .

#### 5.1.3 Supersymmetric Decomposition

When calculating gauge theory amplitudes, the answer depends on the
number of massless fermions and scalars in the gauge theory because they
can run in the loop. There are particular choices for these numbers that
give dramatically simpler answers, namely those corresponding to
supersymmetric theories. It is standard to use the “basis” for the
particle content consisting of an @xmath multiplet (1 gluon, 4 fermions,
3 complex scalars), an @xmath chiral multiplet (1 fermion, 1 complex
scalar), and the so-called @xmath multiplet containing just a complex
scalar. A theory with @xmath adjoint fermions and @xmath adjoint scalars
can thus be written as

  -- -- -- -------
           (5.6)
  -- -- -- -------

If the fermions or scalars are in the fundamental representation, @xmath
should be substituted with @xmath where @xmath is the number of colours.

In background field gauge, it can be shown explicitly that there are
diagram-by-diagram cancellations that remove four powers of loop
momentum in the numerator for @xmath and two powers for @xmath . When
those results are Passarino–Veltman reduced, they can only give rise to
boxes in the @xmath case and only to boxes, triangles and bubbles (that
is, no additional rational terms) in @xmath . For @xmath there are no
such cancellations, but the calculation is made simpler by the reduced
number of Lorentz indices for a scalar running in the loop as compared
to a gluon.

Supersymmetric decompositions can be used in other theories as well,
however, without a formal handle on the cancellation of numerator loop
momentum. Since the expression of the supersymmetry at tree level is the
same as in gauge theory ( e.g. SWI’s, cf. section 2.3.2 ) and tree level
results are recycled in most loop calculations, it is generally believed
that the same regularity holds for other theories, in particular
gravity. For arbitrary @xmath it is believed that an even @xmath
multiplet will have @xmath cancellations of loop momenta in the
numerator while an odd @xmath multiplet will have @xmath [ 21 ] .

#### 5.1.4 Limits and Singularities

To aid in both checking and construction expressions for one-loop
amplitudes, it becomes important to look at these expressions in certain
limits. The tree-level limiting behaviour was studied in section 2.3.3
and this is extended here to one-loop level.

The multiparticle poles of Yang–Mills amplitudes can occur in the same
way as at tree-level when a non-loop propagator goes on shell and splits
the diagram in two, the loop being on one side or the other. We may also
have a singularity coming from other parts of the calculation which has
a more messy interpretation, though. This gives the multiparticle limit
[ 30 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.7)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

as @xmath , where @xmath is a function depending (in a cut-containing
and non-factorized way) on all incoming momenta, but not on the
helicities. It also depends on the particle content of the theory.

Another type of singularity that Yang–Mills theory has, is collinear
singularities. Again, we get something similar to the tree-level case,
only now we have to introduce 1-loop splitting amplitudes which depend
on the particle content of the theory. We have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.8)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

as @xmath , @xmath . The one-loop splitting functions for both gluons
and fermions are given in [ 33 ] (and to all orders in @xmath in [ 32 ]
). The pure-glue splitting functions are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is defined in ( A.3 ).

The general form of infrared divergences in Yang–Mills is also known
from general arguments. This imposes the constraint that [ 92 , 71 , 105
]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

This imposes some quite stringent constraints on coeffiecients of box
and triangle functions because there needs to be complete cancellation
of e.g. terms of the kind

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is any multiparticle kinematic invariant [ 31 ] . In
one-loop gravity, a similar relation holds [ 81 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

with similar consequences [ 48 ] to be explored further in chapter 7 .

### 5.2 Unitarity Cuts

As mentioned in the introduction, the concepts of unitarity and
analyticity of the @xmath -matrix came to play a large role again in the
90’s. That was primarily because the insights of the previous section
were sufficient to fill in the missing parts of the puzzle, the parts
which (helped by experimental evidence) sent @xmath -matrix theory out
in the cold.

#### 5.2.1 Ordinary @xmath Unitarity Cuts

Instead of trying to directly reconstruct the one-loop amplitude from
its cut discontinuities—a procedure which is often ambiguous—it is
possible to use all the insights of the previous section to come up with
an ansatz for the result and match cuts on both sides of the equation to
arrive at an answer. This was first used by Bern, Dixon, Dunbar and
Kosower to compute the one-loop MHV amplitudes in @xmath Yang–Mills [ 33
] as follows: It is known that the @xmath amplitude only contains boxes,
so we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

On both sides we can pick out the discontinuity in @xmath by replacing
the loop propagators between @xmath and @xmath and between @xmath and
@xmath by delta functions in the square of the loop momenta. On the left
side of ( 5.14 ) we get an integral over the product of two tree
amplitudes, possibly summed over internal helicities in the loop,

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath                        (5.15)
                                   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------

Pictorically, this becomes

[]

where the dashed line denotes the cutting of the two internal lines. In
Lorentz invariant gauges such as Feynman gauge, we would have to include
a ghost loop, but by using the spinor-helicity formalism, which is
implicitly in a light-like axial gauge as mentioned at the end of
section 2.2 , we can avoid them.

For the two tree amplitudes to be non-zero, they must both be MHV. Then,
if @xmath and @xmath are both on the left [right] side we have @xmath
while if they are on opposite sides @xmath can take any value in the
@xmath multiplet and we need to do an actual summation. These two
distinct cases can be drawn as

[] []

The summation over the @xmath multiplet, however, gives exactly the same
result as when both @xmath and @xmath are on the same side, namely that
the integrand can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

This can again be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

plus terms that vanish when we integrate. In this way all the dependence
on the loop momenta has been confined to two propagators in each of the
four terms. That, however, is exactly what one would get by cutting four
particular 2-mass easy boxes. And even better, the coefficients (apart
from @xmath ) are the respective Gram determinants, so this is a sum of
cuts of four box functions ( @xmath ’s) with the same coefficient. In
equations,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.18)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This suggests that the one-loop amplitude can be written roughly as the
tree amplitude times the sum of all 2-mass easy box functions. The
’roughly’ comes in through careful considerations of which choices of
@xmath and @xmath are allowed and independent. The result can now be
checked using other means such as collinear limits and it does indeed
hold up.

Staying inside Yang–Mills theory there are two extensions we can make on
this [ 34 ] . Firstly, we can consider the @xmath or the @xmath theory
where triangle and bubble integrals are introduced on the right side of
( 5.14 ). This complicates the calculation by giving integrands whose
numerators depend on the cut loop momenta while there may be one less
propagator. This then requires integral reduction a la Passarino–Veltman
(section 5.1.1 ) with some simplifying conditions on the loop momenta.
For the @xmath theory there is the additional complication that the
rational terms are not picked up by four-dimensional unitarity cuts. As
we will see later, it can still be quite useful to know the
cut-containing parts of the amplitude. Secondly, we can go beyond MHV
amplitudes where the integrand does not immediately have the nice
decomposition into boxes as e.g. in ( 5.2.1 ). Still, some @xmath
six-point results can be obtained.

Inspired by the recent revival of unitarity arguments, some improvements
have been made on the technology which allows for quite efficient
extraction of integral coefficients [ 58 , 63 ] .

#### 5.2.2 Generalized Unitarity

The process of computing a unitarity cut where two propagators are put
on-shell has a clear interpretation as the discontinuity across a cut in
the amplitude as a complex function of the kinematic variables. In the
way it is applied, however, this interpretation of the cut is not used.
Although the interpretation of the cutting of more than two loop
propagators may not be as clear, it seems just as reasonable to use it
to constrain an amplitude.

The problem is that many integrals cut on more than two propagators turn
out to be zero because there are no solutions in Minkowski space for the
cut momenta. A triple cut is only non-zero when applied to three-mass
triangles and three- and four-mass boxes, while a quadruple cut is only
non-zero for four-mass boxes. Higher cuts are zero because they
over-constrain the four-dimensional loop momentum. There are some
situations where generalized unitarity does come in handy in Minkowski
space; the NMHV @xmath amplitude has been calculated to all @xmath in
this way [ 31 , 37 ] .

Since the comments here apply only to amplitudes in real Minkowski
space, they will be altered completely when we move to complex momenta
below.

#### 5.2.3 Unitarity in @xmath

If we want to know a full one-loop amplitude we must do the dimensional
regularization properly. This involves taking the loop momentum to be
@xmath -dimensional rather than four-dimensional. This poses a very deep
problem when using the spinor helicity formalism as it is tied to
exactly four dimensions. One solution could be to use spinor helicity
notation for all non-loop quantities and ordinary Lorentz notation for
loop quantities. This comes at the expense of the compact form of tree
amplitudes.

When computing gluon scattering amplitudes, the easiest way to proceed
is to use the fact that only the @xmath component can have rational
terms, and thus we only need the less compact amplitudes for scalar
particles in the loop [ 26 , 35 ] . In this way issues of summing over
polarization states are also avoided. The cut momentum of the scalar is
written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a four-dimensional momentum of mass @xmath and @xmath is
a @xmath -dimensional unit vector. The integration will then split into
an integral over a massive scalar and an integral over the mass. Using
the unitarity method, this can be used to write the amplitude in terms
of loop integrals whose rational parts as @xmath are known. Recent
versions of such methods are developed in [ 3 , 62 , 4 ] .

### 5.3 MHV Rules for Loops: The BST Prescription

When the MHV rules were conceived, the perspective for their use at loop
level was rather dim. It was argued that the loops would necessarily
contain states of conformal supergravity, a theory which is non-unitary.
Not everyone was deterred by this argument, at least not Brandhuber,
Spence and Travaglini (BST) who decided to recalculate the one-loop
@xmath MHV amplitude using MHV rules [ 57 ] .

Their prescription consists of drawing all diagrams with two MHV
vertices and two internal lines to form a loop,

[]

The momenta @xmath of these internal lines are off-shell, so on-shell
continuations of them are required for use in the MHV vertices. This is
performed by taking the integration measure

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

and changing variables to @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath are
lightlike and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an arbitrary lightlike vector. As shown in [ 55 ] , the
combination @xmath can be integrated out by standard (albeit involved)
methods of complex analysis, while the combination @xmath can be
replaced by @xmath . This yields the measure

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath on the delta functions impose that @xmath and @xmath
must have positive energy.

For @xmath matter running in the loop, BST found that the product of the
two MHV vertices (summed over the multiplet) became—in a way similar to
the unitarity example above—a sum over terms of the kind

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

At this point the loop momenta are described as 4-momenta rater than
spinors, and that permits a dimensional regularization by taking the
number of dimensions to be @xmath as usual.

With sufficient hard work, the integration of ( 5.23 ) with the measure
( 5.22 ) can be performed and terms (four of each) which have the same
numerator in ( 5.23 ) combine to form two-mass easy box functions. The
proof relies in part on an identity between nine dilog functions and in
this way gives a different form of the two-mass easy function derived
earlier by Duplančić and Nižić [ 82 ] but not widely known.

There are generalizations to the cases with @xmath [ 13 , 124 ] and
scalar matter [ 11 ] in the loop which require triangle and bubble
functions. In the scalar case there are additional rational pieces which
are not predicted by this version of the loop MHV rules because they
contain cuts almost by construction. These rational terms, however,
appear to be generated in the light-cone reformulation of the MHV rules
with a particular non-dimensional regularization [ 56 ] .

In spite of the successful application to several one-loop calculations
of MHV (and similar [ 6 , 10 ] ) amplitudes, the BST prescription
appears to be unpractical for higher numbers of negative helicity gluons
than two. Although the formal correctness of the prescription has been
proven using the Feynman Tree Theorem [ 55 ] for any number of negative
helicity gluons, there have been no concrete calculations, mainly
because the method has been superceded by others mentioned in this
chapter.

The prescription also inherits a formal problem from the tree-level MHV
rules, namely the one mentioned in section 3.2.2 that the vertices do
not obey momentum conservation. From that perspective, it may be seen as
odd that the right results appear, as any (momentum conserving)
rewriting of the vertices will change the results to something wrong.
Resolution of this problem comes either from formulating the loop-level
MHV rules in a light-cone form or by noting that any cutting of internal
lines (as in the Feynman Tree Theorem mentioned in the introduction)
reduces the amplitude to integrals over on-shell tree amplitudes where
the conservation-of-momentum problem was resolved by viewing the rules
as coming from recursion relations in complexified Minkowski space
(chapter 4 ).

### 5.4 Quadruple Cuts

The unitarity method of section 5.2 employed cuts on two internal
states, partly because the cut conditions are guaranteed to have
solutions for which the internal momenta are real in Minkowski space.
Clearly, there is nothing wrong with applying more cuts in principle,
but the cut conditions often turn out not to allow any real solutions,
thereby setting the cut to zero and rendering its information useless.

While working with twistor methods, first described in 2+2 dimensions
where the spinors are real and independent, Britto, Cachazo and Feng
realized [ 59 ] that working in that signature (or, more generally, in
complexified Minkowski space) would allow simultaneous solutions to the
constraints of four cuts. Since the loop momentum is four dimensional
this would fix it completely, reducing the problem of finding the
coefficient of a box function to a purely algebraic one. This is
particularly useful for calculating @xmath amplitudes which only contain
box integrals.

#### 5.4.1 Basic idea in @xmath

Consider first a one-loop amplitude and choose four internal lines to
take on-shell. There is, of course, a one-to-one correspondence between
the boxes and the sets of four internal lines, so there is no double
counting issue. The chosen box with coefficient @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is cut to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The constraints have two solutions which give rise to the same Jacobian
for the integral. The Jacobian is inversely proportional to the Gram
determinant but will otherwise not concern us. The result of the cutting
is now

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can do the same considerations for each Feynman diagram in the
calculation of the one-loop amplitude. Adding up contributions from all
diagrams that cut our four chosen internal lines will give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the summation over states refers to the possibility that different
particles may have those momenta, and that we must sum over all
possibilities. In the same way as above, this gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

or,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

In other words, the coefficient is given by products of four on-shell
tree amplitudes in four dimensions. The quadruple cut can be depicted as
a box with four corner tree amplitudes connected by the (implicitly cut)
loop propagators,

[]

In concrete examples the internal momenta have helicity labels if there
is only one helicity configuration which gives non-vanishing
contributions.

#### 5.4.2 A Simple Example

As a first example, we may try to calculate the one-loop @xmath
amplitude. This has only one quadruple cut, namely

[]

There are two solutions for the internal momenta @xmath through @xmath .
The first is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the consequence that MHV three-point amplitudes at corners @xmath
and @xmath are zero while googly-MHV three-point amplitudes at corners
@xmath and @xmath are zero. Thus, the only non-vanishing assignment of
internal states is

[]

giving the contribution ² ² 2 Remember that @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (5.31)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the normal Mandelstam variables. The other
solution for the internal momenta comes about by ’flipping’ @xmath in (
5.4.2 ) and appropriately reversing the conclusions about the helicity
assignments to get

[]

Notice how the symbols [] and [] are used for three-point MHV and
googly-MHV corner amplitudes, respectively. Since @xmath is invariant
under flipping we get the same result as before. The one-loop amplitude
then becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

In practice, a calculation will be a good deal more involved as it may
include more complicated corner amplitudes, especially non-MHV
amplitudes, and summing over the full @xmath multiplet possibly running
in the loop. Such an example (pieces of which were calculated in the
original article on quadruple cuts [ 59 ] ) is presented in the next
chapter.

To aid our calculations in the remainder of this thesis, the solutions
of the internal constraints have been assembled in Appendix B .

#### 5.4.3 Box Coefficients in Other Theories

The quadruple cut method extends smoothly to other theories, but without
being “complete” in the sense that the entire amplitude can be found
from that method. What it does calculate is the contribution to the
amplitude from box functions, since the quadruple cut singles out the
boxes. When calculating a general Yang–Mills one-loop amplitude, the
contributions to boxes from the @xmath chiral multiplet running in the
loop can be calculated just by adjusting the internal states. As is done
in chapter 8 , the method may also be used where some (massive) external
states do not run in the loop. Another extension is to gravity theories
such as @xmath supergravity, where it is possible in general to use the
KLT relations between tree amplitudes to construct KLT-like relations
between the box coefficients. The use of quadruple cuts in gravity will
be considered in more detail in chapter 7 .

#### 5.4.4 Generalized Unitarity in Complexified Minkowski Space

As briefly mentioned in section 5.2.2 , taking quadruple cuts was not a
genuine new idea in itself, rather it was the use of internal momenta in
complexified Minkowski space. Thus, the method also allows for wider use
of the triple cut. This leads to different methods for obtaining the
cut-containing parts of amplitudes [ 88 , 51 , 118 , 85 ] .

Also, both triple and quadruple cuts can be done with massive particles
or, equivalently ( cf. section 5.2.3 ) with massless particles exactly
in @xmath dimensions to yield also the rational parts of amplitudes [ 54
, 114 ]

The idea of generalized unitarity can be extended to higher loop orders,
where cutting a large portion of the propagators can reveal information
as to the structure of both the momentum-dependent numerator and any
other coefficients, and can likewise provide useful checks of higher
loop unitarity cut calculation where a more conventional generalized
unitarity approach is taken. An amusing case [ 64 ] , which
unfortunately does not seem to generalize, is @xmath two-loop integral
coefficients up to and including six external gluons where completely
cut integrals such as

[]

have an additional propagator-like singularity coming from the Jacobian
of the right box. This singularity can again be cut providing a total of
eight constraints which fix the integration completely and gives the
coefficient as a product of tree amplitudes. This, however, requires
that there is a box which is two-mass hard or one-mass; otherwise the
Jacobian is not propagator-like.

Recently, Cachazo and Skinner has shed some additional light on the use
of cutting procedures at higher loops [ 66 ] .

### 5.5 Recursion at Loop Level

Up till now, this chapter has been concerned with deriving one-loop
amplitudes from tree amplitudes. In that perspective it should come as
no surprise that recursion can also play a role here. Indeed it does
play a role in determining coefficients of the integral functions [ 29 ,
51 ] , although it does not seem to be as strong a tool as at tree
level.

The problem of determining integral coefficients is, however, not our
main objective in this section. Rather, it is the calculation of the
rational parts of non-supersymmetric one-loop amplitudes directly in
four dimensions without appealing to @xmath -dimensional (generalized)
unitarity. The methods described here were developed by Bern, Dixon and
Kosower, first for amplitudes with no cut-containing parts [ 39 , 38 ]
and later for amplitudes with cut-containing parts [ 40 ] . Since this
section is more intended as background material for chapter 8 than a
review of advanced topics, the treatment will be adapted to that case
and other complications will only be mentioned briefly.

As in the tree case, on-shell recursion starts out by deforming two
external momenta with a complex parameter @xmath and writing the @xmath
result as an integral along a closed contour enclosing the origin,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath as @xmath , we can write this formally as a sum over
integrations around all singularities of @xmath , which may be both
poles and branch cuts,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.34)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is a branch cut and @xmath is the discontinuity across it.
In the first term, the residues are given by the appropriate
multiparticle or collinear factorization and depend on lower-point
one-loop amplitudes or splitting functions. Since we assume that the
cut-containing parts of the amplitude can be calculated by other methods
described in this chapter, it makes sense to split all one-loop
amplitudes and one-loop splitting functions into their cut-containing ³
³ 3 Rational terms proportional to @xmath are included with the
cut-containing part. and rational parts. Then it can be argued that
cut-containing parts can be deduced from the cut-containing parts of
lower-point one-loop amplitudes and splitting functions, and that
rational parts can be deduced from the rational parts of them.

This removes the complication of cuts in the amplitude, but introduces a
new one. When we make the split of an amplitude into cut-containing and
rational parts

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

we cannot trust that @xmath and @xmath individually only have physical (
i.e. multiparticle and collinear) singularities. In fact, the cut
containing parts will often contain terms like

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

which do not correspond to physical singularities of @xmath . To handle
this, we add and subtract a rational cut-completion term @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

which has (minus) the same unphysical singularities as @xmath . The
singularities of @xmath are poles (single or double) in kinematic
invariants, so we can do the usual on-shell recursion trick (again,
assuming @xmath as @xmath ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the poles are those that arise from known singularities of @xmath
. The terms coming from @xmath and @xmath are known as the direct
recursive @xmath and overlap @xmath terms, respectively. The latter can
be computed directly from @xmath while the former is more intricate.

If the one-loop splitting functions had only single poles, we could
interpret them—in the same way as tree splitting functions—as recursion
diagrams of the type

[]

Rather than now classifying the positions of the two negative helicity
external legs, we can start out by using the simple form of the MHV
amplitude to write down part of the coefficients, namely the part that
depends on the denominator of ( 2.3.1 ),

  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------
           @xmath            (6.1)
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------

Using the solutions of the internal constraints ( B ), we can write this
as

  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------
           @xmath            (6.2)
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------

Notice that

  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------
           @xmath            (6.3)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------

is twice the Gram determinant. Thus, the denominator consists of the
Gram determinant, the conventional @xmath spinor product, and a
remaining term to the fourth power.

The term coming from the numerator depends on the position of the two
external negative helicity legs. These can be placed in four distinct
ways, but we will content ourselves with the calculation of two of them.
The first case is when the two negative helicity legs are on the same
MHV corner, say corner @xmath ,

[]

If we call them @xmath and @xmath , respectively, the numerator becomes

  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------
           @xmath            (6.4)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------

We see that the paranthesis cancels with the one in ( 6.2 ) and leaves
only the Gram determinant times the tree amplitude.

We now turn to the case where @xmath and @xmath are on corners @xmath
and @xmath , respectively. In this case, the whole @xmath multiplet can
run in the loop which we draw as an extra internal line,

[]

The numerator contribution from the gluons can easily be seen to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The contribution of the fermions can be computed by noting that the
amplitude @xmath is simply related to @xmath , namely by the exchange of
one of the numerator factors with another. This yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the prefactor takes into account that there are four species and
that they must have fermionic sign. The scalar contribution becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

When we add these three expressions together, we see a common situation
in @xmath SYM: the particle multiplicities make sure that the result is
simplified, in this case by making it writable as a fourth power of some
term:

  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------
           @xmath            (6.8)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------

In words, the particle states of @xmath running in the loop conspire to
make the numerator factor the same as before. It is not difficult to
imagine (and true) that all four positionings of the negative helicity
legs @xmath and @xmath give the same numerator factor.

We can now write down the complete one-loop MHV amplitude in @xmath SYM.
It is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

This was the result for gluons in the external states, but in fact, it
holds for any MHV choice of external particles. Remember from section
2.3.2 that SWI’s fix all tree-level MHV amplitudes up to a constant;
since the one-loop result should also respect the full @xmath
supersymmetry, the same is the case here. Only the common factor is
corrected from its tree-level value to its one-loop value.

### 6.2 NMHV Amplitudes

The next natural step would be to compute all NMHV amplitudes. The
purely gluonic case was worked out by the unitarity methods of section
5.2 by Bern, Dixon and Kosower [ 37 ] prior to the publication of the
quadruple cut method. With this method, its inventors computed the MHV
constructible parts of the NMHV amplitude [ 59 ] . The case with other
external particles was worked out by Bidder, Perkins and the author [
127 ] , but since the latter calculation naturally incorporates the pure
gluon case, both cases will be reviewed here.

For most (but not all) of the box coefficients of the NMHV amplitude, we
can again exploit MHV constructibility. Doing the same analysis of the
“number of minuses” as above, we see that there are a total of seven
minuses, which can be distributed among the four corner amplitudes in
two ways: Either there is one googly-MHV three point corner and three
MHV corners, or there are two googly-MHV three point corners, one MHV
corner, and one NMHV corner. The latter solution is not MHV
constructible and will be postponed until we have considered the former
which is. The diagram for the calculation and the solution for the
internal spinors are

[]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 6.2.1 3 Mass Boxes, Gluons Only

As in the MHV case, we start by getting the denominator factors out of
the way since they are independent of the external helicities. To fix
the ambiguity in scale of the spinors, we assume the convention

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The numerators now become

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (6.16)
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

By manipulations of the same kind as ( 6.3 ) it can be shown that @xmath
is the Gram determinant. We see the same kind of structure as for MHV:
the Gram determinant, something to the power 4 (which we hope
disappears) and a factor involving @xmath which looks natural as a box
coefficient.

We can now turn to the numerators. The easiest way to proceed is to
consider the gluon case first and then use NMHV SWI’s and the known
facts about the MHV amplitude for other-than-gluons to relate them to
the gluon amplitudes. There are seven distinct non-zero configurations
of the three negative helicity gluons and we will show the calculations
for three of them.

The first case is shown in the box diagram below

[]

The numerator is given by

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (6.17)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

We should be happy to see the factor @xmath appearing as it cancels the
corresponding (unphysical) factor in the denominator. The second
placement of the negative helicity gluons we will explore is

[]

which has the numerator

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (6.18)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

As before, we see the wanted factor to the power four. The last case is
the one where the three negative helicity gluons are situated on the
three massive corners,

[]

This configuration is rather special, as the whole @xmath multiplet can
run in the loop and we have to sum over all the particle species. The
two gluon contributions can be constructed as for the cases above,

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (6.19)
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

As in the one-loop MHV calculation above, the fermion and scalar
contributions follow from the gluon ones by taking products of the two
parantheses above with powers summing to four and by adjusting the
prefactors. This exactly turns the final result into a complete power of
four:

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (6.20)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

Again, we see the same picture emerging as before.

When doing all negative helicity gluon configurations, we finally obtain
the result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the configuration and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

#### 6.2.2 NMHV SWIs

Before proceeding to the equivalent calculations with other particle
content than gluons, we should consider some of the constraints on those
amplitudes coming from supersymmetry. In section 2.3.2 we looked at the
effective supersymmetry of tree amplitudes, supersymmetry algebras and
the supersymmetric Ward identities that follow. Since we are now working
with a genuinely @xmath supersymmetric theory we can use these
considerations for loop amplitudes also. Even better, since the box
functions are all independent, @xmath SWIs for the full amplitude imply
that they must also be satisfied coefficient by coefficient. Here we
will derive SWIs for amplitudes @xmath where all @xmath states are
implicit.

To derive NMHV SWIs relating pure glue amplitudes to amplitudes with a
pair of fermions, we start from @xmath and apply @xmath to find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.23)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This relation holds irrespective of the number of supersymmetries since
we are only using one. In a notation closer in spirit to what we will
use here, the SWI is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.24)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We can extend this to scalars in external states by starting from the
amplitude @xmath and applying again @xmath . Using ( 2.3.2 ) we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.25)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

which relates amplitudes with both gluons, fermions and scalars. For
this SWI we used that an amplitude involving @xmath vanishes, something
which is not immediately obvious. This follows roughly by noting that
@xmath which can be interpreted in the way that @xmath contains a @xmath
, and this sets the amplitude to zero by fermion conservation of
helicity. These arguments can be made more exact by considering a
superfield formulation of the theory such as Nair’s [ 115 ] which plays
a major role in some twistor studies.

To obtain SWIs involving amplitudes with no negative helicity gluons we
can start from @xmath and apply @xmath to get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.26)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

It is possible to deduce quite a few of these NMHV SWI’s and we shall
not attempt to derive all of them here. The general procedure for
generating them is this: Start with an amplitude which has three and a
half units of negative helicity (N @xmath MHV) and where the SUSY
indices @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are each maximally used once on
@xmath and @xmath states, and where the indices @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath are used maximally once on @xmath and @xmath states (and
@xmath must be used once). Then, assuming the four SUSY indices to be
different, act with @xmath to get the SWI. Resulting amplitudes
involving @xmath twice in @xmath and @xmath states are zero for the
reason discussed above.

As should be clear from the discussion of SWI’s, they are not concerned
with colour ordering, or numbering in general.

#### 6.2.3 3 Mass Boxes with Two Fermions

We now want to calculate the three mass box function coefficients when
we have two negative helicity gluons and a pair of fermions. We first
review some general arguments and then give the full results without
detailed calculation.

The easiest way of classifying the configurations is to view it as a
process of moving a half unit of negative helicity from one of the
@xmath ’s to a leg @xmath situated on one of the four corners. Take as
an example the configuration @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and move a half
unit of negative helicity from @xmath on @xmath to @xmath which is also
on @xmath . Since this only involves corner @xmath the ratio of the
coefficients must be the ratio of the @xmath corner amplitudes,

[]

[]

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------
        @xmath   @xmath            (6.27)
                 @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------

If the @xmath helicity came from @xmath we could track the effect on
each corner and derive the relative factor in a similar way. However, we
could also use the SWI

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (6.28)
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

and set @xmath to obtain

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (6.29)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

The case chosen is, of course, deceptively easy since @xmath as can be
seen by trying (and failing) to assign internal helicities in the
quadruple cut. Taking the more involved road, it can also be found by
using the SWI above with @xmath .

In most cases there are no large advantages of using the one method
(tracking the half unit of helicity through the vertices) over the other
(SWI) but in some cases the former should definitely be avoided. Take as
an example the gluon configuration @xmath , @xmath and move @xmath
helicity from @xmath to @xmath . When analysing the possible internal
helicity assignments we find that there are in fact two different ways
it can be done,

[] []

Rather than calculating the result from this analysis, we can use that
(including a fermionic minus)

[]

[]

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------
        @xmath   @xmath            (6.30)
                 @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------

and use this in the corresponding SWI with @xmath ,

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (6.31)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

We see the continuation of the picture that moving @xmath helicity from
one corner to another produces a ratio whose fourth power is the ratio
for moving @xmath helicity between the same legs. This holds not only
when the external helicities constrain us to a single internal state in
the loop, but holds when more internal states open up. The latter is a
consequence of the @xmath supersymmetry.

This becomes a helpful realization when we want to move helicity around
in the @xmath gluon configuration. No matter how we do it, we will need
to sum over at least eight states of the multiplet. This can of course
be done (and was indeed done in [ 127 ] ) but it is simpler to note e.g.
that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.32)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and interpret this to be ’proportional to’ the corresponding SWI

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (6.33)
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

in the sense that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

etcetera . Using the methods described in this section, one can derive
all box coefficients involving two gluinos. They are reported in the
tables below. The top line of each table states the gluon configuration
we start from and the associated @xmath factor. Below, the first column
states where the @xmath unit is moved to (the position of @xmath ) and
the second column states which of the negative helicity gluons it came
from. The third column then states which factor the @xmath in the top
line is to be replaced by to obtain the correct box coefficient. In the
first three cases we have used identities such as @xmath to abbreviate
results.

  AAB               @xmath
  -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath

  AAC               @xmath
  -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath

  ABB               @xmath
  -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath

  ABd               @xmath
  -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath

  ACd               @xmath
  -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath

  BBd               @xmath
  -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath

  ABC               @xmath
  -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath

#### 6.2.4 Beyond Two Fermions

Using the same methods as above and assisted by SWI’s, the analysis can
be extended to other external particles than gluons and two fermions.
For instance, the ratio of coefficients between a @xmath and a @xmath
amplitude is found by squaring the ratio between coefficients of @xmath
and a @xmath , e.g.

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (6.35)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

If we moved four units of @xmath helicity from @xmath to @xmath we would
have to take the parenthesis to the power 4, which is of course
equivalent to exchanging @xmath with @xmath in ( 6.21 ) as it should be.

Amplitudes with both scalars and fermions can be constructed in similar
ways by viewing them as pure-glue amplitudes where units of @xmath
helicity have been moved around. For each move, one of the original
@xmath factors is removed and replaced by another which captures where
the helicity was moved to. In general this does not fix the overall sign
unambiguously, so we must resort to SWIs to be completely sure. As an
example we can try to compute the coefficient @xmath by noting that it
comes from moving @xmath helicity from @xmath to @xmath in @xmath . This
tells us that the relative factor must be @xmath , and that we must use
a SWI of the type ( 6.25 ) which describes moving helicity from
somewhere to in an @xmath configuration to corner @xmath . Such an SWI
is represented in the first table above in the last three lines, namely

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.36)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This leads us to conclude that

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

With these methods, three-mass box function coefficients for any NMHV
external particle configuration can be calculated.

#### 6.2.5 Beyond Three-Mass Boxes

Up until now we completely focussed on three-mass boxes because they
were MHV constructible and have a well controlled structure.
Two-mass-hard boxes are also MHV constructible but they have two
contributions for each coefficient since either of the two massless
corners can be the googly MHV one. We can easily obtain those
coefficients, however, from the three-mass coefficients by taking
massive corners to have only one momentum on them,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

The two-mass-easy boxes are not MHV constructible because the opposite
massless corners are both googly MHV and the two massive corners must be
MHV and NMHV, respectively. Rather than using explicit expressions for
the the NMHV amplitudes, we can use the same procedure as [ 37 ] where
the known structure of IR divergences in @xmath super-Yang–Mills tells
us that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

which again translates to linear conditions on the box coefficients.
These can be inverted (at least for an odd number of external particles)
to produce expressions for the two-mass-easy coefficients in terms of
the three-mass coefficeints. Because we are considering @xmath
supersymmetry in both external and internal states, these identities
hold irrespective of the external states. Formally, the identity is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.40)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the summations rum over all three-mass box coefficients that
fulfill the condition.

Just as two-mass-hard boxes were degenerate three-mass boxes, one-mass
boxes can be characterized as degenerate two-mass-easy and three-mass
boxes. This gives us the formula for the one-mass coefficients,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since there are no further contributions to the one-loop amplitude, this
constitutes a complete characterization of the one-loop NMHV amplitude
in @xmath super-Yang–Mills.

## Chapter 7 One-Loop Amplitudes in @xmath Supergravity

This chapter introduces the calculation of one-loop amplitudes in @xmath
supergravity and the ‘‘No Triangle Hypothesis’’ ¹ ¹ 1 Given the present
weight of evidence it should be termed the “No Triangle Conjecture”, but
the original name seems to have stuck with it. Considering what it
actually says, it ought to be called the “Box Hypothesis” or something
similar. for the structure. It is based on the article [ 50 ] , which
extends the results of earlier work [ 48 ] .

### 7.1 One-Loop Structure of Maximal Supergravity

The results of sections 5.1.1 and 5.1.2 apply just as well to a gravity
theory as to Yang–Mills. Thus, any one-loop amplitude in four dimensions
can be written as a sum of boxes, triangles, bubbles and a rational
function,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

There are, however, no theorems that use supersymmetry to constrain this
further as with Yang–Mills, and generically, any theory of gravity
should be expected to include all types of terms.

For a low number of external gravitons, there are some results that do
constrain the form. If we go back to the integrand of the loop integral,
it will generally have @xmath propagator terms where @xmath is the
number of external particles. Since all Feynman vertices in gravity
contain momentum squared, we should have @xmath powers of loop momentum
in the numerator. By multiplying and dividing by all propagators not in
the expressions, this can be written as @xmath powers of loop momenum in
the numerator and @xmath propagators,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

When we do Passarino–Veltman reduction on this, each propagator can be
exchanged for one or two fewer powers of loop momentum. For any @xmath ,
this is expected to result in a combination of all the terms appearing
in ( 7.1 ). However, we should also expect that there are supersymmetry
cancellations like in Yang–Mills that reduce the power @xmath . This is
indeed the case in the so-called string-based approach to loop
calculations [ 43 , 80 ] (for the string-based approach in Yang–Mills,
consult [ 45 , 46 , 27 , 42 ] ) where cancellations can be made explicit
which reduce the numerator power of loop momentum by 8 in @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

This explicitly tells us that four-point amplitudes (as explicitly shown
by a classic string calculation [ 94 ] ) can only have a box integral,
five-point can have boxes and triangles, six-point can have boxes,
triangles and bubbles, while seven-point and above is again
unconstrained.

Somewhat surprisingly, the situation seems to be even better. It has
been known since the end of the 90’es [ 24 ] that five-point and
six-point MHV 1-loop amplitudes consisted only of boxes and it was
conjectured that this would hold for all MHV amplitudes. When it was
recently found that the box function part of the NMHV six-graviton
amplitude was sufficient to explain all IR, soft and collinear
properties of the amplitude, it was hypothesized that all one-loop
amplitudes in @xmath supergravity consisted of boxes only. In
particular, since there this means no triangles, it was called the
No-Triangle Hypothesis.

An equivalent way to express this at one-loop is that @xmath
supergravity has the same structure as @xmath super Yang–Mills, in
particular that there are cancellations which remove additional powers
of loop momentum from the numerator of integrands to reduce it to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is @xmath more cancellations than @xmath supersymmetry is known to
give and the origin is unknown. As described in the introduction, this
and many other results have led to speculations that @xmath supergravity
is perturbatively UV finite to all orders and that this may be caused by
an unknown symmetry present in all gravitational theories, independent
of supersymmetry, which softens the UV behaviour.

### 7.2 Evidence for the No-Triangle Hypothesis

The present strategy for supporting the No-Triangle Hypothesis is to
determine the part of all six and seven-point amplitudes depending on
box integrals and to argue that no further cut-constructible parts can
be present. This leaves rational parts which are known to be absent at
six-points; additional arguments are presented why these ought to vanish
at seven-point and higher.

#### 7.2.1 Box Coefficients and Soft Divergences

Box coefficients can be determined by use of the quadruple cut method of
section 5.4 . There are two strategies for determining these; the direct
and the KLT-inspired. The latter works by using the KLT relations on all
corner amplitudes of the quadruple cut to write the @xmath coefficient
as a product of kinematic invariants and two @xmath coefficients [ 28 ]
. As an example, the coefficient of @xmath given by the quadruple cut

[]

which can be KLT’ed to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.5)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

In the cases where there is a summation over the multiplet running in
the loop, the rewriting will still hold because the @xmath multiplet is
two copies of the @xmath multiplet, each being summed over in the two
@xmath coefficients on the right hand side. Unfortunately, this strategy
becomes increasingly cumbersome at higher points. The KLT relations
become longer and involve permutations of legs which lead to the @xmath
coefficients being the non-planar ones.

The more direct strategy is to use the expressions for @xmath
supergravity amplitudes. These can be derived from on-shell recursion in
more compact form than those given by the KLT relations, and presumably
give rise to the most compact forms of the coefficients. The
coefficients for general MHV amplitudes were given in [ 24 ] and the
coefficients for the six-point NMHV amplitude were given in [ 28 ] .
Thus, the remaining seven-point amplitudes are the NMHV ones. A large
portion of these are MHV constructible ( cf. section 6.1 ) but some
one-mass coefficients may depend on the NMHV six-graviton tree
amplitude. One even requires summation over the full multiplet, and we
thus need to extend the NMHV six-point tree amplitude to the case where
two external particles are non-gravitons. This can be achieved by
redoing the on-shell recursive calculation of [ 61 ] and the result is
given in appendix C of [ 50 ] . The procedure like the one used in
section 6.2.5 cannot be used as it relies on the previous knowledge that
the amplitude contains only boxes, the fact that we are trying to
establish. All the seven-point NMHV box coefficients are collected in
appendix A of [ 50 ] .

The results for the box coefficients constrain the rest of the amplitude
because it must have the soft ( @xmath ) divergence [ 81 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

If this holds for just the box integral part of the amplitude, the
triangles and bubbles must have their soft divergences add up to zero.
That this is indeed the case has been checked numerically for the all
amplitudes up to and including seven-point. In practise, this is done by
extracting the soft parts of all the box functions and rephrasing ( 7.6
) as identities among the box coefficients.

The soft divergences of one and two-mass triangles are best studied by
rewriting them in a basis consisting of the functions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath runs over all independent kinematic invariants. Since the
soft parts of this basis are independent, the vanishing of their sum
amounts to requiring the vanishing of every coefficient. Going back to
the basis of one and two-mass triangles this means that all coefficents
of these are also zero. The three-mass triangles have no IR
singularities and can thus not be ruled out in this way. The bubble
functions are proportional to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

so all we can say about them is that their coefficients add up to zero.

#### 7.2.2 Ruling Out Bubbles

The safest way of ruling out bubble contributions is of course to
calculate them directly. For this, the article uses two methods which
are closely related. The first is the method of Britto, Buchbinder,
Cachazo and Feng [ 58 ] where the unitarity cuts of amplitudes are
explicitly integrated and the results compared with the cut of the
expansion in terms of scalar integrals. By inspecting all unitarity cuts
of seven-point NMHV amplitudes in this light, bubble integrals can
indeed be ruled out.

Rather than going through this technical, albeit interesting,
calculation, we will use a method which ties together the behaviour of
tree amplitudes deformed by a complex parameter @xmath as in on-shell
recursion ( cf. section 3.3 ) and the UV behaviour of one-loop
amplitude. This choice is made to illustrate one of the central points
of this thesis, namely that properties of graviton tree amplitudes (such
as @xmath behaviour) are tightly linked with the whole perturbative
expansion of @xmath supergravity.

Using the expansion ( 7.1 ) we can write the unitarity cut in a
particular channel with momentum @xmath and lift the momentum
integration. This gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the sets of box and triangle functions which
have a cut in the relevant channel and the @xmath represent the
remaining propagators. Only one bubble function has the cut; this is
represented by @xmath . Finally, we have added a total derivative term
which is set to zero by the integration. By the normal logic of
unitarity, this integrand should be equal to a product of two on-shell
tree amplitudes, summed over internal helicities,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can now deform this product in the same way as done in the BCFW
construction of on-shell recursion described in section 3.3 , namely by
making the shift

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Under this shift, the integrand of boxes and triangles go as @xmath or
@xmath as @xmath and bubbles go as @xmath . This immediately suggests a
condition for absence of a bubble: If ( 7.10 ) tends to zero as @xmath
(and @xmath does as well) the bubble corresponding to the cut is absent.
This condition can be related directly to an equivalent condition for
vanishing of bubbles in the direct integration method mentioned above,
so it is indeed an appropriate check.

The behaviour of tree amplitudes under the under above shift ( 7.11 ) is
not known in general, but two things are known: For MHV amplitudes where
the helicities of @xmath are given as @xmath , then the scaling can be
derived from known expressions for the amplitude [ 12 , 17 ] to be

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------
        @xmath   @xmath            (7.12)
                 @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------

It is also known generally [ 14 ] that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all graviton amplitudes. Furthermore it can be verified that the two
first lines of ( 7.12 ) holds for all six and seven-point tree
amplitudes needed here. Thus, it is not unreasonable to assume that this
is a general picture.

The known @xmath behaviour of MHV amplitudes can be used immediately to
derive the behaviour of the cut integrand for one-loop MHV amplitudes. A
singlet cut integrand where there is only one state running in the loop
has the generic form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

[]

Under the shift, both tree amplitudes go as @xmath so the cut goes as
@xmath , and there are no bubble contributions.

If the cut is non-singlet, the whole multiplet can run in the loop,

[]

the integrand becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, we know from SWIs that MHV amplitudes with different external
particle content are related, e.g. ,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

so we can write ( 7.2.2 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Under the shift, the two tree amplitudes go as @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively, while @xmath , whose form is a consequence of @xmath
supersymmetry, goes as @xmath . In total, the integrand goes as @xmath
which rules out bubbles in all one-loop MHV amplitudes.

For singlet NMHV cuts, the situation is quite the same as for MHV; the
integrand is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

and since both tree amplitudes go as @xmath under the shift, the
integrand goes as @xmath . This explicitly holds true for all cuts of
six and seven-graviton amplitudes, and continues to hold for any singlet
cut if the two first lines of ( 7.12 ) hold beyond MHV.

The non-singlet NMHV cuts are more involved since they require the
summation over the @xmath multiplet. For some integrands, such as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The calculation is essentially the same as for the MHV case because the
left NMHV amplitude is also a googly MHV amplitude where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that the integrand becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

and goes as @xmath . But in the seven-point calculation we will need
cuts like

[]

with the integrand

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the expression depends on the six-point NMHV tree amplitude. As
mentioned above, this has been calculated in the paper and is found to
contain 14 terms, of which 12 have the structure @xmath and the last two
only contribute at @xmath . When this expression is inserted into (
7.2.2 ) we find that it goes to zero as @xmath term by term (after the
@xmath summation) although it does not go as well as @xmath . Again this
highlights the connection between recursion relations and UV structure:
Using recursion relations we can write down a form of the six-point
amplitude which rules out certain bubble contributions to the
seven-point one-loop amplitude without the need for further
cancellations.

Since we have now calculated the @xmath behaviour of every independent
cut at six and seven-points, and found that they approach zero, we
conclude that there are no bubble contributions to the one-loop
amplitudes, and that the absence can be tied to recursion relations for
gravity.

#### 7.2.3 Ruling Out Three-Mass Triangles

As mentioned above, three-mass triangles have no IR singularities and
have to be ruled out explicitly. This can be done by inspecting the
triple cuts

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

and arguing that they are all results of triple cuts of the boxes,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the momentum of the remaining uncut propagator. The
helpful fact here is that there are kinematic regimes where the
three-mass triple cut is real, and thus the remaining integration can be
performed numerically without appealing to complex Minkowski space
methods.

The box functions that have three-mass triple cuts are the 2-mass hard,
3-mass and 4-mass boxes. Since we are only going up to seven-point
amplitudes we need not worry about the last of these. The result of the
cut integrations are

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

With the knowledge of the box coefficients we have, it is fairly
straightforward to numerically integrate all the triple cuts and compare
them to the expectation from the boxes at some randomly chosen kinematic
points. This explicitly rules out three-mass triangles for both six and
seven-point amplitudes. For the six-point NMHV, the independent triangle
coefficients are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The triple cut corresponding to the latter is a non-singlet cut which
requires a sum over the @xmath multiplet. This means that it is non-zero
for @xmath . The first triangle coefficient can be expected to be zero
in any massless theory of gravity. For the seven-point NMHV, the
independent three-mass triangle coefficients are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again, the three first correspond to singlet cuts which are only
sensitive to the presence of the graviton and should be zero in any
massless gravity theory, while the last is non-zero for @xmath .

#### 7.2.4 Factorization and Rational Terms

We have now ruled out contributions to the cut-constructible parts from
anything but boxes at six and seven-point. At six-point it is already
known that there are no rational parts, so this provides a verification
of the No-Triangle Hypothesis in that case. For seven-point amplitudes,
however, there is no general argument ruling out rational contributions.

Computing rational contributions is in general very hard in gravity
theories. A strategy that works in Yang–Mills theory is to do the full
calculation in @xmath dimensions ( cf. section 5.2.3 ) and extract the
rational pieces by taking @xmath . This works well because any massless
field content can be decomposed into an @xmath multiplet, some number of
@xmath chiral multiplets and some number of scalars, and because it can
be proven explicitly that the two supersymmetric theories have no
rational parts; only the scalar loop calculation needs to be done
exactly in @xmath dimensions. For gravity, there is no such theorem
saying that supersymmetric theories have no rational contributions, so
the calculation needs to be done in @xmath dimensions for all states of
the multiplet, thereby rendering most of the benefits of the
spinor-helicity formalism useless.

An alternative is to use the methods of section 5.5 or, more generally,
the known factorization structure of one-loop gravity amplitudes. As in
the gauge case, this means in particular multiparticle, collinear and
soft factorization. The multiparticle factorization is, on the grounds
of general field theory arguments [ 30 ] , the same as for gauge theory
( 5.7 ) with the obvious corrections for the lack of colour ordering in
gravity. The collinear behaviour at one-loop is actually simpler than in
Yang–Mills ( 5.8 ) as the splitting functions have no loop corrections.
This gives [ 24 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

as @xmath , @xmath . The splitting functions for gravitons are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

There is also a universal soft behaviour when a graviton momentum
approaches zero, which also does not incur loop corrections,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

as @xmath . When the graviton going soft is number @xmath in some
arbitrary ordering, the soft factor is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

These limits put some quite strong constraints on the possible rational
parts which must have the same factorization as the cut-constructible
parts. We know that the rational parts of the six-graviton amplitude are
zero, so by ( 7.29 ) and ( 7.31 ) the rational part of the
seven-graviton amplitude can have no collinear or soft singularities. It
is hard to imagine any rational spinor expression which has none of
these singularities while being of mass dimension 4 and having the right
holomorphic weight of spinors as determined by their helicities. Indeed,
it is hard to imagine such an expression for any number of external
gravitons, so by “loose induction” we should expect that all rational
parts are zero.

This argument could probably be formalized by using on-shell recursive
methods like those of section 5.5 for gravity. Some progress has been
made in this direction [ 53 ] but the approach is still too undeveloped
to be used for the problem at hand.

### 7.3 Conclusions

Using an array of different methods, we have explicitly calculated the
cut-containing parts of the NMHV six and seven graviton one-loop
amplitudes in @xmath supergravity and found that only box integrals
contribute. At six points, this determines the amplitude completely
while at seven-point we have argued that an additional rational term is
highly unlikely. This proves the No-Triangle Hypothesis at six points
and renders it highly credible at seven.

The methods used can be applied at any number of external particles, and
it does not appear that they would suddenly start failing. This applies
in particular to the ruling out of bubbles which relied on very general
scaling arguments for the amplitudes, scalings that are expected to hold
to any number of points. Together with the arguments that the rational
parts of amplitudes are likely to be zero, this provides strong evidence
that the one-loop amplitude in @xmath supergravity consists exclusively
of boxes just as @xmath SYM.

As explained in the beginning of the chapter, this amounts to the
cancellation of @xmath powers of loop momentum in a @xmath -point
amplitude, a cancellation which is unexplained. Similar cancellations
seem to occur at higher loop order also. They have been explicitly found
in the four-point amplitude at two [ 23 ] and three [ 25 ] loops, where
it was proven that the divergences of maximal supergravity and maximal
super-Yang–Mills are the same in any dimension. This gives a strong hint
that the divergences of the two theories match in general, and that
@xmath supergravity in four dimensions is UV finite in particlular. It
also hints that there is some unknown symmetry or dynamical principle
present in @xmath which is responsible, although there are no candidates
for such a symmetry. There is evidence that the cancellations occur
already in non-supersymmetric gravity [ 21 ] , and thus the symmetry
should be visible in some form without the presence of supersymmetry.
The identification of such a symmetry will be of immense interest.

## Chapter 8 Amplitude with a Higgs

In this chapter we make the full determination of a particular one-loop
helicity amplitude, @xmath . The chapter is based on [ 10 ] but presents
the calculation in a somewhat different way. The article calculates the
cut constructible parts, using the one-loop MHV rules of section 5.3 ,
of the all- @xmath MHV amplitude @xmath ( @xmath to be defined) and the
rational part of @xmath with on-shell recursion from section 5.5 . In
this chapter, we limit ourselves to the four-gluon case all the way
through and compute the cut-constructible parts using classical
unitarity as in section 5.2 .

Even though the @xmath process, where this amplitude is relevant, is not
included in table 1.1 of wanted NLO calculations, it is generally
considered of the same importance. Some semi-numerical results already
exist [ 84 ] , but clearer analytic results are still missing. The
process forms a background to Higgs production by vector boson fusion [
65 ] .

### 8.1 Higgs in the Large Top Mass Limit

In the present calculation we will make the assumption that the top mass
is large or, to be exact, that the kinematic scales involved in the
scattering are small compared to twice the top mass. The dominant
coupling of the Higgs to massless QCD particles comes through a top
quark triangle loop connecting to two gluons,

[]

In the large top mass limit, such an interaction is well approximated by
an effective term in the Lagrangian [ 130 , 132 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Higgs field and @xmath is an effective coupling
constant equal to [ 97 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the addition to the Higgs, we can add a pseudoscalar Higgs @xmath
such that the total effective Lagrangian becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

If we now change variables to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

the effective Lagrangian becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and Higgs amplitudes can be recovered by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Higgs is colourless and does not participate in the colour ordering,
but is conventionally written first.

The central observation is that tree amplitudes for @xmath and @xmath
are separately simpler than amplitudes for @xmath or @xmath . In
particular, they follow a pattern like that of the Parke–Taylor
amplitudes ( 2.3.1 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

for @xmath , and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

for @xmath . Even though the amplitudes look like the MHV and
googly-MHV, the condition between the gluon momenta for conservation of
momentum is different because of the presence of the @xmath momentum.
Notice also that parity changes the sign of gluon helicities and daggers
the @xmath , so there are no easy @xmath amplitudes. In fact, there is a
simple @xmath -all-minus amplitude (and @xmath -all-plus amplitude),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The similarity of the @xmath -MHV amplitude to the MHV amplitude have
led people to develop MHV rules for amplitudes with a single @xmath ,
where a @xmath -MHV vertex must be used once but where the off-shell
prescription is unchanged [ 77 , 8 ] . The extension to one-loop
amplitudes was explored in [ 6 ] and the article on which this chapter
is based [ 10 ] . The former deals with the cut-constructible part of
@xmath .

One-loop amplitudes involving a @xmath and at most one negative helicity
gluon are purely rational because the tree amplitude vanishes. All-
@xmath expressions for these amplitudes have been constructed in [ 20 ]
where Schmidt’s results for a Higgs and three gluons [ 129 ] is
converted into the @xmath notation. Some of those we need are given at
the relevant point below.

### 8.2 A One-Loop Higgs Amplitude

The methods presented in chapter 5 can be applied just as well to
amplitudes containing a Higgs in the large @xmath limit. Here we will
apply them to the calculation of @xmath , that is, the one-loop
amplitude for a Higgs and four gluons with the ’adjacent MHV’ helicity
configuration. This configuration has a non-zero tree amplitude and we
can thus expect cut-containing pieces at one-loop. In practice we will
calculate @xmath and use that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.11)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

@xmath is split into its cut-containing pieces and its rational pieces.
For generality we calculate the cut-containing pieces for @xmath . The
whole calculation is done in the four-dimensional helicity (FDH)
renormalization scheme.

#### 8.2.1 Cut-Constructible Pieces

As described in section 5.1.3 , the states running in the loop can be
written as a linear combination of an @xmath multiplet, an @xmath chiral
multiplet, and a complex scalar referred to as @xmath . The calculation
of cut-containing pieces can be performed separately for the three
multiplets, and the result assembled from them.

Our plan of action is to first uncover any box functions by the use of
quadruple cuts. We then consider the (two-particle) unitarity cuts where
we isolate the terms coming from the (by now known) boxes and relate the
remainder to triangles and bubbles.

##### Quadruple Cuts

If the amplitude is cut in four places, the four corners must together
have six minuses (two external and four internal). These must
necessarily be distributed as two three-point googly corners (opposite)
and two MHV corners. Since the corner with the @xmath cannot be
three-point googly, it must be one of the MHV corners. For @xmath ,
which contains the gluons, this gives us the following six types of
non-zero quadruple cuts:

[] [] [] [] [] []

Notice that all permitted cuts necessarily have gluons running in the
loop. This immediately shows us that @xmath and @xmath cannot contribute
since they do not have gluons running in loops.

The calculation of the prefactors of the box functions is almost
identical to the one without the @xmath . Thus, we will only present one
example calculation, namely that of the coefficient @xmath of the box
corresponding to the second cut above. From ( B ) in appendix B we
derive that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.13)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

As usual for MHV amplitudes, this is just the Gram determinant times the
tree amplitude. This holds for all coefficients, so the boxy part of the
amplitude is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is a combination of 1-mass and 2-mass-easy box functions. The
difference in comparison to the result without the @xmath is primarily
that there are twice as many 2-mass boxes because the @xmath makes the
two massive corners non-identical.

##### Two Particle Cuts, @xmath Case

By counting minuses, we can again see that the two tree amplitudes
separated by the cut must be MHV and @xmath -MHV, respectively:

[]

Regardless of the position of 1 and 2, the cut integrand becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

For generic values of @xmath and @xmath it can be shown, analogously to
the pure gluon case, that this is equivalent to the same cut of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The pure glue requirement that @xmath is, however, not present when
there is a @xmath on the left tree amplitude where the cut

[]

must be taken into account. The decomposition is the same as above, but
the box function @xmath is physically nonsensical as it stands. Luckily,
its cut can be rewritten,

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (8.17)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

as a sum of the cuts of the two triangle functions. But since a triangle
functions is independent of the ordering of its momenta, these two
triangles are actually the same, leaving us exactly with the cut of
@xmath . There are no contributions from bubble functions in the @xmath
case.

The conclusion is, that the amplitude should have the following
dependence on triangles

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Two Particle Cuts, @xmath and @xmath Cases

With the two particle cuts, we have a possibility to let a full
multiplet run in the loop if we have @xmath and @xmath sitting on
different sides of the cut, that is, in the cases

[] []

where @xmath runs from 3 to @xmath in both. For simplicity, we only
treat the first of these.

For @xmath , the cut is given by

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (8.19)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

We have now written this as cuts of vector triangles. To put this into
the standard basis of scalar integrals we need to perform a
Passarino–Veltman reduction [ 121 ] . The details of this procedure is
given in appendix C , and the result is (using @xmath ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here we have to remember that we have suppressed the integration, so
what this really tells us is that the cuts we have calculated are the
cuts of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using that @xmath , we can rewrite this as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The contribution from the second class of diagrams is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

or

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath case is complicated by the need for integral reduction.
However, if we plunge right into it, the cut corresponding to the first
diagram above is

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (8.25)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

These are cuts of triangles with three-index tensors in the numerators.
Again, we use the Passarino–Veltman reduction from appendix C (using
@xmath ) to reduce

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

to

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (8.27)
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

Thus, the bubble functions coming from the first diagram are

  -- -------- -- --------
                 
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

while those coming from the second are

  -- -------- -- --------
                 
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again, these can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (8.30)
                             
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

##### Summing Up

We can now sum up the cut containing pieces for arbitrary fermion and
scalar content. In place of the logs we use

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The result is

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (8.32)
                             
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

We can now specialize to @xmath , since this is the amplitude we
ultimately want to calculate. There, the result is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.33)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 8.2.2 Rational Pieces

To compute the remaining parts of the amplitude we use the methods
described in section 5.5 . The total one-loop amplitude is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

but @xmath and @xmath contain unphysical poles which cancel against each
other, but prevent us from finding @xmath directly from recursion.
Instead, we add and subtract a term @xmath with the same unphysical
singularities as @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that only physical poles are left in each of the parentheses. Our
first observation about ( 8.2.1 ) will be that the unphysical poles only
reside in the @xmath functions, and by rewriting it as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.36)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

we see that @xmath must be constructed by replacing @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.38)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Knowing now that @xmath has only physical poles, we can attack it with
recursion relations. For reasons which will become clear later, we
choose the recursive shift

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Rather than proving that this shift has the proper @xmath behaviour, we
will note that it does indeed work without the @xmath [ 89 ] , and that
the tests to be explained in the next section show no signs of bad
@xmath behaviour. The results of doing recursion on @xmath are the
overlap terms @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , coming from the
singularities in @xmath , etc . These are found by leaving the kinematic
invariant, shifting its coefficient according to ( 8.39 ), and inserting
the @xmath which puts us exactly at the pole. Taking @xmath as an
example, we note that @xmath has a pole where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

and find that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.42)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The other overlaps are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.43)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.44)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.45)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The hattings used in these and later calculations are given in the table
below:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can now turn to the results of doing recursion on @xmath . This does
not give us the @xmath since we are summing over a limited set of poles,
but rather gives us the ’direct recursive’ terms @xmath , etc , composed
of (a sum of) an unshifted propagator times a shifted tree amplitude
times a shifted rational part of a one-loop amplitude. One complication
is that the three-point one-loop vertices cannot really be interpreted
as the corresponding amplitudes, rather they have to be deduced from the
one-loop splitting functions. In the case at hand, however, we are
considering a scalar running in the loop and we have chosen our shift
such that the two external gluons in a three-point vertex have opposite
signs. Fortunately, the rational parts of the corresponding splitting
functions are all zero ( cf. ( 5.5 )) so there are no contributions in
our case from three-point one-loop vertices. The non-zero diagrams are

[] [] [] []

The relevant lower-point amplitudes with a @xmath can be found in [ 20 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

while the last was calculated in [ 46 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         (8.47)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

This gives the direct recursive terms

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.48)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.49)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.50)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.51)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

To obtain @xmath , we now have to add the @xmath terms and @xmath and
subtract the @xmath terms. Some lengthy but trivial manipulations give

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.52)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

It is of special interest here that the first term is present regardless
of supersymmetry, where we might have expected that an amplitude with
supersymmetric particle content running in the loop would be fully
cut-constructible. The catch is, of course, that cut-constructibility
requires also the external particles to be supersymmetric, something
which is not the case with @xmath . With those arguments it may seem
slightly surprising (although welcome) that it drops out of @xmath when
we use ( 8.11 ). In @xmath , of course, the additional rational piece
stays.

#### 8.2.3 Tests

There are a series of tests which we can perform to check that the
result is correct. The first regards only the cut-containing part, in
particular the IR divergences in @xmath . These are given by ( cf.
section 5.1.4 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

This can be checked readily by taking the IR divergent parts of the box
and triangle functions from appendix A and putting them into ( 8.2.1 ).
There are no contributions from the bubble-like and rational parts.

##### Collinear Limits

The second test is that of collinear limits. The full checking of all
collinear limits is a rather tedious exercise and will not be repeated
here. It is contained in the original article in detail. Since the
cut-containing parts have been fixed by unitarity, we expect the right
collinear limits automatically; for the rational parts, the use of
recursion amounts exactly to enforcing the correct collinear limits for
gluons 4 and 1, and for gluons 2 and 3. Checking these limits provide
primarily a check on the algebra.

From the perspective of on-shell recursion, the important collinear
limits are the rational ones which do not participate in the direct
recursive terms. If these turn out wrong, it is a sign that the use of
recursion was not justified because @xmath did not vanish as @xmath . In
the case at hand, the important limits in this sense is when 1 and 2
become collinear and when 3 and 4 become collinear.

For these checks, we can use the rational parts of the splitting
functions for a scalar running in the loop ( 5.5 ) along with the tree
splitting functions ( 2.3.3 ). These predict that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.54)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

as 1 and 2 go collinear, and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.55)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

as 3 and 4 go collinear. We can prove the first by first extracting the
part of ( 8.52 ) that has the correct singularity,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath                     (8.56)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

as wanted. For the collinear limit between 3 and 4 things are a bit more
messy. Because @xmath , the first line of ( 8.55 ) comes from the first
term of ( 8.52 ) in the same way as for 1 and 2. The remaining terms
with the collinear singularity are

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (8.57)
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

as wanted. Notice how we had to rewrite a contribution which
superficially went as @xmath to one with either a @xmath or a @xmath
divergence. As noted above, the correctness of these two collinear
limits are an indicative necessary condition for the recursion relation
to hold.

##### Soft Higgs Limit

The very last test we will make is the limit as the Higgs momentum goes
soft. In fact, it turns out to fail, but only because the naive
expectation for the soft limit is wrong. The naive expectation comes
from noting that as the Higgs momentum goes to zero, the @xmath field in
the effective correction @xmath becomes a constant, and the term becomes
proportional to the Higgsless gluon term. This tells us that the first
order term in @xmath should be obtainable in this limit as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.58)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the gauge coupling and @xmath is the number of loops.
From looking at the form of the @xmath -MHV amplitude and the @xmath
-googly-MHV amplitude, it is reasonable to guess that the corresponding
limits for @xmath and @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.59)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In other words, we should be trying to prove that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

as @xmath . @xmath in the FDH renormalization scheme has the
cut-containing and rational parts [ 46 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath               (8.61)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The cut-containing part can be checked quite easily by taking the
expression ( 8.2.1 ) and converting the @xmath functions back into
@xmath bubble functions and then treating each term in turn. In short,
only the one-mass box (which becomes zero-mass) and @xmath survive the
limit, and for the bubble functions it is only the last line of ( 8.2.1
) that survives.

The limit of the rational part is in principle done in the same way. The
term proportional to @xmath vanishes in the limit, and there are several
terms which must be considered together if the limit has to be taken
consistently. In the end we find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

as @xmath . The corresponding @xmath rational part has the soft limit

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.63)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

such that the Higgs soft limit is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is a factor @xmath away from the expectation. This sort of
violation was anticipated already in [ 20 ] where it was pointed out
that the Higgs momentum can act as a kind of effective infrared
regulator and that this would cause an exchange-of-limits problem with
the dimensional regularization. Thus, we conclude that our results are
indeed correct.

## Appendix A Integral Functions

The box, triangle and bubble integrals used in this thesis can be
obtained from [ 34 ] , though with slightly different conventions. The
boxes are given by

  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------
           @xmath            (A.1)
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------

where the usual @xmath prescribtion is understood. The integrals are
classified according to which of the momenta are massive and which are
massless. 1-mass integrals have one massive momentum, 4-mass integrals
have four. There are two different 2-mass configurations; if the massive
momenta are opposite it is called the 2-mass-easy and if they are
adjacent it is called the 2-mass-hard.

We give the integrals in terms of the box functions @xmath which are
dimensionless because they are multiplied by the Gram determinant @xmath
of that integral. We also take out a factor @xmath coming from
dimensional reduction,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

We also define the kinematic invariants

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The box functions through 3-mass are,

  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------
           @xmath            (A.9)
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------

The Gram determinants are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Triangles are defined by the integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

again with @xmath understood. They have the same classification in terms
of massive corners as the boxes. As in the box case, we can take factors
out of the integral and define triangle functions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The triangle functions are (omitting the 3-mass)

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.14)
     @xmath   @xmath               (A.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The bubble integral is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.17)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

## Appendix B Solutions of Quadruple Cut Constraints

This appendix lists the solutions to the cut constraints in a quadruple
cut of a one-loop amplitude. For each number of massive corners there
are two solutions which are distinguished by which massless corners are
MHV and which are googly-MHV. The two solutions will always be related
by flipping ( @xmath ) but they are all included for clarity. The
four-mass cut is not used in this thesis and the reader is referred to
the original article for those solutions [ 59 ] . It should also be
noted that all the solutions here follow from the three-mass cases
(which follow from four-mass) by taking external momenta lightlike, but
again, all cases are included to benefit maximally from the masslessness
of some corners.

Our conventions are to denote the internal on-shell momenta @xmath
through @xmath starting from the bottom of the diagram and moving
clockwise around the loop. These momenta point in the clockwise
direction. The corners are denoted by @xmath through @xmath starting in
the lower left corner. The outgoing momenta at those corners are denoted
by the corresponding letter in uppercase when it is massive and in
lowercase when it is massless. Massless corners are denoted by [] when
they are MHV and by [] when they are googly-MHV.

[]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

[]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

[]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

[]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

[]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

[]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

[]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

[]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

[]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

[]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

## Appendix C Passarino–Veltman Reduction of Cuts

This appendix deals with the reduction of cut integrals which have loop
momentum dependence in their numerators. Those needed for this thesis
are:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The goal is to express all of these integrals in terms of @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . The method can be illustrated
for @xmath by noting Lorentz invariance forces it to take on the
structure

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are scalar integrals. These can be determined
from the equations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Similarly, @xmath can be computed by noting that it must take on the
form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and using the contractions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

which relate @xmath and @xmath to @xmath . This procedure will allow us
to construct the required integrals recursively. Rather than deriving
the results in detail, we will just note that they are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.14)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.19)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------