The nature of semistructured data in web collections is evolving. Even
when XML web documents are valid with regard to a schema, the actual
structure of such documents exhibits significant variations across
collections for several reasons: an XML schema may be very lax (e.g., to
accommodate the flexibility needed to represent collections of documents
in RSS ¹ ¹ 1 http://www.rss-specifications.com/ feeds), a schema may be
large and different subsets used for different documents (e.g., this is
common in industry standards like UBL ² ² 2
http://oasis-open.org/committees/ubl/ ), or open content models may
allow arbitrary schemas to be mixed (e.g., RSS extensions like those
used for podcasting). A schema alone may not provide sufficient
information for many data management tasks that require knowledge of the
actual structure of the collection.

Web applications (such as processing RSS feeds or web service messages)
rely on XPath-based data manipulation tools. Web developers need to use
XPath queries effectively on increasingly larger web collections
containing hundreds of thousands of XML documents. Even when tasks only
need to deal with a single document at a time, developers benefit from
understanding the behaviour of XPath expressions across multiple
documents (e.g., what will a query return when run over the thousands of
hourly feeds collected during the last few months?). Dealing with the
(highly variable) structure of such web collections poses additional
challenges.

This thesis introduces DescribeX, a powerful framework that is capable
of describing arbitrarily complex XML summaries of web collections,
providing support for more efficient evaluation of XPath workloads.
DescribeX permits the declarative description of document structure
using all axes and language constructs in XPath, and generalizes many of
the XML indexing and summarization approaches in the literature.
DescribeX supports the construction of heterogenous summaries where
different document elements sharing a common structure can be
declaratively defined and refined by means of path regular expressions
on axes, or axis path regular expression (AxPREs). DescribeX can
significantly help in the understanding of both the structure of
complex, heterogeneous XML collections and the behaviour of XPath
queries evaluated on them.

Experimental results demonstrate the scalability of DescribeX summary
refinements and stabilizations (the key enablers for tailoring
summaries) with multi-gigabyte web collections. A comparative study
suggests that using a DescribeX summary created from a given workload
can produce query evaluation times orders of magnitude better than using
existing summaries. DescribeX’s light-weight approach of combining
summaries with a file-at-a-time XPath processor can be a very
competitive alternative, in terms of performance, to conventional
fully-fledged XML query engines that provide DB-like functionality such
as security, transaction processing, and native storage.

\degree

Doctor of Philosophy \department Computer Science \gradyear 2008

{preliminary} {dedication}

To my parents,

Ofelia and Juan Carlos
