## 3.2 Basic Scenario

Consider the following sequence of measurements. A quantum particle with
spin @xmath , prepared in the initial state @xmath , is sent through a
cascade of Stern-Gerlach (SG) measurements for the spin components along
the directions given by the unit vectors @xmath ( i.e. , measurement of
observables of the form @xmath , where @xmath is the vector of spin
angular momentum operators @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is a unit
vector from @xmath ). Each measurement has @xmath possible outcomes. For
the @xmath -th measurement, we denote these outcomes (eigenvalues) by
@xmath . We denote by @xmath the quantum mechanical (ensemble) average
@xmath by @xmath the average @xmath etc.

Each of the @xmath possible outcomes, which one gets after performing
@xmath consecutive measurements, corresponds to a particular combination
of the results of the measurements at previous @xmath steps and the
result of the measurement at the @xmath -th step. The probability of
each of these @xmath outcomes is the joint probability for such
combinations. Note that even though the spin observables @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , whose measurements are being performed at times
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath respectively (with @xmath ) do not
commute, above-mentioned joint probabilities for the outcomes are well
defined because each of these spin observables act on different states [
59 ] [ 60 ] [ 61 ] . We emphasize that this is the joint probability for
the results of @xmath actual measurements and not a joint probability
distribution for hypothetical simultaneous values of @xmath noncommuting
observables. Moreover, various sub-beams ( i.e. , wave functions)
emerging from every Stern-Gerlach apparatus (corresponding to @xmath
outcomes) in every stage of measurement are separated without any
overlap or recombination between them. In other words, the eigen wave
packet @xmath , corresponding to the eigen value @xmath of the
observable @xmath , measured at time @xmath , will not have any part in
the regions where the SG setups, for measurement of the observables
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , are
situated. We further assume that, between two successive measurements,
the spin state does not change with time i.e. @xmath commutes with the
interaction Hamiltonian, if any. Also, throughout the string of
measurements, no component ( i.e. , sub-beam) is blocked. It is to be
mentioned here that the time of each of the measurements are measured by
a common clock.

### 3.3 Implications of HVT

HVT assumes that in every possible state of the system, all observables
have well defined (sharp) values [ 62 ] . On the measurement of an
observable in a given state, the value possessed by the observable in
that state ( and no other value) results. To gain compatibility with QM
and the experiments, a set of ‘hidden’ variables is introduced which is
denoted collectively by @xmath . For given @xmath , the values of all
observables are specified as the values of appropriate real valued
functions defined over the domain @xmath of possible values of hidden
variables. For the spin observable @xmath , we denote the value of
@xmath in the QM (spin) state @xmath by @xmath . Considered as a
function, @xmath , we represent the value of @xmath when the hidden
variables have the value @xmath by @xmath . More generally, we may
require that a value of @xmath gives the probability density @xmath over
the values of @xmath rather than specifying the value of @xmath
(stochastic HVT). We denote the probability density function for the
hidden variables in the state @xmath by @xmath ( @xmath measures the
probability that the collective hidden variable lies in the range @xmath
to @xmath ). Then the average value of @xmath in the state @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the integration is over @xmath defined above. In the general case
(SHVT)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

We now analyze the consequences of SHVT for our scenario. In general,
the outputs of @xmath th and @xmath th experiments may be correlated so
that,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

However, in SHVT we suppose that these correlations have a common cause
represented by a stochastic hidden variable @xmath so that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

As a consequence of equation ( 3.4 ), the probability @xmath obtained in
a measurement ( @xmath say) performed at time @xmath is independent of
any other measurement ( @xmath say) made at some earlier or later time
@xmath . This is called locality in time [ 25 ] [ 56 ] .
One should note that for a two dimensional quantum mechanical system,
one can always assign values ( deterministically or probabilistically )
to the observables with the help of a HVT. Once the measurement is done,
the system will be prepared in an output state ( namely, an eigenstate
of the observable), and the earlier HVT may or may not work to reproduce
the values of the observables to be measured on that output state (
prepared after the first measurement). In the present paper, we have
considered possibility of existence of a HVT for every input qubit state
which can reproduce the measurement outcomes of @xmath successive
measurements.
Equation ( 3.4 ) is the crucial equation expressing the fundamental
implication of SHVT to the successive measurement scenario. We now
obtain the Bell type inequalities from equation ( 3.4 ) which can be
compared with QM. Here we assume that in HVT all probabilities
corresponding to outputs of measurements account for the possible
changes in the values of the observable being measured, ( due to the
interaction of the measuring device and the system), occurring in the
previous measurements.
Now @xmath is the expectation value of obtaining the outcome @xmath in
the measurement of the observable @xmath at time @xmath as well as the
outcome @xmath in the measurement of the observable @xmath at later time
@xmath . Due to the HVT, we must have ( dropping @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.6)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

by equation ( 3.4 ). Now let us consider the case of two successive
measurements, with options @xmath and @xmath respectively for measuring
spin components. In each run of the experiment, a random choice between
@xmath and @xmath is made. Define @xmath ( @xmath ) to be the angle
between @xmath and the positive @xmath -axis, @xmath ( @xmath and @xmath
) is the angle between @xmath and @xmath . Using condition ( 3.6 ) and
the result [ 63 ] [ 64 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Multiplying by @xmath and integrating over @xmath , we get the CHSH-type
inequality [ 7 ] (involving the hidden variable @xmath ) corresponding
to performing two successive measurements of spin- @xmath observables on
a spin- @xmath initial state:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Similarly, using the algebraic fact

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and ¹ ¹ 1 This is obtained by using equation ( 3.4 ) and the similar
argument as has been used in deriving equation ( 3.6 ).

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we can prove Mermin-Klyshko Inequality (MKI) [ 12 ] , [ 13 ] for three
successive measurements,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let @xmath , where @xmath is obtained from equation ( 3.9 ) by
interchanging primes with non-primes in MKI. It is easily shown that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the Svetlichny inequality (SI) [ 65 ] , [ 66 ] , [ 67 ] .

For @xmath successive measurements on spin @xmath system, we define the
MK polynomials recursively as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are obtained from @xmath by interchanging all primed and
non-primed @xmath ’s. The recursive relation ( 3.12 ) gives, for all
@xmath [ 67 ] , [ 74 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

In particular, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now show that in HVT,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

First note that ( 3.16 ) is true for @xmath (equations ( 3.8 ), ( 3.9
)). Suppose it is true for @xmath i.e. @xmath . Now

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since HVT applies here we can use ( 3.4 ) to get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This implies, by induction hypothesis (and using the fact that @xmath ),
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This result is derived for @xmath spin- @xmath particles by Cabello [ 74
] .

We now define a quantity, denoted by @xmath , which will be required
later on. @xmath , is the ratio between maximum @xmath given by quantum
correlation between @xmath successive measurement’s outputs and the
maximal classical one,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 3.4 Mixed Input State for Arbitrary Spin

#### 3.4.1 Two Successive Measurements (BI)

We first deal with the case when input state is a mixed state whose
eigenstates coincide with those of @xmath for some @xmath whose
eigenvalues we denote by @xmath . For spin 1/2 this is the most general
mixed state because given any density operator @xmath for spin 1/2
(corresponding to some point within the Bloch sphere), we can find an
@xmath such that the eigenstates of @xmath and @xmath coincide. However,
for @xmath , our choice forms a restricted class of mixed states. We
note that these are the only states accessible via SG experiments. Thus
we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

After the first measurement along @xmath , the resulting state of the
system is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now @xmath is the expectation value (according to QM) that given the
initial state @xmath (given in equation ( 3.18 )), the 1st measurement
along @xmath will give rise to any value @xmath , and then, on the
after-measurement state @xmath (given in equation ( 3.19 )), if one
performs measurement along @xmath , one of the values @xmath will arise.
So

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Note that, since @xmath are complete observables, all of whose
eigenvalues are non degenerate, the probabilities factorize like those
of a Markov chain [ 68 ] . Every factor in ( 3.4.1 ) corresponds to the
transition amplitude between two successive measurements. By equation
(A.12), we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is to be noted that although @xmath can have positive and negative
values, @xmath will always be positive. Moreover, for all @xmath , if
@xmath , @xmath is always positive and if @xmath , @xmath . We now have
the following expression for the quantity @xmath , appeared in equation
( 3.8 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.22)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where (according to Appendix A) @xmath is the angle between @xmath and
@xmath , @xmath is the angle between @xmath and @xmath , @xmath is the
angle between @xmath and @xmath , @xmath is the angle between @xmath and
@xmath , @xmath is the angle between @xmath and @xmath , @xmath is the
angle between @xmath and @xmath . We have used, in Eq ( 3.22 ), the
expressions for @xmath and @xmath in terms of @xmath and @xmath . Note
that the second term in equation ( 3.22 ) ( i.e. , the term with the
factor @xmath ) is similar to the expression for @xmath corresponding to
the CHSH inequality [ 7 ] . And hence, its maximum value will occur when
we choose all the four vectors @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath on the
same plane. But we also have to take care about maximization of the
first term in equation ( 3.22 ) and that might require these four
vectors to be on different planes. In order to resolve this issue, we
now consider the spherical-polar co-ordinates @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath of the vectors @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath respectively,
where @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath has the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.23)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here also the maximum value of @xmath will occur when all the vectors
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath lie on the same plane. This is
obtained by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In that case, the maximum value of @xmath will occur when @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and (correspondingly) the quantity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

is maximized over all possible values of @xmath ( @xmath ). If @xmath ,
the correlations for two successive measurements violate the CHSH-type
inequality ( 3.8 ), and hence a contradiction with the above-mentioned
HVT. In fact @xmath implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Real roots (for @xmath ) of this equation give values of @xmath for
which @xmath is maximum. The maximum value of @xmath is evaluated at
these @xmath ’s.

We find that for @xmath , @xmath for all @xmath , and so @xmath , @xmath
. So, from equation ( 3.24 ), we have @xmath . Therefore equation ( 3.25
) becomes @xmath , whose only one real solution is @xmath . So @xmath or
@xmath . @xmath gives the maximum possible value @xmath . Thus all
possible spin- @xmath states break BI for (proper choices of) two
successive measurements. This can be compared with the measurement
correlations corresponding to measurement of spin observables on
space-like separated two particles scenario where only the entangled
pure states break BI while not all entangled mixed states break it [ 16
] .

From now on, we will use the range of values of the quantity @xmath to
identify the parametric region of the initial density matrix @xmath
where the inequality ( 3.8 ) will be violated. Thus we see that for all
spin- @xmath input states @xmath , @xmath .
For a spin- @xmath system, we first consider all input states @xmath
none of which have a contribution of @xmath eigenstate. In this case
@xmath , @xmath . So @xmath and equation ( 3.25 ) takes the form @xmath
. The only real root of this equation is @xmath . Thus the maximum
possible value of @xmath is (using equation ( 3.24 )) @xmath (
approximately). Thus we see that all input spin- @xmath states @xmath ,
none of which has a component along @xmath , break BI (equation ( 3.8 ))
for proper choice of the observables.

Next, for @xmath , we consider the state @xmath , for which @xmath ,
i.e. , @xmath . In this case, @xmath , and so, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
. Then equation ( 3.25 ) takes the form @xmath . It has three real
solutions, which corresponds to @xmath (or @xmath ), @xmath (approx.),
@xmath (approx.). The maximum possible value of @xmath occurs at @xmath
, and the corresponding value is given by @xmath . Thus the state @xmath
breaks the BI (equation ( 3.8 )).

For @xmath , when @xmath , we have @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We then
have @xmath (by equation ( 3.24 )), and equation ( 3.25 ) becomes @xmath
. In this case, one can show numerically that the BI will break ( i.e. ,
@xmath ) if and only if either @xmath or @xmath ( equivalently, either
@xmath or @xmath ).

Thus we see that, when @xmath , only those input states @xmath ( given
in equation ( 3.18 )) will break BI for each of which @xmath .

Next we consider the situations where @xmath . Note that, by definition
(true for all @xmath ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath . Therefore, we must have @xmath . In this case,
equations ( 3.24 ) and ( 3.25 ) respectively take the forms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us first consider the input states of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Thus we see
here that @xmath . Also equations ( 3.26 ) and ( 3.4.1 ) have
respectively been turned into the forms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

As here @xmath , therefore the last equation will have only one positive
root and the other two roots will be complex. The positive root will
correspond to an angle @xmath for which it can be shown that @xmath for
all @xmath . Hence, in this case, BI is violated.

If @xmath has contribution from neither of the states corresponding to
@xmath ( i.e. , @xmath ), we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From equation ( 3.24 ) it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But the quantity @xmath is less than 1 for all @xmath . Therefore, for
@xmath , if the initial state @xmath has contribution from neither of
the states corresponding to @xmath , BI will be satisfied for all @xmath
.

Thus we see that whenever @xmath , in order that @xmath violates BI, the
associated quantity @xmath must have values near @xmath . In table 1, we
have given the ranges of values of @xmath (obtained numerically) for
which BI is violated, starting from @xmath . The case when @xmath has
also been considered in table 1.

Table 1

  -------- ------------------- -------- -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  1        @xmath and @xmath   3        @xmath   5        @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  2        @xmath              4        @xmath   6        @xmath
                                                 @xmath   @xmath
  -------- ------------------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The ranges of @xmath , for which BI is violated.

The maximum violation of Bell inequality, characterized by @xmath ,
decreases monotonically with @xmath . Table 2 summarizes ( obtained
numerically) the maximum allowed value of @xmath for each @xmath . We
see from this table that for all spin values @xmath , BI is broken. Note
that there is a sharp decrease in @xmath from @xmath to @xmath , while
@xmath decreases slowly as @xmath increases from 1. A possible reason is
that, for @xmath , all states break BI while for @xmath , only a
fraction of spin states break it.

Table 2

  -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  1        @xmath   3        @xmath   5        @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  2        @xmath   4        @xmath   6        @xmath
                                      @xmath   @xmath
  -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The maximum violation of BI for different spin values for two successive
measurements.

We now consider a case where the initial state @xmath (given in equation
( 3.28 )) is contaminated by the maximally noisy state, resulting in the
state

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the positive parameter @xmath ( @xmath ) is the probability of the
noise contamination of the state @xmath . Proceeding as before ( see
equation ( 3.21 )), we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the maximization procedure ( i.e. , taking @xmath ), @xmath for
maximum @xmath is given by a real root of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

The range of @xmath for which @xmath is tabulated in table 3. Note that
for @xmath the state corresponding to @xmath ( the random mixture) also
breaks BI! Of course we have already shown that for @xmath , BI is
broken for all states. This indicates that the notion of “classicality”,
compatible with the usual local HVT, is different in nature from the
notion of classicality that would arise from the non-violation of BI
here.

Table 3

  -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  1        @xmath   3        @xmath   5        @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  2        @xmath   4        @xmath   6        @xmath
                                      @xmath   @xmath
  -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The range of the noise @xmath over which BI is violated.

Table 3 answers the question, “what is the maximum fraction of noise
that can be added to @xmath , which maximally breaks BI, so that the
state has stronger than ‘‘classical correlations ² ² 2 i.e. ,
correlations obeying “realism” and “locality in time”, as described in
section 3. ?” We see that the corresponding fraction of noise ( i.e. ,
for which BI is violated) decreases monotonically with @xmath , or with
the dimension of the Hilbert space. This may be compared with the
results of Collins and Popescu [ 69 ] who found that the nonlocal
character of the correlations between the outcomes of measurements
performed on entangled systems separated in space is robust in the
presence of noise. They showed that, for any fraction of noise, by
taking the Hilbert space of large enough dimension, one can find
bipartite entangled states giving nonlocal correlations. These results
have been obtained by considering two successive measurements on each
part of the system. On the other hand, in the present case of successive
measurements on the single spin state, we see that the fraction of noise
that can be added so that the quantum correlations continue to break
Bell inequality, falls off monotonically with @xmath , or the dimension
of the Hilbert space. For @xmath all fractions @xmath are allowed, while
for large s, @xmath .

#### 3.4.2 Three Successive Measurements (MKI)

We again assume the input state to be given by equation ( 3.18 ). Using
equation (A.19) :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is the angle between @xmath and @xmath (measured with respect to
the right-handed system @xmath ), @xmath is the angle between @xmath ,
@xmath (measured with respect to the right-handed system @xmath ), etc.

We now consider the pure state @xmath instead of considering the most
general state @xmath , given in equation ( 3.18 ). So here @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath . Substituting the correlations like that in
equation ( 3.35 ) in the MKI (given in equation ( 3.9 )), using the
above-mentioned values of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and then finding
out the conditions ( numerically) for which @xmath is maximized, we get
the maximum possible @xmath -values for different spins as summarized in
table 4.

Table 4

  -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  1        @xmath   3        @xmath   5        @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  2        @xmath   4        @xmath   6        @xmath
                                      @xmath   @xmath
  -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The maximum violation of MKI for different spin values for three
successive measurements.

We see that @xmath for all spins and @xmath except @xmath , while @xmath
for @xmath . Also @xmath , like @xmath , decreases monotonically with
@xmath . It is interesting, in the case of two and three successive
measurements of spin @xmath prepared in a pure state, the maximum
violation of BI and MKI tends to a constant for arbitrary large @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is thus seen that large quantum numbers do not guarantee “classical”
( as defined in this chapter) behavior.

It is straightforward to check that, three successive measurements
satisfy Svetlichny Inequality (SI) (equation ( 3.10 )). The reason is
that, for all @xmath , the settings of the measurement directions which
maximize @xmath are obtained from those which maximize @xmath by
interchanging primes on the corresponding unit vectors. Thus these two
settings are incompatible so that we cannot get a single set of
measurement directions, which maximize both @xmath and @xmath . In fact,
for all @xmath , the measurement directions which maximize @xmath @xmath
correspond to @xmath @xmath .
We now consider the situation of three consecutive observations but
two-fold correlations for two measurements @xmath and @xmath performed,
say, at time @xmath and @xmath , but where an additional measurement (
@xmath ) is performed at time @xmath lying between @xmath and @xmath
@xmath .
By substituting Eq (A.20) in Bell type inequality Eq( 3.8 ) and
simplifying, we obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.36)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We have used @xmath .
So, the correlation function ( 3.36 ) for a given measurement performed
at @xmath cannot violate the Bell type inequality for measurements at
@xmath and @xmath . Therefore, any measurement performed at time @xmath
“disentangles” events at time @xmath and @xmath if @xmath [ 56 ] .

### 3.5 n Successive Measurements for Spin-@xmath

#### 3.5.1 Violation Mermin-Klyshko Inequality (MKI) by n Successive
Measurements

We consider now @xmath successive measurements in direction @xmath on a
spin @xmath particle in a mixed state. For simplicity we take the
eigenvalues to be @xmath , i.e. , the eigenvalues of @xmath are taken
here as @xmath instead of @xmath . We also write @xmath for @xmath . The
initial state is taken as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

For a spin- @xmath system, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So, given the input state @xmath , the (joint) probability that the
measurement outcomes will be @xmath in the first measurement, @xmath in
the second measurement, @xmath , @xmath in the @xmath -th measurement,
will be given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus we see that given the input state @xmath , the average output state
after @xmath successive measurements will be given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, for @xmath successive measurements on spin- @xmath system,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath                     (3.40)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

by equation ( 3.39 ). Further

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.41)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , etc. Now equations ( 3.40 ) and ( 3.41 ) give,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Further,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

All of the above results are inherently quantum and are not compatible
with HVT ( see the discussion in the next paragraph). The first two
results (( 3.41 ) and ( 3.42 )) are the special cases of the last result
( 3.5.1 ) for @xmath and @xmath (with @xmath . If the number of
variables ( which are averaged) is odd (i.e. @xmath is even) the average
depends on the measurements prior to @xmath , while in the other case
the average does not depend on the measurements prior to @xmath . For
example, for two successive measurements ( taking @xmath and @xmath ),
gives @xmath , which is independent of the initial state. On the other
hand, for three successive measurements ( taking @xmath and @xmath ), we
have @xmath – showing its dependence on the initial state (as @xmath
depends upon the initial state @xmath ). Moreover, the correlation
@xmath for four successive measurements ( for example ) turns out to be
dependent only on the two ‘disjoint’ correlations @xmath and @xmath . In
general, we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.45)
  -- -- -- --------

Interestingly if @xmath so that @xmath ( and so, @xmath ) or, if the
initial state is the random mixture @xmath ( and so @xmath ), then for
all even @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We shall now show that for @xmath successive experiments ( with @xmath
), QM violates the inequality @xmath ( see equation ( 3.9 )) up to
@xmath for @xmath systems. We take the eigenvalues to be @xmath so
@xmath ). We have already shown that for @xmath and @xmath , the
corresponding MKI’s are violated (section 4). Now, we know that temporal
two-fold correlations @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
independent on the previous measurements. So by using equations ( 3.5.1
) and ( 3.13 ) we find that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We now consider the spherical-polar co-ordinates @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath of the vectors @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
respectively, where all @xmath and all @xmath . Then @xmath has the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.47)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We know from

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The maximum value of @xmath will occur when all the vectors @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath lie on the same plane. We obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.48)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

By substituting @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in above-equation
and by using

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we get @xmath Finally, by using the fact @xmath we obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can get this result by induction hypothesis. Thus, we conclude that
QM violates the MKI ( @xmath ) for @xmath successive measurements upto
@xmath , i.e. ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 3.5.2 Violation Scarani-Gisin Inequality (SCI) by Successive
Measurements on Qubit

Although in contrast to correlations in space there are no genuine
multi-mode correlations in time, we will see that temporal correlations
can be stronger than spatial ones in a certain sense. We denote by max
@xmath the maximal value of the Bell expression for qubits @xmath and
@xmath (Bell inequality is obtained by Eq( 3.8 )). Scarani and Gisin [
70 ] found an interesting bound that holds for arbitrary state of three
qubits:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Physically, this means that no two pairs of qubits of a three-qubit
system can violate the CHSH inequalities simultaneously. This is because
if two systems are highly entangled, they can not be entangled highly to
another systems. Let us denote by max @xmath the maximal value of the
Bell expression for two consecutive observations of a single qubit at
times @xmath and @xmath . Since quantum correlations between two
successive measurements do not depend on the initial state ( see Eq (
3.40 )), one can obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

By selecting,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, although there are no genuine three-fold temporal correlations, a
specific combination of two-fold correlations can have values that are
not achievable with correlations in space for any three-qubit system. In
fact, one would need two pairs of maximally entangled two-qubit states
to achieve the bound in ( 3.53 ). Also note that the local realistic
bound is @xmath , which is equal to the bound in ( 3.51 ). Similar
conclusion can be obtained for the sum of @xmath successive
measurements.

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.54)
  -- -- -- --------

#### 3.5.3 Violation Chained Bell Inequalities (CHI) by Two Successive
Measurement on Qubit

Generalized CHSH inequalities may be obtained by providing more than two
alternative experiments to each process. We consider two successive
measurements on a spin- @xmath particle in a mixed state, such that the
first experiment can measure spin component along one of the directions
@xmath and the second experiment along one of the directions @xmath .
The results of these measurements are called @xmath ( @xmath ) and
@xmath ( @xmath ), respectively, and their values are @xmath (in unit if
@xmath ). We have a generalized CHSH inequality [ 71 ] , [ 47 ] :

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

This upper bound is violated by quantum correlations in two successive
measurements, increasingly with larger @xmath . In order to obtain the
maximum value above-inequality, we consider the spherical-polar
co-ordinates ( @xmath ),( @xmath ) of the vectors @xmath and ( @xmath )
for vectors @xmath . The maximum value @xmath will occur when all the
vectors lie on the same plane. this is because of:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

After partial differential over all @xmath , we get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, we obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

So,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

By substituting , we obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

We know @xmath tends to @xmath for @xmath . Therefore the maximum CBI
can be made arbitrarily close to @xmath .

#### 3.5.4 Violation Bell Inequalities Involving Tri and Bi-measurements
Correlations by Three Successive Measurements on Qubit

As a final remark, it would be interesting to consider Bell inequalities
involving both two and three successive measurement correlations. The
simplest way of obtaining such an inequality would be by adding
genuinely bipartite correlations to the tripartite correlations
considered in Mermin’s inequality. For instance,a straightforward
calculation would allow us to prove that any local realistic theory must
satisfy the following inequality [ 83 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

A numerical calculation shows that both the GHZ and W states give a same
maximal violation of the inequality 3.5.4 . However, if we assign a
higher weight to the bipartite correlations appearing in the inequality,
then we can reach a Bell inequality such as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is violated by the W state but not by GHZ state [ 83 ] . It is not
difficult to show that three successive measurements correlations for
spin 1/2 break the hybrid Bell inequalities.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

So two successive measurements correlations are relevant to those of
three successive measurements. This behavior is analogous to three
particle W state [ 83 ] .

### 3.6 Classical Simulation of n Successive Measurements on a
Spin-@xmath System

We have seen that QM correlations between the outputs of @xmath
successive measurements of incompatible observables @xmath are stronger
than their ‘classical’ ( i.e. , HVT) counterparts. An interesting
question is whether these quantum correlations can be simulated
classically ( i.e. , using classical resources, where ‘classical’ means
the conditions obeyed by the HVT here in this chapter). Can we design a
classical protocol to produce @xmath sets of outputs which are
correlated as if these were the outputs of genuine successive
measurements? If this is possible, what amount of classical information
(cbits) has to be shared between successive measurements [ 41 ] ? Note
that here sending cbits will be meaningful if the experimenter at later
time does not have any information about the measurement direction ( as
well as measurement outcomes) of the previous experiment(s). We try and
answer some aspects of these questions in this section. Notice that,
there is no room for spatial non locality in this scenario, because the
events are time-like separated. When the particle is coming out from
@xmath -th experiment there is no particle in any of the previous
experiments. The communication of information is carried by the particle
itself. We now describe our protocol for two successive measurements.

We imagine that two different experimenters, Alice and Bob perform two
successive measurements of @xmath and @xmath respectively at time @xmath
and (at later time) @xmath . Directions @xmath and @xmath are chosen by
each experimenter randomly and independent of each other. Alice and Bob
do not know each others inputs @xmath and outputs @xmath . Alice knows
the input state parameter @xmath . Bob does not know @xmath . They share
three random variables (unit vectors) @xmath . They are chosen
independently and distributed uniformly over the unit sphere.
The protocol proceeds as follows:
(i) Alice outputs @xmath .
(ii) Alice sends two cbits @xmath and @xmath to Bob where @xmath .
(iii) Bob outputs @xmath , where we have used the sgn function defined
by @xmath if @xmath and @xmath if @xmath .
We note immediately that Bob cannot obtain any information about Alice’s
input and output from @xmath and @xmath . We now show that the above
protocol reproduces the statistics of two successive measurements of
@xmath and @xmath on spin @xmath particle in initial state @xmath . As
shown in Appendix B we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is consistent with the quantum case. We can generalize this
protocol to get the classical simulation of @xmath successive
experiments. Here, again, each experiment is performed by an independent
experimenter, who has no knowledge of the inputs and outputs of the
previous and the future experiments. All experimenters share @xmath
random variables ( unit vectors ) @xmath . The @xmath -th experimenter
@xmath receives cbit @xmath and @xmath from @xmath -th experiment,
defined by @xmath The @xmath -th experimenter, then outputs @xmath . For
@xmath , the outputs @xmath

As shown in Appendix B, this protocol produces all quantum correlations
between @xmath successive measurements described in equations ( 3.40 ),
( 3.41 ), ( 3.42 ) and ( 3.5.1 ). Brukner et al. [ 56 ] have described a
communication complexity ( where space is replaced by time) protocol of
computing the Boolean function @xmath of three input bits @xmath . If
the input bits are supplied one after another, the computer ( where the
computation has to be done) will have to store all the three bits
according to their arrival to compute the function at the end. But if
the random access memory (RAM) of the computer is limited to one bit,
then this process will not work, as storing of three bits won’t be
possible in that case. But feeding the first bit @xmath ( given at time
@xmath ) into the RAM, then performing measurement of one of the two
observables @xmath , @xmath on the the input qubit according to the
value of the second bit @xmath (supplied at time @xmath ) and thereby
multiplying @xmath by the output @xmath of the measurement and then
feeding the product @xmath into the RAM, then repeating this process for
the third input bit @xmath ( supplied at time @xmath ), by performing
measurement of one of the two observables @xmath , @xmath on the the
output qubit after the first measurement qubit according to the value of
the third bit @xmath , one can compute the function @xmath with
probability of success higher than what one might get classically ( i.e.
, without using QM ).

Note that although the classical simulation, described above, seems to
be artificial ( as the same experimenter can, in principle, perform the
successive experiments and use the input and/or output data), from the
perspective of memory resource available, we can always put some
restriction on the capacity of the memory of the experimenter, like
limitation of RAM of the computer in the above-mentioned description.

### 3.7 Summary and Comments

In this chapter we have considered a hidden variable theory of
successive measurements on a single spin- @xmath system. In all the
previous scenarios comparing HVT and QM the principal hypothesis being
tested was that, in a given state ( having spatial correlation), HVT
implies the existence of a joint probability distribution for all
observables even if some of them are not compatible. QM is shown to
contradict the consequence of this requirement as it does not assign
joint probabilities to the values of incompatible observables. The
particular implication that is tested is whether the marginal of the
observable @xmath in the joint distribution of the compatible
observables @xmath and @xmath is the same as the marginal for @xmath in
joint distribution for the observables @xmath and @xmath even if @xmath
and @xmath are not compatible. In other words, HVT implies
noncontextuality for which QM can be tested. The celebrated theorem of
Bell and Kochen-Specker showed that QM is contextual [ 3 ] , [ 4 ] . In
our scenario, the set of measured observables have a well defined joint
probability distribution as each of them acts on a different state. Note
that the Bell-type inequalities we have derived follow from equation (
3.4 ) which says that, for a given value of stochastic hidden variable
@xmath , the joint probability for the outcomes of successive
measurements must be statistically independent. In other words the
hidden variable @xmath completely decides the probabilities of
individual measurement outcomes independent of other measurements. We
show that QM is not consistent with this requirement of HVT. A Bell-type
inequality (for single particle), testing contextuality of QM was
proposed by Basu et al. [ 72 ] and was shown that it could be
empirically tested. However, the approach given in the present paper
furnishes a test for realistic nature of QM independent of
contextuality. Our approach may be used to get a measure of the
deviation of QM from HVT. One such measure is the amount of information
needed to be transferred between successive measurements in order to
classically simulate quantum correlations. As we have shown in section
6, a pure spin 1/2 state can be classically simulated by communicating
two c-bits of information to get the @xmath -th output from @xmath -th
output by using (2k+1) shared random variables. Whether this is the
minimum communication required is still open. For our protocol, the
amount of information needed is twice as much in the case of bipartite
nonlocal scenario [ 41 ] .
In sections 4 and 5 we have compared QM with HVT for different values of
spin and for different number of successive measurements. The dependence
of the deviation of QM from HVT on the spin value and on the number of
successive measurements opens up new possibilities for comparison of
these models, and may lead to a sharper understanding of QM. We get many
surprising results. First, for a spin @xmath particle, maximum deviation
( @xmath ) is obtained for all convex combinations (mixed states) of
@xmath states. This is surprising as one would expect pure states to be
more ‘quantum’ than the mixed ones thus breaking Bell inequalities by
larger amount. In particular, all spin @xmath states maximally break
Bell inequality as against only the entangled states break it in
bipartite case. This does not contradict Bell’s explicit construction of
HVT for spin @xmath particle, as this construction does not apply for
two or more successive measurements. Further, the maximum deviation from
Bell inequality measured by @xmath falls off as the spin of the particle
increase. There is a large drop in @xmath value from @xmath to @xmath ,
after which it drops monotonically with @xmath , but very weakly,
asymptotically approaching @xmath . This can be compared with the case
of two spin @xmath operators in the singlet state where the deviation
from Bell’s inequality is found to tend to a constant [ 73 ] , [ 8 ] , [
74 ] , [ 12 ] . All spins violate MKI and satisfy SI for three
successive measurements. The maximum violation is @xmath for spin @xmath
. In the case of @xmath spin 1/2 particles in the singlet state, Bell
inequalities are broken by a factor which increases exponentially with
@xmath [ 74 ] , [ 12 ] .

### 3.8 Appendix A

We evaluate @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in the state @xmath given
in(4.1).
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the angle between @xmath and @xmath and @xmath is the
unit vector along the direction defined by @xmath . By using Baker-
Hausdorff Lemma

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath
  -- -------- -- --------

we get,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

By using:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath
  -- -------- -- --------

Terms with odd powers of @xmath vanish

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath
  -- -------- -- --------

If the initial state is mixed state(4.1):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath
  -- -------- -- --------

Further we compute

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By using (A.7)

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Using the Baker-Hausdorff Lemma, and using

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we get,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath
  -- -------- -- --------

If the initial state is mixed state (4.1),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath
  -- -------- -- --------

Next we calculate,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath
  -- -------- -- --------

By using (A.7) and (A.11) we get,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath
  -- -------- -- --------

where,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Baker-Hausdorff lemma and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -- -- --------
           @xmath
  -- -- -- --------

where,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we get,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This gives,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath
  -- -------- -- --------

After substituting (A.18) in (A.14) and simplifying,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath
  -- -------- -- --------

where,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If the initial state is a mixed state (4.1),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also, by using equations (A.12) and (A.13), one obtains:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and we can obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

(A.21)

### 3.9 Appendix B

To evaluate @xmath we integrate over @xmath , taking @xmath to point
along the positive @xmath axis.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

(B-1)

where @xmath and @xmath .

To evaluate @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

(B-2)

The same way we can prove

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(B-3)

By using induction, we shall show that for @xmath successive
measurements is simulated by this protocol. We suppose for @xmath , it
is true i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath
  -- -------- -- --------

So, for @xmath , first we show that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(B-7)

By using (B-7), (B-4), (B-5) and (B-6) all quantum correlations are
obtained by this protocol.

## Chapter 4 Non Locality Without Inequality

### 4.1 Introduction

An early thought-provoking analysis of quantum composite system
explicitly pointing out the surprising nature of entangled quantum
states that also introduced consideration of locality and realism in
regard to microscopic physical systems was made by Einstein, Podolsky
and Rosen (EPR) [ 1 ] , who provided a specific argument for the
incompleteness-though importantly, not the incorrectness- of the quantum
mechanical description of the microscopic world.
To arrive at this conclusion, EPR assumed locality and a criterion for
the result of a measurement of a physical quantity to be considered an
element of physical reality prior to the measurement, and established a
necessary condition for a physical theory to be considered complete.
This led to the search of a “complete theory” by adding “hidden”
variables to the wave function in order to implement realism, the most
celebrated of this kind of theories being the de Broglie-Bohm theory [ 5
] .
Bohm, just prior to developing his HV interpretation, introduced a
simplified scenario involving two spin-half particles with correlated
spins, rather than two particles with correlated positions and momenta
as used by EPR [ 6 ] . The EPR-Bohm scenario has the advantage of being
experimentally accessible.
In 1964 John Bell [ 2 ] derived an inequality ( which is a statistical
result, and is called Bell’s inequality BI) using locality and reality
assumptions of EPR-Bohm, and showed that the singlet state of two spin-
@xmath particles violates this inequality, and hence the contradiction
with quantum mechanics.
Bell inequalities are statistical predictions about measurements made on
two particles, typically photons or particles with spin @xmath . So some
people were trying to show a direct contradiction ( which is not a
statistical one) of quantum mechanics with local realism. Greenberger,
Horne and Zeilinger (GHZ) [ 43 ] found a way to show more immediately,
without inequalities, that results of quantum mechanics are inconsistent
with the assumptions of EPR. A proof of non locality without
inequalities for two spin- @xmath particles had been given earlier by
Heywood and Redhead [ 26 ] which was much simplified by Brown and
Svetlichny [ 75 ] . This employed a Kochen-Specker [ 4 ] type argument
to demonstrate that elements of reality corresponding to space separated
measurements must be contextual. The GHZ proof used three spin half
particles and the Heywood and Redhead proof used two spin one particles.
Thus both proofs required a minimum total of eight dimensions in Hilbert
space rather than the four required by Bell in his proof.
Hardy [ 76 ] gave a proof of non locality for two particles with spin
@xmath that only requires a total of four dimensions in Hilbert space
like Bell’s proof but does not require inequalities.
This was accomplished by considering a particular experimental setup
consisting of two over-lapping Mach-Zehnder interferometers, one for
positrons one for electrons, arranged so that if the electron and
positron each take a particular path then they will meet and annihilate
one another with probability equal to 1. This arrangement is required to
produce assymetric entangled state which only exhibits non locality
without any use of inequality. The argument has been generalized to two
spin s particles by Clifton and Niemann [ 27 ] and to N spin half
particles by Pagonis and Clinton [ 28 ] .
Later, Hardy showed that this kind of non locality argument can be made
for almost all entangled states of two spin- @xmath particles except for
maximally entangled one [ 77 ] . This proof was again simplified by
Goldstein [ 78 ] who extended it to the case of bipartite systems whose
constituents belong to Hilbert spaces of arbitrary dimensions.
Hardy’s proof works only for entangled states but non-maximally
entangled states ( also known as “Hardy states” [ 27 ] ). This curious
feature has led to several attempts and suggestions to develop a
Hardy-like argument for maximally entangled states of two qubits.
However, so far none of these proposals has worked [ 79 ] . In addition,
Hardy’s argument works only for @xmath of the runs of a certain
experiment. On the other hand, nonlocality in GHZ works for 100% of the
runs, but requires three observers ( instead of two, as in Hardy’s
proof).
The converse of the Hardy’s result i.e. for any choice of two
measurement possibilities for each particle, there is a state which
exhibits Hardy’s non locality, was first presented by Jordan [ 80 ] and
later on by Cereceda [ 81 ] .
For almost all entangled states of three spin- @xmath particles, Wu and
Xie [ 82 ] have recently proved Hardy’s non locality theorem. They have
used a particular type of relation among the coefficients of the given
entangled state; but this type of relation does not arise in the case of
Hardy’s non locality proof for two spin- @xmath particles, so, the proof
of Wu and Xie lacks generality.
Recently, Cabello has introduced a logical structure to prove Bell’s
theorem without inequality for three particles GHZ and W state [ 83 ] .
Logical structure presented by Cabello is as follows: consider four
events D, E, F and G where D and F may happen in one system and E and G
happen in another system which is far apart from the first. The
probability of joint occurrence of D and E is nonzero, E always implies
F, D always implies G, but F and G happen with lower probability than D
and E. These four statements are not compatible with local realism. The
difference between these two probabilities is the measure of violation
of local realism. Cabello’s logical structure was originally proposed
for showing non locality for three particle states, but Liang and Li [
84 ] exploited it in establishing non locality without inequality for a
class of two qubit mixed entangled states. In this sense, Hardy’s
logical structure is a special case of Cabello’s structure as the
logical structure of Hardy for establishing non locality is as follows:
D and E sometimes happen, E always implies F, D always implies G, but F
and G never happen. Based on Cabello’s logical structure Kunkri and
Choudhary [ 85 ] , recently, have shown that there may be many classes
of two-qubit mixed states which exhibit non locality without inequality.
It is noteworthy here that in contrast there is no two-qubit mixed state
which shows Hardy type non locality [ 86 ] . So, it seems interesting to
study that whether maximally entangled states follow this more general (
than Hardy’s), Cabello’s non locality argument or not because Hardy’s
non locality argument is not followed by a maximally entangled state.
In section 2, we review Hardy’s non locality. In section 3, we describe
Cabello’s argument for two qubits. In section 4, we show that maximally
entangled states do not respond even to Cabello’s logic. Next in section
5, we show for all other pure entangled states, Cabello’s argument runs.
In section 6, we obtain the highest value of difference between the two
probabilities which appear in Cabello’s argument. Surprisingly, for
almost all two qubit pure entangled states, this value turns out to be
larger than the highest value of probability that appears in Hardy’s
argument. In section 7, we extend previous result to three probabilities
which appear in Cabello’s argument and we show that this value is larger
than the previous result. Finally we conclude with summary and comments
in section 8. Mathematical details are relegated to appendix.

### 4.2 Non Locality Without Inequalities for Almost All Entangled
States for Two Particles ( Hardy Non Locality)

Here we give the Hardy’s non locality proof ( as presented by Goldstein
[ 78 ] ) for given states of two spin- @xmath particles. Consider a
system of two spin- @xmath particles in a pure non maximal entangled
state @xmath . We see that @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

for a proper choice of orthonormal basis @xmath for @xmath -th particle,
@xmath . Now we define the following projectors

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -- -- -------
           (4.4)
  -- -- -- -------

Now from the above state in ( 4.1 ), we have the following conclusions:
If we measure @xmath and @xmath then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

since there is no @xmath term.
If we measure @xmath on particle @xmath and @xmath on particle @xmath
then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

If we measure @xmath on particle @xmath and @xmath on particle @xmath
then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Finally, if we measure @xmath and @xmath , with non vanishing
probability

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

since @xmath . But if we assume local hidden variable theory for these
observables, it follows from ( 4.5 ), ( 4.6 ) and ( 4.7 ) that the
result of measurements of both @xmath and @xmath can not be
simultaneously @xmath , which contradicts ( 4.8 ). We can rearrange the
above logic,as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

There is contradiction between result obtained from ( 4.9 ), ( 4.10 ),(
4.11 ) and result ( 4.12 ).
Thus a normalized state @xmath of two spin- @xmath particles @xmath and
@xmath is said to satisfy Hardy type non locality, if we can find two
pairs of one dimensional projectors ( @xmath ) and ( @xmath ) for the
systems @xmath and @xmath respectively, such that
(I) @xmath
(II) if A is found in the state @xmath ( after doing the projective
measurement in the orthonormal basis ( @xmath , @xmath )on @xmath ), the
state of @xmath will be projected on to the state @xmath ,
(III) if B is found in the state @xmath ( after doing the projective
measurement in the orthonormal basis ( @xmath , @xmath )on @xmath ), the
state of @xmath will be projected on to the state @xmath ,
(IV) @xmath
Now, we show that no maximally entangled state of two spin- @xmath
particles will satisfy Hardy’s non locality.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In order that this maximally entangled state will satisfy Hardy’s non
locality, we must have, in the above-mentioned conditions ( 4.9 )- (
4.12 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which follow from ( 4.9 )-( 4.11 ), above. From ( 4.12 ), we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

But this last condition does not hold by quantum mechanics, as can be
easily seen from the maximally entangled state @xmath . So any
non-maximally entangled state of two spin- @xmath particles A and B will
satisfy Hardy’s non locality with a maximum probability @xmath ,
obtained by taking maximum of the probabilities @xmath over the choice
af all two pairs of one dimensional projectors ( @xmath ) and ( @xmath )
for the systems A and B respectively. Now every non-maximally entangled
state @xmath of two spin- @xmath particles A and B has its Schmidt
decomposition:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where { @xmath } is an orthonormal basis for system A, { @xmath } is an
orthonormal basis for system B, and @xmath . It can be shown that the
maximum possible value of @xmath ’s over all possible choice of
non-maximally entangled states of two spin- @xmath particles A and B, is
approximately equal to @xmath , and this maximum value will occur when
the ratio @xmath is equal to @xmath [ 77 ] .

### 4.3 Cabello’s Argument for Two Qubits

Let us consider two spin-1/2 particles A and B. Let F, D, G and E
represent the spin observables along

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

respectively. Every observable has the eigenvalue @xmath . Let F and D
be measured on particle A whereas G and E are measured on particle B.
Now we consider the following equations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equation ( 4.16 ) tells that if F is measured on particle A and G is
measured on particle B, then the probability that both will get @xmath
eigenvalue is @xmath . Other equations can be analyzed in a similar
fashion. These equations form the basis of Cabello’s non locality
argument. It can easily be seen that these equations contradict local
realism if @xmath . To show this, let us consider those hidden variable
states @xmath for which @xmath and @xmath . For these states, Eqs. (
4.17 ) and ( 4.18 ) tell that the values of G and F must be equal to
@xmath . Thus according to local realism @xmath should be at least equal
to @xmath . This contradicts Eq. ( 4.16 ) as @xmath . It should be noted
here that @xmath reduces this argument to Hardy’s one. So by Cabello’s
argument, we specifically mean that the above argument runs, even with
nonzero @xmath .
Now we will show that for almost all two-qubit pure entangled states
other than maximally entangled one, this kind of non locality argument
runs. Following Schmidt decomposition procedure; any entangled state of
two particles A and B can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

If either @xmath or @xmath is zero, we have a product state not an
entangled state. Then it is not possible to satisfy Eqs. ( 4.16 )-( 4.19
). Hence, we assume that neither @xmath or @xmath is zero; both are
positive.The density matrix for the above state is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.21)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are pauli operators. For this state if
F is measured on particle A and G is measured on particle B, then the
probability that both will get @xmath eigenvalue is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
                       @xmath      
     @xmath                        (4.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Rearranging the above expression we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.23)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Similar calculations for other probabilities give us

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.24)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.25)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.26)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

For running Cabello’s non locality argument, the following conditions
should be satisfied:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

since @xmath represents probability, it cannot be negative. If it is
zero, it is at its minimum value. Then its derivative must be zero. From
its derivative with respect to @xmath we see that @xmath must be zero.
Evidently

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

We conclude that if @xmath is zero, then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

A similar sort of argument for @xmath to be zero will give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 4.4 Maximally Entangled States of Two Spin-1/2 Particles Do Not
Exhibit Cabello Type Non Locality

For maximally entangled state @xmath , then from Eqs. ( 4.29 )and ( 4.31
) we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Eqs. ( 4.32 ) and ( 4.33 ), first in Eq. ( 4.23 ) and in Eq. (
4.26 ), we get @xmath and @xmath for maximally entangled state as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.34)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.35)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

From Eqs. ( 4.34 ) and ( 4.35 ) it is clear that @xmath will be greater
than @xmath for a maximally entangled state only when @xmath . But Eq. (
4.28 ) together with Eq.( 4.30 ) says that @xmath , i.e., @xmath . So
one can conclude that there is no choice of observable which can make
maximally entangled state to show Cabello type of non locality.

### 4.5 Cabello’s Argument Runs for Other Two Particle Pure Entangled
States

To show that for every pure entangled state other than maximally
entangled state of two spin- @xmath particles, a Cabello-like argument
runs; it will be sufficient to show that one can always choose a set of
observables, for which set of conditions given by Eq.( 4.27 ) is
satisfied. This is equivalent of saying that for @xmath ( except for
@xmath ) there is at least one value for each of @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , for which conditions
mentioned in ( 4.27 ) are satisfied.
Let us choose our @xmath ’s in such a manner that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For these @xmath ’s Eqs.( 4.23 ) and ( 4.26 ), respectively, will read
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

So

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.38)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Now we will have to choose at least one set of values of @xmath ’s in
such a way that @xmath and @xmath are nonzero and positive. Moreover,
these values of @xmath ’s should also not violate conditions given in
Eqs. ( 4.29 ) and( 4.31 ). Let us try with @xmath , i.e., with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This makes Eq. ( 4.29 ) to read as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then from Eq. ( 4.38 ) we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

rewriting Eq.( 4.31 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Values of @xmath ’s satisfying inequality ( 4.39 ) will not violate Eq.
( 4.40 ) provided @xmath . Now for these values of @xmath ’s, from Eq. (
4.36 ), we get: @xmath which is greater than zero.
So for the above values of @xmath ’s, i.e., for @xmath and @xmath , all
the states for which @xmath ; Cabello’s non locality argument runs.
For other states, i.e., for the states for which @xmath , let us choose
@xmath . Then from Eq. ( 4.38 ) we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can easily check that for above mentioned values of @xmath ’s;
@xmath is also positive and Eq. ( 4.40 ) is satisfied too.
Thus if we choose @xmath and @xmath , then all the states for which
@xmath , satisfy Cabello’s non locality argument. So for every @xmath (
except for @xmath ), we can choose @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s and hence the
observables in such a way that Cabello’s argument runs.

### 4.6 Maximum Probability of Success

For getting maximum probability of success of Cabello’s argument in
contradicting local realism, we will have to maximize the quantity
@xmath , for a given @xmath , over all observable parameters @xmath ’s
and @xmath ’s and under the restrictions given by Eqs. ( 4.28 )-( 4.31
), we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

It is clear from Eq. ( 4.6 ) that one can obtain maximum value of @xmath
, when @xmath . Let us first consider @xmath , then from Eq. ( 4.6 ) we
get

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
                 @xmath      
                 @xmath      
     @xmath                  (4.43)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

From the above equation one can show that @xmath will be maximum when
@xmath ( see the Appendix ) which, in turn, implies @xmath , i.e.,
@xmath becomes maximum when measurement settings in both the sides are
same as was the situation in Hardy’s argument. Now for the optimal case,
i.e., for @xmath and @xmath , @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Numerically we have checked that @xmath has a maximum value of 0.1078
when @xmath with @xmath . This is interesting as maximum probability of
success of Hardy’s argument is only @xmath whereas in case of Cabello’s
argument it is approximately @xmath .
Here we are comparing the maximum probability of success of Hardy’s
argument with that of Cabello’s argument for all states ( see Fig.3 ).
Figure 3 shows that for @xmath , i.e., for @xmath and @xmath , i.e., for
@xmath ; maximum of @xmath vanishes. This is as expected because these
values of @xmath represent, respectively, the maximally entangled and
product states for which Cabello’s argument does not run. For most of
the other values of @xmath , the probability for success of Cabello’s
argument inestablishing their nonlocal feature, is more than the maximum
probability of success of Hardy’s argument in doing the same.

As we have mentioned earlier [just before Eq. ( 4.6 )] that @xmath also
optimizes @xmath . This also gives the same maximum value for @xmath as
given by @xmath , but for @xmath .

### 4.7 Extension Cabello’s Argument to Three Probabilities Are Nonzero

We consider only @xmath , for running Cabello’s non locality argument,
the following conditions should be satisfied:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

We show that in this case, maximum value @xmath is higher than @xmath
with @xmath . since @xmath represents probability, it cannot be
negative. If it is zero, it is at its minimum value. Then its derivative
must be zero. From its derivative with respect to @xmath we see that
@xmath must be zero. Evidently

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

We conclude that if @xmath is zero, then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

The optimization @xmath , for a given @xmath , over all observable
parameters @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s and under restrictions given by Eqs.
( 4.46 ) and ( 4.47 ), occurs when

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

The maximum value @xmath is obtained by selection:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.49)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Numerically we have checked that @xmath has a maximum value of @xmath
when @xmath with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . So, the maximum
probability of success of Hardy’s argument is only @xmath whereas in
case of Cabello’s argument with two probability nonzero it is
approximately @xmath and for Cabello’s argument with three probability
nonzero it is approximately @xmath .

### 4.8 Conclusion

In conclusion, here we have shown that maximally entangled states do not
respond even to Cabello’s argument which is a relaxed one and is more
general than Hardy’s argument. All other pure entangled states response
to Cabello’s argument. These states also exhibit Hardy’s type non
locality. But, interestingly, for most of these non maximally entangled
states, fraction of runs in which Cabello’s argument succeeds in
demonstrating their nonlocal feature, can be made more than the fraction
of runs in which Hardy’s argument succeeds in doing the same. So it
seems that in some sense, for demonstrating the nonlocal features of
most of the entangled states, Cabello’s argument is a better candidate.

### 4.9 Appendix

We want to optimize @xmath given in Eq. ( 4.6 ) with respect to @xmath
and @xmath for a given @xmath . Differentiating Eq. ( 4.6 ) with respect
to @xmath and equating it to zero, we get the following two equations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly differentiating Eq. ( 4.6 ) with respect to @xmath and
equating it to zero, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Analyzing the above four conditions we find that @xmath will give the
optimal solution. Similarly for @xmath , we will get same kind of
results.

## Chapter 5 Summary and Future Directions

This is not the end. Nor is this a beginning of the end.

This may at most be the end of a beginning.

-Sir Winston Churchill ¹ ¹ 1 From his last address to the British
parliament as the prime minister of U.K. ( 3rd tune 1946) .

In this thesis I have tried to understand different aspects of quantum
non-locality, particularly:
I- Measure of non locality in quantum correlations between two spin-
@xmath particles in the singlet state by the number of classical bits
required to simulate the corresponding quantum correlations.
II- Investigation of non locality in time for a spin- @xmath particle in
successive measurements scenario and deviation of quantum mechanics from
realistic hidden variable theory.
III- Investigation of non locality in quantum mechanics without using
inequalities in Hardy’s argument and Cabello’s argument.
Entanglement in space displays one of the most interesting features of
quantum mechanics, often called quantum non locality. Locality in space
and realism impose constraints -Bell’s inequalities- on certain
combinations of correlations for measurements of spatially separated
systems, which are violated by quantum mechanics. Non locality is one of
the strangest properties of quantum mechanics, and understanding this
notion remains an important problem.
Entanglement in time is not introduced in quantum mechanics because of
different roles time and space play in quantum theory. The meaning of
locality in time is that the results of measurement at time @xmath are
independent of any measurement performed at some earlier time @xmath or
later time @xmath . The temporal Bell’s inequalities are derived from
the realistic hidden variable theory.
The non-local nature of quantum mechanics is, in general, a consequence
of entangled states ( non locality in space), although they are
independent properties of quantum systems, or consequence of successive
measurements (non locality in time). A possible approach to measure non
locality ( in space or in time) is the number of classical bits required
for simulation of non local quantum correlations. The goal is to
quantify how powerful quantum mechanics is by comparing its achievements
to those of more familiar resources. For instance, one may naturally ask
how much information should be sent from one party ( or one experiment)
to the other party (or other consecutive measurement) in order to
reproduce the correlations distributed by entangled pairs ( or two
successive measurements). Information is something that we are able to
quantify, thus the number of communicated cbits measure the non-locality
in space ( or in time). In the following, I bring some of the key
results obtained in this thesis.
Chapter II:
1- We give a classical protocol to exactly simulate quantum correlations
implied by a spin- @xmath singlet state for all spins satisfying @xmath
, in the worst-case scenario, @xmath and @xmath are a positive integer.
We can find out a unique positive integer @xmath such that @xmath , so
we can write @xmath according to the binary representation, @xmath (
where all @xmath @xmath ). We must have @xmath . The required amount of
communication ( @xmath )is found to be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the number of independent and uniformly distributed shared random
variables ( @xmath ) is found to be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For example, Case @xmath : The number of cbits is @xmath and the number
of share randomness is found @xmath .
2- We also introduce another classical model to exactly simulate quantum
correlations corresponding to the spin @xmath singlet state for all
spins. The required amount of communication is found to be @xmath and
the number of shared randomness variables is found to be @xmath where
@xmath satisfy @xmath ( @xmath ). It is interesting to see that for all
@xmath values satisfying @xmath the required communication does not vary
and equals @xmath cbits.
3- The correlations of a pure non-maximally entangled state can not be
simulated using one cbit of communication [ 24 ] . We give a classical
protocol for simulation of quantum correlations between two parties who
share a non maximally entangled two qubit state which requires two cbits
of communication.
Chapter III
1- We obtain temporal Mermin-Klyshko inequality (MKI) for @xmath
successive measurements by using realism and non locality in time. We
showed quantum correlations violate temporal Mermin-Klyshko inequality.
2- It was interesting that, for a spin- @xmath particle, maximum
deviation of quantum mechanics from realism was obtained for all convex
combinations of @xmath states (the case when input state is a mixed
state whose eigenstates coincide with those of @xmath for some @xmath
whose eigenvalues we denote by @xmath ). This is surprising as one would
expect pure states to be more ‘quantum’ than the mixed ones thus
breaking Bell inequalities by larger amount.
3- All spin 1/2 states maximally break Mermin-Klyshko inequalities for
@xmath successive measurements ( @xmath ) as against only the entangled
states break it in multipartite case. Interestingly that for @xmath the
random mixture ( maximum noisy state) also breaks BI. This indicates
that the notion of “classicality”, compatible with the usual local HVT,
is different in nature from the notion of classicality that would arise
from the non-violation of BI here.
4- We see that for all spins, BI and MKI is violated in two and three
successive measurements ( @xmath , @xmath ) and the value of violation
MKI in three successive measurements is a little more than the value of
violation BI in two successive measurements @xmath except @xmath , while
@xmath for spin @xmath . Also @xmath and @xmath decrease monotonically
with increase in the value of @xmath . It is interesting, in the case of
two and three successive measurements of spin @xmath prepared in a pure
state, that the maximum violation of BI and MKI falls off as the spin of
the particle increases, but tends to a constant for arbitrary large
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . It is thus seen that large quantum numbers
do not guarantee classical behavior.
5- We show that for @xmath , the correlation between the outputs of
measurements from last @xmath out of @xmath successive measurements (
@xmath ) depend on the measurement prior to ( @xmath ), when @xmath is
even, while for odd @xmath , these correlations are independent of the
outputs of measurements prior to @xmath .
6- Interestingly if the initial state is the random mixture or first
Stern-Gerloch measurements for the qubit component along the directions
@xmath perpendicular to initial state @xmath so that, @xmath , then
always quantum averages for all odd number of successive measurements
are zero.
7- We proved that the correlation function between first and third
measurement ( @xmath and @xmath ) on spin- @xmath particle for a given
measurement performed at @xmath can not violate the temporal Bell
inequality. Therefore, any measurement performed at time @xmath
disentangles events at time @xmath and @xmath if @xmath .
8- Three successive measurements on spin- @xmath particles do not break
Svetlinchi Inequality. But it is proved that three successive
measurements on qubit violate Scarani-Gisin inequality. Thus, although
there are no genuine three-fold temporal correlations, a specific
combination of two-fold correlations can have values that are not
achievable with correlations in space for any three-qubit system.
9- Also we showed that three successive measurements violate two types
of Bell inequalities involving two and three successive measurements. So
two successive measurement correlations are relevant to those of three
successive measurements. This behavior is analogous to three particle
W-state.
10- Quantum correlations between two successive measurements on a qubit
violates chained Bell inequality which is obtained by providing more
than two alternative experiments in every step.
11- By using just two cbits communications between successive
measurements on qubit it is possible to simulate all quantum
correlations. The amount of information needed to be transferred between
successive measurements in order to classically simulate quantum
correlations, measure the deviation of quantum mechanics from HVT.
Chapter IV
1- In this chapter we showed that for most of non maximally entangled
states, fraction of runs in which Cabello’s argument succeeds in
demonstrating their nonlocal feature, can be made more than the fraction
of runs in which Hardy’s argument succeeds in doing the same. The
maximum probability of success of Hardy’s argument is only @xmath
whereas in case of Cabello’s argument with two probability nonzero it is
approximately 11% and for Cabello’s argument with three probability
nonzero it is approximately 16%.
Finally, there are deeper question that remain unanswered:
Until now, we had investigated on the simulation @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath for singlet states on spin- @xmath only for spin observables (
Stern-Gerlach measurement ), namely the observables of the form @xmath
on each individual spin- @xmath system where @xmath is an arbitrary unit
vector in @xmath and @xmath . For @xmath , this choice contains all
observables but for @xmath this choice corresponds to a restricted class
of observables. There are some directions in which this work can be
generalized.
1- In classical model that introduced in chapter II, if the spin value
crosses @xmath , the required number of cbits takes a “quantum jump”
from @xmath to @xmath . It will be interesting to find an explanation of
this behavior and is one of the problems we want to tackle in future.
2- Toner and Bacon’s protocol [ 41 ] to simulate quantum correlations
for @xmath singlet state, simulates @xmath , @xmath and @xmath where
@xmath and @xmath are the outputs of Alice and Bob respectively. This
specifies all the joint probabilities @xmath , through the system of
equations

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The question is, can we have a classical simulation protocol which can
simulate all the joint probabilities implied by @xmath singlet state?
To do this for spin @xmath , classical protocol must simulate eight
quantum averages for the spin @xmath singlet state @xmath and @xmath .
This can then be used to obtain all nine joint probabilities through the
system of nine equations, eight of them are obtained using the
definitions of the corresponding average in terms of the joint
probabilities and the ninth equation is given by normalization
condition, ( as described above for the @xmath case).
For high spin ( @xmath ) singlet state, the classical protocol must
simulate all quantum correlations averages @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (
for all @xmath ). By comparison, our protocols presented in chapter II
simulate only @xmath for all spin- @xmath singlet state.
3- If we consider most general measurements on both the sides of a
maximally entangled state of two qudits, How about exactly simulating
arbitrary entangled state- even mixed states- under arbitrary
measurements, including POVMs?
4- How can we simulate all quantum correlations- even spin observables-
between more than two parties (like GHZ-state and W-state)?
5- Until now, there are no any classical models to simulate all quantum
correlations implied by two qudit non maximally entangled states. This
open problem can be generalized to more than two parties.
6- How much @xmath ( @xmath ) successive measurements on spin- @xmath (
@xmath ) violate MKI?
7- How much is the maximum violation of CGLMP inequality [ 10 ] ( in
terms of probabilities) by @xmath successive measurements?
8- We may consider @xmath -successive measurements on a spin @xmath
-system and each step, experimenter select @xmath ( @xmath )-valued
measurements. This gives a total of @xmath experimentally accessible
probabilities. Investigation on the set of all Bell’s inequalities is a
open problem.
9- How can we simulate all quantum correlations in successive
measurements for high spin- @xmath ?
10- Exploring the possibility to find a non locality in time argument
without using inequality (like Hardy’s argument or Cabello’s argument)
for successive measurements scenario.