This thesis presents theoretical work in @xmath - and @xmath -wave
resonantly paired Fermi gases at zero temperature. In the BEC regime of
the wide-resonance @xmath -wave BCS-BEC crossover, the chemical
potential, speed of sound, condensate depletion, and ground state energy
are computed. The quantities are calculated in a low density
approximation. The bosonic scattering length is computed
diagrammatically to be approximately @xmath with @xmath the fermionic
scattering length, confirming a well-known result. The perturbative
approach breaks down in the intermediate BCS-BEC crossover regime which
is not investigated. Quantum corrections are computed in the low density
expansion, and the mass-imbalanced two-species Fermi gas is
investigated. For identical fermions, it is discussed how @xmath -wave
Feshbach resonances naturally fall into two classes of “weak” and
“strong”, depending on the short-distance physics. It is shown how bound
fermionic trimers appear in the strongly-resonant superfluid. The
appearance of the trimer under the strengthening of the resonance is
investigated, and the lifetime of @xmath -wave diatomic molecules due to
collisional relaxation into trimers is estimated.

Levinsen \otherdegrees B.A. Physics, University of Copenhagen, 2001
M.S. Physics, University of Copenhagen, 2003 \degree Doctor of
PhilosophyPh.D., Physics \dept Department ofPhysics \degreeyear 2007
\advisor Assistant ProfessorVictor Gurarie \reader Eric Cornell
\readerThree Thomas DeGrand \readerFour Andrew Hamilton \readerFive
James Shepard
