  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

In this thesis, we focus on the study of the base rings associated to
some transversal polymatroids. A transversal polymatroid is a special
kind of discrete polymatroid. Discrete polymatroids were introduced by
Herzog and Hibi [ 16 ] in 2002.

The thesis is structured in four chapters. Chapter @xmath starts with a
short excursion into convex geometry. Next, we look at some properties
of affine semigroup rings. We recall some basic definitions and known
facts about semigroup rings. Next we give a brief introduction to
matroids and discrete polymatroids. Finally, we remind some properties
of the base rings associated to discrete polymatroids. These properties
will be needed in the next chapters of the thesis.

Chapter two is devoted to the study of the canonical module of the base
ring associated to a transversal polymatroid. We determine the facets of
the polyhedral cone generated by the exponent set of monomials defining
the base ring. This allows us to describe the canonical module in terms
of the relative interior of the cone. Also, this would allow one to
compute the @xmath of the base ring. Since the base ring associated to a
discrete polymatroid is normal it follows that Ehrhart function is equal
with Hilbert function and knowing the @xmath we can very easy get its
Hilbert series. We end this chapter with the following open problem
Open Problem: Let @xmath @xmath for any @xmath and @xmath be the base
ring associated to the transversal polymatroid presented by @xmath If
the Hilbert series is:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then we have the following:
@xmath If @xmath then @xmath
@xmath If @xmath then @xmath

In chapter three we study intersections of Gorenstein base rings. These
are also Gorenstein rings and we are interested when the intersections
of Gorenstein base rings are the base rings associated to some
transversal polymatroids. More precisely, we give necessary and
sufficient conditions for the intersection of two base rings to be still
a base ring of a transversal polymatroid.

In chapter four we study when the transversal polymatroids presented by
@xmath with @xmath have the base ring @xmath Gorenstein. Using Worpitzky
identity, we prove that the numerator of the Hilbert series has the
coefficients Eulerian numbers and from [ 1 ] the Hilbert series is
unimodal.

We acknowledge the support provided by the Computer Algebra Systems
NORMALIZ [ 5 ] and SINGULAR [ 8 ] for the extensive experiments which
helped us to obtain some of the results in this thesis.

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --
