## Acknowledgements.

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

I wish to express my gratitude to my advisor Dorin Popescu for his
warm-hearted support and for his unresting willingness to discuss all my
questions and problems. I would like to thank for financial support to
University of Genova and CNCSIS program during one month visit to
University of Genova. I wish to express my thanks to Aldo Conca for
helpful discussions and hospitality. I would like to thank Şerban
Bărcănescu, Mihai Cipu, Viviana Ene, Ezra Miller for several useful
suggestions and discussions. Also, I am deeply indepted to my wife
Mădălina and my parents for them continuous encouragement and moral
support during the preparation of this thesis.

Contents.

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

## Chapter 1 Background

### 1.1 A short excursion into convex geometry.

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

An affine space in @xmath is a translation of a linear subspace of
@xmath Let @xmath and aff @xmath be the affine space generated by @xmath
Recall that aff @xmath is the set of all affine combinations of points
in @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There is a unique linear subspace @xmath of @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath The dimension of aff @xmath is @xmath

If @xmath then @xmath will denote the hyperplane of @xmath through the
origin with normal vector @xmath , that is,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the usual inner product in @xmath The two closed
halfspaces bounded by @xmath are:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall that a @xmath is the intersection of a finite number of closed
subspaces of the form @xmath If @xmath is a polyhedral cone, then aff
@xmath is the intersection of those hyperplanes @xmath , @xmath , that
contain @xmath (see [ 4 , Proposition 1.2.] ). The @xmath is the
dimension of aff @xmath , @xmath .
If @xmath is a finite set of points in @xmath the cone generated by
@xmath , denoted by @xmath respectively the convex hull of @xmath ,
denoted by conv @xmath , are defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

respectively

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the set of nonnegative real numbers. An important
fact is that @xmath is a polyhedral cone in @xmath if and only if there
exists a finite set @xmath such that @xmath (see [ 4 ] or [ 35 , Theorem
4.1.1.] ). If @xmath is a @xmath vector subspace of @xmath such that
@xmath , then we say that a cone is rational if is generated by a subset
of @xmath .

Next we give some important definitions and results (see [ 2 ] , [ 3 ] ,
[ 4 ] , [ 27 ] , [ 28 ] ).

###### Definition 1.1.1.

A proper face of a polyhedral cone @xmath is a subset @xmath such that
there is a supporting hyperplane @xmath satisfying:

@xmath @xmath ,

@xmath @xmath and @xmath .

The @xmath of a proper face @xmath of a polyhedral cone @xmath is @xmath

###### Definition 1.1.2.

A cone @xmath is pointed if @xmath is a face of @xmath Equivalently we
can require that @xmath and @xmath @xmath @xmath

###### Definition 1.1.3.

The 1-dimensional faces of a pointed cone are called @xmath

###### Definition 1.1.4.

A proper face @xmath of a polyhedral cone @xmath is called a @xmath of
@xmath if @xmath

###### Definition 1.1.5.

If a polyhedral cone @xmath is written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that no @xmath can be omitted, then we say that this is an
irreducible representation of @xmath

###### Theorem 1.1.6.

Let @xmath @xmath , be a polyhedral cone with @xmath Then the halfspaces
@xmath in an irreducible representation @xmath are uniquely determined.
In fact, the sets @xmath are the facets of @xmath .

###### Proof.

See [ 4 , Theorem 1.6.] ∎

The following two results are quite useful to determine the facets of a
polyhedral cone.

###### Proposition 1.1.7.

Let @xmath be a finite set of points in @xmath . If @xmath is a nonzero
face of @xmath then @xmath for some @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath with @xmath Then @xmath is equal to the cone generated by the
set @xmath . ∎

###### Corollary 1.1.8.

Let @xmath be a finite set of points in @xmath and @xmath a face of
@xmath .
@xmath If @xmath and @xmath then @xmath for some @xmath
@xmath If @xmath and @xmath is a facet defined by the supporting
hyperplane @xmath , then @xmath is generated by a linearly independent
subset of @xmath

###### Definition 1.1.9.

Let @xmath be a polyhedral cone in @xmath with @xmath and such that
@xmath Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the irreducible representation of @xmath If @xmath then we call

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the equations of the cone @xmath

###### Definition 1.1.10.

The relative interior @xmath of a polyhedral cone is the interior of
@xmath with respect to the embedding of @xmath into its affine space aff
( @xmath ), in which @xmath is full-dimensional.

The following result gives us the description of the relative interior
of a polyhedral cone when we know its irreducible representation.

###### Theorem 1.1.11.

Let @xmath @xmath , be a polyhedral cone with @xmath and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be an irreducible representation of @xmath with @xmath pairwise
distinct, where @xmath for all @xmath Set @xmath for @xmath . Then:
@xmath @xmath , where @xmath is the relative interior of @xmath which in
this case is just the interior.
@xmath Each facet @xmath of @xmath is of the form @xmath for some @xmath
@xmath Each @xmath is a facet of @xmath .

###### Proof.

See [ 2 , Theorem 8.2.15] and [ 35 , Theorem 3.2.1] . ∎

### 1.2 Affine semigroup rings.

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

An affine semigroup @xmath is a finitely generated additive semigroup
which for some @xmath is isomorphic to a subsemigroup of @xmath
containing 0. For instance, @xmath is an affine semigroup for all @xmath
Just like @xmath being generated by @xmath as a group, for every affine
semigroup @xmath there exists a unique up to a canonical isomorphism
finitely generated abelian group, denoted @xmath , that contains @xmath
and is generated by @xmath as a group. Its rank is the dimension of
@xmath . Moreover, @xmath denotes @xmath and one considers @xmath to be
a subset of @xmath via the canonical map @xmath @xmath is said to be
positive , if 0 is the only invertible element in @xmath .

Let @xmath be an affine semigroup, and let @xmath be a field. The @xmath
vector space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

becomes a @xmath algebra by setting @xmath for all @xmath It is the
affine semigroup ring associated to @xmath over @xmath . We say that
@xmath is positive affine semigroup ring in case @xmath is positive.
Since @xmath is a finitely generated semigroup, @xmath is a finitely
generated @xmath algebra and thus Noetherian. Since @xmath is a subring
of @xmath and @xmath is isomorphic to the ring @xmath of Laurent
polynomials, where @xmath is the dimension of @xmath , one obtains that
@xmath is an integral domain.

Assume that @xmath is positive. A decomposition @xmath of @xmath is
called an admissible grading , if the following conditions are
fulfilled:

1.  @xmath .

2.  For all @xmath , @xmath is a @xmath vector space that is generated
    by finitely many elements of the form @xmath , @xmath

3.  For all @xmath , @xmath .

The existence of an admissible grading is guaranteed by the following
result.

###### Proposition 1.2.1.

If @xmath is a positive affine semigroup, then there exist @xmath and a
group homomorphism @xmath , such that @xmath .

###### Proof.

See [ 3 , Proposition 6.1.5] . ∎

An affine semigroup @xmath is called normal if it satisfies the
following condition: if @xmath for some @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath
. We have the following important results:

###### Proposition 1.2.2.

@xmath
@xmath If @xmath is a normal semigroup, then @xmath .
@xmath Let @xmath be a finitely generated subgroup of @xmath and @xmath
a finitely generated rational cone in @xmath . Then @xmath is a normal
semigroup.

###### Theorem 1.2.3.

Let @xmath be an affine semigroup, and let @xmath be the associated
affine semigroup ring over a field @xmath . Then @xmath is normal if and
only if @xmath is normal.

###### Proof.

One sees immediately that @xmath must be normal if @xmath is a normal
domain: if @xmath is an element of the field of fractions of @xmath and
if @xmath and @xmath is normal, then @xmath For the proof of the
converse, see [ 3 , Theorem 6.1.4] . ∎

The following famous theorem is due to Hochster, see [ 3 , Theorem
6.3.5] for a proof.

###### Theorem 1.2.4.

Let @xmath be an affine semigroup ring. If @xmath is normal, then it is
Cohen-Macaulay.

Let @xmath be a polynomial ring over a field @xmath in the
indeterminates @xmath and @xmath a finite set of distinct monomials in
@xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath . For @xmath we set @xmath The
monomial subring spanned by @xmath is the @xmath subalgebra

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The exponent vector of @xmath is denoted by log( @xmath )= @xmath and
log( @xmath ) denotes the set of exponent vectors of the monomials in
@xmath .

Note that @xmath is equal to the affine semigroup ring

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the subsemigroup of @xmath generated by log( @xmath ).
Thus as @xmath vector space @xmath is generated by the set of monomials
of the form @xmath , with @xmath . An important feature of @xmath is
that it is a graded subring of @xmath with the standard grading @xmath .

Next we give an important result of Danilov and Stanley which
characterizes the canonical module in terms of the relative interior of
a cone.

###### Theorem 1.2.5.

(Danilov, Stanley) Let @xmath be a polynomial ring over a field @xmath
and @xmath a finite set of monomials in @xmath If @xmath is normal, then
the canonical module @xmath of @xmath with respect to standard grading,
can be expressed as an ideal of @xmath generated by monomials

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath denotes the relative interior of @xmath

The formula above represents the canonical module of @xmath as an ideal
of @xmath generated by monomials. For a comprehensive treatment of the
Danilov-Stanley formula see [ 3 ] , [ 27 ] or [ 28 ] .

### 1.3 Discrete polymatroids.

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Matroid theory is one of the most fascinating research areas in
combinatorics. The discrete polymatroid is a multiset analogue of the
matroid. Based on the polyhedral theory on integral polymatroids
developed in late 1960’s and early 1970’s, in the present section the
combinatorics and algebra on discrete polymatroids will be studied.

Let @xmath and @xmath the set of all subsets of @xmath . For a subset
@xmath write @xmath for the cardinality of @xmath . The following
definition of the matroid is originated in Whitney (1935).

###### Definition 1.3.1.

A matroid on the ground set @xmath is a nonempty subset @xmath
satisfying:

1.  if @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath ;

2.  if @xmath and @xmath , then there is @xmath such that @xmath .

The members of @xmath are the independent sets of @xmath . A base of
@xmath is a maximal independent set of @xmath . It follows from @xmath
that if @xmath and @xmath are bases of @xmath , then @xmath . The set of
bases of @xmath possesses the @xmath following:

1.  If @xmath and @xmath are bases of @xmath and if @xmath , then there
    is @xmath such that @xmath is a base of @xmath .

Moreover, the set of bases of @xmath possesses the following @xmath :

1.  If @xmath and @xmath are bases of @xmath and if @xmath , then there
    is @xmath such that both @xmath and @xmath are bases of @xmath .

Alternatively, we can give another definition of matroid in terms of its
set of bases. Given a nonempty set @xmath , there exists a matroid
@xmath on the ground set @xmath with @xmath its set of bases if and only
if @xmath possesses the exchange property @xmath . If we denote the
canonical basis vectors of @xmath by @xmath , then a matroid on @xmath
can be regarded as a set of @xmath vectors @xmath for each @xmath . Now
we give three important examples of matroids.

###### Example 1.3.2.

Vector Matroid: Let @xmath be a vector space and @xmath be a nonempty
finite subset of @xmath . We define the matroid @xmath on the ground set
@xmath by taking the independent sets of @xmath to be the sets of
linearly independent elements in @xmath . With linear algebra arguments
one can check that the axioms of the matroid are fulfilled.

Cycle Matroid: Let @xmath be a finite graph, with @xmath its set of
vertices and @xmath its set of edges. Consider a set of edges
independent if and only if it does not contain a simple cycle. Then the
set of all these independent sets defines a matroid on the ground set
@xmath .

Uniform Matroid: Let @xmath and @xmath be nonnegative integers with
@xmath no larger than @xmath . Let @xmath be a set of cardinality @xmath
and let @xmath be the collection of all subsets of @xmath of cardinality
@xmath or less. Then @xmath is a matroid, called the uniform matroid of
rank @xmath on @xmath elements, and it is denoted by @xmath .

Let @xmath denote the canonical basis vectors of @xmath and @xmath
denote the set of vectors @xmath with each @xmath . Also, let @xmath .
If @xmath and @xmath are two vectors belonging to @xmath then we write
@xmath if all components @xmath of @xmath are nonnegative, and write
@xmath if @xmath and @xmath . We say that @xmath is a subvector of
@xmath if @xmath . In addition, we set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, @xmath and @xmath . The modulus of @xmath is @xmath and for a
subset @xmath , we set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next we present the concept of polymatroid and its associated rank
function . The concept of polymatroid originated in Edmonds ( [ 10 ] ),
and for further properties the reader can consult ( [ 14 ] , [ 33 ] ).

###### Definition 1.3.3.

A polymatroid on the ground set @xmath is a nonempty compact subset
@xmath , the set of independent vectors, such that

1.  every subvector of an independent vector is independent;

2.  if @xmath with @xmath , then there is a vector @xmath such that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

A base of a polymatroid @xmath is a maximal independent vector of @xmath
, i.e. an independent vector @xmath with @xmath for no @xmath . It
follows from ( @xmath ) that every base of @xmath has the same modulus
rank( @xmath ), the rank of @xmath .

Now we give an equivalent description of a polymatroid. Let @xmath be a
polymatroid on the ground set @xmath . The ground set rank function of
@xmath is a function @xmath defined by setting

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all nonempty @xmath together with @xmath . Then we have

###### Proposition 1.3.4.

@xmath @xmath Let @xmath be a polymatroid on the ground set @xmath and
@xmath its ground set rank function. Then @xmath is nondecreasing, i.e.,
if @xmath , then @xmath , and is submodular, i.e.,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . Moreover, @xmath coincides with the compact set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath Conversely, given a nondecresing and submodular function @xmath
with @xmath , the compact set @xmath is a polymatroid on the ground set
@xmath with @xmath its ground set rank function.

From Proposition 1.3.4. @xmath it follows that a polymatroid @xmath on
the ground set @xmath is a convex polytope in @xmath . A polymatroid is
integral if and only if its ground set rank function is integer valued.
For a detailed material on convex polytopes see [ 15 ] , [ 31 ] .

Now we introduce discrete polymatroids . They may be viewed as
generalizations of matroids.

###### Definition 1.3.5.

@xmath Let @xmath be a nonempty finite set of integer vectors in @xmath
, which contains with each @xmath all its integral subvectors. The set
@xmath is called discrete polymatroid on the ground set @xmath if for
all @xmath with @xmath , there is a vector @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A base of @xmath is a vector @xmath such that @xmath for no @xmath . We
denote by @xmath the set of bases of a discrete polymatroid @xmath . It
follows from the definition that any two bases of @xmath have the same
modulus. This common number is called the rank of @xmath .

Discrete polymatroids can be characterized in terms of their set of
bases as follows.

###### Theorem 1.3.6.

@xmath Let @xmath be a nonempty finite set of integer vectors in @xmath
, which contains with each @xmath all its integral subvectors, and let
@xmath be the set of vectors @xmath with @xmath for no @xmath . The
following conditions are equivalent:
@xmath @xmath is a discrete polymatroid;
@xmath if @xmath with @xmath , there is an integer @xmath such that
@xmath and @xmath ;
@xmath

1.   all @xmath have the same modulus,

2.   if @xmath with @xmath there is @xmath with @xmath such that @xmath
    .

Condition @xmath from the theorem is also called the exchange property .
An important consequence of this theorem is that it gives a way to
construct discrete polymatroids. According to condition @xmath , it is
enough to give a set of integer vector of the same modulus, which
satisfy the exchange property and then, by taking all its integral
subvectors, we obtain a discrete polymatroid.

The following result, which is obtained from Theorem 1.3.6. and the
definition of matroid, shows that it makes sense to view the discrete
polymatroids as generalizations of matroids.

###### Corollary 1.3.7.

@xmath Let @xmath be a nonempty finite set of integer vectors in @xmath
. The following conditions are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is the set of bases of a matroid;

2.  @xmath is the set of bases of a discrete polymatroid, and for all
    @xmath one has @xmath for @xmath .

Just as in the case of matroids, we have the symmetric exchange property
:

###### Theorem 1.3.8.

@xmath If @xmath and @xmath are bases of a discrete polymatroid @xmath ,
then for each @xmath with @xmath there is @xmath with @xmath such that
both @xmath and @xmath are bases of @xmath .

In the proof it is used the rank function of a discrete polymatroid,
which we define next. Let @xmath be a discrete polymatroid and @xmath
its set of bases. We define the rank function of the discrete
polymatroid @xmath to be function @xmath , by setting

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath , together with @xmath . It is clear that @xmath is a
nondecreasing function and from ( [ 16 ] ) we have that @xmath is
submodular. Conversely, given a nondecreasing and submodular function
@xmath , the set of @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a discrete polymatroid, whose rank function is @xmath . In connection
to the rank function @xmath of a discrete polymatroid @xmath we
distinguish two important types of sets. A set @xmath is @xmath -closed
if any subset @xmath properly containing @xmath satisfies @xmath , and
@xmath is @xmath -separable if there exist two nonempty subsets @xmath
and @xmath with @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath A nonempty subset
@xmath in @xmath is @xmath -inseparable if it is not @xmath -separable .
The following example is intended to give a better view to the
construction @xmath and the definition above.

###### Example 1.3.9.

@xmath Let us consider the function @xmath defined by @xmath One can
easily check that @xmath is nondecreasing and submodular. The bases are
the integer solutions @xmath of the inequations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

together with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

i.e., the vectors (1, 2, 1) and (0, 2, 2). Taking all subintegral
vectors of (1, 2, 1) and (0, 2, 2) we obtain the discrete polymatroid
@xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The @xmath subsets of @xmath are: @xmath The @xmath subsets of @xmath
are: @xmath

The following result makes the connection between discrete polymatroids
and integral polymatroids.

###### Theorem 1.3.10.

@xmath A nonempty finite set @xmath is a discrete polymatroid if and
only if @xmath is an integral polymatroid with @xmath .

Now we present two techniques from [ 16 ] to construct discrete
polymatroids. The first one shows that a nondecreasing and submodular
function defined on a sublattice of @xmath produces a discrete
polymatroid. A sublattice of @xmath is a collection @xmath of subsets of
@xmath with @xmath and @xmath such that for all @xmath both @xmath
belong to @xmath .

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Theorem 1.3.11.

@xmath Let @xmath be a sublattice of @xmath and @xmath an integer valued
nondecreasing and submodular function with @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a discrete polymatroid.

###### Example 1.3.12.

@xmath Let @xmath be a chain of length @xmath of @xmath , say

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Given nonnegative integers @xmath define @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

together with @xmath . Then the discrete polymatroid @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the second result about construction of discrete polymatroids, first
we need to fix some notation. Let @xmath be a family of nonempty subsets
of @xmath . It is not required that @xmath if @xmath . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and define the integer valued nondecreasing function @xmath by setting

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we can state

###### Theorem 1.3.13.

@xmath The function @xmath is submodular and @xmath is the set of bases
of the discrete polymatroid @xmath arising from @xmath .

The discrete polymatroid @xmath is called the transversal polymatroid
presented by @xmath . The rank of @xmath is @xmath . The following
examples, given by Herzog and Hibi, show that the discrete polymatroid
considered in Example 1.3.12. is a transversal polymatroid and that not
all discrete polymatroids are transversal.

###### Example 1.3.14.

@xmath @xmath Let @xmath and set @xmath , @xmath . Let @xmath denote the
smallest integer belonging to @xmath , where @xmath . If @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is @xmath , then @xmath . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then the discrete polymatroid @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath coincides with the discrete polymatroid @xmath in Example
1.3.12.

@xmath Let @xmath denote the discrete polymatroid of rank 3 consisting
of those @xmath with @xmath for @xmath and with @xmath . Then @xmath is
not transversal. Suppose, on the contrary, that @xmath is a transversal
polymatroid presented by @xmath with each @xmath . Since @xmath and
@xmath we may assume that @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath we
may assume that @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath , one has
@xmath . Hence @xmath , a contradiction.

### 1.4 The Ehrhart ring and the base ring of a discrete polymatroid.

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Let @xmath be a field and let @xmath and @xmath be indeterminates over
@xmath . If @xmath , then we denote by @xmath the monomial @xmath . Let
@xmath be a discrete polymatroid of rank @xmath on the ground set @xmath
with set of bases @xmath . The toric ring @xmath generated over @xmath
by the monomials @xmath , where @xmath , is called the base ring of
@xmath . Since @xmath is the set of integer vectors of an integral
polymatroid @xmath (see Theorem 1.3.10), we may study the Ehrhart ring
of @xmath . For this, one considers the cone @xmath with @xmath . Then
@xmath is a subsemigroup of @xmath , and the Ehrhart ring of @xmath is
defined to be the toric ring @xmath generated over @xmath by the
monomials @xmath , @xmath . By Gordan’s Lemma ( [ 3 ] , Proposition
6.1.2), @xmath is normal. Notice that @xmath is naturally graded if we
assign to @xmath the degree @xmath . We denote by @xmath the @xmath
subalgebra of @xmath which is generated over @xmath by the elements of
degree 1 in @xmath . Since @xmath it follows that @xmath . Observe that
@xmath may be identified with the subalgebra @xmath of @xmath .

The base ring @xmath was introduced in 1977 by N. White, in the
particular case when @xmath is the set of bases of a matroid, and he
showed that for every matroid, the ring @xmath is normal (see [ 34 ] )
and thus Cohen-Macaulay. It is natural to ask whether the same holds for
the base ring of any discrete polymatroid. Herzog and Hibi showed this.

###### Theorem 1.4.1.

@xmath @xmath . In particular, @xmath is normal.

As corollary they also obtain

###### Corollary 1.4.2.

@xmath @xmath is normal.

It is natural to ask, since both @xmath and @xmath are Cohen-Macaulay,
when these rings are Gorenstein. Next we give some suggestive examples.

###### Example 1.4.3.

@xmath @xmath Let @xmath be the discrete polymatroid consisting of all
integer vectors @xmath with @xmath . Then the base ring @xmath is the
Veronese subring @xmath , which is Gorenstein. On the other hand, since
the Hilbert series of the Ehrhart ring @xmath is @xmath , it follows
that @xmath is not Gorenstein.
@xmath Let @xmath be the discrete polymatroid consisting of all integer
vectors @xmath with @xmath . Then the base ring @xmath is not
Gorenstein. On the other hand, since the Hilbert series of the Ehrhart
ring @xmath is @xmath , it follows that @xmath is Gorenstein.
@xmath Let @xmath be the discrete polymatroid with @xmath its set of
bases. Then both @xmath and @xmath are Gorenstein.

However in [ 16 ] Herzog and Hibi give a combinatorial criterion for
@xmath to be Gorenstein.

###### Theorem 1.4.4.

@xmath Let @xmath be a discrete polymatroid and suppose that the
canonical basis vectors @xmath of @xmath belong to @xmath . Let @xmath
denote the ground set rank function of the integral polymatroid @xmath .
Then the Ehrhart ring @xmath of @xmath is Gorenstein if and only if
there exists an integer @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath and @xmath subsets @xmath on @xmath .

We now turn to the problem when the base ring of a discrete polymatroid
is Gorenstein. A complete answer is not given so far. However, there are
some particular classes for which there is a complete description. For
example, in [ 17 ] there is a classification of the Gorenstein rings
belonging to the class of algebras of Veronese type. Herzog and Hibi, in
[ 16 ] [Theorem 7.6.] find a characterization for the base ring of a
generic discrete polymatroid to be Gorenstein.

We will end this chapter with the last phrase from the paper of Herzog
and Hibi, Discrete Polymatroids :

@xmath It would, of course, be of interest to classify all transversal
polymatroids with Gorenstein base rings. @xmath

## Chapter 2 The type of the base ring associated to a transversal
polymatroid

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

In this chapter we determine the facets of the polyhedral cone generated
by the exponent set of the monomials defining the base ring associated
to a transversal polymatroid presented by @xmath . The importance of
knowing those facets comes from the fact that the canonical module of
the base ring can be expressed in terms of the relative interior of the
cone. Since the base ring of a transversal polymatroid is normal using,
Danilov-Stanley theorem we can find all minimal generators of the
canonical module @xmath as an ideal of @xmath generated by monomials.
So, we can compute the type of @xmath . Also, this would allow us to
compute the a- invariant of those base rings. The results presented were
discovered by extensive computer algebra experiments performed with
Normaliz [ 5 ] .

### 2.1 Cones of dimension @xmath with @xmath facets.

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Let @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath the cycle of length @xmath @xmath and
@xmath be the canonical base of @xmath For a vector @xmath , @xmath , we
will denote @xmath If @xmath is a monomial in @xmath we set @xmath .
Given a set @xmath of monomials, the @xmath denoted @xmath consists of
all @xmath with @xmath

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

We consider the following set of integer vectors of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

@xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

where @xmath for all @xmath @xmath and @xmath

@xmath It is easy to see @xmath that for any @xmath and @xmath we have
@xmath

If @xmath are some nonempty subsets of @xmath for @xmath , @xmath , then
the set of the vectors @xmath with @xmath is the base of a polymatroid,
called the transversal polymatroid presented by @xmath The base ring of
a transversal polymatroid presented by @xmath is the ring

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 2.1.1.

Let @xmath @xmath @xmath and @xmath We consider the following two cases:

@xmath If @xmath then let @xmath be the exponent set of generators of
@xmath algebra @xmath where @xmath .

@xmath If @xmath then let @xmath be the exponent set of generators of
@xmath algebra @xmath where @xmath .
Then the cone generated by @xmath has the irreducible representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath is the canonical base of @xmath

###### Proof.

We denote @xmath and @xmath Since @xmath for any @xmath and @xmath for
any @xmath it is easy to see that for any @xmath and @xmath the set of
monomials @xmath @xmath @xmath is a subset of the generators of @xmath
algebra @xmath Thus one has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we denote by @xmath the matrix with the rows the coordinates of
@xmath then by a simple computation we get @xmath for any @xmath and
@xmath Thus, we get that the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is linearly independent and it follows that @xmath Since @xmath is
linearly independent and lie on the hyperplane @xmath we have that
@xmath
Now we will prove that @xmath for all @xmath It is enough to show that
for all vectors @xmath @xmath for all @xmath Since @xmath is the
canonical base of @xmath we get that @xmath for any @xmath Let @xmath
@xmath We have two possibilities:
@xmath If @xmath then let @xmath be the number of @xmath such that
@xmath and @xmath Thus @xmath Then @xmath
@xmath If @xmath then let @xmath be the number of @xmath such that
@xmath and @xmath Thus @xmath Then @xmath
Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we will prove the converse inclusion @xmath
It is enough to prove that the extremal rays of the cone @xmath are in
@xmath Any extremal ray of the cone @xmath can be written as the
intersection of @xmath hyperplanes @xmath , with @xmath There are two
possibilities to obtain extremal rays by intersection of @xmath
hyperplanes.
@xmath
Let @xmath be a sequence of integers and @xmath The system of equations:
@xmath admits the solution @xmath @xmath with @xmath @xmath for all
@xmath where @xmath is Kronecker’s symbol.
There are two possibilities:
@xmath If @xmath then @xmath and thus @xmath
@xmath If @xmath then @xmath and thus @xmath and is an extremal ray.
Thus, there exist @xmath sequences @xmath such that the system of
equations @xmath has a solution @xmath with @xmath and @xmath
The extremal rays are: @xmath
@xmath
Let @xmath be a sequence of integers and @xmath with @xmath
Let @xmath with @xmath be a solution of the system of equations:
@xmath
There are two possibilities:
@xmath If @xmath and @xmath then the system of equations @xmath admits
the solution @xmath with @xmath with @xmath for all @xmath
@xmath If @xmath or @xmath then there exists no solution @xmath for the
system of equations @xmath because otherwise @xmath or @xmath
Thus, there exist @xmath sequences @xmath such that the system of
equations @xmath has a solution @xmath with @xmath , and the extremal
rays are:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In conclusion, there exist @xmath extremal rays of the cone @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath where @xmath or @xmath it is easy to see that @xmath Thus,
we have @xmath
The representation is irreducible because if we delete, for some @xmath
the hyperplane with the normal @xmath , then the @xmath coordinate of
@xmath would be negative, which is impossible; and if we delete the
hyperplane with the normal @xmath then the cone @xmath would be
presented by @xmath which is impossible.  Thus the representation @xmath
is irreducible. ∎

###### Lemma 2.1.2.

Let @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath and @xmath Let @xmath be the exponent
set of generators of @xmath algebra @xmath where @xmath if @xmath or
@xmath if @xmath Then the cone generated by @xmath has the irreducible
representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath

Note that the algebras from Lemmas 2.1.1. and 2.1.2. are isomorphic.

###### Lemma 2.1.3.

@xmath Let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be such that @xmath and @xmath .
Then @xmath and @xmath .
@xmath Let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be such that @xmath and
@xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

@xmath Let @xmath so that @xmath Then @xmath . Since @xmath , it follows
that @xmath and so @xmath . Thus, @xmath and @xmath .
@xmath The proof goes as that for @xmath ∎

### 2.2 The type of base ring associated to transversal polymatroids
with the cone of dimension @xmath with @xmath facets.

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The main result of this chapter is the following.

###### Theorem 2.2.1.

Let @xmath be a standard graded polynomial ring over a field @xmath and
@xmath satisfies the hypothesis of @xmath Then:
@xmath If @xmath then the type of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath If @xmath then the type of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath @xmath

###### Proof.

Since @xmath is normal ( [ 16 ] ), the canonical module @xmath of @xmath
with respect to standard grading, can be expressed as an ideal of @xmath
generated by monomials

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the exponent set of the @xmath algebra @xmath and @xmath
denotes the relative interior of @xmath By Lemma 2.1.1., the cone
generated by @xmath has the irreducible representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath @xmath being the canonical base of @xmath
@xmath Let @xmath @xmath be such that @xmath @xmath @xmath for any
@xmath We will denote by @xmath the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will show that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since for any @xmath @xmath and @xmath it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath then @xmath for any @xmath Since @xmath it follows that
@xmath Let @xmath It is clear that @xmath If @xmath then @xmath Thus
@xmath
If @xmath then let @xmath such that @xmath

We claim that for any @xmath with @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath we
can find @xmath with @xmath and @xmath
We proceed by induction on @xmath If @xmath , then it is clear that
@xmath . Indeed, then @xmath @xmath for some @xmath and so @xmath that
is @xmath . It follows @xmath
Suppose @xmath Since @xmath by Lemma  2.1.3.  we can get @xmath , with
@xmath for any @xmath , such that @xmath Since @xmath by Lemma  2.1.3.
 we can get @xmath , with @xmath for any @xmath , such that @xmath It is
clear that @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So, @xmath and, since @xmath we get by induction hypothesis that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath and @xmath we get that @xmath and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So, the canonical module @xmath of @xmath with respect to standard
grading, can be expressed as an ideal of @xmath generated by monomials

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The type of @xmath is the minimal number of generators of the canonical
module. So, @xmath where @xmath is the cardinal of @xmath
Note that for any @xmath the equation @xmath has @xmath distinct
nonnegative integer solutions with @xmath for any @xmath respectively
@xmath has @xmath distinct nonnegative integer solutions with @xmath for
any @xmath Thus, the cardinal of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath Let @xmath @xmath such that @xmath @xmath @xmath for any @xmath
where @xmath We will denote by @xmath the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will show that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since for any @xmath @xmath it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath then @xmath for any @xmath Since @xmath it follows that
@xmath We claim that @xmath Indeed, since @xmath and @xmath it follows
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath and so @xmath

We claim that for any @xmath with @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath we
can find @xmath with @xmath such that @xmath
We proceed by induction on @xmath If @xmath , then it is clear that
@xmath . Indeed, then @xmath @xmath for some @xmath and so @xmath that
is @xmath . It follows @xmath
Suppose @xmath . Since @xmath by Lemma  2.1.3 we can get @xmath , with
@xmath for any @xmath , such that @xmath Since @xmath by Lemma  2.1.3.
we can get @xmath , with @xmath for any @xmath , such that @xmath It is
clear that @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So, @xmath and, since @xmath we get by induction hypothesis that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Since @xmath and @xmath we get that @xmath and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So, the canonical module @xmath of @xmath with respect to standard
grading, can be expressed as an ideal of @xmath generated by monomials

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The type of @xmath is the minimal number of generators of the canonical
module. So, @xmath where @xmath is the cardinal of @xmath
Note that for any @xmath the equation @xmath has @xmath distinct
nonnegative integer solutions with @xmath for any @xmath respectively
@xmath has @xmath distinct nonnegative integer solutions with @xmath for
any @xmath
Thus, the cardinal of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

###### Corollary 2.2.2.

@xmath is Gorenstein ring if and only if @xmath

###### Proof.

@xmath From Theorem 2.2.1.a) @xmath . See also @xmath
@xmath If @xmath since @xmath and @xmath it follows that @xmath or
@xmath and @xmath for @xmath @xmath @xmath , which is false.
If @xmath then using Theorem 2.2.1.b) we have @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath and @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath , which is false. ∎

Let @xmath be a standard graded @xmath algebra over a field @xmath .
Recall that the @xmath invariant of @xmath denoted @xmath is the degree
as a rational function of the Hilbert series of @xmath see for instance
( [ 28 , p. 99] ). If @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay and @xmath is the
canonical module of @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

see [ 3 , p. 141] and [ 28 , Proposition 4.2.3] . In our situation
@xmath is normal [ 16 ] and consequently Cohen-Macaulay, thus this
formula applies. We have the following consequence of Theorem 2.2.1.

###### Corollary 2.2.3.

The @xmath invariant of @xmath is @xmath

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be generators of the @xmath algebra @xmath Then @xmath is a
standard graded algebra with the grading

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath then @xmath and so we have @xmath
If @xmath then @xmath So, we have @xmath ∎

### 2.3 Ehrhart function

We consider a fixed set of distinct monomials @xmath in a polynomial
ring @xmath over a field @xmath

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the convex hull of the set @xmath The @xmath of @xmath is the graded
algebra

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the @xmath component is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The @xmath of @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

An important result of [ 28 ] , Corollary 7.2.45 is the following.

###### Theorem 2.3.1.

If @xmath is a standard graded subalgebra of @xmath and @xmath is the
@xmath of @xmath then:
@xmath @xmath for all @xmath and
@xmath @xmath for all @xmath if and only if @xmath is normal.

In this section we will compute the Hilbert function and the Hilbert
series for the @xmath algebra @xmath where @xmath satisfies the
hypothesis of Lemma 2.1.1.

###### Proposition 2.3.2.

In the hypothesis of Lemma @xmath , the Hilbert function of the @xmath
algebra @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

From [ 16 ] we know that the @xmath algebra @xmath is normal. Thus, to
compute the Hilbert function of @xmath is equivalent to compute the
Ehrhart function of @xmath where @xmath (see Theorem 2.3.1.).
It is clear that @xmath and thus @xmath

Since for any @xmath the equation @xmath has @xmath nonnegative integer
solutions and the equation @xmath has @xmath nonnegative integer
solutions, we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

###### Corollary 2.3.3.

In the hypothesis of @xmath , the Hilbert series of the @xmath algebra
@xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath being the Hilbert function and @xmath

###### Proof.

Since the @xmath invariant of @xmath is @xmath with @xmath it follows
that to compute the Hilbert series of @xmath is necessary to know the
first @xmath values of the Hilbert function of @xmath , @xmath for
@xmath Since @xmath applying @xmath times the difference operator @xmath
(see [ 3 ] ) on the Hilbert function of @xmath we get the conclusion.

Let @xmath for any @xmath For @xmath let @xmath and @xmath for any
@xmath We claim that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath and @xmath We proceed by induction on @xmath

If @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath
If @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, if @xmath it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath

∎

Next we will give some examples.

###### Example 2.3.4.

Let @xmath where @xmath @xmath The cone genereated by @xmath the
exponent set of generators of @xmath algebra @xmath has the irreducible
representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The type of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Hilbert series of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that @xmath

###### Example 2.3.5.

Let @xmath where @xmath @xmath The cone genereated by @xmath the
exponent set of generators of @xmath algebra @xmath has the irreducible
representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The type of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Hilbert series of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that @xmath

We end this section with the following open problem.

Open Problem: Let @xmath @xmath for any @xmath and @xmath be the base
ring associated to the transversal polymatroid presented by @xmath If
the Hilbert series is:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then we have the following:
@xmath If @xmath then @xmath
@xmath If @xmath then @xmath

## Chapter 3 Intersections of base rings associated to transversal
polymatroids

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The discrete polymatroids and their base rings are studied recently in
many papers (see [ 6 ] , [ 16 ] , [ 18 ] , [ 29 ] , [ 30 ] ). It is
important to give conditions when the base ring associated to a
transversal polymatroid is Gorenstein (see [ 16 ] ). In [ 21 ] we
introduced a class of such base rings. In this paper we note that an
intersection of such base rings (introduced in [ 21 ] ) is Gorenstein
and give necessary and sufficient conditions for the intersection of two
base rings from [ 21 ] to be still a base ring of a transversal
polymatroid. Also, we compute the @xmath -invariant of those base rings.
The results presented were discovered by extensive computer algebra
experiments performed with Normaliz [ 5 ] .

### 3.1 Intersection of cones of dimension @xmath with @xmath facets.

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Let @xmath , @xmath @xmath and consider r presentations of transversal
polymatroids:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath From [ 21 ] we know that the base rings @xmath are
Gorenstein rings and the cones generated by the exponent vectors of the
monomials defining the base ring associated to a transversal polymatroid
presented by @xmath are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath
We denote by @xmath the @xmath generated by @xmath with @xmath
It is clear that one has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Conversely, since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We claim that the intersection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the irreducible representation of the cone @xmath
We prove by induction on @xmath If @xmath , then the intersection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the irreducible representation of the cone @xmath (see [ 21 ] , Lemma
 4.1).
If @xmath then we have two cases to study:
@xmath if we delete, for some @xmath the hyperplane with the normal
@xmath , then a coordinate of a @xmath would be negative, which is
impossible;
@xmath if we delete, for some @xmath , the hyperplane with the normal
@xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is by induction the irreducible representation of the cone @xmath ,
which is different from @xmath Hence, the intersection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the irreducible representation of the cone @xmath

###### Lemma 3.1.1.

The @xmath algebra @xmath is a Gorenstein ring.

###### Proof.

We will show that the canonical module @xmath is generated by @xmath
Since the semigroups @xmath are normal for any @xmath , it follows that
@xmath is normal. Then the @xmath algebra @xmath is normal   (see [ 3 ]
Theorem 6.1.4. p. 260)  and using the Danilov-Stanley theorem we get
that the canonical module @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the greatest common divisor of @xmath for any @xmath
For any @xmath , there exist two possibilities for the equation of the
facet @xmath :
@xmath If @xmath then the equation of the facet @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath If @xmath then the equation of the facet @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The relative interior of the cone @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will show that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is clear that @xmath
If @xmath then @xmath for any @xmath and for any @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We claim that there exists @xmath such that @xmath Let @xmath for all
@xmath
It is clear that @xmath and for any @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath then we will get a contradiction. Indeed, since @xmath divides
@xmath it follows that @xmath divides @xmath which is false.
Hence, we have @xmath and @xmath .
Since @xmath we get that @xmath ∎

Let @xmath be a standard graded @xmath over a field @xmath . Recall that
the @xmath of @xmath denoted @xmath is the degree as a rational function
of the Hilbert series of @xmath see for instance @xmath If @xmath is
Cohen-Macaulay and @xmath is the canonical module of @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

see ( [ 3 ] ,  p.  141) and ( [ 28 ] ,  Proposition 4.2.3). In our
situation @xmath is normal and consequently Cohen-Macaulay, thus this
formula applies. As consequence of Lemma 3.1.1. we have the following.

###### Corollary 3.1.2.

The @xmath of @xmath is @xmath

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the generators of the @xmath @xmath @xmath is a standard
graded algebra with the grading

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath it follows that @xmath and so @xmath ∎

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

### 3.2 When is @xmath the base ring associated to some transversal
polymatroid?

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Let @xmath and consider two transversal polymatroids presented by @xmath
respectively @xmath Let @xmath and @xmath be the set of exponent vectors
of monomials defining the base rings @xmath respectively @xmath and
@xmath the @xmath generated by @xmath with @xmath
Question: There exists a transversal polymatroid such that its base ring
is the @xmath @xmath ?
In the following we will give two suggestive examples.
Example @xmath . Let @xmath @xmath @xmath where @xmath @xmath @xmath and
@xmath @xmath the base rings associated to transversal polymatroids
presented by @xmath respectively @xmath It is easy to see that the
generators set of @xmath respectively @xmath is given by @xmath
respectively @xmath We show that the @xmath algebra @xmath is the base
ring of the transversal polymatroid presented by @xmath where @xmath
Since the base ring associated to the transversal polymatroid presented
by @xmath has the exponent set @xmath it follows that @xmath Thus, in
this example @xmath is the base ring of a transversal polymatroid.
Example @xmath . Let @xmath @xmath @xmath where @xmath @xmath @xmath and
@xmath @xmath the base rings associated to the transversal polymatroids
presented by @xmath respectively @xmath It is easy to see that the
generators set of @xmath respectively @xmath , is @xmath respectively
@xmath We claim that there exists no transversal polymatroid @xmath such
that the @xmath algebra @xmath is its base ring. Suppose, on the
contrary, that @xmath is presented by @xmath with each @xmath Since
@xmath and @xmath we may assume by changing the numerotation of @xmath
that @xmath and @xmath Since @xmath we may assume that @xmath Hence
@xmath a contradiction.

Let @xmath @xmath and @xmath @xmath the cycle of length @xmath We
consider two transversal polymatroids presented by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath respectively @xmath , is the exponent vectors of the
monomials defining the base ring associated to the transversal
polymatroid presented by @xmath respectively @xmath From [ 21 ] we know
that the base rings @xmath and @xmath are Gorenstein rings and the cones
generated by the exponent vectors of the monomials defining the base
rings associated to the transversal polymatroids presented by @xmath and
@xmath are:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is easy to see that @xmath and
@xmath
or

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For any base ring @xmath of a transversal polymatroid presented by
@xmath we associate a @xmath square tiled by closed unit subsquares,
called boxes , colored with two colors, @xmath and @xmath as follows:
the box of coordinate @xmath is @xmath if @xmath otherwise the box is
@xmath We will call this square the polymatroidal diagram associated to
the presentation @xmath

Next we give necesary and sufficient conditions such that the @xmath
@xmath is the base ring associated to some transversal polymatroid.

###### Theorem 3.2.1.

Let @xmath @xmath We consider two presentations of transversal
poymatroids presented by: @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath
respectively @xmath is the set of exponent vectors of the monomials
defining the base ring associated to the transversal polymatroid
presented by @xmath respectively @xmath
Then, the @xmath @xmath is the base ring associated to a transversal
polymatroid if and only if one of the following conditions holds:
@xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath and @xmath
@xmath @xmath and @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath and @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath and @xmath

The proof follows from the following three lemmas.

###### Lemma 3.2.2.

Let @xmath and @xmath be as above. If @xmath @xmath then the @xmath
@xmath is the base ring associated to some transversal polymatroid if
and only if @xmath

###### Proof.

@xmath Let @xmath We will prove that there exists a transversal
polymatroid @xmath presented by @xmath such that the base ring
associated to @xmath is @xmath
We have two cases to study.
@xmath If @xmath then let @xmath be the transversal polymatroid
presented by @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The associated polymatroidal diagram is the following.

[]

It is easy to see that the base ring associated to the transversal
polymatroid @xmath presented by @xmath is generated by the following set
of monomials

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath and @xmath If @xmath @xmath then there exist @xmath and
@xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and thus, @xmath
Conversely,  if @xmath then @xmath and thus there exist @xmath and
@xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, @xmath and so @xmath
@xmath If @xmath then it follows that @xmath and @xmath Let @xmath be
the transversal polymatroid presented by @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The associated polymatroidal diagram is the following.

[]

It is easy to see that the base ring associated to the transversal
polymatroid @xmath presented by @xmath is generated by the following set
of monomials

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath and @xmath Since @xmath and @xmath , it follows that for
any @xmath we have @xmath , @xmath and thus, @xmath
Conversely,  if @xmath then @xmath , @xmath and thus there exist @xmath
and @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, @xmath and so @xmath

@xmath Now suppose that there exists a transversal polymatroid @xmath
given by @xmath such that its associated base ring is @xmath . We will
prove that @xmath
Suppose, on the contrary, that @xmath We have two cases to study:
@xmath If @xmath then since @xmath for any @xmath and @xmath for any
@xmath and @xmath we may assume @xmath and @xmath If @xmath then since
@xmath we may assume @xmath Then @xmath which is false. If @xmath then
since @xmath we may assume @xmath Then @xmath which is false.
@xmath If @xmath then since @xmath for any @xmath and @xmath for any
@xmath and @xmath we may assume @xmath @xmath and @xmath If @xmath then
since @xmath we may assume @xmath Then @xmath which is false. If @xmath
then since @xmath we may assume @xmath Then @xmath which is false. ∎

###### Lemma 3.2.3.

Let @xmath and @xmath be as above. If @xmath @xmath then the @xmath
@xmath is the base ring associated to some transversal polymatroid if
and only if @xmath

###### Proof.

@xmath Let @xmath We will prove that there exists a transversal
polymatroid @xmath presented by @xmath such that its associated base
ring is @xmath We distinguish three cases to study:
@xmath If @xmath and @xmath then let @xmath be the transversal
polymatroid presented by @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The associated polymatroidal diagram is the following.

[]

It is easy to see that the base ring @xmath associated to the
transversal polymatroid @xmath presented by @xmath is generated by the
following set of monomials

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath and @xmath If @xmath @xmath then there exist @xmath and
@xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and thus, @xmath Conversely,  if @xmath then @xmath thus there exist
@xmath and @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and since @xmath it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, @xmath and so @xmath
@xmath If @xmath and @xmath then @xmath and let @xmath be the
transversal polymatroid presented by @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The associated polymatroidal diagram is the following.

[]

It is easy to see that the base ring @xmath associated to the
transversal polymatroid @xmath presented by @xmath is generated by the
following set of monomials

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath and @xmath If @xmath @xmath then there exist @xmath and
@xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and thus, @xmath Conversely,  if @xmath then @xmath thus there exist
@xmath and @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, @xmath and so @xmath
@xmath If @xmath then let @xmath be the transversal polymatroid
presented by @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The associated polymatroidal diagram is the following:

[]

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Since @xmath it follows that @xmath and so @xmath It is easy to see that
the base ring @xmath associated to the transversal polymatroid @xmath
presented by @xmath is generated by the following set of monomials

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath and @xmath If @xmath @xmath then there exist @xmath and
@xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and thus, @xmath Conversely,  if @xmath then @xmath then there exist
@xmath and @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and since @xmath it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, @xmath and so @xmath

@xmath Now suppose that there exists a transversal polymatroid @xmath
presented by @xmath such that its associated base ring is @xmath . We
will prove that @xmath Suppose, on the contrary, that @xmath We may
assume that @xmath If @xmath then @xmath . But @xmath because the
maximal power of @xmath in a minimal generator of @xmath is @xmath ,
which is false. If @xmath then @xmath . But @xmath because the maximal
power of @xmath in a minimal generator of @xmath is @xmath , which is
false. Thus, @xmath ∎

###### Lemma 3.2.4.

Let @xmath and @xmath as above. If @xmath and @xmath or @xmath and
@xmath or @xmath and @xmath then the @xmath @xmath is the base ring
associated to some transversal polymatroid.

###### Proof.

We have three cases to study:
@xmath @xmath and @xmath Then we distinguish five subcases:
@xmath If @xmath then we find a transversal polymatroid @xmath like in
the Subcase @xmath when @xmath
@xmath If @xmath then let @xmath be the transversal polymatroid
presented by @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is easy to see that the polymatroid @xmath is the same as in Lemma
3.2.3. when @xmath Thus @xmath
@xmath If @xmath then let @xmath be the transversal polymatroid
presented by @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is easy to see that the polymatroid @xmath is the same as in Lemma
3.2.3. when @xmath Thus @xmath
@xmath If @xmath then let @xmath be the transversal polymatroid
presented by @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is easy to see that the polymatroid @xmath is the same as in Lemma
3.2.3. when @xmath Thus @xmath
@xmath If @xmath and @xmath then let @xmath be the transversal
polymatroid presented by @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is easy to see that the polymatroid @xmath is the same as in Lemma
3.2.3. when @xmath Thus @xmath
@xmath @xmath and @xmath Then we distinguish three subcases:
@xmath If @xmath then let @xmath be the transversal polymatroid
presented by
@xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is easy to see that the polymatroid @xmath is the same as in Lemma
3.2.3. when @xmath Thus @xmath
@xmath If @xmath then let @xmath be the transversal polymatroid
presented by @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is easy to see that the polymatroid @xmath is the same as in Lemma
3.2.3. when @xmath Thus @xmath
@xmath If @xmath then let @xmath be the transversal polymatroid
presented by @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is easy to see that the polymatroid @xmath is the same as in Lemma
3.2.2. when @xmath Thus @xmath
@xmath @xmath and @xmath Then we distinguish two subcases:
@xmath If @xmath then let @xmath be the transversal polymatroid
presented by @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is easy to see that the polymatroid @xmath is the same as in Lemma
3.2.2. when @xmath Thus @xmath
@xmath If @xmath then let @xmath be the transversal polymatroid
presented by @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The associated polymatroidal diagram is the following.

[]

It is easy to see that the base ring @xmath associated to the
transversal polymatroid @xmath presented by @xmath is generated by the
following set of monomials

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath and @xmath If @xmath @xmath then there exist @xmath and
@xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and thus, @xmath Conversely,  if @xmath then @xmath and so there exist
@xmath and @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and since @xmath it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, @xmath and so @xmath
∎

## Chapter 4 A remark on the Hilbert series of transversal polymatroids

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

In this chapter we study when the transversal polymatroids presented by
@xmath with all sets @xmath having two elements, have the base ring
@xmath Gorenstein. Using Worpitzky identity, we prove that the numerator
of Hilbert series has the coefficients Eulerian numbers and from [ 1 ]
it follows that the Hilbert series is unimodal.

### 4.1 Segre product and the base ring associated to a transversal
polymatroid.

Let @xmath be an infinite field, @xmath and @xmath be positive integers,
@xmath be some subsets of @xmath for @xmath , @xmath Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Obviously @xmath , where S is the Segre product of polynomial rings in
@xmath , respectively @xmath indeterminates

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We consider the variables @xmath @xmath @xmath and we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We also consider the presentations @xmath and @xmath defined by @xmath
By [ 28 , Proposition 9.1.2] we know that @xmath is the ideal @xmath of
the @xmath –minors of the @xmath matrix @xmath via the map @xmath . The
algebras @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -graded by
setting @xmath where @xmath , @xmath denote the vectors of the canonical
basis of @xmath By [ 20 , Propositions 4.11 and 8.11] or [ 28 ,
Proposition 8.1.10] we know that the cycles of the complete bipartite
graph @xmath give a universal Gröbner basis of @xmath A cycle of the
complete bipartite graph is described by a pair @xmath of sequences of
integers, say

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and such that the @xmath are distinct and
the @xmath are distinct. Associated with any such a pair we have a
polynomial @xmath which is in @xmath .

For a @xmath -graded algebra @xmath we denote by @xmath the direct sum
of the graded components of degree @xmath Similarly, for a @xmath graded
@xmath module @xmath , we denote by @xmath the direct sum of the graded
components of @xmath of degree @xmath Clearly @xmath is a @xmath graded
algebra and @xmath is a @xmath graded @xmath module. Furthermore @xmath
is exact as a functor on the category of @xmath graded @xmath modules
with maps of degree @xmath Now @xmath is the @xmath -algebra generated
by the elements @xmath with @xmath . Therefore @xmath is isomorphic to
the algebra @xmath and we have the presentation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath

@xmath is the @xmath algebra generated by the monomials @xmath with
@xmath , that is, @xmath is the Segre product @xmath of the polynomial
rings @xmath Now we consider the variables @xmath with @xmath Then we
get the presentation of the Segre product @xmath as a quotient of @xmath
by mapping @xmath to @xmath

From [ 15 ] the defining ideal of @xmath is generated by the so-called
Hibi relations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Example 4.1.1.

Let @xmath and @xmath Then @xmath is the quotient of @xmath by zero
ideal ( @xmath because we don’t have cycles) and then @xmath is the
quotient of @xmath modulo the ideal generated by the Hibi relations:

@xmath , @xmath

@xmath , @xmath

@xmath , @xmath

@xmath , @xmath

@xmath

Since @xmath is a Gorenstein ring ( [ 16 , Example 7.4] ), @xmath is a
Gorenstein ring .

###### Example 4.1.2.

Let @xmath and @xmath Then @xmath is the quotient of @xmath by the
polynomial @xmath (we have one 6-cycle) and then @xmath is the quotient
of @xmath modulo the ideal generated by the Hibi relations:

@xmath , @xmath

@xmath , @xmath

@xmath , @xmath

@xmath , @xmath

@xmath

and by the linear relation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is a Gorenstein ring and @xmath is a regular element in
@xmath , @xmath @xmath is a Gorenstein ring.

### 4.2 Hilbert series

###### Definition 4.2.1.

Let @xmath be a polynomial ring over a field @xmath . If @xmath is a
finitely generated @xmath graded @xmath -module, the numerical function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath for all @xmath is the Hilbert function and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the Hilbert series of @xmath

###### Definition 4.2.2.

A sequence @xmath is log-concave if @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Definition 4.2.3.

A sequence @xmath is unimodal if there exists an index @xmath such that
@xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath .

Log-concavity is easily shown to imply unimodality.

Let @xmath , @xmath be positive integers, @xmath be some subsets of
@xmath such that @xmath for @xmath , @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From section above we know that @xmath is isomorphic to the algebra
@xmath and we have the presentation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath

Now we are interested when @xmath .

###### Remark 4.2.4.

If @xmath then @xmath is isomorphic to the algebra @xmath .

The ideal @xmath is zero if and only if when the bipartite graph
presented by @xmath @xmath V @xmath and the edges from @xmath to @xmath
are the following: join @xmath with @xmath has no cycles. If @xmath for
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath for @xmath , @xmath then the bipartite graph
presented by @xmath has no cycles , thus the ideal @xmath is zero.
Since @xmath , then @xmath is the Segre product of @xmath polynomial
rings, each of them in @xmath indeterminates, that is, @xmath is a
Gorenstein ring (see [ 16 , Example 7.4] ); @xmath In the case @xmath it
is known (see [ 28 , proposition 9.1.3] ) that the Hilbert series of
@xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It results that the Krull dimension of @xmath is @xmath and the number
of generators of the defining ideal of @xmath (the number of
Hibi-relations of @xmath ) is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition 4.2.5.

We have the following relation between the Hilbert series of @xmath and
@xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

###### Definition 4.2.6.

( [ 12 ] ) Let @xmath and @xmath be two power series in @xmath . Then we
define the Hadamard product of @xmath and @xmath and we denote it by
@xmath

###### Definition 4.2.7.

( [ 12 ] ) Let @xmath be the Hilbert series of a standard @xmath algebra
@xmath .Then we denote by @xmath (or @xmath ) the regularity index of
@xmath (or of @xmath ), i.e. the first integer @xmath such that for
every @xmath the Hilbert function of @xmath takes the same values as the
Hilbert polynomial of @xmath .

###### Remark 4.2.8.

@xmath where @xmath is the @xmath invariant of @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.2.9.

@xmath Let @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
and assume that @xmath and @xmath are the Hilbert series of standard
@xmath algebras. Then:

1.  @xmath and @xmath ;

2.  @xmath ;

3.  @xmath with @xmath ;

4.  @xmath + @xmath .

###### Theorem 4.2.10.

@xmath Let @xmath and @xmath be two standard @xmath algebras and assume
that we know their Hilbert series, @xmath and @xmath . Then the Hilbert
series of the Segre product of @xmath and @xmath is @xmath = @xmath .

###### Definition 4.2.11.

Let @xmath be a polynomial ring over a field @xmath , @xmath is a
finitely generated @xmath graded @xmath -module. The @xmath on the set
of numerical functions @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Hilbert function of @xmath .

The @xmath @xmath will be denoted by @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.2.12.

If @xmath for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath for @xmath , @xmath then the
Hilbert series of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath and @xmath

###### Proof.

We know that @xmath , where @xmath is the Segre product of @xmath
polynomial rings in two indeterminates and @xmath .

We will show that @xmath has Krull dimension dim @xmath and the Hilbert
series, @xmath with @xmath
We proceed by induction on @xmath . If @xmath it is clear. Suppose
@xmath . For every @xmath we have @xmath , thus @xmath . Since @xmath we
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we will find the coefficients @xmath of the Hilbert series @xmath
where @xmath . We may compute the first @xmath values of @xmath . Then
it suffices to take the @xmath difference of these first @xmath values
and we get the required @xmath . For this it suffices to go backward in
the algorithm which determines the numerators of the Hilbert series and
to obtain @xmath for all @xmath .

We define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath and @xmath

For @xmath and @xmath fixed we want to prove that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath .
We proceed by induction on @xmath .
Case @xmath . Since for any @xmath and @xmath fixed we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Case @xmath .
From

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we want to prove that @xmath
From [ 11 ] or [ 35 ] we mention the Worpitzky identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We know that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus we have @xmath for @xmath ∎

###### Corollary 4.2.13.

The sequence in @xmath , @xmath with @xmath , is symmetric for any
@xmath

###### Proof.

If @xmath then @xmath = @xmath =1.
If @xmath then @xmath ∎

###### Corollary 4.2.14.

The number of generators of the defining ideal of @xmath @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Corollary 4.2.15.

The h-vector of the Hilbert series associated to the transversal
polymatroid presented by @xmath such that @xmath for @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath for @xmath , @xmath , is unimodal .

###### Proof.

From [ 1 ] , we know that @xmath is a log-concave sequence in @xmath for
all @xmath , thus it is unimodal. ∎