The subject of this thesis is the theory of strong interactions of
quarks and gluons, with particular emphasis on nonperturbative aspects
of the gluon sector. Continuum methods are used to investigate in
particular the confinement phenomenon. Confinement—which states that the
elementary quarks and gluons cannot be detected as free
particles—requires an understanding of large-scale correlations. In
perturbation theory, only short-range correlations can be reliably
described. A nonperturbative approach is given by the set of integral
Dyson–Schwinger equations involving all Green functions of the theory. A
solution for the gluon propagator is obtained in the infrared and
ultraviolet asymptotic limits.

In chapter 1 , redundant degrees of freedom of the Yang–Mills gauge
theory are removed by fixing the Weyl and Coulomb gauge prior to
quantization. The constrained quantization in the Dirac bracket
formalism is then performed explicitly to produce the quantized
Yang–Mills Hamiltonian.

The asymptotic infrared limits of Coulomb gauge correlation functions
are studied analytically in chapter 2 in the framework of the
Gribov–Zwanziger confinement scenario. The Coulomb potential between
heavy quarks as part of the Yang–Mills Hamiltonian is calculated in this
limit. A connection between the infrared limits of Coulomb and Landau
gauge is established.

The Hamiltonian derived paves the way in chapter 3 for finding the
Coulomb gauge vacuum wave functional by means of the variational
principle. Numerical solutions for the propagators in this vacuum state
are discussed and seen to reproduce the anticipated infrared limit. The
discussion is extended to the vertex functions. The effect of the
approximations on the results is examined.

Chapter 4 is mainly devoted to the ultraviolet behavior of the
propagators. The discussion is issued in both Coulomb and Landau gauge.
A nonperturbative running coupling is defined and calculated. The
ultraviolet tails of the variational solutions from chapter 3 are
compared to the behavior demanded by perturbation theory.

In chapter 5 , the back reaction of the gluon sector on the presence of
external charges (heavy quarks) is explored. To this end, coherent
excitations of gluonic modes are suggested to account for the presence
of quarks. Further alternatives for the discussion of this issue are put
forward.
