##### Contents

-    Abstract
-    Foreword
    -    Acknowledgements
    -    Author’s declaration
-    Introduction
-    1 Philosophical reflections
    -    1.1 Philosophical background information
    -    1.2 Modal logic and locally covariant QFT
-    2 Locally covariant QFT
    -    2.1 Operational aspects
    -    2.2 Spacetimes
    -    2.3 Spacetimes with a spin structure
    -    2.4 Locally covariant quantum field theory
    -    2.5 Quantum fields
-    3 The real free scalar field
    -    3.1 Distributional approach to the free scalar field
        -    3.1.1 The real scalar field
        -    3.1.2 The real free scalar field
    -    3.2 A @xmath -algebraic description of the real free scalar
        field
-    4 The free Dirac field
    -    4.1 The classical free Dirac field
        -    4.1.1 The Dirac algebra
        -    4.1.2 The @xmath group
        -    4.1.3 The Dirac spinor and cospinor bundles
        -    4.1.4 The spin connection, Dirac operator and Dirac
            equation
    -    4.2 The free Dirac field as a LCQFT
        -    4.2.1 Quantisation
        -    4.2.2 States of the Dirac field
        -    4.2.3 The free Dirac field as a LCQFT
    -    4.3 Relative Cauchy evolution and the energy-momentum tensor
        -    4.3.1 The stress-energy-momentum tensor
        -    4.3.2 Relative Cauchy evolution
-    5 The Reeh-Schlieder property in curved spacetime
    -    5.1 The Reeh-Schlieder property in LCQFT
    -    5.2 Some general results on the Reeh-Schlieder property
    -    5.3 Spacetime deformation of the Reeh-Schlieder property
        -    5.3.1 Spacetime deformation
        -    5.3.2 Deformation of the Reeh-Schlieder property
    -    5.4 @xmath and the Reeh-Schlieder property
        -    5.4.1 Wave front sets and the support
        -    5.4.2 The quasi-analytic microlocal spectrum condition
    -    5.5 The real free scalar field on @xmath
    -    5.6 The RS-property for the real free scalar field
-    6 Conclusions
-    A Some results on wave front sets
    -    A.1 The smooth wave front set
    -    A.2 The analytic wave front set

###### List of Figures

-    5.1 Sketch depicting the proof of lemma 5.2.6 .
-    5.2 Sketch of the geometry of proposition 5.3.3 .
-    5.3 Sketch of the proof of the second part of proposition 5.3.4 .

## Foreword

  … it is not his possession of knowledge, of irrefutable truth, that
  makes the man of science, but his persistent and recklessly critical
  quest for truth.

Karl Popper, [ 65 ] p.281

This thesis is based on research that was done at the University of York
between October 2005 and June 2008. During those three years I learned a
lot about science, about the world around us and also about myself. I
feel that I have grown a lot as a mathematician, or perhaps as a
mathematical physicist, although I don’t feel that my knowledge of
physics has increased much. To a lesser extent I feel that I have grown
as a philosopher of science, especially during the preparation of
chapter 1 below, which is essentially the condensation of ideas that
have been in my head since early 2004.

The most important thing that I learned about myself is exactly how
ruthless I have to be to myself from time to time in order to get things
done and to achieve the goals that I have set myself. My working
attitude is perhaps best described in the words of my fellow PhD-student
Paul Melvin, who told me time and again that I had been working like a
machine. Maybe an insult to many, but to me these words were a
compliment and they motivated me to go on and not to be tempted too much
by York’s beautiful scenery, walks along the river Ouse and the taste of
lukewarm, non-sparkling, English beer.

And so I went on in the quest for truth, as Popper describes it in the
quote above. ¹ ¹ 1 Probably more accurate than the word “truth”, at
least for the physical aspect of mathematical physics, would be the word
“verisimilitude” or the phrase “statements in which we have confidence”,
see chapter 1 section 1.1 . Of course these alternatives are far less
aesthetic. On some occasions I managed to prove a useful mathematical
result that has consequences for the physical theories under
investigation, as this thesis will indicate. On other occasions
Mathematics denied me the proof that I was looking for and left me in
the dark as to whether my gut feeling was right or wrong. Looking back
on the results that were obtained I feel some gratification, of course,
and pride for the knowledge I now possess due to all the hard work I
have done. The dominant feeling, however, is curiosity. Curiosity
aroused by the intriguing and tantalising new questions that emerged
during the course of this research and that remain unanswered. For me
too the quest for truth still goes on, and I am grateful for every
opportunity I get to pursue it.

This thesis has been divided into six chapters and an appendix. Chapter
1 is of a more philosophical nature and the later chapters can be read
independently of the first chapter. Conversely, chapter 1 only requires
a superficial understanding of the framework of locally covariant
quantum field theory, the main object of study in this thesis. The
precise mathematical formulation of this framework is given in chapter 2
. Chapters 3 and 4 describe in detail two examples of locally covariant
quantum field theories, namely the real free scalar field and the free
Dirac field. These chapters freely make use of the notion of wave front
sets, which is explained in appendix A . It should be noted that the
appendix provides an elegant and new approach to generalise results for
scalar distributions to Banach space-valued ones and proves results that
are more general than those existing in the literature. Chapter 5
studies the Reeh-Schlieder property in locally covariant quantum field
theory, both in the general axiomatic setting and in the special
examples of chapter 3 . The final chapter 6 summarises the conclusions
that can be drawn from the earlier chapters and discusses some
opportunities for further research.

A remark about notations and conventions in this thesis is in order,
although most notations are either standard or defined in the text when
they are first introduced. The signatures of our spacetimes will be
@xmath , which agrees with most of the references, except e.g. [ 42 , 88
, 90 , 6 ] . Lower case Greek letters are used to denote the components
of vectors and covectors in a coordinate basis. Lower case Latin indices
are used to indicate abstract indices of tensors (see [ 88 ] for a
review of the abstract index notation), or to indicate the components of
vectors and covectors in a vierbein in chapter 4 . Capital Latin indices
are used to indicate the components of spinors and cospinors in a spin
frame, but for convenience these indices will often be dropped in favour
of a matrix notation, as explained in chapter 4 . Einstein’s summation
convention is used throughout. Retarded fundamental solutions have their
support to the future of the source function and are indicated by a
superscript @xmath . Similarly, advanced fundamental solutions have
their support in the past and are indicated by a @xmath . (A few of the
references swap the names “retarded” and “advanced”, e.g. [ 85 ] .) For
quantisation we use the advanced-minus-retarded fundamental solution, as
in [ 35 , 66 , 90 ] .

Fourier transforms on @xmath are defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the pairing of @xmath and its dual. This is unlike
e.g. [ 26 , 34 , 35 , 67 ] who omit the minus sign in the exponent. The
Fourier inversion formula on @xmath then reads:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the real free scalar field in Minkowski spacetime the retarded
@xmath and advanced @xmath fundamental solutions of the Klein-Gordon
equation are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we have written @xmath and @xmath is the four-dimensional Dirac
distribution. The advanced-minus-retarded fundamental solution is given
by (using e.g. [ 47 ] p.73)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Heaviside distribution. The two-point distribution
of the Minkowski vacuum @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the symmetric part @xmath has been defined implicitly. Notice that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we have equality if @xmath is supported in the half space @xmath .
In other words, positive frequency functions annihilate the vacuum,
because then @xmath . By analogy with Parseval’s formula, @xmath (see [
47 ] theorem 7.1.6), we then say that the quantum field @xmath has
positive energy in the vacuum state. We have @xmath , where @xmath
denotes the future pointing null vectors and @xmath the past pointing
null vectors (both including @xmath ) and @xmath denotes the wave front
set (see appendix A ).

### Acknowledgements

I would like to thank the University of York for providing me with the
opportunity to carry out the research on which this thesis is based and
especially my supervisor, Dr. Chris Fewster, who has helped me with good
advice on many occasions and has provided useful comments on drafts of
this thesis at several stages of its development. I would also like to
thank the University of Trento for its hospitality during my visit there
in October 2007 and I am particularly grateful to Dr. Romeo Brunetti,
who corrected a misconception of mine on the relative Cauchy evolution
for the Dirac field at an early stage. Furthermore I would like to thank
Dr. Alexander Strohmaier for a very helpful discussion on the
Reeh-Schlieder property in curved spacetimes. Finally, while trying to
help me understand its meaning, Esther Sanders (MA) has spotted a
typographical error in the Greek quote on page A , for which I am
grateful.

### Author’s declaration

Parts of chapters 2 and 5 are taken from a paper that has been made
available online [ 74 ] and was submitted to Communications in
Mathematical Physics for publication. The idea to apply a spacetime
deformation argument to the Reeh-Schlieder property is due to Dr. Chris
Fewster.

## Introduction

Locally covariant quantum field theory was introduced in [ 16 ] as a
mathematical framework to formulate axiomatic quantum field theories in
curved spacetime and to give a precise meaning to Einstein’s general
covariance principle for such theories. As such it provides an
appropriate setting for the formulation of a semi-classical
approximation to quantum gravitation. Moreover, as a matter of
principle, quantum field theories are tested in the presence of gravity,
so their formulation should not depend too much on the specific
properties of Minkowski spacetime. In particular this means that the use
of global symmetries and Fourier transformation should not be of crucial
importance.

One major advance of recent years has been the realisation that the
spectrum condition of Wightman field theories in Minkowski spacetime can
be replaced by a microlocal spectrum condition in curved spacetimes [ 15
, 66 ] . This has allowed the formulation of interacting quantum field
theories in curved spacetime using perturbation theory, analogous to the
Minkowski spacetime case [ 14 , 45 ] . Another important idea has been
the use of spacetime deformation arguments, which use the time-slice
axiom to show that results on Minkowski spacetime can be carried over to
(diffeomorphic) curved spacetimes [ 38 ] . One successful example of
this is the spin-statistics theorem proved by [ 85 ] .

Locally covariant quantum field theory can also serve as a reference
structure for the philosophical discussion of quantum field theories in
curved spacetime and possibly also quantum gravity. In this sense it
would be analogous to algebraic quantum field theory, which serves the
same purpose for quantum field theory in Minkowski spacetime [ 40 , 22 ,
41 , 21 ] , and indeed algebraic quantum field theory can be recovered
from locally covariant quantum field theory [ 16 ] . Crucial aspects for
the theory in this context are its clear structure and the fact that the
assumptions that are used are believed to be weak and general enough to
encompass a sufficiently wide range of useful theories.

In this thesis we will use locally covariant quantum field theory as a
reference structure as well as for the formulation of specific quantum
field theories. In chapter 1 we will study the use of embeddings from a
philosophical point of view. We believe this aspect deserves attention,
because it is essentially new. (It differs from the setting of algebraic
quantum field theory in Minkowski spacetime, because no fixed universe
is present.) In chapters 2 , 3 and 4 we will give a precise formulation
of locally covariant quantum field theory and describe two examples of
such theories, the real free scalar field and the free Dirac field,
including some new results concerning the microlocal spectrum condition
and Hadamard states. Chapter 5 then studies the Reeh-Schlieder property
for quantum field theories in curved spacetimes. A state with this
property has many non-local correlations, which makes this property of
importance both for the physical and the philosophical aspects of
quantum field theory in curved spacetime. On top of that it has useful
and interesting mathematical implications. It is known that many
physically interesting states in many spacetimes have this property [ 69
, 80 , 79 ] , but whether this covers (almost) all physically
interesting states in (almost) all interesting spacetimes is not at all
clear. We will use the locally covariant framework to make several
partial contributions towards answering this question.

## Chapter 1 Preliminary philosophical reflections

  ‘But how does it happen,’ I said with admiration, ‘that you were able
  to solve the mystery of the library looking at it from the outside,
  and were unable to solve it when you were inside?’
  ‘Thus God knows the world, because He conceived it in His mind, as if
  from the outside, before it was created, and we do not know its rule,
  because we live inside it, having found it already made.’
  ‘So one can know things by looking at them from the outside!’

Umberto Eco, The Name of the Rose, Third Day: Vespers

Looking at the history of science, especially the last few centuries, it
is hard to imagine what mathematics or physics would have been like
without each other. Nevertheless, the two disciplines are separate.
Indeed, a purely mathematical argument is logically true, whether it
accurately describes the world around us or not. If a physical theory
allows a precise mathematical formulation, then the physics is in the
formulation of the model, the assumptions that are made to arrive at it
and the interpretation of the variables. Perhaps a mathematical
physicist is the most prudent of physicists, because he checks the
mathematical structure of physical theories for any shortcomings and
tries to correct these. As a result, he can lay bare any assumptions of
the theory that were previously hidden and these may provide new insight
into the physical content of the theory.

However, there is more to physics than just the mathematical structure
of its theories. There is also a philosophical side, which deals with
questions like: what is physics? and how can we hope to learn something
about the world around us in the first place? and what do our physical
theories tell us about what the world is like? The philosophy of physics
and mathematical physics are not independent of one another.
Mathematical physics can provide a clear boundary between the logical
(analytic) and the physical (synthetic) aspects of physical theories,
thereby making the job of philosophers of physics easier. On the other
hand, philosophical ideas can suggest alterations of physical theories,
which then call for a sound mathematical formulation. (As an example one
may think of Mach’s principle, which influenced Einstein’s thinking
while he was formulating his general theory of relativity.)

In this light, some philosophical reflections are appropriate, even
though this thesis is a work of mathematical physics. In fact, we feel
there is an even more pressing reason for such reflections, because
locally covariant quantum field theory, as described in chapter 2 , is a
relatively new and very general framework, whose mathematical structure
introduces some interesting new ideas. In section 1.2 , after an outline
of some philosophical background material, we will argue that the novel
use of morphisms lends itself excellently to make locally covariant
quantum field theory a model for modal logic. To our knowledge the
current chapter provides the first description of an interpretation of
this important aspect of the theory. The author, trained as a
mathematical physicist and not as a philosopher of physics, apologises
in advance for the relatively low standard of philosophical discussion.

### 1.1 Philosophical background information

Following Kant (see e.g. [ 70 ] ) we may divide the reality of the world
around us into two parts, namely those aspects of reality to which we,
as observers, have direct epistemic access and those parts of reality
for which this is not the case. By the phrase “direct epistemic access”
we intend to describe all direct observations, experienced by whatever
sense of a sentient being. Whatever we know, or believe to know, about
the real world must be based on our observations. In these observations
one may discern patterns and regularities, which lend themselves to
abstraction and theoretical description. In particular, it often happens
that different senses record certain patterns which tend to occur
together. When we theorise about these observations, we tend to
construct a single theoretical “object”, which is assumed to cause all
the different perceptions. (According to [ 70 ] it is these theoretical
objects which Kant calls “things in themselves” or “Dinge an sich”.)

Of course there is no way of knowing anything for certain about reality
beyond the realm of our own observations, so whether our theoretical
objects actually exist will always be unknown. In fact, one may take the
philosophical position that reality consists of nothing else than ones
own observations and theories (idealism). On the other hand there is the
realist position, which postulates that there do exist things outside
the realm of mere observations. In the realist’s words, the observations
are appearances , and there must exist something that does the
appearing. Note, however, that this does not mean that the theoretical
objects of a specific theory must exist (see [ 70 ] ).

Science is in the business of providing mathematical descriptions of
observations. As such it makes no difference for science whether one
takes an idealist or a realist position, although the meaning and
importance that an individual ascribes to science may depend on his
philosophical position. Following Popper [ 65 ] we note that science
adopts a particular way of theorising about observations. It deals with
events that are reproducible ¹ ¹ 1 Popper remarks: “It follows that any
controversy over the question whether events which are in principle
unrepeatable and unique do occur cannot be decided by science: it would
be a metaphysical controversy,” [ 65 ] section 8, p.24. and describes
them by theories that are as universal in their range of application and
precise in their description of observations as possible. Whenever a
theory is falsified, i.e. whenever it has become clear that is not in
agreement with observations, the theory is discarded and science will
have to search for a better one. Another characteristic of science is,
according to Popper, the persistence in attempting to falsify theories
and lay bare the need for better ones.

The main difficulty in the characterisation of science seems to lie in
the characterisation of the way that new theories are developed. Popper,
following Hume, rejects the use of inductive logic as a characterisation
of the scientific method, because it is not clear that inductive
conclusions are justified ( [ 65 ] section 1). Although induction can be
used to formulate new theories (just like creativity or divine
inspiration for that matter), Popper holds that it is the falsifiability
and testing of such theories that is characteristic for science. The
rejection of induction is a very cautious position, which seems to fit
in well with the prudent nature of the mathematical physicist, but it
does beg the question why unfalsified theories that have withstood
serious testing are useful. Indeed, the obvious rational reason for
their usefulness, namely that they will be successful in predicting the
future, is based on an inductive argument (see [ 61 ] ) and is therefore
in contradiction with Popper’s position. Another less rational
explanation for Popper’s choice of theory comes from the hypothesis that
biological evolution has provided us with the inclination to choose such
theories and to have confidence in them. This is certainly consistent
with the fact that these choices have served us well in the past. See [
39 , 77 ] for a further discussion along these lines.

As a final point we will comment on the social aspects of science,
because contact and discussion between different scientists is often
considered to be a crucial characteristic too. However, taking the words
on direct epistemic access at the beginning of this section seriously,
an observer should theorise on the basis of his own observations only
and contact with other observers can only be included by treating it as
a form of measurement or observation. This seems to be consistent both
with relativity theory and quantum physics. Whether the opinions of
other observers are accepted is then a question for the individual to
decide and the fact that the opinions of others carry so much weight may
perhaps be explained by another reference to evolution theory. For
further comments on the social aspects of science and the
characterisation of science as a social phenomenon we refer to [ 61 ] .

### 1.2 Modal logic and locally covariant quantum field theory

Modal logic is the study of the truth values of statements and the
validity of arguments that involve situations that are not actually the
case. It deals with possibilities, with "it could have been that…” and
“if only…” sentences. The analysis of such sentences and arguments is
notoriously more difficult than that of proposition or predicate logic.
Nevertheless, science uses such sentences in abundance when formulating
hypothetical situations, e.g. in classical mechanics: “if a cylinder
@xmath would roll down a slope with angle @xmath …”, a situation which
need not actually be the case in order for us to analyse it. Indeed, if
we want to make predictions it is necessary to think of situations that
are not yet the case, but that may come about in the future.

Modal logic decides whether an argument is valid using the idea of
models (see [ 36 ] for an introduction). In a specific model the
validity of an argument can be evaluated explicitly. If a statement or
argument is valid in every allowed model of a certain theory of modal
logic, then the argument is said to be valid. The most common type of
model consists of ‘‘possible worlds’’, a complete alternative for how
things might have been. Objects may or may not exist at a certain
possible world and propositions and predicate statements may or may not
hold. The idea of possible worlds is well-known in quantum physics
because of the ‘‘many worlds interpretation’’ of quantum physics, in
which all possible measurement outcomes are considered to be real, but
existing at different worlds. ² ² 2 Van Fraassen’s modal interpretation
of quantum physics also uses modal logic to describe possible
measurement outcomes, although it only considers one of these as real,
see [ 37 ] .

It is sometimes said that locally covariant quantum field theory
describes quantum fields on all possible spacetimes ³ ³ 3 More
precisely, one works with globally hyperbolic spacetimes, as will be
explained in chapter 2 . simultaneously. Here the word simultaneously
clearly doesn’t mean “at the same instant of time”, but it rather means
the unified, systematic way in which the quantum field is described in
all spacetimes. In fact, locally covariant quantum field theory deals
with a category whose objects can be thought of as systems, indexed by
the region of spacetime in which they live, and whose morphisms are
embeddings, each of which can be thought of as a subsystem relation.
(See [ 58 ] for more information on category theory.) Moreover, the
framework assigns to each system a certain state space and it provides a
map that restricts states to subsystems, this map being the dual to the
embeddings of systems.

Taking things at face value it may be tempting to think of each
spacetime as a possible world, in the sense of modal logic, and wonder
whether there is an analogy to the many worlds interpretation of quantum
mechanics. Actually, this idea fails at the first hurdle: a possible
world in modal logic is supposed to be a complete set of circumstances,
but when a spacetime can be embedded into a bigger one the description
of the circumstances is clearly not complete. However, we can use a less
well-known model theory for modal logic, which uses incomplete sets of
circumstances called “possibilities” (see [ 36 ] pp.18-22). At a
possibility, not all logical sentences need to be assigned a truth
value, so they describe incomplete sets of circumstances. Moreover, a
possibility can be refined by extending the set of circumstances, i.e.
by extending the set of logical sentences which are assigned a truth
value.

To see the correspondence with locally covariant quantum field theory we
notice that we are using two types of modal operators. The first refers
to possible systems, the systems that are the subject of the theory. The
second refers to the set of possible states, for a given possible
system. The first type of operator uses incomplete worlds and
possibility semantics, whereas the second uses complete sets of
circumstances because a state should provide a complete description of
the circumstances in which a system finds itself. Putting everything
together we could identify a possibility with a pair consisting of a
system and the state it is in. A refinement necessarily corresponds to
an embedding into a supersystem together with an extension of the state.
Note that we will always identify a system with its image under a
morphism, because this seems to correspond best to the idea of extension
of circumstances and to the operational notion of subsystem.

In general refinements of a possibility are not unique: a possible
system may have many supersystems and a state of a subsystem can be
extended to a given supersystem in more than one way. Let us now turn to
the interesting question whether a given state of a subsystem can be
extended to a given supersystem at all. First suppose that a state
cannot be extended to any supersystem. If a system is known to be in
such a state, then it must clearly be the whole universe, for otherwise
there would have to be some extension to a supersystem. Now suppose that
a state can only be extended to some supersytems, but not to others.
Such a state tells us not just something about the system under
consideration, but also about the nature of any possible supersystems.
This would be a strange situation, which would seem to indicate that we
have chosen the boundary between the system and the rest of the universe
poorly. The assumption that every state can be extended to every
supersystem is the principle of local physical equivalence introduced in
[ 33 ] . ⁴ ⁴ 4 More precisely, [ 33 ] definition 4.1 requires that for
every supersystem every state is empirically equivalent with a state
that can be extended. This prevents us from detecting a state that
cannot be extended, but it does allow the theory to make unphysical
idealisations.

The possibility semantics seems to fit well with our generally prudent
approach and with experimental praxis: we would like to be able to make
predictions for a certain laboratory experiment, without prescribing a
complete set of circumstances for the entire world; making assumptions
about the system in question should be enough. For practical purposes,
then, we may stick with an instrumentalist interpretation of the
framework, using a Heisenberg cut between the system and the observer
which may shift, according to which system is under consideration.
(Arguably this avoids the measurement problem by denying that the theory
deals with the universe as a whole, excepting the special case of
inextendible spacetimes.)

Let us emphasise the difference between possible worlds and possible
systems by drawing some physically relevant conclusions. The difference
between the two semantics is the idea of refinement, i.e. the embeddings
of locally covariant quantum field theory and the corresponding
extension of states. We will see in chapter 2 that these embeddings have
a rich structure and they are a crucial part of the theory, because they
express the idea of local covariance. Now suppose that we may embed a
subsystem @xmath into two distinct systems @xmath , which cannot both be
embedded into a single supersystem, at least not when we identify the
images of @xmath in both @xmath as we have chosen to do. (See [ 16 ] for
an even more elaborate example in their discussion of states). In other
words, both @xmath and @xmath are possible extensions of @xmath , but it
is not possible to have all the circumstances of both @xmath and @xmath
. This implies that not all embeddings can be actual at the same time.
Furthermore, this shows that not all possible systems can be actual at
the same time.

Similar problems occur when trying to obtain a theory of quantum gravity
from locally covariant quantum field theory by allowing superpositions
over different spacetimes, each with its own classical background
gravitational field. If we would simply allow indiscriminate
superpositions, we would disregard the subsystem relation altogether.
Moreover, we would somehow jump from a theory of systems and
possibilities to a quantum gravity theory of universes and possible
worlds. This approach seems to be too naive and in fact it does not
correspond to the many worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics.
Indeed, in quantum mechanics one uses only a single system (the
universe), so no superpositions of different systems appear. The modal
aspect refers to measurement outcomes only, which can be formulated in
terms of states. When trying to quantise gravity we believe it would be
better to find a way that respects the notion of embeddings. This means
we ought to allow only superpositions of different possibilities of the
same system. This begs the question which spacetimes should be
considered as the same system, but with a different background metric.
This is obviously not the place to go into this difficult question.

## Chapter 2 Locally covariant quantum field theory

  As before, the Peqoud steeply leaned over towards the Sperm Whale’s
  head, now, by the counterpoise of both heads, she regained her even
  keel; though sorely strained, you may well believe. So, when on one
  side you hoist in Locke’s head, you go over that way; but now, on the
  other side, hoist in Kant’s and you come back again; but in very poor
  plight. Thus, some minds for ever keep trimming boat. Oh, ye foolish!
  throw all these thunderheads overboard, and then you will float light
  and right.

Herman Melville, Moby Dick, Ch. 73

After the preliminary discussion in chapter 1 of the meaning of the
categorical structure underlying locally covariant quantum field theory,
we now come to the actual and detailed definition of this framework.
Most of the following chapters is formulated in this framework, so this
chapter serves to establish notations as well as to explain all the
basic concepts. We will follow the original work [ 16 ] closely, but
also refer to [ 33 ] for a slightly different formulation. Furthermore
our definition of the time slice axiom is slightly stronger than that of
[ 16 ] and we introduce the new notion of nowhere-classicality. The
basic facts from category theory that we will use can be found in [ 58 ]
and we refer to [ 42 , 88 , 62 ] for background information on general
relativity. Information on @xmath -algebras, respectively @xmath
-algebras, can be found in [ 49 , 76 ] , respectively. For the physical
applications of these algebras we refer to [ 13 , 2 , 40 ] .

### 2.1 Operational aspects

A quantum physical system will be described by a topological @xmath
-algebra @xmath with a unit @xmath , whose self-adjoint elements are the
observables of the system. For technical reasons it is often desirable
to work with @xmath -algebras, because they can be faithfully
represented as algebras of bounded operators. However, both @xmath
-algebras and more general topological @xmath -algebras will appear in
the following chapters, so for clarity we will develop both cases
alongside each other. It will be advantageous to consider a whole class
of possible systems rather than just one.

###### Definition 2.1.1

The category @xmath has as its objects topological @xmath -algebras ¹ ¹
1 We recall from [ 76 ] p.22 that a topological @xmath -algebra is a
@xmath -algebra which is also a locally convex vector space such that
the involution @xmath is continuous and the product is separately
continuous. with unit @xmath and its morphisms are continuous, injective
@xmath -homomorphisms @xmath such that @xmath . The product of morphisms
is given by the composition of maps and the identity map @xmath on a
given object serves as an identity morphism. The category @xmath is the
subcategory of @xmath whose objects are unital @xmath -algebras.

A morphism @xmath in @xmath expresses the fact that the system described
by @xmath is a sub-system of that described by @xmath , which is called
a super-system (see also the discussion in section 1.2 ). The
injectivity of the morphisms means that, as a matter of principle, any
observable of a sub-system can always be measured, regardless of any
practical restrictions that a super-system may impose.

A state of a system @xmath is represented by a continuous linear
functional @xmath on @xmath which is positive, i.e. @xmath for all
@xmath , and normalised, @xmath . The set of all states on @xmath will
be denoted by @xmath . Not all of these states are guaranteed to be of
physical interest, so it will be convenient to have the following notion
at our disposal:

###### Definition 2.1.2

The category @xmath has as its objects all convex subsets @xmath , for
all objects @xmath in @xmath , which are closed under operations from
@xmath (i.e. @xmath if @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath ) and
morphisms in @xmath are all affine maps @xmath , i.e. maps for which
@xmath for all @xmath and @xmath . Again the product of morphisms is
given by the composition of maps and the identity map @xmath on a given
object serves as an identity morphism.

Each object @xmath is a priori a suitable candidate for a state space of
a system in @xmath . Using the category @xmath allows us to postpone a
specific choice of state space until later.

If @xmath is a state on a (not necessarily topological) @xmath -algebra
with unit @xmath , then we can perform the GNS-construction. To explain
this we need the following definitions (see [ 76 ] ):

###### Definition 2.1.3

A @xmath -representation of @xmath is called closed if and only if it
represents @xmath as an algebra of closable operators on a Hilbert space
@xmath which have as a common, dense and invariant domain @xmath .

The graph topology of @xmath is the locally convex topology determined
by the family of semi-norms @xmath .

A closed @xmath -representation of @xmath on a Hilbert space @xmath is
called cyclic if and only if there is a cyclic vector @xmath , i.e. a
vector such that @xmath is dense in the graph topology.

If @xmath is a closed @xmath -representation with @xmath , then @xmath
represents @xmath as an algebra of bounded operators (by the closed
graph theorem, [ 49 ] theorem 1.8.6) and hence the graph topology
coincides with the norm topology of @xmath . In general, a cyclic vector
for a cyclic representation @xmath is also weakly cyclic , i.e. @xmath
is dense in the norm topology of @xmath .

###### Theorem 2.1.4 (GNS-representation)

Let @xmath be a state on @xmath . Then there exists a closed cyclic
@xmath -representation @xmath of @xmath on a Hilbert space @xmath with a
cyclic vector @xmath in the dense domain @xmath such that @xmath for all
@xmath .

If @xmath is a closed cyclic @xmath -representation of @xmath with a
cyclic vector @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath , then there is a
unique unitary equivalence @xmath between @xmath and @xmath such that
@xmath .

This follows from theorem 8.6.4 of [ 76 ] . The representation @xmath is
called the GNS-representation . In the special case that @xmath is a
@xmath -algebra one can show that @xmath and the triple @xmath is then
called the GNS-triple (see e.g. the GNS-construction in [ 49 ] for the
@xmath -algebraic case). In general we will call @xmath the
GNS-quadruple .

If @xmath is a sub- @xmath -algebra and @xmath then the GNS-quadruple
(or GNS-triple) associated to @xmath is related to that of @xmath by
@xmath , @xmath where @xmath is the orthogonal projection and @xmath .
This follows from the uniqueness part of theorem 2.1.4 and we will often
use this fact in the subsequent chapters.

### 2.2 Spacetimes

After these operational aspects we now turn to the physical ones. The
systems we will consider are intended to model quantum fields living in
a (region of a) spacetime which is endowed with a fixed Lorentzian
metric (a background gravitational field). The relation between
sub-systems will come about naturally by considering sub-regions of
spacetime. More precisely we consider the following:

###### Definition 2.2.1

By the term globally hyperbolic spacetime we will mean a connected,
Hausdorff, paracompact, @xmath Lorentzian manifold @xmath of dimension
@xmath , which is oriented, time-oriented and admits a Cauchy surface
(i.e. a continuous hypersurface which is intersected exactly once by
every inextendible time-like curve, see e.g. [ 8 ] ).

A subset @xmath of a globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath is called
causally convex iff for all @xmath all causal curves from @xmath to
@xmath lie entirely in @xmath . A non-empty open set which is connected
and causally convex is called a causally convex region or cc-region . A
cc-region whose closure is compact is called a bounded cc-region .

The category @xmath has as its objects globally hyperbolic spacetimes
@xmath and its morphisms @xmath are given by all maps @xmath which are
smooth isometric embeddings (i.e. @xmath is a diffeomorphism and @xmath
) such that the orientation and time-orientation are preserved and
@xmath is causally convex. Again the product of morphisms is given by
the composition of maps and the identity map @xmath on a given object
serves as a unit.

A region @xmath in a globally hyperbolic spacetime is causally convex if
and only if @xmath is a globally hyperbolic region in the sense of [ 42
] section 6.6. It then follows that @xmath is a globally hyperbolic
spacetime in its own right. However, the converse does not hold, i.e. if
@xmath is a globally hyperbolic spacetime in its own right it does not
follow that it is causally convex (see e.g. the helical strip on p.177
of [ 53 ] ).

The image of a morphism is by definition a cc-region. Notice that the
converse also holds. If @xmath is a cc-region then @xmath defines a
globally hyperbolic spacetime in its own right. In this case there is a
canonical morphism @xmath given by the canonical embedding @xmath . We
will often drop @xmath and @xmath from the notation and simply write
@xmath .

The importance of causally convex sets is that for any morphism @xmath
the causality structure of @xmath coincides with that of @xmath in
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

If this were not the case then the behaviour of a physical system living
in @xmath could depend in an essential way on the super-system, which
makes it practically impossible to study the smaller system as a
sub-system in its own right. This possibility is therefore excluded from
the mathematical framework.

Equation ( 2.1 ) allows us to drop the subscript in @xmath if we
introduce the convention that @xmath is always taken in the largest
spacetime under consideration. This simplifies the notation without
causing any confusion, even when @xmath with canonical embeddings,
because then we just have @xmath and @xmath . We adopt a similar
convention for the domain of dependence and the causal complement,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and we deduce from causal convexity that @xmath and @xmath . The
following lemma gives some ways of obtaining causally convex sets in a
globally hyperbolic spacetime.

###### Lemma 2.2.2

Let @xmath be a globally hyperbolic spacetime and @xmath an open subset.
Then:

1.   the intersection of two causally convex sets is causally convex,

2.   for any subset @xmath the sets @xmath are causally convex,

3.  @xmath is causally convex,

4.  @xmath is causally convex iff @xmath ,

5.   for any achronal set @xmath the sets @xmath and @xmath are causally
    convex,

6.   if @xmath is a cc-region, then @xmath is a cc-region,

7.   if @xmath is an acausal continuous hypersurface then @xmath ,
    @xmath and @xmath are open and causally convex.

Proof. The first two items follow directly from the definitions and the
fact that a piecewise smooth, causal curve which is time-like on some
neighbourhood can be deformed to a smooth time-like curve (see e.g. [ 88
] p.191 or [ 62 ] ). The fourth follows from @xmath , which is contained
in @xmath if and only if @xmath is causally convex. The fifth item
follows from the first two and theorem 14.38 and lemma 14.6 in [ 62 ] .

To prove the third item, assume that @xmath is a causal curve between
points in @xmath and @xmath lies on @xmath . By perturbing one of the
endpoints of @xmath in @xmath we may ensure that the curve is time-like
(see [ 88 , 62 ] loc. cit.). Then we may perturb @xmath on @xmath so
that @xmath and @xmath is still causal. This gives a contradiction,
because there then exists a causal curve from @xmath through @xmath to
either @xmath or @xmath .

For the sixth statement we note that @xmath is globally hyperbolic (see
[ 42 ] section 6.6), we let @xmath be a smooth Cauchy surface for @xmath
(see [ 9 ] ) and note that @xmath is non-empty, connected and @xmath .
The causal convexity of @xmath implies that @xmath is acausal, which
reduces this case to statement seven. The first part of statement seven
is just lemma 14.43 and theorem 14.38 in [ 62 ] . The rest of statement
seven follows from statement one and two together with the openness of
@xmath . @xmath

As a matter of notation we define for any subset @xmath the set @xmath
by @xmath and

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Strictly speaking we should index these sets with the spacetime or
manifold on which they are defined. However, we will avoid this
cumbersome notation, because it will always be clear from the context
what spacetime or manifold is meant. In particular, when @xmath , the
expressions @xmath and @xmath are meant to imply that @xmath is the zero
section of @xmath .

### 2.3 Spacetimes with a spin structure

In order to describe the Dirac field we need more geometric structure
than for the scalar field. This section gives the relevant definitions
to formulate a locally covariant quantum field theory in this setting.
More details on the @xmath -group can be found in section 4.1.2 .

Given a globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath , the frame bundle @xmath ,
which consists of all oriented, time-oriented frames of the tangent
bundle @xmath , is a principal @xmath -bundle over @xmath , where the
proper orthochronous Lorentz group @xmath acts from the right. In other
words, given @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath and
@xmath future pointing, the action of @xmath is defined by @xmath where
@xmath . The universal covering group of @xmath is a double covering,
namely @xmath , the identity connected component of the Spin group.

###### Definition 2.3.1

A spin structure on @xmath is a pair @xmath , where @xmath is a
principal @xmath -bundle over @xmath , the spin frame bundle , which
carries a right action @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath is a base-point
preserving bundle homomorphism such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the canonical universal covering map of proposition
4.1.12 .

A globally hyperbolic spin spacetime @xmath is a globally hyperbolic
spacetime @xmath which is endowed with the spin structure @xmath .

The category @xmath has as its objects globally hyperbolic spin
spacetimes @xmath and its morphisms @xmath are all pairs of maps @xmath
such that

1.  @xmath is a morphism in @xmath between @xmath and @xmath ,

2.  @xmath is smooth and satisfies @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath
    denotes the canonical extension of @xmath .

Again the product of morphisms is given by the composition of maps and
the identity map @xmath on a given object serves as a unit.

Every globally hyperbolic spacetime admits a spin structure, which need
not be unique [ 30 ] . Different spin structures on the same spacetime
define distinct spin spacetimes and are therefore to be regarded as
distinct systems. We will often drop the hat @xmath from our notation,
when it is clear from the context that we are dealing with a spin
spacetime rather than a spacetime.

To keep the framework unified it will be useful to have at our disposal
a forgetful functor @xmath , which maps the spin spacetime @xmath to the
spacetime @xmath . This functor is surjective, but not necessarily
injective. A functor @xmath to some category @xmath gives rise to a
functor @xmath defined by @xmath . Whenever @xmath is of this form we
can recover @xmath using the surjectivity of @xmath .

### 2.4 Locally covariant quantum field theory

We now come to the main set of definitions, which combine the notions
introduced above (cf. [ 16 , 33 ] ).

###### Definition 2.4.1

A locally covariant quantum field theory is a covariant functor @xmath ,
written as @xmath , @xmath .

A state space for a locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath is a
contravariant functor @xmath , such that for all objects @xmath we have
@xmath and for all morphisms @xmath we have @xmath . The set @xmath is
called the state space for @xmath .

When it is clear that @xmath is a canonical embedding @xmath , @xmath ,
of a cc-region @xmath in a globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath , i.e.
when @xmath as spin spacetimes, we will often simply write @xmath
instead of using @xmath . For a morphism @xmath which restricts to a
morphism @xmath we then have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

rather than @xmath , as one can see from a commutative diagram.

As a special case we may consider locally covariant quantum field
theories @xmath , which use @xmath -algebras only. This is a
generalisation of algebraic quantum field theory (see [ 16 , 40 ] ). We
will indicate it explicitly when we restrict attention to @xmath
-algebras only.

We now proceed to define and discuss several physically desirable
properties that a locally covariant quantum field theory and its state
space may have (cf. [ 16 ] , but note that our time-slice axiom is
stronger because it places a restriction on the state spaces as well as
the algebras; see also [ 33 ] ; the last property is original).

###### Definition 2.4.2

A locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath is called causal iff for
any two morphisms @xmath , @xmath , such that @xmath in @xmath we have
@xmath in @xmath .

A locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath with state space @xmath
satisfies the time-slice axiom iff for all morphisms @xmath such that
@xmath contains a Cauchy surface for @xmath we have @xmath and @xmath .

A locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath with state space @xmath
respects local physical equivalence iff for every morphism @xmath the
state spaces @xmath and @xmath have the same weak @xmath closures in
@xmath .

A locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath is called additive iff
@xmath , where the @xmath form a locally finite open covering of @xmath
and the right-hand side denotes the smallest algebra generated by the
algebras @xmath . Similarly, @xmath is called additive iff @xmath ,
where we take the completion on the right-hand side.

Given a locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath , a state space
@xmath for @xmath is called locally quasi-equivalent iff for all @xmath
every pair of states in @xmath is locally quasi-equivalent, i.e. iff for
every morphism @xmath such that @xmath is bounded and for every pair of
states @xmath the GNS-representations @xmath of @xmath restricted to
@xmath are quasi-equivalent (see the discussion and definition below).
The local von Neumann algebras @xmath are then @xmath -isomorphic for
all @xmath .

A locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath with a state space
functor @xmath is called nowhere classical iff for every morphism @xmath
and for every state @xmath the local von Neumann algebra @xmath is not
commutative.

Note that the condition that @xmath in @xmath is symmetric in @xmath ,
because @xmath is open and hence:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The causality condition formulates how the quantum physical system
interplays with the classical gravitational background field, whereas
the time-slice axiom expresses the existence of a causal dynamical law.
Classical theories can be described by commutative algebras, which
motivates the definition of nowhere-classicality (see also section 5.1
for comments on non-local correlations in nowhere-classical theories).
The condition of a locally quasi-equivalent state space is more
technical in nature and means that all states of a system can be
described in the same Hilbert space representation, as long as we only
consider operations in a small (i.e. bounded) cc-region of the
spacetime. More precisely:

###### Definition 2.4.3

The folium of a representation @xmath of a @xmath -algebra @xmath on a
Hilbert space @xmath is the set of all states @xmath on @xmath of the
form @xmath with some trace-class operator @xmath .

Two representations are called quasi-equivalent iff their folia are
equal.

The condition that @xmath contains a Cauchy surface for @xmath is
equivalent to @xmath , because a Cauchy surface @xmath maps to a Cauchy
surface @xmath for @xmath . On the algebraic level this yields:

###### Lemma 2.4.4

For a locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath with a state space
@xmath satisfying the time-slice axiom, an object @xmath and a cc-region
@xmath we have @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath contains a Cauchy surface
of @xmath we have @xmath and @xmath .

Proof. Note that both @xmath and @xmath are objects of @xmath (by lemma
2.2.2 ) and that a Cauchy surface @xmath for @xmath is also a Cauchy
surface for @xmath . (The causal convexity of @xmath in @xmath prevents
multiple intersections of @xmath by inextendible causal curves in @xmath
, cf. the comments below definition 2.2.1 .) The first statement then
reduces to the second. Leaving the canonical embedding implicit in the
notation, the result follows immediately from the time-slice axiom.
@xmath

### 2.5 Quantum fields

The functorial dependence of an algebra @xmath on a spacetime @xmath is
not specific enough for many purposes. Instead, we would like to have
certain elements in these algebras, (smeared) quantum fields, which
depend in a functorial way on the spacetime. Our formulation of such
quantum fields follows closely the treatment of [ 16 , 33 , 85 ] . For
simplicity we will first describe the case of the scalar field. Here the
sets of test-functions are simply @xmath in the test-function topology.
² ² 2 As a matter of convention we will always identify a distribution
density on a spacetime @xmath with a distribution, using the metric
volume element @xmath on @xmath (see [ 47 ] section 6.3). To remind the
reader of this fact we will write @xmath instead of @xmath .

###### Definition 2.5.1

The category @xmath has as objects all topological spaces and as
morphisms all continuous maps.

The functor @xmath maps each object @xmath to the linear space @xmath in
the test-function topology and each morphism @xmath to the push-forward
@xmath , extending functions by @xmath outside the image of @xmath .

A locally covariant scalar quantum field @xmath is a natural
transformation ³ ³ 3 A natural transformation can only exist between two
functors with the same target category, so strictly speaking @xmath
should be defined as a natural transformation between @xmath and @xmath
, where @xmath is the forgetful functor. between the functor @xmath and
a locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath , i.e. for each @xmath
in @xmath we have a continuous map @xmath such that @xmath for every
morphism @xmath in @xmath .

For Dirac fields we will need to use test-sections of a certain vector
bundle instead, namely the Dirac double spinor bundle @xmath , which
will be introduced in chapter 4 . All we need to know for now is that
there is a functorial dependence of these vector bundles on the spin
spacetime @xmath :

###### Definition 2.5.2

The category @xmath has as its objects the (finite dimensional) vector
bundles @xmath on every globally hyperbolic spin spacetime @xmath and as
its morphisms the vector bundle homomorphisms @xmath such that for some
morphism @xmath in @xmath we have @xmath , where @xmath are the
projections of @xmath on @xmath . As usual the products of morphisms are
given by composition of maps and the identity maps serve as units.

Given a functor @xmath , written as @xmath and @xmath , the functor
@xmath maps each object @xmath to the linear space @xmath of compactly
supported smooth sections of @xmath in the test-section topology and
each morphism @xmath to the push-forward @xmath , extending sections by
@xmath outside the image of @xmath .

In the first part of the definition above we specifically use spin
spacetimes rather than spacetimes, because the vector bundles we have in
mind, the Dirac double spinor bundles, are constructed from the spin
structure. Of course a similar definition can equally well be made on
the category of spacetimes @xmath . The definition of a locally
covariant quantum field is now straightforward:

###### Definition 2.5.3

A locally covariant quantum field @xmath with test-section functor
@xmath is a natural transformation between the functor @xmath and a
locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath , i.e. for each @xmath in
@xmath we have a continuous map @xmath such that @xmath for every
morphism @xmath in @xmath , where @xmath under @xmath .

Notice that we may think of @xmath as a generalised distributional
density, which is a section of @xmath , the vector bundle dual to @xmath
, and which takes values in @xmath . ( @xmath need not be a distribution
in the usual sense of the word, because we do not require it to be
linear.)

## Chapter 3 The real free scalar field

  If thou tellest thy tale in this manner, cried Don Quixote, repeating
  every circumstance twice over; it will not be finished these two days:
  proceed therefore, connectedly, and rehearse it, like a man of
  understanding: otherwise thou hadst better hold thy tongue.

Miguel de Cervantes, Don Quixote, Vol. 1 Book 3 Ch. 6

As a first example of a locally covariant quantum field theory we will
now describe the real free scalar field in two different ways. First we
give the distributional description using the Borchers-Uhlmann algebra
in section 3.1 , followed by the @xmath -algebraic description using the
CCR-algebra (or Weyl-algebra) in section 3.2 . Because the free scalar
field is a well-known test ground for quantum field theory in curved
spacetime it is instructive to describe it in some detail before we
treat the more complex case of the free Dirac field. We also give an
elegant proof in proposition 3.1.13 of the fact that the commutation
relations together with the Hadamard condition on the two-point
distribution of a (not necessarily quasi-free) state completely fix the
singularity structure of all @xmath -point distributions. This result
appears to be hitherto unknown in this generality.

### 3.1 Distributional approach to the free scalar field

In this section we will make use of a topological @xmath -algebra that
is not a @xmath -algebra, namely the Borchers-Uhlmann algebra. This
algebra naturally gives rise to unbounded field operators. After
describing a general real scalar field and the microlocal spectrum
condition we will specialise to the real free scalar field and introduce
the important class of Hadamard states. We refer to appendix A for
results on wave front sets. Our presentation in this section is largely
based on [ 29 , 16 , 66 , 84 ] .

#### 3.1.1 The real scalar field

On a spacetime @xmath in @xmath we make the following definition:

###### Definition 3.1.1

The Borchers-Uhlmann algebra is the direct sum

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(in the algebraic sense, i.e. only a finite number of terms in the sum
are non-zero), equipped with:

1.   the product @xmath , extended linearly,

2.   the @xmath -operation @xmath , extended anti-linearly,

3.   a topology such that @xmath converges to @xmath if and only if for
    all @xmath we have @xmath in @xmath and for some @xmath we have
    @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath .

More precisely, as a topological space @xmath is the strict inductive
limit @xmath , where @xmath is an exhausting (and increasing) sequence
of compact subsets of @xmath and each @xmath is given the test-function
topology, see [ 75 ] theorem 2.6.4. ¹ ¹ 1 Therefore, @xmath is an
LF-space, which is by definition the strict inductive limit of an
increasing sequence of Fréchet spaces. Following our convention for
@xmath we will write @xmath instead of @xmath (see the footnote on page
2 ). It should be noted that the algebra @xmath restricts the field to
be Hermitean by property 2, but it does not contain any dynamical
information.

###### Lemma 3.1.2

The Borchers-Uhlmann algebra is a topological @xmath -algebra with unit
and a continuous linear functional @xmath consists of a sequence of
distributions @xmath on @xmath , which are called the @xmath -point
distributions.

Proof. The given topology makes @xmath a locally convex topological
vector space, @xmath is continuous and multiplication is separately
continuous, i.e. @xmath is a topological @xmath -algebra (see [ 76 ]
p.22). The unit @xmath is @xmath , i.e. @xmath . A continuous linear
functional on @xmath gives rise to continuous linear functionals @xmath
on all @xmath and vice versa and therefore corresponds to a sequence of
distributions @xmath . @xmath

The Borchers-Uhlmann algebra is not a @xmath -algebra and it cannot be
represented faithfully as an algebra of bounded operators. Nevertheless,
most of the ideas of locally covariant quantum field theory that apply
to @xmath -algebras also apply in the case of more general topological
@xmath -algebras. The following proposition shows that the map @xmath
can be made into a covariant functor from @xmath into @xmath .

###### Proposition 3.1.3

If @xmath is a morphism in @xmath then there is a unique injective
@xmath -algebra homomorphism @xmath determined by @xmath on @xmath ,
where we extend @xmath by @xmath outside @xmath .

Proof. Using finite sums of finite tensor products of elements in @xmath
the given relation determines @xmath uniquely on @xmath , where we take
the algebraic direct sum and tensor product. The map so defined is an
injective @xmath -algebra homomorphism of a dense subalgebra of @xmath
into @xmath and extends by continuity in a unique way to a @xmath
-algebra homomorphism @xmath of @xmath into @xmath . To prove that
@xmath is injective we note that @xmath . @xmath

###### Definition 3.1.4

The Borchers-Uhlmann functor @xmath assigns to each globally hyperbolic
spacetime @xmath the Borchers-Uhlmann algebra @xmath and to each
morphism @xmath the morphism @xmath of proposition 3.1.3 .

###### Proposition 3.1.5

The Borchers-Uhlmann functor @xmath defines an additive locally
covariant quantum field theory.

Proof. If @xmath and @xmath is a partition of unity on @xmath such that
@xmath , then every @xmath can be written as @xmath with @xmath . The
inclusion @xmath now follows by decomposing every test-function in an
element @xmath in this way and the converse inclusion is trivial. @xmath

A locally covariant quantum field, in the sense of definition 2.5.1 , is
given in the current setting by ² ² 2 In analogy to theorem A.1.3 in
appendix A we can define the wave front set of the distribution @xmath
as @xmath , where the union is taken over all continuous linear
functionals @xmath on @xmath . This makes perfect sense, provided we can
generalise lemma A.1.1 to the case of @xmath -valued distributions. If
@xmath is any continuous linear functional on @xmath , then @xmath and
hence @xmath by theorem 8.1.4 in [ 47 ] .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This takes care of the operators of the theory and the fields. Now let
us turn our attention to the states. The following class of states is
often of special interest, because they arise from the canonical
quantisation of a linear field equation.

###### Definition 3.1.6

A state @xmath on @xmath is called quasi-free iff @xmath for @xmath odd
and for @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the set of permutations of @xmath such that

1.  @xmath ,

2.  @xmath , @xmath .

A quasi-free state is completely determined by its two-point
distribution (note that @xmath ) and definition 3.1.6 tells us that the
higher @xmath -point distributions can be obtained using the
combinatorics that is familiar from flat spacetime quantum field theory.
Indeed, for a @xmath -point distribution we sum over all pairings of the
indices, where we preserve the left-right ordering within each pair (we
put the smaller index of each pair on the left by the second condition
on @xmath ) and we only count every pairing once by the first condition
on @xmath .

If @xmath we may define smeared field operators by ³ ³ 3 For these
representation specific entities we drop the subscript @xmath to ease
the notation. This causes no confusion, because it is clear that @xmath
itself is defined on a specific spacetime.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

These are unbounded operators on @xmath with a common dense and
invariant domain @xmath (see theorem 2.1.4 ). We also define @xmath
-valued @xmath -point distributions by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

For all @xmath and all @xmath we have the identity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

As our state space for @xmath we can select the class of states that
satisfy the microlocal spectrum condition of [ 15 ] . To formulate this
condition we need to introduce some new terminology. Let @xmath be the
set of directed graphs ⁴ ⁴ 4 A directed graph is a graph in which each
edge @xmath is given a direction, so that it goes from a source vertex
to a target vertex. with @xmath vertices in which every edge that
appears also appears in the opposite direction. An immersion of such a
graph into @xmath assigns to every vertex @xmath a point @xmath and to
every edge @xmath from @xmath to @xmath a piecewise smooth curve @xmath
from @xmath to @xmath and a causal covector field @xmath on @xmath which
is covariantly constant ( @xmath ) along the curve in such a way that

1.  if @xmath is the edge @xmath in the opposite direction, then @xmath
    is the curve @xmath in the opposite direction and @xmath ,

2.  if @xmath is a curve from @xmath to @xmath with @xmath then @xmath
    is future directed.

Intuitively one may think of the vectors @xmath as “singularities”,
“propagating” along the curves @xmath between points @xmath and @xmath .
We now define a set of allowed singularities as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.4)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath denotes the source of the edge @xmath . ⁵ ⁵ 5 Note that we
have ordered the indices of @xmath in the opposite way to [ 15 ] ,
because we want the singularities to originate on the right-hand side in
the @xmath -point distributions and to travel to the left as time
progresses, cf. definition 3.1.7 below.

###### Definition 3.1.7

A state @xmath on @xmath is said to satisfy the microlocal spectrum
condition ( @xmath SC) if and only if for all @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The microlocal spectrum condition restricts the set of singularities of
the @xmath -point distributions to the sets @xmath and the usefulness of
this condition follows from the special properties of the @xmath :

###### Proposition 3.1.8

The sets @xmath have the following properties:

1.   each @xmath is a convex cone,

2.  @xmath ,

3.  @xmath , where @xmath is a permutation acting on the indices such
    that @xmath ; @xmath ; …; @xmath .

Proof. We refer to [ 15 ] lemma 4.2 for a proof of the first property.
The second property follows from the first and the third property
follows immediately from the definitions, using the unions of disjoint
graphs (cf. [ 15 ] proposition 4.3). @xmath

It follows from the last two items that a quasi-free state satisfies
@xmath SC if and only if @xmath . It also seems that the first two items
are sufficient to guarantee that products of @xmath -point distributions
and Wick powers can be defined [ 15 , 47 ] , even without the commutator
property that we will introduce in the next section. ⁶ ⁶ 6 Note that the
difference of two two-point distributions with the @xmath SC does not
have to be smooth unless we also impose the commutator property [ 66 ] .
[ 15 ] assumes the commutator property, but it does not appear to be
necessary for their proofs. This forms the starting point of the
perturbative treatment of interacting quantum field theories on curved
spacetimes [ 14 ] .

###### Proposition 3.1.9

One can define a state space functor @xmath for the locally covariant
quantum field theory @xmath that assigns to each globally hyperbolic
spacetime @xmath the set @xmath of states on @xmath that satisfy the
@xmath SC.

Proof. We first note that the set of states is convex by theorem A.1.5 .
To show that it is closed under operations from @xmath we note that for
fixed @xmath and @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

using [ 47 ] theorem 8.2.12. The same holds for linear combinations of
such terms, so if @xmath then the state @xmath satisfies the @xmath SC
if @xmath does.

The action of @xmath on morphisms is defined implicitly by the statement
that @xmath is a state space for @xmath . That this action is
well-defined follows from the fact that wave front sets transform as a
subset of the cotangent bundle (see appendix A ) and the cones @xmath
are subsets of the cotangent bundle that are constructed from the metric
and hence covariant under isometric diffeomorphisms. @xmath

The locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath with state space
@xmath is not causal and does not satisfy the time-slice axiom. These
shortcomings are due to the fact that we have not put any constraints on
the dynamics or causality. This will be our next task.

#### 3.1.2 The real free scalar field

In order to arrive at the usual description of the real free scalar
field we will put in some physically motivated restrictions. These
restrictions can be put either on the state or on the algebra and we
will describe both approaches in that order.

Classically, two operations performed in space-like separated regions
cannot influence each other. It seems reasonable to postulate that this
must remain true for the expectation values of quantum physical
operators. We therefore say that a state @xmath is causal iff (cf.
definition 2.4.2 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whenever @xmath . Here @xmath denotes anti-symmetrisation.

A state @xmath on @xmath is a state of the free field iff the dynamics
is described by the Klein-Gordon equation. The classical form of the
Klein-Gordon equation is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Klein-Gordon operator, @xmath is the d’Alembertian,
@xmath is the mass of the field @xmath , @xmath is the Ricci scalar of
@xmath and @xmath is a coupling parameter. Here @xmath and @xmath are
assumed to be independent of @xmath . A state @xmath on @xmath is a
state for the free field iff for all @xmath and all @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As the Klein-Gordon operator @xmath is formally self-adjoint (or more
precisely: the dual of @xmath is an extension of @xmath ) these
equations can also be written as @xmath , where the upper index
indicates that @xmath acts on the @xmath ’th variable of the
distribution @xmath .

Because we assume that the spacetime @xmath is globally hyperbolic there
are unique advanced @xmath and retarded @xmath fundamental solutions
@xmath such that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath (see [ 6 ]
theorem 3.3.1). Setting @xmath we see that @xmath is a solution of the
Klein-Gordon equation whose intersection with each Cauchy surface of
@xmath is compact. Conversely, every solution which has compact
intersection with all Cauchy surfaces can be obtained in this way by [
29 ] lemma A.3.

A stronger requirement than causality is the commutator property. A
state @xmath is said to have the commutator property if and only if

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we view @xmath as the bidistribution @xmath . This condition
arises naturally from the canonical quantisation of the classical
Klein-Gordon field.

For quasi-free states the causality condition, Klein-Gordon equation and
commutator property reduce to the corresponding conditions on the
two-point distribution:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Instead of putting the causality, reality, dynamics and commutator
property in the state we can incorporate this information directly in
the algebra as follows. Let @xmath be the closed @xmath -ideal generated
by all elements of the form @xmath or @xmath . The quotient space @xmath
is another locally convex topological vector space ( [ 75 ] p.54) and
the @xmath -operation, respectively multiplication, on @xmath descends
to a continuous, respectively separately continuous, map on @xmath . In
other words, @xmath is another topological @xmath -algebra. The easiest
way to show that the algebra @xmath is not trivial is to show that it
has a non-trivial (faithful) representation.

###### Proposition 3.1.10

If @xmath is a morphism in @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , is the quotient
map, then @xmath descends to an injective @xmath -algebra homomorphism
@xmath on @xmath .

Proof. Let @xmath be the closed @xmath -ideal generated by elements of
the form @xmath or @xmath , where @xmath respectively @xmath are the
Klein-Gordon operator and its advanced-minus-retarded fundamental
solution on @xmath . For @xmath set @xmath and @xmath . Because of the
covariance of the Klein-Gordon operator, @xmath , we see that @xmath .
Similarly we can use the uniqueness of the advanced and retarded
fundamental solutions and equation 2.1 to conclude that @xmath and
therefore @xmath , because on the right-hand side we integrate over a
compact region in @xmath . This then yields @xmath . By continuity we
conclude that @xmath , which means that @xmath descends to a
well-defined @xmath -algebra homomorphism @xmath on @xmath which is
injective. @xmath

###### Definition 3.1.11

The free field Borchers-Uhlmann functor @xmath assigns to each globally
hyperbolic spacetime @xmath the algebra @xmath and to each morphism
@xmath the morphism @xmath of proposition 3.1.10 .

If @xmath denotes the quotient map, then @xmath is the unit for @xmath
and a state @xmath on @xmath gives rise to a state @xmath on @xmath
because @xmath is continuous. By construction, @xmath is a causal state
for the free field with the commutator property and the @xmath -point
distributions of @xmath and @xmath are related by @xmath . ⁷ ⁷ 7
Strictly speaking @xmath is not a distribution, because it is not
defined on the space of test-functions, but rather on a quotient of that
space. The GNS-quadruples of @xmath and @xmath satisfy @xmath by the
uniqueness part of theorem 2.1.4 .

A locally covariant quantum field @xmath can be defined as @xmath . It
follows that @xmath in the weak sense, i.e. @xmath . Moreover,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in @xmath , so the field @xmath is an @xmath -valued distribution that
satisfies the Klein-Gordon equation and has the commutator property. ⁸ ⁸
8 Again we can define the wave front set of @xmath in analogy to theorem
A.1.3 as @xmath , where the union is taken over all continuous linear
functionals @xmath on @xmath . If @xmath is any continuous linear
functional on @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath , so @xmath by theorem
A.1.5 (recall the definition of @xmath on page 2.2 ).

A class of states that is of special importance for the free scalar
field in curved spacetime is the class of Hadamard states. The original
definition of the Hadamard condition in curved spacetimes of Kay and
Wald [ 54 ] is equivalent to the following definition, due to a theorem
of Radzikowski [ 66 ] . (Recall the definition of @xmath on page 2.2 .)

###### Definition 3.1.12

A (not necessarily quasi-free) state @xmath on @xmath is called a
Hadamard state iff

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath if and only if @xmath or there is an affinely parameterised
light-like geodesic between @xmath and @xmath to which @xmath are
cotangent (and hence @xmath and @xmath are parallel transports of each
other along the geodesic).

Note that the principal symbol of @xmath is the metric @xmath , so by
theorem A.1.5 the wave front set can only contain null-covectors.
Moreover, the propagation of singularities theorem of Duistermaat and
Hörmander ( [ 32 ] theorem 6.1.1, also quoted in [ 66 ] ) implies that
these singularities propagate under the Hamiltonian flow on @xmath
determined by the principal symbol. It turns out that this means that
null covectors propagate along the null geodesics to which they are
cotangent, which gives rise to the equivalence relation @xmath .

The two-point distributions of two Hadamard states on @xmath differ by a
smooth function, so the expectation value of the stress-energy-momentum
tensor of the free scalar field can be renormalised (see [ 66 ] , [ 90 ]
section 4.6). A free field state satisfying the @xmath SC is Hadamard [
66 ] . Conversely, it is known (and easy to see) that a quasi-free
Hadamard state satisfies the @xmath SC [ 15 ] . In fact, we will now
prove the new result that this is even true for general (not necessarily
quasi-free) Hadamard states:

###### Proposition 3.1.13

Let @xmath be a state on @xmath which is Hadamard on a neighbourhood
@xmath of a Cauchy surface in @xmath . Then @xmath satisfies the @xmath
SC on @xmath .

Proof. Suppose that @xmath for @xmath . (Note that @xmath is always
smooth.) For each index @xmath we have @xmath , because of the equation
of motion (see theorem A.1.5 ). Moreover, if @xmath then we can apply
theorem A.1.6 first to @xmath (see equation ( 3.3 )) to find @xmath and
then again to @xmath to obtain @xmath . We may then apply the
propagation of singularities theorem ( [ 32 ] theorem 6.1.1, [ 66 ] ) to
find @xmath such that @xmath (see definition 3.1.12 ) and @xmath . If
@xmath is Hadamard on @xmath we conclude that @xmath and hence @xmath .
Similarly, if @xmath then @xmath . In particular, for @xmath we find
that @xmath , so @xmath and @xmath is smooth.

We now argue by contradiction. Let @xmath be the smallest number for
which we can find a point @xmath in @xmath . There must then be an index
@xmath such that @xmath . Assume first that @xmath . Now we interchange
the points @xmath and @xmath in @xmath to find:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the hats denote that these points are omitted. Using theorem A.1.5
we see that @xmath must be in the wave front set of one of the terms on
the right-hand side of equation ( 3.1.2 ). Suppose that it is in the
wave front set of the second term. This wave front set can be estimated
by ( [ 47 ] theorem 8.2.9)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , then the assumption on @xmath implies @xmath by proposition
A.1.7 . By the minimality of @xmath and proposition 3.1.8 we find @xmath
, which is a contradiction. Hence, @xmath must be in the wave front set
of the first term of equation ( 3.1.2 ) and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proceeding in this way we can permute the point @xmath all the way to
the right. Then we have @xmath by assumption and @xmath by the first
paragraph of the proof. Similarly, if we had started with @xmath we
could have permuted this point to the left to conclude that @xmath . In
both cases we get a contradiction, because @xmath , but @xmath . This
completes the proof. @xmath

The argument in the proof of proposition 3.1.13 can also be used to show
that the immersed graphs that occur in @xmath are disjoint unions of
pieces of light-like geodesics, to which the cotangent vectors are
parallel or anti-parallel.

For completeness we also prove a result concerning truncated @xmath
-point distributions, although we will not use it in this thesis. For
@xmath we let @xmath denote the set of all partitions of the set @xmath
into pairwise disjoint ordered sets and for each set @xmath in the
partition @xmath we denote its elements by @xmath where @xmath is the
number of elements of @xmath . We then define the truncated @xmath
-point distributions @xmath implicitly through

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that this equation can be solved iteratively for the @xmath order
by order.

In their discussion of perturbative quantum field theory [ 45 ] impose
the Hadamard condition together with the condition that @xmath is smooth
for all @xmath and @xmath . The same condition has also been considered
by Kay in [ 52 ] . Our result states that the Hadamard condition already
implies this condition on the truncated @xmath -point distributions, so
this extra condition is superfluous.

###### Proposition 3.1.14

If @xmath is a (not necessarily quasi-free) Hadamard state on @xmath ,
then @xmath is smooth for all @xmath and @xmath .

Proof. First note that @xmath and @xmath by equation ( 3.8 ). Now,
@xmath is smooth by the proof of proposition 3.1.13 and hence @xmath .
We prove the result for @xmath by induction.

Suppose that @xmath and let @xmath be an index such that @xmath .
Expanding equation ( 3.8 ) and using the induction hypothesis it follows
that @xmath is in the wave-front set of

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

because it cannot be in the wave front set of any of the other terms.
Notice that @xmath and @xmath , because the @xmath satisfy the @xmath SC
by proposition 3.1.13 .

Now we note what happens when we use the commutation relations for the
indices @xmath and @xmath in expression ( 3.1.2 ). The only changes
occur in the first term and in the term @xmath under the second
summation symbol, namely:

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath               
  -- -------- -------- -- --

Substituting this in expression ( 3.1.2 ) we see that @xmath is in the
wave front set of

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

It follows that @xmath is in the wave front set of expression ( 3.1.2 )
with @xmath substituted for @xmath . Hence it is also in the wave front
set of @xmath . Hence, if @xmath we can swap the points @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath . Now move @xmath to the @xmath th position to see that
@xmath . Then move @xmath to the first position to find that @xmath .
This implies @xmath , so there can be no non-zero vector @xmath . This
proves that the wave front set of @xmath is empty and hence @xmath is
smooth for @xmath . @xmath

###### Definition 3.1.15

The state space functor @xmath for the locally covariant quantum field
theory @xmath assigns to every globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath the
set of Hadamard states @xmath on @xmath .

For each globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath the set @xmath is the
subset of states in @xmath characterised by the extra conditions that
they solve the Klein-Gordon equation and have the commutator property.
This class of states is convex and closed under operations from @xmath ,
because these extra conditions are invariant under convex linear
combinations and under operations from @xmath . This last point uses
proposition 3.1.9 and the fact that the Hadamard condition implies the
@xmath SC, proposition 3.1.13 . The action of @xmath on morphisms is
implicitly defined by the statement that @xmath is a state space functor
for @xmath and this action is well-defined, because both wave front sets
and the cones @xmath behave covariantly under isometric diffeomorphisms
of the spacetime (see the proof of proposition 3.1.9 ).

The following lemma contains the core of the proof of the time-slice
axiom for the free scalar field and is adapted from [ 29 ] .

###### Lemma 3.1.16

Let @xmath be a globally hyperbolic spacetime, @xmath a neighbourhood of
a Cauchy surface and @xmath such that @xmath on @xmath and @xmath on
@xmath . For every @xmath we have @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath .

Proof. Clearly @xmath and @xmath on a neighbourhood of @xmath , so that
@xmath . (This uses the results of [ 8 ] and corollary A.5.4 of [ 6 ] .)
We have @xmath , which is compactly supported in @xmath and @xmath .
@xmath

###### Proposition 3.1.17

The locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath with the state space
@xmath is causal, additive and satisfies the time-slice axiom.

Proof. Because @xmath whenever @xmath it is immediately verified that
the free field Borchers-Uhlmann functor defines a causal locally
covariant quantum field theory. Additivity follows from proposition
3.1.5 by choosing a representative in @xmath for each element of @xmath
. To prove the time-slice axiom we suppose that @xmath is a morphism
such that @xmath contains a Cauchy surface @xmath . For any @xmath we
use lemma 3.1.16 to find @xmath such that @xmath for some @xmath .
Therefore, @xmath . Because the elements @xmath generate @xmath we
conclude that @xmath is an isomorphism. We already noted that @xmath
maps a state satisfying the @xmath SC on @xmath to a state satisfying
the @xmath SC on @xmath (see proposition 3.1.9 ). Conversely, every such
state on @xmath can be obtained in this way as follows. First such a
state gives rise to a state on @xmath which satisfies the @xmath SC.
This state in turn determines a state on @xmath with the @xmath SC by
proposition 3.1.13 . @xmath

### 3.2 A @xmath-algebraic description of the real free scalar field

We now describe the real free scalar field as a locally covariant
quantum field theory using @xmath -algebras, which is often convenient
because @xmath -algebras can be represented as algebras of bounded
operators [ 49 ] (in particular the GNS-representation yields an algebra
of bounded operators). We will follow the usual practice and use the
CCR-algebra or Weyl-algebra for this purpose, following [ 29 , 90 , 54 ,
13 , 16 , 84 ] . An alternative would be to use the resolvent algebra
instead [ 18 ] .

Given a globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath we choose a smooth Cauchy
surface @xmath and consider the linear space @xmath , where @xmath is
the space of real-valued test-functions on @xmath . An element @xmath in
@xmath specifies a unique solution @xmath to the Klein-Gordon equation
on @xmath with initial data @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is the
future pointing normal vector field on @xmath . In this way @xmath can
be identified with a linear space of classical solutions to the
Klein-Gordon equation. We endow @xmath with the non-degenerate
symplectic structure

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we integrate with respect to the volume element associated to the
metric on @xmath that is induced by the metric @xmath of @xmath . Before
we quantise the classical system that is described by the symplectic
space @xmath we show that it is independent of the choice of Cauchy
surface (see [ 29 , 84 ] ).

###### Proposition 3.2.1

Define the symplectic space @xmath , where @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is isomorphic as a symplectic space to @xmath for every
smooth Cauchy surface @xmath .

Proof. Note that each element @xmath determines a unique solution @xmath
of the Klein-Gordon equation which has compact intersection with each
Cauchy surface of @xmath , so we can define a linear map @xmath by
@xmath . This map is surjective, because every smooth solution of the
Klein-Gordon equation which has a compact intersection with every Cauchy
surface can be obtained in this way by [ 29 ] lemma A.3. It remains to
check that @xmath . Leaving the metric volume elements on @xmath and
@xmath implicit we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we used @xmath , @xmath and a partial integration (see e.g. [ 88 ]
(B.2.26), but note the different sign convention; in this case the sign
can easily be checked by studying the example of Minkowski spacetime).
@xmath

The symplectic space @xmath gives a covariant and Cauchy-surface
independent description of the classical Klein-Gordon field. Also note
that @xmath is non-degenerate by proposition 3.2.1 , because @xmath is
non-degenerate. To the symplectic space @xmath we may associate the
CCR-algebra @xmath , i.e. the (simple) @xmath -algebra @xmath of
canonical commutation relations [ 59 , 13 ] . This algebra is generated
by the set of Weyl-operators @xmath , @xmath satisfying the
Weyl-relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proposition 3.2.2

One can define a locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath which
maps each @xmath to @xmath and each morphism @xmath in @xmath to the
morphism @xmath determined by @xmath , where @xmath denotes the Weyl
operators that generate @xmath . This locally covariant quantum field
theory is causal and additive.

Proof. For the proof that @xmath is a causal locally covariant quantum
field theory we refer to [ 16 ] . Additivity follows from [ 13 ]
proposition 5.2.10. @xmath

Let us now explain the relation between the @xmath -algebra @xmath and
the Borchers-Uhlmann algebra @xmath . If @xmath is a quasi-free state on
@xmath and @xmath , then @xmath is a self-adjoint (unbounded) operator
and we can define the unitary operator @xmath (see [ 84 ] proposition
3.2 and [ 13 ] theorem 5.2.3 and 5.2.4). These unitary operators satisfy
the Weyl-relations ( 3.10 ) and therefore generate a @xmath -algebra
that is isomorphic to @xmath , [ 13 ] .

In order to go in the opposite direction, i.e. to obtain the
Borchers-Uhlmann algebra from the Weyl-algebra, we need to restrict our
attention to a special class of states on @xmath :

###### Definition 3.2.3

We call a state @xmath on @xmath regular if and only if for every @xmath
the unitary group @xmath is strongly continuous with self-adjoint
(unbounded) generator @xmath .

A regular state @xmath on @xmath is called @xmath - regular if and only
if the maps

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are distributions, after extending them by linearity to @xmath -valued
test-functions.

A @xmath -regular state @xmath on @xmath also defines a continuous state
on @xmath via the @xmath -point distributions (see [ 13 ] or [ 35 ]
section A.5). The notation @xmath coincides with that of equation ( 3.1
). This is justified, because the operators @xmath are linear in their
argument and they generate an algebra that is isomorphic to @xmath (see
[ 13 ] lemma 5.2.12). We have for example

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

on a dense domain of @xmath , i.e. we recover equation ( 3.6 ). To make
the correspondence with section 3.1 precise we should extend the real
scalar field @xmath of this section by linearity to complex-valued
test-functions.

###### Definition 3.2.4

A (not necessarily quasi-free) state @xmath on @xmath is called Hadamard
iff @xmath is @xmath -regular and defines a Hadamard state on @xmath .

The state space functor @xmath for the locally covariant quantum field
theory @xmath assigns to each globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath the
set of states on @xmath which are locally quasi-equivalent to a
quasi-free Hadamard state.

To define the state space functor we used the fact that a quasi-free
Hadamard state on @xmath restricts to a quasi-free Hadamard state on any
given sub-spacetime and the same is then true for any state locally
quasi-equivalent to a quasi-free Hadamard state. In our choice of state
space functor we have followed [ 16 ] , who also prove some of the
following properties in their theorem 3.4:

###### Proposition 3.2.5

The locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath with state space
@xmath is causal, additive, satisfies the time-slice axiom, respects
local physical equivalence, is locally quasi-equivalent and nowhere
classical.

Proof. We already noted causality and additivity in proposition 3.2.2 .
The condition on @xmath needed for the time-slice axiom follows from
proposition 3.2.1 . For the condition on @xmath we first note that a
state @xmath which is Hadamard on a neighbourhood @xmath of a Cauchy
surface @xmath is Hadamard everywhere by proposition 3.1.13 and if
@xmath is quasi-free on @xmath it is quasi-free everywhere by lemma
3.1.16 . Now let @xmath be any bounded cc-region and note that @xmath
has a compact intersection with @xmath . This means we can find a
bounded cc-region @xmath such that @xmath . If the state @xmath is
locally quasi-equivalent to @xmath on @xmath , then the map @xmath for
all @xmath is well-defined and can be extended to a @xmath -isomorphism
@xmath of the local von Neumann algebras @xmath and @xmath (see [ 3 ]
pp.212-213). It follows that @xmath restricts to a @xmath -isomorphism
of the von Neumann algebras @xmath and @xmath , which proves that the
restrictions of @xmath and @xmath to @xmath are quasi-equivalent ( [ 3 ]
loc. cit.). We can therefore conclude that a state which is locally
quasi-equivalent to a quasi-free Hadamard state on @xmath remains
locally quasi-equivalent to a quasi-free Hadamard state. Local physical
equivalence is proved in proposition 4.3 of [ 33 ] . Local
quasi-equivalence follows from [ 84 ] and the theory is nowhere
classical because of the Weyl-relations ( 3.10 ) and the fact that the
symplectic structure @xmath is not identically @xmath . @xmath

If we take @xmath in the norm topology, then @xmath is not a locally
covariant quantum field. Indeed, @xmath for all @xmath , [ 13 ]
proposition 5.2.4. However, in the strong operator topology on @xmath
for any Hadamard state @xmath , @xmath as @xmath in @xmath ( [ 13 ]
loc. cit.). Because the locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath is
additive and locally quasi-equivalent we could define the strong
topology unambiguously on a norm-dense subset of each @xmath , but we
will not pursue this approach further. It is worth noting, however, that
@xmath , as a locally covariant quantum field, is non-linear and does
not satisfy the same equation of motion as @xmath .

## Chapter 4 The free Dirac field

  One’s ideas must be as broad as Nature if they are to interpret
  Nature,

Arthur Conan Doyle, A study in scarlet, Ch. 5

After our treatment of the real free scalar field in chapter 3 we now
broaden our perspective a little and describe the free Dirac field as a
locally covariant quantum field along the same lines. In section 4.1 we
present a construction of the classical Dirac field in a
four-dimensional globally hyperbolic spacetime, describing the necessary
algebraic, group theoretic and geometric aspects in sufficient detail in
order to point out some pitfalls (such as the change of spacetime
signature, @xmath or @xmath ) and to correct a few typos that appear in
parts of the literature. Our treatment differs from the existing
literature by proving that the construction is essentially independent
of the chosen representation of the Dirac algebra. More precisely, we
will impose certain relations on Dirac spinors and cospinors, concerning
their adjoints, charge conjugation and the Dirac operator. Given these
relations, different choices of representation give rise to isomorphic
Dirac spinor bundles. This shows that the physics is determined entirely
by the relations we imposed and can be described in a coherent and
unified (representation-independent) way within the locally covariant
framework. It should be noted that [ 30 ] discusses a similar idea,
namely the independence of the algebras on the choice of representation
of the canonical anti-commutation relations. However, it does not seem
to consider different representations of the Dirac algebra or to
determine the theory by imposing relations between the adjoint map,
charge conjugation and the Dirac operator.

Next we will quantise the theory in section 4.2 , noting that the
distributional and @xmath -algebraic description in this case coincide.
In that section we also describe the class of Hadamard states and show
that the Hadamard condition implies the @xmath SC, exactly as for the
real free scalar field. We discuss the causality and time-slice
properties of the free Dirac field and we indicate how Majorana spinors
can be quantised in the same, representation independent way.

In the final section of this chapter we consider the relative Cauchy
evolution of the free Dirac field. For this we use the time-slice axiom
to identify the algebra of a neighbourhood of a Cauchy surface @xmath in
a spin spacetime @xmath with the algebra of a neighbourhood of a Cauchy
surface @xmath to the future of @xmath . This identification is a @xmath
-isomorphism, which depends on the spin spacetime in between the two
regions. A variation of the metric and/or the spin structure in the
intermediate region can be encoded in such @xmath -isomorphisms, which
is the idea behind the relative Cauchy evolution. We will then consider
the functional derivative of the relative Cauchy evolution with respect
to the metric and prove a relation between this quantity and the
stress-energy-momentum tensor, where we describe the latter using a
point-splitting procedure. The relation we obtain is the direct analogue
of that which is already known to hold for the free scalar field [ 16 ]
.

For our presentation of the Dirac field in curved spacetime we largely
follow [ 30 , 26 , 34 ] ; for results on Clifford algebras we refer to [
57 ] chapter 1.

### 4.1 The classical free Dirac field

The description of the classical Dirac field is much more involved than
that of the scalar field. Whereas the classical scalar field is a
section of a trivial vector bundle over @xmath (either @xmath or @xmath
), the Dirac field is a section of a four-dimensional complex vector
bundle @xmath , the Dirac spinor bundle, that is intimately related to
the spacetime geometry. Before we define the Dirac spinor bundle and the
Dirac equation (subsection 4.1.3 and 4.1.4 respectively), we will give a
review of the Dirac algebra (subsection 4.1.1 ), i.e. the algebra of
gamma-matrices, and the Spin group (subsection 4.1.2 ). This is
necessary in order to prove the representation independence of the Dirac
spinor bundle in proposition 4.1.23 as well as to fix our notation and
to point out some confusions and typos in the literature.

#### 4.1.1 The Dirac algebra

To add clarity to our description of the Dirac algebra we will take the
more general point of view of Clifford algebras at the beginning of this
subsection. For a detailed treatment of Clifford algebras we refer to
chapter 1 of [ 57 ] (but note the difference in sign convention in the
Clifford multiplication).

Let @xmath be the finite dimensional real vector space of dimension
@xmath , equipped with a non-degenerate bilinear form @xmath which has
@xmath positive and @xmath negative eigenvalues. As a special case we
note that @xmath is Minkowski spacetime, where the bilinear form is
@xmath when expressed in the orthonormal basis @xmath , @xmath , with
@xmath .

###### Definition 4.1.1

The Clifford algebra @xmath of @xmath is defined as the real-linear
associative algebra generated by a unit element @xmath and an
orthonormal basis @xmath of @xmath subject to the Clifford relations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The even , respectively odd , subspace of @xmath is the real-linear
space spanned by monomials of even, respectively odd, degree in the
basis vectors @xmath and is denoted by @xmath , respectively @xmath .

The Dirac algebra @xmath is the Clifford algebra of Minkowski spacetime
@xmath and is characterised by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The definition of Clifford algebra is independent of the choice of basis
( [ 57 ] section 1.1). As a real-linear space @xmath has a basis
consisting of @xmath and all elements @xmath with @xmath , @xmath ,
which shows that the dimension of @xmath is @xmath . The even and odd
subspaces are well-defined, because the Clifford relations are purely
even. Note that the even subspace @xmath is a subalgebra. We will
identify @xmath as the subspace of monomials of degree 1 in the basis
@xmath . In particular we will identify @xmath .

For convenience we define the volume element @xmath of the Dirac algebra
by @xmath . The following lemma lends a geometric interpretation to
Clifford multiplication and will allow us to construct the Spin group as
a subset of the Dirac algebra in subsection 4.1.2 :

###### Lemma 4.1.2

We have @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Moreover, if @xmath has @xmath , with the norm taken in @xmath , then
@xmath and @xmath defines a reflection of @xmath in the hyperplane
perpendicular to @xmath .

Proof. This follows directly from the Clifford relations ( 4.2 ).
Indeed, we have @xmath for each @xmath , which implies equation ( 4.3 )
and @xmath . For the last claim we compute:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

###### Definition 4.1.3

A complex representation of the real algebra @xmath is a real-linear
representation @xmath for some @xmath .

In order to characterise the complex representations of the Dirac
algebra we first note the following. Using standard arguments with
Clifford algebras ( [ 57 ] theorem I.3.7, equation (I.1.7) and section
I.4) we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In fact, @xmath is generated by the generators @xmath of @xmath together
with a central element @xmath , which corresponds to the matrix @xmath ,
and hence:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

This implies that the center of @xmath is spanned by @xmath (over @xmath
). Moreover, it brings the well-known representation theory of @xmath
into the study of complex representations of @xmath . The following
fundamental theorem contains what is usually known as Pauli’s theorem [
63 ] . Our method of proof is close to the approach of [ 87 ] and is
shorter, but less elementary, than Pauli’s (loc. cit.)

###### Theorem 4.1.4 (Fundamental Theorem)

The Dirac algebra @xmath is simple and has a unique irreducible complex
representation, up to equivalence. This is the representation @xmath
determined by @xmath with the Dirac matrices @xmath given by ¹ ¹ 1 This
set of gamma-matrices is taken from [ 40 ] equation (I.3.45) and is the
same as the Weyl or chiral representation of [ 64 ] equation (3.25) up
to a sign in the @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are the Pauli matrices:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The equivalence with another irreducible complex representation @xmath
of @xmath is implemented by @xmath for all @xmath , where @xmath is
unique up to a non-zero complex factor.

Consequently, for every set of matrices @xmath satisfying equation ( 4.2
) there is an @xmath , unique up to a non-zero complex factor, such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. One can show that @xmath ( [ 57 ] section I.4), which is simple,
because it is a full matrix algebra. Indeed, suppose that @xmath is an
ideal which contains a non-zero element @xmath . Let @xmath denote the
matrix whose only non-zero entry is the @xmath -entry, which is @xmath .
If the @xmath -entry of @xmath is @xmath , then @xmath contains @xmath ,
@xmath being the @xmath identity matrix. As @xmath is invertible we have
@xmath and hence @xmath .

It can be checked by direct computation that the given matrices @xmath
satisfy the Clifford relations ( 4.2 ) and therefore extend to a
representation of @xmath in @xmath (see [ 57 ] , chapter I proposition
1.1). Any complex representation @xmath extends to a complex
representation @xmath of @xmath by ( 4.4 ), which is irreducible if
@xmath is irreducible. As @xmath has only one irreducible representation
up to equivalence ( [ 87 ] section 16, p.75), this determines @xmath up
to equivalence, as stated. If @xmath are two matrices which implement
the same equivalence, then @xmath commutes with @xmath and hence with
all of @xmath by ( 4.4 ). The center of @xmath is @xmath , so we
conclude @xmath and @xmath is non-zero because @xmath is invertible.

Note that @xmath extends to a complex representation of @xmath in @xmath
. The last statement therefore follows from the previous one. @xmath

For notational consistency we define @xmath . As special cases of
theorem 4.1.4 we now consider the adjoint and complex conjugate
matrices, respectively, that will be used in subsection 4.1.3 to define
the adjoint and charge conjugation maps on Dirac spinors, respectively.

###### Definition 4.1.5

We say that @xmath satisfy assumption ( 4.5 ) w.r.t. an irreducible
complex representation @xmath if and only if

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5)
     @xmath   @xmath               
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

for all future pointing time-like vectors @xmath . ² ² 2 On a general
representation space of complex dimension four one can define many
complex conjugations @xmath and Hermitean inner products @xmath . We
desire to obtain certain equalities involving adjoint and charge
conjugate spinors in section 4.1.3 , which requires the complex
conjugation and Hermitean inner product to be compatible: @xmath . In
this case we can use the standard complex conjugation and Hermitean
inner product on @xmath without loss of generality.

Here the condition @xmath means that @xmath is a positive matrix, i.e.
@xmath for all non-zero @xmath . Note that the sets of matrices @xmath
and @xmath , @xmath , both satisfy the Clifford relations ( 4.2 ), so by
theorem 4.1.4 the matrices @xmath and @xmath are uniquely determined up
to non-zero complex factors.

###### Theorem 4.1.6

For any irreducible complex representation @xmath of @xmath there are
@xmath which satisfy assumption ( 4.5 ) w.r.t. @xmath . The matrix
@xmath is uniquely determined up to a positive factor, @xmath up to a
phase factor and we have @xmath . Moreover, if @xmath , @xmath , satisfy
assumption ( 4.5 ) w.r.t. irreducible complex representations @xmath of
@xmath , then there is an @xmath , unique up to a sign, such that @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath on @xmath .

Proof. This result is essentially already contained in [ 63 ] . To prove
existence in the representation @xmath we take @xmath , @xmath and check
assumption ( 4.5 ) by direct computation, using the Clifford relations (
4.2 ). Note for example that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

because @xmath and @xmath . Also, @xmath . To prove existence in a
general irreducible complex representation @xmath we use theorem 4.1.4
to write @xmath for some @xmath . One can then verify by direct
computation that @xmath and @xmath satisfy assumption ( 4.5 ) and @xmath
. This proves the existence.

The matrices @xmath and @xmath are uniquely determined up to non-zero
complex factors @xmath and @xmath by theorem 4.1.4 . Because @xmath and
@xmath we see that @xmath and @xmath . Moreover, as @xmath for future
pointing time-like vectors we must have @xmath . Now, the relation
@xmath is invariant under changes of @xmath and @xmath and we saw that
for any @xmath there exist matrices @xmath satisfying assumption ( 4.5 )
and this equality. Therefore any @xmath satisfying assumption ( 4.5 )
w.r.t. @xmath necessarily satisfy this equality.

Given matrices @xmath for the representations @xmath , @xmath , we can
fix @xmath such that @xmath on @xmath by the fundamental theorem 4.1.4 .
Setting @xmath and @xmath we can verify by direct computation that
@xmath and @xmath satisfy assumption ( 4.5 ) w.r.t. @xmath , as in the
first paragraph of this proof. By the uniqueness this means that @xmath
and @xmath for some @xmath , @xmath . The desired matrix @xmath must be
@xmath for some @xmath , by the fundamental theorem. To get the right
intertwining relations for @xmath and @xmath we need @xmath and @xmath ,
which fixes @xmath up to a sign. @xmath

As another application of the fundamental theorem we can introduce a
determinant and trace on @xmath :

###### Definition 4.1.7

The determinant and trace functions on @xmath are defined by @xmath and
@xmath for all @xmath , where @xmath is any irreducible complex
representation of @xmath .

This is well-defined by the fundamental theorem. The following lemma
will be useful in what follows:

###### Lemma 4.1.8

@xmath and @xmath .

Proof. Using the cyclicity of the trace and the Clifford relations ( 4.2
) we find:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

@xmath

#### 4.1.2 The @xmath group

We now turn to the Spin group, which is the universal covering group of
the proper Lorentz group and which can be constructed in an elegant way
as a subset of the Dirac algebra.

###### Definition 4.1.9

The Pin and Spin groups of @xmath are defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We also define the Lorentz group @xmath , the proper Lorentz group
@xmath and the proper orthochronous Lorentz group @xmath , which is the
connected component of @xmath containing the identity.

The proper orthochronous Lorentz group preserves the time-orientation as
well as the orientation. Note that Pin is indeed a group and that @xmath
because of the following equivalent characterisation ³ ³ 3 The
definition of the Spin group in [ 20 ] corresponds to our group @xmath .
In [ 30 ] and one uses the term Spin group for the group

@xmath

Note that this group cannot give a double covering of the Lorentz group,
as claimed in [ 30 ] (but not in [ 34 ] ), because for any @xmath the
matrices @xmath are in @xmath too. Its usefulness is based on its simple
definition and the fact that @xmath . (cf. [ 20 ] p.66 and p.334):

###### Proposition 4.1.10

@xmath .

Proof. For @xmath the map @xmath on @xmath is a product of reflections
(up to a sign), by lemma 4.1.2 , so @xmath for all @xmath . Because
@xmath for all @xmath , which can be verified by direct computation, we
also have @xmath .

For the converse we suppose that @xmath has @xmath and @xmath for all
@xmath . Notice that the adjoint action of @xmath is a linear map on
@xmath which preserves the Lorentzian inner product, because it
preserves the right-hand side of the equality @xmath . Hence, the
adjoint action of @xmath determines a Lorentz transformation @xmath ,
which can be written as a finite product of reflections in non-null
hyperplanes ( [ 4 ] theorem 3.20). Let @xmath be unit normal vectors to
these hyperplanes, where @xmath for some @xmath . If @xmath is even we
let @xmath and otherwise we let @xmath . Notice that @xmath and that in
both cases we have @xmath , by lemma 4.1.2 . (Each reflection is given
by @xmath and we used @xmath to cancel the extra sign in case of an odd
number of reflections.) In particular, @xmath , so by theorem 4.1.4 we
have @xmath and hence @xmath for some non-zero @xmath . Because @xmath
we must have @xmath by equation ( 4.4 ). Moreover, we have @xmath as in
the first paragraph and @xmath by assumption, so @xmath . Finally,
@xmath too, so in any case @xmath . @xmath

It can be seen from proposition 4.1.10 that @xmath and @xmath are indeed
Lie groups, using the embedding of equation ( 4.4 ). We let @xmath
denote the connected component of @xmath which contains the identity. We
now prove the following lemma concerning the Lie algebras of these Lie
groups (cf. [ 57 ] proposition I.6.1):

###### Lemma 4.1.11

The Lie algebras @xmath are spanned by @xmath , @xmath .

Proof. We consider the curves @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath
all starting at @xmath and defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The derivatives of these curves at @xmath are the six linearly
independent elements @xmath with @xmath . Conversely, for every curve
@xmath with derivative @xmath at @xmath the condition @xmath for all
@xmath (see proposition 4.1.10 ) implies @xmath . If we express @xmath
as a real-linear combination of products of @xmath ’s then an elementary
computation shows that this condition implies @xmath for some @xmath .
The condition @xmath implies @xmath and hence @xmath . We conclude that
all three Lie algebras are equal and spanned by the given elements.
@xmath

After these preparations we can now turn to the relation between the Pin
group and the Lorentz group. We define a mapping @xmath by @xmath such
that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The matrix @xmath exists by proposition 4.1.10 , is unique and
determines a Lorentz transformation because the adjoint action of @xmath
leaves the right-hand side of @xmath invariant.

###### Proposition 4.1.12

The map @xmath defined in equation ( 4.6 ) is a surjective double
covering homomorphism of Lie groups, which restricts to a double
covering homomorphism @xmath . We have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the derivative @xmath at @xmath .

Proof. (Cf. [ 57 ] theorem I.2.10.) To check the homomorphism property
we note that @xmath by ( 4.6 ) and for @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and hence @xmath . Next we compute

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and hence also

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(Of course this also follows from the fact that @xmath is a group
homomorphism and that @xmath for @xmath .) To find @xmath we expand
@xmath for @xmath up to second order in @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we used the cyclicity of the trace. We can now immediately read
off @xmath . Notice that @xmath (real dimensions). We will show that the
map @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an inverse of @xmath . First note that @xmath for @xmath , so @xmath
is in the linear span of @xmath with @xmath and hence @xmath takes
values in @xmath by lemma 4.1.11 . Now we use lemma 4.1.8 to compute:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we used the symmetry properties of @xmath again in the last line.

Because @xmath is invertible @xmath is a local diffeomorphism (using the
inverse function theorem). The surjectivity follows as in the proof of
proposition 4.1.10 by expressing any Lorentz transformation @xmath as a
finite product of reflections in non-null hyperplanes [ 4 ] .

To find the kernel of @xmath we suppose that @xmath has @xmath . Then,
by definition, @xmath and @xmath by the fundamental theorem 4.1.4 . As
@xmath we see that @xmath must be real by equation ( 4.4 ). By
proposition 4.1.10 we have @xmath , so @xmath and @xmath . Note that
@xmath and @xmath are both in @xmath , so the kernel of @xmath is @xmath
. It now follows that @xmath restricts to a local diffeomorphism of
@xmath onto @xmath , which also is a double covering. @xmath

One can show that @xmath and its restrictions to @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath are the universal coverings of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively and all of these are double coverings (see [ 57 ] chapter I
theorem 2.10 and the remarks below).

In the next subsection we will need the following lemma, which
establishes a relationship between @xmath and matrices satisfying
assumption ( 4.5 ):

###### Lemma 4.1.13

Let @xmath be a complex irreducible representation of @xmath and let
@xmath satisfy assumption ( 4.5 ) w.r.t. @xmath . Then for all @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. For a unit vector @xmath we have @xmath and hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By definition 4.1.9 we must therefore have @xmath for @xmath . If @xmath
the sign is a plus, so by continuity we conclude that @xmath for all
@xmath . For @xmath we use the fact that for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence @xmath for all @xmath , because @xmath is a product of an even
number of @xmath ’s. @xmath

Note that @xmath . Indeed, using @xmath and @xmath in lemma 4.1.13 we
see that @xmath , so @xmath is in @xmath by definition, but not in
@xmath by the lemma.

#### 4.1.3 The Dirac spinor and cospinor bundles

After presenting the algebraic and group theoretical background
information in the previous subsections we will now start the
formulation of the classical Dirac field in curved spacetime. Our first
task will be to construct the vector bundles in which the Dirac spinor
and cospinor fields take values. For this purpose we choose an
irreducible complex representation @xmath of @xmath and matrices @xmath
satisfying assumption ( 4.5 ). Such matrices exist by theorem 4.1.6 and
we will show afterwards, in proposition 4.1.23 , that different choices
give rise to equivalent constructions.

Let @xmath be a globally hyperbolic spin spacetime. We define the
associated vector bundle

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath acts on @xmath from the right as usual and on @xmath from
the left via the representation @xmath . In other words, @xmath is
obtained from the product bundle @xmath by identifying ⁴ ⁴ 4 The claim
of [ 34 ] that the map @xmath defines a left action is to be understood
as follows. If we fix the local section @xmath of @xmath , i.e. if we
choose a local gauge, then the right-hand side is well-defined and
defines a left action.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we think of @xmath as a column vector. (Recall that @xmath denotes
the right action of the group @xmath on the principal vector bundle
@xmath , see definition 2.3.1 .) We denote the dual vector bundle by
@xmath and note the equivalence relation @xmath , where we used the
standard anti-isomorphism @xmath between @xmath and its dual @xmath and
we treat @xmath as a row vector. There is then a canonical pairing of
the fibers of @xmath and @xmath over any point in @xmath , which is
given by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that the element @xmath must be the same in both entries. This can
always be accomplished by using the equivalence relation of @xmath or
@xmath , because the action of @xmath on each fiber of @xmath is
transitive.

###### Definition 4.1.14

The vector bundle @xmath is the (Dirac) spinor bundle , its elements are
(Dirac) spinors and a section of it is a (Dirac) spinor field . The
space of all smooth spinor fields is denoted by @xmath , and the space
of all compactly supported smooth spinor fields by @xmath .

The dual vector bundle @xmath of @xmath is called the Dirac cospinor
bundle , its elements are (Dirac) cospinors and a section of it is a
(Dirac) cospinor field . The space of all smooth cospinor fields is
denoted by @xmath and that of the compactly supported smooth cospinor
fields by @xmath .

We indicate the canonical pairing of a spinor field @xmath and a
cospinor field @xmath by writing them next to each other: @xmath . This
pairing therefore defines a sesquilinear map @xmath . As a matter of
notation we will write @xmath and @xmath , which is well-defined because
@xmath commutes with the action of @xmath on @xmath .

We now turn to the adjoint and charge conjugation maps. We first define
these maps for spinors and cospinors, then for spinor and cospinor
fields.

###### Lemma 4.1.15

We can define maps @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These maps are base-point preserving vector bundle anti-isomorphisms.
For @xmath and @xmath we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath            @xmath      
     @xmath            @xmath      (4.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Proof. It follows from lemma 4.1.13 that the maps @xmath and @xmath are
well-defined. As an example we compute for all @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The proof for the other maps is similar. By their definition the maps
@xmath and @xmath are seen to be anti-linear and to preserve the
base-point. That they are isomorphisms follows from the relations (
4.1.15 ), which we will prove next.

From assumption ( 4.5 ) we see that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , so for
any @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath we find:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

From theorem 4.1.6 we find that @xmath , and hence

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The result @xmath now follows, because @xmath for some @xmath and hence
@xmath whereas @xmath . Finally, @xmath and hence:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

@xmath

###### Definition 4.1.16

The maps @xmath are called the (Dirac) adjoint maps and the maps @xmath
are called the charge conjugation maps.

For spinor and cospinor fields we define the adjoint maps and the charge
conjugation maps pointwise.

This means that for @xmath we have e.g. @xmath . Notice that the adjoint
and charge conjugation maps preserve the support. The identities (
4.1.15 ) of lemma 4.1.15 translate as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath            @xmath      
     @xmath            @xmath      (4.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Taking tensor products of @xmath we can form a mixed spinor-tensor
algebra in a natural way. In order to perform computations in this mixed
spinor-tensor algebra it will be useful to work in suitable local
frames, which we will now describe.

Given a local section @xmath of @xmath and an orthonormal basis @xmath
of @xmath such that @xmath we obtain local frames @xmath of @xmath and
@xmath of @xmath , where @xmath is the projection of the spin structure.
We denote the dual frames of @xmath and @xmath by @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively, so that @xmath and @xmath , where the Kronecker @xmath ’s
are regarded as constant functions on @xmath . Together these local
frames give rise to local frames for the spinor-tensor algebra.

A different local section @xmath of @xmath over the same region @xmath
can always be expressed as @xmath , where we allow @xmath to depend on
@xmath , i.e. @xmath . To find the corresponding change of frames we
compute:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It then follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The components of a spinor @xmath transform under a change of section as
@xmath and for general spinor-tensors we get similar expressions, e.g.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the frame @xmath of @xmath we can use @xmath to derive

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

because both sides have the same action on basis vectors. It follows
that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . A vector @xmath can be expressed as
@xmath where @xmath and similarly for covectors. We see that we can
raise and lower indices in the frame @xmath with @xmath and @xmath .

Using the matrix expressions of @xmath in the bases @xmath , @xmath we
can also express the adjoint and charge conjugation maps in components.
Because of @xmath and @xmath we find:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 4.1.17

There is a smooth section @xmath such that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every local section @xmath of @xmath , where @xmath denotes the
entries of @xmath in the basis @xmath and its dual basis @xmath .

Proof. Using a different local section @xmath and, using the definitions
of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and that of @xmath in equation ( 4.6 ), we
see that we can define @xmath locally by the given expression,
independent of the choice of @xmath . Covering the manifold by suitable
regions (e.g. contractible ones) we can then extend @xmath to a global
section, which is given by the formula in any local frame constructed
from a local section @xmath of @xmath . @xmath

When we perform computations in components we will ease the notation
considerably by dropping the spinorial (capital) indices and using a
matrix notation instead, whenever this is possible. In this notation we
think of spinors as column vectors and cospinors as row vectors, so
@xmath becomes @xmath and @xmath becomes @xmath . This should cause no
confusion, as long as we remember which objects carry spinor indices and
we are careful with the non-commutative matrix products. This only works
as long as no object carries more than one upper or lower spinorial
index, but this will usually be the case in what follows. For vector
fields @xmath and covector fields @xmath we also introduce the Feynman
slash notation: @xmath , @xmath .

#### 4.1.4 The spin connection, Dirac operator and Dirac equation

The dynamics of the free Dirac field is described by a partial
differential equation which contains a covariant derivative for sections
of the Dirac spinor bundle @xmath . There is a natural choice of a
connection for this bundle, which is related to the Levi-Civita
connection on the tangent bundle @xmath . The latter is therefore the
starting point of this subsection.

Let @xmath be the Levi-Civita connection, i.e. the unique connection on
@xmath which is torsion free and compatible with the metric. In local
coordinates we can define the Christoffel symbols @xmath in terms of the
coordinate derivatives through

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These Christoffel symbols are given by the expression ( [ 88 ] equation
(3.1.30))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

We may define connection coefficients @xmath for any local frame @xmath
through

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the action of the vector field @xmath as a
derivative. The connection coefficients @xmath may be compared to the
Christoffel symbols in a coordinate basis ⁵ ⁵ 5 It is important to note
that our indices are not abstract indices, that only indicate the type
of a tensor, but actually number the specific vector fields of a frame.
, which yields:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence, using @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equivalently the Levi-Civita connection can be described by the
connection one-forms @xmath . These one-forms can be regarded as a
single one-form taking values in @xmath , because equation ( 4.10 )
implies:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.13)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

To find the spin connection on @xmath we use a third equivalent
description of the Levi-Civita connection in terms of the principal
@xmath -bundle @xmath . Indeed, there is an @xmath -valued one-form
@xmath on @xmath such that for every local section @xmath of @xmath the
pull-back satisfies @xmath and which behaves in a particular way under
the action of @xmath . We refer to [ 55 ] chapter 2 proposition 1.1 for
the detailed description of this behaviour, because it is not essential
for our discussion. The one-form @xmath can be pulled back by @xmath and
lifted from @xmath to @xmath , which yields a @xmath -valued one-form
@xmath on @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(see proposition 4.1.12 ), where we used @xmath . Because @xmath
intertwines the actions of the structure groups appropriately @xmath
defines a connection on @xmath (see [ 55 ] loc. cit.), which we call the
spin connection. In a local section @xmath of @xmath the spin connection
one-forms @xmath are given by the pull-back of @xmath by @xmath .
Because of @xmath we obtain ⁶ ⁶ 6 Note the mistaken sign in the
expression for the spin connection in [ 30 , 34 ] . With the wrong sign
we do not obtain a connection on @xmath , because one of the properties
of [ 55 ] proposition 1.1 is not satisfied, and lemma 4.1.18 would no
longer hold. :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

We define the covariant derivative of spinor fields @xmath by ⁷ ⁷ 7 Here
again it is important that our indices are not abstract indices, but
denote the components in specific frames.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for cospinor fields @xmath via @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In components, using the shorthand matrix notation, these definitions
read:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can now define a covariant derivative @xmath for mixed spinor-tensors
as follows. For spinorial indices we use the spin connection as in
equation ( 4.15 ). For tensor indices we use the Levi-Civita connection
as usual. The following lemma gives a typical illustration:

###### Lemma 4.1.18

The section @xmath is covariantly constant.

Proof. Because the coefficients @xmath in a local frame are constant we
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or, dropping the spinor indices and using equation ( 4.14 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here we used the Clifford relations ( 4.2 ), which also hold pointwise
for the section @xmath , and the anti-symmetry of the @xmath -valued
connection one-form ( 4.1.4 ). @xmath

###### Remark 4.1.19

We warn the reader for the following. When applying @xmath to a
spinor-tensor @xmath we find the usual expression, involving the
coordinate derivative @xmath and a term for each index. Because we often
leave the spinorial indices implicit to ease our notation, it is
tempting to forget the corresponding terms in the expression for @xmath
.

We now define the following operators:

###### Definition 4.1.20

The Dirac operator @xmath is the first order partial differential
operator defined by @xmath , where we view @xmath as a map from @xmath
to itself, acting on the left.

The Dirac operator @xmath is defined by the same expression, @xmath ,
where we now view @xmath as a map from @xmath to itself, acting on the
right.

When expressed in a local frame the Dirac operator on spinor and
cospinor fields is given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

or dropping the spinorial indices:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

###### Definition 4.1.21

The Dirac equation for @xmath , respectively for @xmath , is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

for a constant mass @xmath .

Note that the spinor field @xmath is a solution to the Dirac equation if
and only if the cospinor field @xmath is a solution, because of the
following lemma:

###### Lemma 4.1.22

For all spinor fields @xmath and cospinor fields @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath      @xmath   
     @xmath      @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

and @xmath everywhere on @xmath , for any future pointing time-like
vector field @xmath .

Proof. Using assumption ( 4.5 ) and the fact that the entries of @xmath
and @xmath are constant we can compute in a local frame @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the minus sign in the last line appears because the order of the
two factors of @xmath in the expression ( 4.14 ) for @xmath needs to be
reversed. It follows that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Finally, if @xmath at @xmath , then @xmath , because @xmath is just
@xmath considered as an element of the Dirac algebra. @xmath

We have now used all parts of assumption ( 4.5 ) to define the adjoint
and charge conjugation maps and to establish their interrelations with
each other (equation ( 4.1.3 )), with the Dirac equation and with the
time-orientation of the spacetime (lemma 4.1.22 ). The next proposition
shows that these relations completely characterise the Dirac field,
independent of the choice of representation and of the matrices @xmath
satisfying assumption ( 4.5 ).

###### Proposition 4.1.23

Consider the Dirac spinor bundle @xmath and cospinor bundle @xmath ,
defined analogously to @xmath and @xmath but using @xmath instead of
@xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be defined analogously to @xmath and
@xmath , using the matrices @xmath and @xmath , and let @xmath be the
Dirac operator defined through the representation @xmath . Then there
exists a base-point preserving, vector bundle isomorphism @xmath with
induced isomorphism @xmath such that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . This
isomorphism is unique, up to an overall sign.

Proof. On each fiber the bundle isomorphism @xmath must be given by the
formula @xmath for some @xmath by the fundamental theorem 4.1.4 . The
induced morphism @xmath is then @xmath . To make @xmath well-defined and
to obtain the correct intertwining with adjoint operation, charge
conjugation and the Dirac operator we need:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the fact that @xmath we can apply theorem 4.1.6 to conclude that
@xmath exists and is unique up to a sign. By continuity @xmath must be
locally constant on @xmath , but then the map @xmath is globally
well-defined and is unique up to a global sign (by connectedness of
@xmath ). @xmath

The bundle isomorphisms which intertwine the relations between the
adjoint operation, charge conjugation and the Dirac operator form a
group. Because this group preserves these relations it will also leave
the theory’s predictions invariant, so we can think of this group as a
gauge group for the Dirac field. Choosing a specific representation is
then like fixing a gauge, leaving as a residual gauge freedom only the
involutive bundle isomorphism @xmath . We will divide out this residual
gauge freedom after quantisation of the Dirac field.

A change in the signature convention, @xmath , should not have any
physical consequences either and indeed it can be seen that this is
easily compensated for by changing the sign in equation ( 4.2 ). This
does not change the Dirac algebra and any other constructions that
follow from it, although we do get signs for all covectors when raising
or lowering indices with @xmath . ⁸ ⁸ 8 Alternatively we could set
@xmath , in which case the Dirac algebra would become @xmath . Because
@xmath we have @xmath , so nothing changes in the representation of the
Spin group. We can also keep the same matrices @xmath , which now must
satisfy the relations @xmath and @xmath . The spinor and cospinor bundle
and the adjoint and charge conjugation maps remain the same as before.
All relations between these operations and the Dirac equation remain
valid if we drop the factor @xmath in front of the Dirac operator in the
Dirac equation. Notice that a complex irreducible representation of
@xmath extends to an irreducible representation of @xmath and therefore
also gives a complex irreducible representation of @xmath and vice
versa. The standard Clifford algebra isomorphism @xmath appears if and
only if the representation of @xmath is a Majorana representation, i.e.
iff @xmath . In that case we also find

@xmath

The group @xmath is also sometimes called Spin group (see e.g. [ 20 ]
p.334).

### 4.2 The free Dirac field as a LCQFT

Now that we have described spinor and cospinor fields and their equation
of motion, the Dirac equation, it is time to quantise the theory. In
subsection 4.2.1 we will describe a suitable space of classical
solutions and quantise the theory on a single spin spacetime, largely
following [ 30 , 26 , 34 ] . Then we consider Hadamard states and states
with the microlocal spectrum condition in subsection 4.2.2 , obtaining
the new result that every Hadamard state satisfies the microlocal
spectrum condition, just as in the scalar field case. Finally we show
that that we indeed obtain a locally covariant quantum field theory in
subsection 4.2.2 and we establish some of its properties. There we also
note that different choices of representation give rise to equivalent
theories.

#### 4.2.1 Quantisation

It will be convenient to deal with spinor and cospinor fields
simultaneously, for which purpose we introduce the following:

###### Definition 4.2.1

The double spinor bundle is defined as the vector bundle @xmath . A
double spinor (field) is a smooth section of this vector bundle. The
space of double spinors will be denoted by @xmath .

The space of double test-spinors is the space of compactly supported
smooth double spinors @xmath in the topology of uniform convergence on a
fixed compact set.

We define the adjoint map and charge conjugation map as anti-linear
isomorphisms from @xmath to itself by @xmath and @xmath , respectively.
For double spinors we define the adjoint and charge conjugation maps
pointwise, i.e. @xmath and @xmath . We also introduce the operators
@xmath and @xmath .

Note that the Dirac equation ( 4.16 ) translates as @xmath for @xmath .
Every @xmath determines a distribution on the double test-spinors @xmath
by the sesquilinear pairing

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

This pairing is non-degenerate, but not positive (because @xmath itself
is not a positive matrix). The following relations hold between the
adjoint and charge conjugate maps, @xmath and the pairing of equation (
4.17 ):

###### Lemma 4.2.2

We have for all @xmath and @xmath :

1.  @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,

2.  @xmath ,

3.  @xmath and @xmath .

Proof. The first set of equations follows from lemma 4.1.22 . E.g.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and similarly for cospinors @xmath , which implies @xmath . The second
item follows directly from the equations ( 4.1.3 ) and ( 4.17 ). For the
last item we note that @xmath for every @xmath by definition 4.1.16 and
that we can perform a partial integration as follows [ 30 ] : note that
for all @xmath we have @xmath , because @xmath is covariantly constant.
If either @xmath or @xmath is compactly supported we can integrate this
equation over @xmath to get @xmath . Together with equation ( 4.17 )
this implies the result. @xmath

The second order operator @xmath has as its principal part the wave
operator @xmath , which is diagonal in the spinorial indices. Due to
global hyperbolicity of @xmath there exist ⁹ ⁹ 9 As a slight abuse of
notation we use the same symbols @xmath here as in chapter 3 , although
the operators are not the same. (They do not even have the same domain.)
unique advanced (-) and retarded (+) fundamental solutions @xmath for
the operator @xmath , i.e. for all @xmath we have @xmath and @xmath (see
[ 6 ] theorem 3.3.1). The fundamental solutions @xmath help us to find
fundamental solutions for the operator @xmath as follows (see [ 30 ] ):

###### Proposition 4.2.3

The maps @xmath defined by @xmath are the unique advanced ( @xmath ) and
retarded ( @xmath ) fundamental (left and right) solutions for @xmath
such that @xmath for all @xmath . Moreover, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
for all @xmath .

Proof. For @xmath we see that @xmath has the correct support property
and @xmath , so @xmath is a right fundamental solution. For the fact
they are left fundamental solutions and their uniqueness we refer to [
30 ] theorem 2.1. Given @xmath we choose @xmath with @xmath on the
compact sets @xmath . Using lemma 4.2.2 and the support properties we
then compute:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Finally we compute for all @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

from which it follows that @xmath . The proof for charge conjugation is
similar. @xmath

Analogous to the scalar field case we define @xmath . The proof of
proposition 4.2.3 also works for the spinor and cospinor cases
separately, yielding fundamental solutions @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath using the obvious notation. By the uniqueness part of the
proposition we find @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (see [ 30 , 34 ] ).

###### Lemma 4.2.4

@xmath and the bilinear map @xmath defines an inner product on @xmath .
The adjoint and charge conjugation maps descend to this quotient space
too and @xmath .

Proof. If @xmath for @xmath then @xmath , so @xmath . Conversely, if
@xmath with @xmath then @xmath has its support in the compact set @xmath
and @xmath , so @xmath Now @xmath by proposition 4.2.3 and lemma 4.2.2 ,
so @xmath is a well-defined sesquilinear map on @xmath . By proposition
4.2.3 again the adjoint and charge conjugation maps descend to the
quotient space @xmath and with @xmath denoting either @xmath or @xmath
we compute:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It remains to show that @xmath for all @xmath , with equality only if
@xmath . Leaving the metric induced volume element implicit in the
notation we have,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for any Cauchy surface @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the future pointing normal vector field to @xmath and we
used [ 88 ] equation (B.2.26) for the final partial integration. The
integrand is smooth and pointwise positive by lemma 4.1.22 , so the
result follows. @xmath

We define @xmath to be the Hilbert space completion in the inner product
@xmath . The continuous extensions of @xmath and @xmath to @xmath will
be denoted by the same symbol.

In order to quantise the free Dirac field we first define the following.

###### Definition 4.2.5

The exterior tensor product @xmath of two vector bundles @xmath over
@xmath with fiber @xmath , @xmath , is the vector bundle over @xmath
whose fiber is @xmath and whose local trivialisations are determined by
local trivialisations @xmath of @xmath as @xmath .

We can extend the adjoint and charge conjugation maps from @xmath to its
exterior powers @xmath by anti-linear extension of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath .

###### Definition 4.2.6

The Dirac Borchers-Uhlmann algebra @xmath is the direct sum

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(in the algebraic sense), equipped with:

1.   the product @xmath , extended linearly,

2.   the @xmath -operation @xmath , extended anti-linearly,

3.   a topology such that @xmath converges to @xmath if and only if for
    all @xmath we have @xmath in @xmath and for some @xmath we have
    @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath .

Much like the Borchers-Uhlmann algebra for the real scalar field, @xmath
is the strict inductive limit @xmath , where @xmath is an exhausting
(and increasing) sequence of compact subsets of @xmath , the vector
bundle @xmath is the restriction of @xmath to @xmath and each @xmath is
given the test-function topology, see [ 75 ] theorem 2.6.4.

As in lemma 3.1.2 one can show that @xmath is a topological @xmath
-algebra and that a continuous state @xmath on @xmath consists of a
sequence of @xmath -point distributions @xmath acting on the smooth,
compactly supported sections of @xmath . Another analogy with the scalar
field case is that @xmath does not carry any dynamical information or
anti-commutation relation. As in chapter 3 this can be remedied by
dividing out a certain ideal:

###### Definition 4.2.7

We define the free Dirac Borchers-Uhlmann algebra as the topological
@xmath -algebra @xmath , where @xmath is the closed @xmath -ideal
generated by all elements of the form @xmath or @xmath , where @xmath .

We have presented the Dirac Borchers-Uhlmann algebras @xmath and @xmath
to indicate the analogy with the Borchers-Uhlmann algebras @xmath and
@xmath of the real scalar field. However, there is a more direct way to
obtain @xmath , which is analogous to the algebra @xmath for the free
scalar field. This approach also shows that @xmath can be completed to a
@xmath -algebra.

###### Proposition 4.2.8

The algebra @xmath can be completed to a @xmath -algebra @xmath , which
is the unique @xmath -algebra generated by elements @xmath , @xmath ,
such that

1.  @xmath is @xmath -linear,

2.  @xmath ,

3.  @xmath .

Recall that @xmath , so the equation of motion is implicit.

Proof. To prove that @xmath has a @xmath -norm we note that it is an
infinite-dimensional Clifford algebra, by the anti-commutation
relations. Each finite dimensional Clifford algebra has a @xmath -norm,
because it can be represented faithfully as an algebra of bounded
operators [ 57 ] . The algebra @xmath is the @xmath -algebraic inductive
limit of its finite dimensional subalgebras. We refer to [ 13 ] theorem
5.2.5 (or [ 2 ] lemma 4.1 and 3.3) for a proof that @xmath is the unique
@xmath -algebra generated by elements @xmath with @xmath and satisfying
the stated properties. @xmath

We formulate a charge conjugation map on the algebra @xmath as follows:

###### Proposition 4.2.9

The map @xmath gives rise to a @xmath -isomorphism @xmath of @xmath
determined by @xmath and we have @xmath .

Proof. Note that @xmath is a linear isomorphism of @xmath , because of
@xmath by lemma 4.2.4 . The result then follows (see [ 13 ] section
5.2.2.1, p.18). @xmath

We have now quantised the Dirac field on a single spin spacetime. In
subsection 4.2.3 we will investigate the properties of this construction
as a locally covariant quantum field theory. The map @xmath of
proposition 4.2.8 will then be a candidate for a locally covariant
quantum field. For now we will only introduce the following notation.

###### Definition 4.2.10

Leaving the quotient map @xmath implicit, we define the maps @xmath and
@xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We also define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition 4.2.11

The maps @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are distributions valued in the
@xmath -algebra @xmath and:

1.  @xmath ,

2.  @xmath and all the other anti-commutators vanish,

3.  @xmath and @xmath , where we have set @xmath and @xmath for any
    distribution @xmath on smooth sections of @xmath .

Proof. The first two items follow straightforwardly from the definitions
of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and the inner product @xmath . For the third
we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

because @xmath , and similarly for @xmath .

It remains to show that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are @xmath
-algebra-valued distributions. The @xmath -sub-algebra of @xmath
generated by @xmath is a Clifford algebra which is isomorphic to @xmath
and an explicit isomorphism is given by @xmath , where @xmath . It
follows that @xmath is the operator norm of the corresponding matrix,
i.e. ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 The factor 2 in [ 34 ] remark 2, p.340 seems to be
erroneous. The sign is due to the fact that [ 34 ] uses for @xmath the
retarded-minus-advanced rather than the advanced-minus-retarded
fundamental solution.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the test-spinor topology we then have continuous maps @xmath , from
which it follows that @xmath is norm continuous, i.e. it is a @xmath
-algebra-valued distribution. The proof for @xmath is analogous and the
result for @xmath then follows. @xmath

###### Remark 4.2.12

The quantisation of Majorana spinors proceeds in a largely analogous
way. The space of test-spinors @xmath can be given the inner product
@xmath and then completed to a Hilbert space @xmath . The map @xmath
provides a conjugation map on this space, so we can quantise to obtain a
@xmath -algebra @xmath generated by elements @xmath , @xmath ,
satisfying

1.  @xmath is @xmath -linear,

2.  @xmath and

3.  @xmath .

For cospinors @xmath we can then define @xmath , which adds nothing new
to the algebra. However, @xmath , but on the other hand @xmath .
Furthermore, the charge conjugation map @xmath used in propositions
4.2.9 and 4.2.13 reduces to the identity map in the case of Majorana
spinors.

To conclude this subsection we deal with the residual gauge freedom:

###### Proposition 4.2.13

The bundle isomorphism @xmath defined by @xmath gives rise to an
involutive @xmath @xmath of @xmath . The set @xmath of @xmath -invariant
elements is a @xmath -algebra and is generated by elements of the form
@xmath (i.e. it is the even subalgebra of @xmath ). The @xmath
-isomorphism @xmath restricts to an involutive @xmath -isomorphism of
@xmath .

Proof. Note that @xmath extends to @xmath as @xmath and then descends to
@xmath , where it is the linear map @xmath . It then gives rise to the
map @xmath on @xmath defined by @xmath extended as an algebra
homomorphism. As @xmath we see that @xmath and we can define the linear
space @xmath of @xmath -invariant elements. As @xmath is a @xmath
-isomorphism, @xmath is a closed @xmath -subalgebra of @xmath and hence
a @xmath -algebra in its own right. Clearly, @xmath contains all even
powers of @xmath , i.e. @xmath . Conversely, any @xmath -invariant
@xmath can be approximated by a sequence of polynomials @xmath , which
we can choose to be @xmath -invariant. As the @xmath -invariant
polynomials @xmath only contain even powers of the @xmath ’s we see that
these even polynomials generate @xmath . Finally, @xmath maps the even
polynomials onto themselves, so @xmath , and @xmath implies that @xmath
is the identity on @xmath . @xmath

Although the physical information should be contained entirely in the
gauge-invariant algebra @xmath , it will be convenient to have @xmath at
our disposal too, because the putative locally covariant quantum fields
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath take values in @xmath rather than @xmath .

#### 4.2.2 States of the Dirac field

If @xmath is a state on @xmath and @xmath its GNS-triple, then we may
consider for each @xmath the @xmath -valued distribution on @xmath
defined by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath .

###### Definition 4.2.14

A state @xmath on @xmath is called Hadamard if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A state @xmath on @xmath satisfies the microlocal spectrum condition (
@xmath SC) if and only if @xmath for all @xmath .

A state @xmath on @xmath or @xmath is called Hadamard , respectively
satisfies the microlocal spectrum condition , if and only if it can be
extended to a state on @xmath which is Hadamard, respectively satisfies
the @xmath SC.

Note that every state on @xmath can be extended to a state on @xmath by
the Hahn-Banach theorem [ 49 ] and every state on @xmath has an
extension to @xmath only if it is continuous in the @xmath -norm, in
which case the extension is unique by continuity. The Hadamard condition
on @xmath is independent of the choice of extension, because it depends
solely on the two-point distribution, as the following proposition
shows, and the same is true for the @xmath SC by proposition 4.2.17
below. The following proposition also shows that the definition of
Hadamard states on @xmath is analogous to definition 3.1.12 for the free
scalar field.

###### Proposition 4.2.15

For a state @xmath on @xmath the following three conditions are
equivalent:

1.  @xmath is Hadamard,

2.   the two-point distribution @xmath has

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where again @xmath if and only if @xmath or there is an affinely
    parameterised light-like geodesic between @xmath and @xmath to which
    @xmath are cotangent (and hence @xmath and @xmath are parallel
    transports of each other along the geodesic),

3.   there is a two-point distribution @xmath such that @xmath and
    @xmath .

Proof. First note that @xmath is a bidistribution on @xmath , because
@xmath is an @xmath -valued distribution and multiplication in @xmath
and @xmath are continuous. For the equivalence of the first two
statements we adapt the argument in [ 80 ] , proposition 6.1. If @xmath
, then @xmath by theorem A.1.6 , so @xmath is Hadamard. For the converse
we suppose that @xmath is Hadamard. Again by theorem A.1.6 we see that
@xmath . Defining @xmath we find @xmath . Now, @xmath , so @xmath and
hence @xmath , because @xmath . By proposition A.1.7 and @xmath we find
@xmath and therefore @xmath .

To prove the equivalence of the second and third statement we now assume
that @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath is the formal adjoint of @xmath ,
then @xmath . For the converse we suppose that @xmath satisfies
condition @xmath and we choose a smooth real-valued function @xmath on
@xmath such that @xmath to the past of some Cauchy surface @xmath and
such that @xmath to the future of another Cauchy surface @xmath . We
then define @xmath . Note that @xmath is a bidistribution which is
well-defined, because @xmath and @xmath are compactly supported. It is
easy to verify that @xmath . We now estimate the wave front set of
@xmath as follows. The wave front set of @xmath is contained in @xmath ,
which we collected in proposition A.1.7 . Then we may apply theorem
8.2.9 and 8.2.13 in [ 47 ] to estimate the wave front sets of the tensor
product @xmath and the compositions in @xmath respectively and, using
@xmath , we find:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

@xmath

Using scaling limits one can even show that @xmath if @xmath . In this
form the equivalence of statements @xmath and @xmath was already known (
[ 73 ] definitions 5.1 and 5.3 and theorem 5.8). The first
characterisation appears to be new, but is analogous to the result for
the free scalar field [ 80 ] .

The following definition of quasi-free states is analogous to the free
field case, definition 3.1.6 .

###### Definition 4.2.16

A state @xmath on either of the algebras @xmath or @xmath is called
quasi-free if and only if @xmath for @xmath odd and for @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the set of permutations of @xmath such that

1.  @xmath ,

2.  @xmath , @xmath .

The set of all states on @xmath satisfying the @xmath SC will be denoted
by @xmath .

The set of all states on @xmath which are locally quasi-equivalent to a
quasi-free Hadamard state is denoted by @xmath .

The set of all states on @xmath which are locally quasi-equivalent to
the restriction of a state on @xmath which is in @xmath is denoted by
@xmath .

Adapting the proof of proposition 3.1.13 we now show that every Hadamard
state on @xmath satisfies the @xmath SC. (The quasi-free Hadamard case
was essentially known, because the proof is the same as for the scalar
field algebra @xmath , see [ 15 ] proposition 4.3).

###### Proposition 4.2.17

Let @xmath be a state on @xmath which is Hadamard on a neighbourhood
@xmath of a Cauchy surface in @xmath . Then @xmath satisfies the @xmath
SC on @xmath .

Proof. The proof is completely analogous to that of proposition 3.1.13 ,
with the following modifications. We use the parts of theorems A.1.5 and
A.1.6 that pertain to distributions on vector bundle-valued sections and
the operator @xmath . The propagation of the wave front set in this case
follows from the work of [ 27 ] concerning polarisation sets. We use the
fact that @xmath and finally we need to use the anti-commutation
relations instead of the commutation relations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here we view @xmath as the bidistribution @xmath , cf. lemma 4.2.4 .
Finally we need to replace @xmath and @xmath by @xmath and @xmath
respectively. @xmath

We now check that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are suitable candidates to
construct a state space functor, in the sense of definition 2.1.2 (cf.
proposition 3.1.9 and 3.1.17 for analogous results for the scalar
field):

###### Proposition 4.2.18

The set @xmath , @xmath , respectively @xmath , is convex and closed
under operations from @xmath , @xmath , respectively @xmath .

Proof. @xmath is convex by theorem A.1.5 . To show that it is closed
under operations from @xmath we note that for fixed @xmath and @xmath we
have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

using [ 47 ] theorem 8.2.12, which can also be applied to vector
bundle-valued sections by using local sections and expressing @xmath as
a sum of components (cf. appendix A ). The same inclusion holds for
linear combinations of such terms, so if @xmath then the state @xmath
satisfies the @xmath SC if @xmath does.

@xmath is convex, because all quasi-free Hadamard states of @xmath are
locally quasi-equivalent [ 24 ] . From the definition of @xmath we see
that it is closed under operations from @xmath .

To see that @xmath is convex we note that the restrictions of any two
states @xmath in @xmath to @xmath are locally quasi-equivalent. Indeed,
for any bounded cc-region a @xmath -isomorphism between the von Neumann
algebras @xmath restricts to a @xmath -isomorphism of the von Neumann
algebras @xmath and the claim then follows from [ 3 ] pp.212-213. That
@xmath is closed under operations from @xmath follows directly from
definition 4.2.16 again. @xmath

The following lemma is analogous to the free field case, lemma 3.1.16 :

###### Lemma 4.2.19

Let @xmath be a globally hyperbolic spin spacetime, @xmath a
neighbourhood of a Cauchy surface and @xmath such that @xmath on @xmath
and @xmath on @xmath . For every @xmath we have @xmath , where @xmath
and @xmath .

Proof. Notice that @xmath and @xmath on a neighbourhood of @xmath , so
@xmath . We have @xmath which is compactly supported in @xmath and
@xmath . @xmath

If, in the situation of lemma 4.2.19 , we set @xmath and @xmath we note
that @xmath and @xmath have compact support in @xmath and hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 4.2.3 The free Dirac field as a LCQFT

In the previous subsections we have quantised the Dirac field and
discussed interesting classes of states on a single spin spacetime. In
this section we will show how the free Dirac field can be described as a
locally covariant quantum field theory. For that purpose we will need to
investigate how our quantisation and our classes of states behave under
morphisms, paying special attention to the residual gauge freedom that
arises from the choice of representation (see proposition 4.1.23 ).

###### Proposition 4.2.20

Given a morphism @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath (see definition 2.3.1
), there exist exactly two bundle isomorphisms @xmath which intertwine
the adjoint, charge conjugation and Dirac operator and we have @xmath .
Each of these bundle isomorphisms gives rise to a morphism @xmath in
@xmath and we have @xmath where @xmath is the @xmath -isomorphism of
@xmath of proposition 4.2.13 .

Proof. First we note that @xmath , because @xmath maps the fiber of
@xmath over @xmath to the fiber of @xmath over @xmath and it intertwines
the action of the structure group and the bundle projection
appropriately. Note in particular that @xmath is a diffeomorphism of
each fiber, because the action of the structure group is transitive.
Because the Dirac spinor bundle is constructed from the spin frame
bundle we can apply proposition 4.1.23 to conclude that there are only
two bundle isomorphisms @xmath which intertwine the adjoint, charge
conjugation and Dirac operator in the required way and that @xmath .

The bundle isomorphisms @xmath extend in the canonical way to the
cospinor bundle and the double spinor bundle and we denote these
extensions by the same symbol. Therefore the @xmath give rise to two
linear maps @xmath . Now let @xmath be the fundamental advanced @xmath
and retarded @xmath solution to the Dirac equation on the globally
hyperbolic spin spacetimes @xmath . Let @xmath , let @xmath denote the
operator @xmath on the spin spacetime @xmath and fix a sign @xmath .
Then we have (cf. the proof of proposition 3.1.10 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by causal convexity. The uniqueness part of proposition 4.2.3 now shows
that @xmath and hence @xmath .

If @xmath has @xmath , then @xmath for some @xmath by lemma 4.2.4 and
hence @xmath . Therefore @xmath descends to a map @xmath (see lemma
4.2.4 ) which is injective and isometric. Indeed, leaving the metric
induced volume elements implicit:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

because @xmath outside @xmath . It now follows that there are morphisms
@xmath in @xmath defined by @xmath (see [ 13 ] ). Finally, as @xmath we
have @xmath and hence @xmath . @xmath

To describe the @xmath explicitly we fix a choice of complex irreducible
representation @xmath of the Dirac algebra @xmath and of matrices @xmath
satisfying assumption ( 4.5 ). We use this choice to construct the Dirac
spinor bundle on every spin spacetime in @xmath . For the morphism
@xmath with @xmath we can then define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

and note that this is a linear, base-point preserving bundle
homomorphism, which is well-defined because @xmath intertwines the right
action of @xmath on both spin frame bundles. Moreover, @xmath
intertwines the adjoint and charge conjugation maps, because @xmath
commutes with @xmath and @xmath . Hence, @xmath are the maps of
proposition 4.2.20 .

Choosing the representation @xmath and the matrices @xmath does not fix
the gauge completely. There are still bundle-automorphisms of the Dirac
spinor bundle that leave all physical equations invariant. There are two
ways to proceed in order to deal with this residual gauge freedom. The
first is to fix it by hand in a locally covariant way. The second is to
divide out the gauge freedom. We will present both approaches in that
order.

To fix the residual gauge freedom we need to choose a sign for the Dirac
spinor bundle on each spin spacetime in a locally covariant way. The
following proposition shows that this can be done.

###### Proposition 4.2.21

Fix a choice of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We can define a locally
covariant quantum field theory @xmath which assigns to a globally
hyperbolic spin spacetime @xmath the algebra @xmath and to every
morphism @xmath the morphism @xmath of proposition 4.2.20 associated to
the bundle isomorphism @xmath defined in equation ( 4.20 ).

Proof. The maps are well-defined, so we only need to check that they
define a covariant functor. The identity morphism gets mapped to the
identity morphism and for a composition of morphisms @xmath we have in
the obvious notation, @xmath and hence @xmath , which proves the
proposition. @xmath

The functor @xmath of proposition 4.2.21 seems to depend on the choice
of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , however we will now prove that all
choices give rise to equivalent functors. Recall that two functors
@xmath , @xmath , are equivalent iff there is a natural transformation
between @xmath and @xmath , given by maps @xmath , such that each @xmath
is an isomorphism in the category @xmath (see e.g. [ 58 , 16 ] ). ¹¹ ¹¹
11 The fact underlying the proof of proposition 4.2.22 is the following.
Given a choice of representation @xmath and matrices @xmath we can
define a functor from the category @xmath to the category @xmath of
vector bundles over spin manifolds, which maps each spin spacetime to
the associated Dirac bundle and which uses @xmath to describe
embeddings. Different choices of representation then give rise to
equivalent functors and there is an equivalence from such a functor to
itself which is given by the bundle isomorphism @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.2.22

Let @xmath and @xmath be two complex irreducible representations of the
Dirac algebra @xmath and let @xmath and @xmath be matrices in @xmath
satisfying assumption ( 4.5 ) w.r.t. @xmath and @xmath , respectively.
We let @xmath and @xmath be the corresponding functors of proposition
4.2.21 . Then there are two equivalences between the functors @xmath and
@xmath .

Proof. Let @xmath be the matrices of theorem 4.1.6 which intertwine
@xmath and @xmath . For each globally hyperbolic spin spacetime @xmath
we then define bundle isomorphisms of the Dirac spinor bundle by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we let @xmath be the associated @xmath -isomorphisms of @xmath as in
proposition 4.2.20 .

Now let @xmath be a morphism in @xmath and let @xmath and @xmath be the
bundle homomorphisms of equation ( 4.20 ) using the representation
@xmath and @xmath respectively. Notice that @xmath . The corresponding
equation for the @xmath -isomorphisms of @xmath is then @xmath , which
shows that @xmath defines an equivalence for each choice of the sign.
@xmath

###### Corollary 4.2.23

We can define a locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath which
assigns to every globally hyperbolic spin spacetime @xmath the algebra
@xmath and to every morphism @xmath the restriction of the morphism
@xmath in @xmath to @xmath . If we define the functor @xmath in the same
way, but for a different choice of representation @xmath and matrices
@xmath , @xmath , then there are two equivalences between @xmath and
@xmath .

Proof. This follows from propositions 4.2.21 and 4.2.22 . We only need
to check that for each morphism the image @xmath is contained in @xmath
, which follows from the definition of @xmath in the proof of
proposition 4.2.20 . @xmath

The following corollary describes the result of dividing out the
residual gauge symmetry:

###### Corollary 4.2.24

We can define a locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath which
assigns to every globally hyperbolic spin spacetime @xmath the algebra
@xmath and to every morphism @xmath the restriction of the morphism
@xmath in @xmath to @xmath . If we define the functor @xmath in the same
way, but for a different choice of representation @xmath and matrices
@xmath , @xmath , then there is an equivalence between @xmath and @xmath
.

Proof. Again this follows from propositions 4.2.21 and 4.2.22 if we
check that for each morphism the image @xmath is contained in @xmath ,
which follows from the definition of @xmath in the proof of proposition
4.2.20 . Note that the two natural transformations of proposition 4.2.22
coincide on the even algebras @xmath , so now we only find one
equivalence. @xmath

Finally we prove the properties of the locally covariant quantum field
theories and their associated state spaces:

###### Proposition 4.2.25

We can define a state space functor @xmath for the locally covariant
quantum field theory @xmath , which assigns to every globally hyperbolic
spin spacetime @xmath the set @xmath . Together these functors satisfy
the time-slice axiom, additivity and nowhere-classicality.

Proof. We know that each @xmath is convex and closed under operations
from @xmath by proposition 4.2.18 . To see that the functor @xmath is
well-defined we need to show that @xmath for every morphism @xmath .
This holds, because a state @xmath on @xmath which satisfies the @xmath
SC restricts to a state on @xmath satisfying the @xmath SC and hence
maps to a state on @xmath satisfying the @xmath SC, as in the proof of
proposition 3.1.9 .

Additivity follows as in proposition 3.1.17 , by using a partition of
unity after choosing representatives in @xmath . The time-slice axiom
follows from lemma 4.2.19 and proposition 4.2.17 and covariance of the
functors @xmath and @xmath . To prove nowhere-classicality we use that
fact that for each globally hyperbolic spin spacetime @xmath the @xmath
-algebra @xmath is simple, [ 13 ] theorem 5.2.5. It is also
non-commutative, because any subspace of @xmath of dimension at least
@xmath generates a non-commutative Clifford-algebra, which is a
sub-algebra of @xmath . By our definition of the @xmath SC, definition
4.2.14 , the state @xmath of @xmath extends to a state on @xmath , which
is necessarily faithful, because @xmath is simple. It follows that
@xmath is not commutative and hence the dense sub-algebra @xmath cannot
be commutative. @xmath

###### Proposition 4.2.26

We can define a state space functor @xmath for the locally covariant
quantum field theory @xmath , which assigns to every globally hyperbolic
spin spacetime @xmath the set @xmath . Together these functors satisfy
the time-slice axiom, local physical equivalence, local
quasi-equivalence, additivity and nowhere-classicality.

Proof. We know that each @xmath is convex and closed under operations
from @xmath by proposition 4.2.18 . To see that the functor @xmath is
well-defined we need to show that @xmath for every morphism @xmath . For
this we first notice that a quasi-free Hadamard state @xmath on @xmath
restricts to a quasi-free Hadamard state @xmath on @xmath which maps to
a quasi-free Hadamard state @xmath on @xmath . Next we note that a state
which is locally quasi-equivalent to @xmath restricts to a state which
is locally quasi-equivalent to @xmath and then maps to a state which is
locally quasi-equivalent to @xmath , by covariance.

The additivity and nowhere-classicality of @xmath and @xmath follow from
proposition 4.2.25 by taking the norm closure. The same is true for the
time-slice axiom, if we notice in addition that a state which is locally
quasi-equivalent to a quasi-free Hadamard state on a neighbourhood of a
Cauchy surface extends to a state with the same property, just like in
proposition 3.2.5 . Because @xmath is simple (theorem 5.2.5 in [ 13 ] )
the local physical equivalence follows from proposition 4.3 in [ 33 ] .
Local quasi-equivalence of @xmath was already shown in the proof of
proposition 4.2.18 . @xmath

###### Proposition 4.2.27

We can define a state space functor @xmath for the locally covariant
quantum field theory @xmath , which assigns to every globally hyperbolic
spin spacetime @xmath the set @xmath . Together these functors satisfy
causality, the time-slice axiom, local quasi-equivalence and additivity.

Proof. We know that each @xmath is convex and closed under operations
from @xmath by proposition 4.2.18 . The fact that the functor @xmath is
well-defined follows from proposition 4.2.26 .

To prove causality we choose @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath for some
cc-region @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath            
                                
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

because all the anti-commutators vanish in @xmath by the support
properties of the @xmath and @xmath .

To prove the time-slice axiom we let @xmath be any morphism in @xmath
for which @xmath contains a Cauchy surface of @xmath . We then use the
time-slice axiom of proposition 4.2.26 together with the fact that the
isomorphism @xmath preserves the even and odd subspaces of the @xmath .

That all states in @xmath are locally quasi-equivalent follows from the
fact that the restrictions of all states in @xmath to @xmath are locally
quasi-equivalent, which was shown in the proof of proposition 4.2.18 .

Additivity follows as in proposition 3.1.17 , by using a partition of
unity after choosing representatives in @xmath . @xmath

Note that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are linear locally covariant
quantum fields with values in @xmath , but not in @xmath . To find a
locally covariant quantum field for the theory @xmath we could choose
e.g. the non-linear field @xmath , but we have little need for this
field in what follows, because the linear field @xmath is much easier to
work with.

### 4.3 Relative Cauchy evolution and the stress-energy-momentum tensor
for the free Dirac field

Using lemma 4.2.19 , which is an explicit expression for the time-slice
axiom, we can now consider the relative Cauchy evolution of the free
Dirac field (cf. [ 16 ] ). This means that we will consider the @xmath
-isomorphism @xmath between the algebras of two cc-regions @xmath in a
spin spacetime @xmath , @xmath being to the future of @xmath and each
containing a Cauchy surface for @xmath . We study how @xmath varies when
we vary the metric and/or the spin structure in a compact set in the
region between @xmath and @xmath . We will show that we obtain
commutators with the stress-energy-momentum tensor, in complete analogy
with the case of the free scalar field ( [ 16 ] theorem 4.3).

As a preparation we will first discuss the stress-energy-momentum tensor
in subsection 4.3.1 , where we use a point-splitting procedure to obtain
an expression for its commutator with a smeared field operator.

#### 4.3.1 The stress-energy-momentum tensor

In a local frame @xmath the stress-energy-momentum tensor for the
classical free Dirac field @xmath on a spin spacetime @xmath has the
form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the brackets around indices denote symmetrisation as an idempotent
operation. (In the following, indices between @xmath are not to be
excluded from the symmetrisation over.) Following [ 34 ] we want to find
a point-split bidistribution which acts on scalar test-functions and
which is analogous to @xmath . For this purpose we use the components
@xmath of @xmath in a spin frame @xmath . Recall that these components
are constant and note that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.22)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

reduces to @xmath in the limit @xmath . We write @xmath as a
bidistribution of scalar test-functions @xmath after performing a
partial integration, @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.23)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Equation ( 4.23 ) can be promoted to the quantised case by replacing
@xmath and @xmath with the operator-valued distributions @xmath and
@xmath of definition 4.2.10 . The expression ( 4.22 ) can be viewed as a
formal expression for the same bidistribution when we substitute the
quantised field operators.

###### Proposition 4.3.1

Writing @xmath and @xmath we have for all @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath               
  -- -------- -------- -- --

Proof. For @xmath we use proposition 4.2.11 to obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the pairing @xmath on the right-hand side denotes the action of a
scalar distribution on @xmath . Together with equation ( 4.22 ), the
anti-commutation relations and @xmath this implies

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In this expression we may take the coincidence limit, which yields:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

from which the result follows. @xmath

Note that the point-split stress-energy-momentum tensor of equation (
4.22 ) can also be used to renormalise the expectation value of the
stress-energy-momentum tensor by subtracting a term that cancels out the
divergence. In the proof of proposition 4.3.1 , however, we used the
tensor in a commutator, so any (divergent) multiple of the unit operator
@xmath cancels out. For that reason we did not need to subtract any
divergent part. For more details on the stress-energy-momentum tensor,
its renormalisation and its conservedness we refer to [ 60 , 46 ] ,
which deal with the real scalar field.

The result of proposition 4.3.1 can be written for spinor and cospinor
fields separately as:

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         
     @xmath                  (4.24)
     @xmath   @xmath         
     @xmath                  
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

#### 4.3.2 Relative Cauchy evolution

In this subsection we will prove that we can obtain the expressions on
the right-hand side of equation ( 4.3.1 ) also via a relative Cauchy
evolution. We will first have to explain what such a relative Cauchy
evolution means in the case of the free Dirac field theory @xmath (cf. [
16 ] ).

Suppose that we have two objects in @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , where
the manifold @xmath is the same in both cases and such that both spin
spacetimes are the same outside a compact subset @xmath , i.e. @xmath
and @xmath . Now let @xmath be cc-regions, each containing a Cauchy
surface for @xmath and such that @xmath lies to the future of @xmath
(i.e. @xmath in @xmath and hence also in @xmath ) and to the past of
@xmath . We view @xmath as objects in @xmath and consider the canonical
embedding morphisms @xmath and @xmath . By the time-slice axiom,
proposition 4.2.26 , these give rise to @xmath -isomorphisms @xmath and
@xmath . We then define the @xmath -automorphism @xmath of @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

This @xmath -automorphism can easily be characterised in terms of its
action on the generators @xmath of @xmath as follows:

###### Proposition 4.3.2

If @xmath with @xmath , then @xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here the superscripts on @xmath and @xmath indicate whether they are the
objects defined on @xmath or @xmath and the smooth functions @xmath are
such that @xmath to the past of some Cauchy surface in @xmath and @xmath
to the future of some other Cauchy surface in @xmath .

Proof. Note that @xmath for any @xmath . Similarly, for @xmath we have
@xmath . The functions @xmath have been chosen appropriately in order to
apply equation ( 4.19 ). We then have @xmath and hence @xmath , where
@xmath . Notice that @xmath indeed has a compact support in @xmath .
Similarly we have @xmath , where @xmath has support in @xmath . Putting
everything together yields for @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

@xmath

We will want to compute the variation of the @xmath -isomorphism @xmath
with respect to the metric @xmath . For this purpose we suppose that the
compact set @xmath has a contractible neighbourhood @xmath which doesn’t
intersect either @xmath . Now let @xmath be a smooth curve from @xmath
into the space of Lorentzian metrics on @xmath starting at @xmath and
such that @xmath outside @xmath for every @xmath .

The spin bundle @xmath must be trivial over the contractible region
@xmath . If we assume it to be diffeomorphic to @xmath outside @xmath we
can simply take @xmath as a manifold and, choosing a fixed complex
irreducible representation @xmath and matrices @xmath satisfying
assumption ( 4.5 ) to construct the Dirac spinor bundle, we obtain
@xmath . The deformation of the spin structure is contained entirely in
the @xmath -dependence of the projection @xmath . Now let @xmath be a
section of @xmath over @xmath and set @xmath . We require that @xmath
varies smoothly with @xmath and that @xmath outside @xmath . To show
that projections @xmath with these properties exist we can apply the
Gram-Schmidt orthonormalisation procedure for all @xmath simultaneously,
starting with the frame @xmath , which yields a smooth family of frames
@xmath . The assignment @xmath then determines @xmath completely,
because of the intertwining properties of @xmath and the transitive
action of @xmath on the spin frame bundle. The family of frames @xmath
determines principal fiber bundle isomorphisms @xmath between the frame
bundles by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

on @xmath and extending it by the identity on the rest of @xmath . By
definition @xmath intertwines the action of @xmath on the frame bundles.

There may be many deformations of the spin structure, i.e. many families
of projections @xmath which satisfy our requirements. However, the
variation of @xmath will not depend on this choice. Indeed, if @xmath is
a different deformation of the spin structure, then @xmath for some
smooth curve @xmath in @xmath . However, @xmath and @xmath are invariant
under the action of the gauge group @xmath and therefore the variation
will be too.

On each spin spacetime @xmath we can now quantise the Dirac field and
obtain relative Cauchy evolutions @xmath on @xmath as in equation 4.25 .

###### Proposition 4.3.3

Writing @xmath we have for all @xmath with @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. Using the fact that @xmath is a @xmath -algebra-valued
distribution and proposition 4.3.2 we find:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Now, because @xmath and @xmath is to the past of @xmath we see that
@xmath vanishes on @xmath and that @xmath has compact support. Because
@xmath solves the Dirac equation we conclude that the second term
vanishes. The first term can be rewritten using equation ( 4.19 ), which
yields:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the last equality we used the fact that @xmath is supported in
@xmath , where @xmath . @xmath

To compute the variation of @xmath we may work in a local frame on the
contractible region @xmath , because that is where @xmath is supported.
Recall that @xmath , so essentially we just need to find the variation
of @xmath on spinor and cospinor fields. In fact, we will next show that
it is sufficient to know the variation of this operator on cospinor
fields, because we can then derive the case of spinor fields using the
adjoint map. This uses the fact that the Dirac adjoint map is
independent of @xmath . Also note that the components @xmath , in a
local frame determined by the section @xmath of @xmath over @xmath , are
constant and independent of @xmath . This follows immediately from the
definition of @xmath , in lemma 4.1.17 .

###### Lemma 4.3.4

For @xmath we have @xmath .

Proof. Because the adjoint operation between spinor and cospinor fields
is continuous we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

We now start the computation of the variation of the Dirac operator on a
cospinor field. For this purpose we will work in components and in local
coordinates on the contractible neighbourhood @xmath . To ease the
notation we will drop the subscript @xmath on the local frame @xmath .
As @xmath is independent of @xmath we may use equations ( 4.14 ) and (
4.12 ) to vary the following equation for @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.26)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

which yields:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.27)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we inserted a factor @xmath twice to simplify the first two terms.

We now define @xmath acting on cospinor fields and we try to get terms
with this operator acting on @xmath or on the whole expression. These
are harmless when we compute @xmath , because @xmath and @xmath solve
the Dirac equation. We start by performing what is essentially an
integration by parts as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Because @xmath we can write:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.29)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

When substituting equations ( 4.3.2 ) and ( 4.29 ) in ( 4.27 ) we can
recombine the terms

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Note that the variations of the frame @xmath cancel out, except in the
terms with @xmath . Therefore, the final answer will not depend on
variations of the frame, as desired.

In the last term of equation ( 4.3.2 ) we can use the symmetry of the
Christoffel symbol in the lower indices:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.31)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We handle the last term as before:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we used @xmath . The second term in equation ( 4.31 ) is:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.33)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The first term of equation ( 4.33 ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

The other terms can be simplified using equation ( 4.12 ) and some
computation, which yields:

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         
     @xmath                  
     @xmath   @xmath         
     @xmath                  
     @xmath   @xmath         
     @xmath   @xmath         
     @xmath                  
     @xmath   @xmath         
     @xmath                  (4.35)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

Substituting equations ( 4.31 - 4.3.2 ) into ( 4.3.2 ) yields:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.36)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Using lemma 4.3.4 and introducing @xmath we find for a spinor field
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.37)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Using the same notation as in proposition 4.3.1 we find the result:

###### Theorem 4.3.5

For a double test-spinor @xmath with @xmath and for @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.38)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Proof. Using proposition 4.3.3 and equations ( 4.36 , 4.37 ) we notice
that the terms with @xmath and @xmath cancel out, because @xmath and
@xmath satisfy the (doubled) Dirac equation:

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         
     @xmath   @xmath         
     @xmath                  (4.39)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

We now compare with proposition 4.3.1 to obtain the result. @xmath

This result compares well with the scalar field case, theorem 4.3 in [
16 ] . As particular cases we obtain for @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

###### Corollary 4.3.6

Let @xmath and @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. Theorem 4.3.5 tells us that the equation is true if @xmath for
any double test-spinor @xmath with @xmath . The same is then true for
any monomial of such terms, because for @xmath we have @xmath and hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath for any operator @xmath . Finally, because the equation is
linear in @xmath it holds for any polynomial of terms @xmath with @xmath
supported in @xmath . Any @xmath is of this form, by lemma 4.2.19 . This
completes the proof. @xmath

## Chapter 5 The Reeh-Schlieder property in curved spacetime

  Er stürzte sich allerdings in das Unermeßliche, das die astrophysische
  Wissenschaft zu messen sucht, nur um dabei zu Maßen, Zahlen,
  Größenordnungen zu gelangen, zu denen der Menschengeist gar kein
  Verhältnis mehr hat, und die sich im Theoretischen und Abstrakten, im
  völlig Unsinnlichen, um nicht zu sagen: Unsinnigen verlieren.

Thomas Mann, Doktor Faustus, Ch. 27

The Reeh-Schlieder theorem [ 69 ] is a result in axiomatic quantum field
theory which states that for a scalar Wightman field in Minkowski
spacetime any state in the Hilbert space can be approximated arbitrarily
well by acting on the vacuum with operations performed in any prescribed
open region. The physical meaning of this is that the vacuum state has
very many non-local correlations and an experimenter in any given region
can exploit the vacuum fluctuations by performing a suitable measurement
in order to produce any desired state up to arbitrary accuracy.

The original proof uses analytic continuation arguments, an approach
which was extended to analytic spacetimes in [ 80 ] by replacing the
spectrum condition of the Wightman axioms in Minkowski spacetime by an
analytic microlocal spectrum condition. For spacetimes which are not
analytic a result by Strohmaier [ 79 ] (see also [ 83 ] ) shows that in
a stationary spacetime all ground and thermal (KMS-)states of several
types of free fields (including the Klein-Gordon, Dirac and Proca field)
also have the Reeh-Schlieder property. To prove the existence of such
states directly one may need to make further assumptions, depending on
the type of field (see [ 79 ] ).

In this chapter we will investigate whether Reeh-Schlieder states exist
in general globally hyperbolic spacetimes, which may be neither analytic
nor stationary. First we will define and discuss the Reeh-Schlieder
property in the context of locally covariant quantum field theory in
section 5.1 and discuss the relevant fact that not all states on an
algebra need to be in the physical state space. Next we will prove some
general results in section 5.2 , namely that the Reeh-Schlieder property
is local and stable under purifications. We then proceed to discuss the
possibility of deforming a Reeh-Schlieder state on one spacetime into a
Reeh-Schlieder state on a diffeomorphic (but not isometric) spacetime in
section 5.3 . For this we use the time-slice axiom and the technique of
spacetime deformation as pioneered in [ 38 ] and as applied successfully
to prove a spin-statistics theorem in curved spacetime in [ 85 ] . We
will prove that, given a Reeh-Schlieder state on the initial globally
hyperbolic spacetime, we can find for every region in the deformed
spacetime a state in the physical state space that has the
Reeh-Schlieder property for that particular region (but maybe not for
all regions). After these general results we specialise in section 5.4
to the Borchers-Uhlmann functor @xmath of chapter 3 and give a smoothly
covariant condition on states that guarantees that a state has the
Reeh-Schlieder property and satisfies the @xmath SC. Next we specialise
even further to the real free scalar field in Minkowski spacetime and we
prove the existence of many Hadamard Reeh-Schlieder states in section
5.5 . Finally, we draw some conclusions concerning the Reeh-Schlieder
property in locally covariant quantum field theory in section 5.6 .

### 5.1 The Reeh-Schlieder property in a locally covariant quantum field
theory

In locally covariant quantum field theory we define the Reeh-Schlieder
property as follows:

###### Definition 5.1.1

Consider a locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath with a state
space @xmath . A state @xmath has the Reeh-Schlieder property for a
cc-region @xmath iff

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We then say that @xmath is a Reeh-Schlieder state for @xmath . We say
that @xmath is a (full) Reeh-Schlieder state , or that @xmath has the
(full) Reeh-Schlieder property , iff it is a Reeh-Schlieder state for
all cc-regions in @xmath .

The original result of [ 69 ] then states that the vacuum state @xmath
of a scalar Wightman field theory in Minkowski spacetime @xmath has the
full Reeh-Schlieder property. It implies that the vacuum is an entangled
state even over causally disjoint regions of spacetime [ 56 , 21 ] .
(Even if a state has the Reeh-Schlieder property only for a certain
cc-region @xmath and the theory is nowhere classical, there exist
non-local correlations between @xmath and any cc-region @xmath
space-like to it [ 68 ] ). Furthermore, the entanglement can be improved
using a distillation procedure (see [ 86 ] ) to approximate a maximal
violation of the Bell inequalities (for appropriate observables in the
two disjoint regions). Moreover, it is argued in [ 22 ] that these
non-local correlations cannot easily be avoided. Indeed, if there is one
vector in a Hilbert space which defines a state with the Reeh-Schlieder
property for a theory defined by @xmath -algebras, and this is the case
for example for the Minkowski vacuum of the real free scalar field in
terms of the local Weyl algebras (i.e. using the functor @xmath of
chapter 3 ), then the same is true for a generic vector in that Hilbert
space. (We will make this statement more precise below in definition
5.1.2 .) Therefore, by Fell’s theorem (see [ 40 ] theorem 3.2.2.13), we
cannot distinguish a Reeh-Schlieder vector-state from a vector-state
that does not have the Reeh-Schlieder property. ¹ ¹ 1 [ 22 ] contrasts
this with the entanglement that can occur between two systems in quantum
mechanics and that can be undone by performing a measurement on one of
the systems. However, [ 22 ] also argues that scientific methodology is
not in danger due to another property commonly found in quantum field
theories, namely the split property (see e.g. [ 40 ] ). This allows one
to isolate systems “for all practical purposes”. Another consequence of
the Reeh-Schlieder theorem is that every nontrivial positive local
operator has a strictly positive vacuum expectation value (see e.g.
proposition 5.2.2 ahead). The Reeh-Schlieder theorem therefore poses a
problem for a notion of localised particles, because it is impossible to
create, annihilate or even just count particles using local operations
and again these problems cannot easily be avoided [ 41 ] .

Apparently the conclusion must be that entanglement is the rule rather
than the exception. On the other hand, it can be argued that the energy
required to approximate a given state increases with the desired
accuracy (see [ 40 ] p.254, [ 22 ] ). In other words, it may take an
increasingly large ensemble in order for a selective measurement to give
a positive result within the desired range of accuracy. It is also known
that the strength of any non-classical correlations decay exponentially
with the separation between the regions of interest (see [ 81 ] ). The
Reeh-Schlieder theorem also has many theoretical implications, both of a
mathematical and of a physical nature. On the mathematical side it can
be used to determine the type of local von Neumann algebras [ 48 , 1 ]
and it allows the application of Tomita-Takesaki modular theory, which
has led to a field of research in its own right (see [ 12 ] for a
review).

An extension of the Reeh-Schlieder theorem to curved spacetimes would
have physical implications as well. One of its consequences would be the
existence of correlations between observables localised in regions which
are causally disjoint, or even in regions which have always been
causally disjoint. This has led to speculations about its importance for
the physical understanding of e.g. black holes ( [ 5 ] ) and the early
universe. As Wald puts it in the beautiful little essay [ 89 ] :

  The point I do wish to make is that – at the very least – it is far
  from obvious, a priori , that the relevant correlations beyond the
  horizon in a quantum field theory model will be small, and the neglect
  of such correlations in analyzing any phenomenon must be justified by
  quantitative estimates rather than by a simple appeal to a lack of
  causal communication. Indeed, because of the fundamental and universal
  nature of these correlations, it would be surprising if they did not
  play some important role in our understanding of the nature of the
  early universe.

Wald then goes on to state that

  …the strength and generality of the Reeh-Schleider [sic] theorem in
  flat spacetime is such that it seems inconceivable that similar
  correlations could fail to be present for essentially all states and
  over essentially all regions in any curved spacetime, including
  cosmological spacetimes with horizons.

As we already mentioned, the Reeh-Schlieder property has indeed been
shown to hold in curved spacetimes too, under certain conditions.
However, there are also some arguments that suggest it may not be quite
as general as Wald suggests. Indeed, even in Minkowski spacetime it can
be argued that the property may not be as omnipresent as the references
above make us believe. To be specific, let us examine the case of the
Minkowski vacuum state @xmath of the real free scalar field, described
by a net of algebras [ 40 , 16 ] . If this field is described by the
functor @xmath (see chapter 3 ), then the results of [ 22 , 31 ] do show
that a generic vector in @xmath defines a state in the state space
@xmath (for the state space defined in chapter 3 ) which has the
Reeh-Schlieder property. But now suppose that we describe the real free
scalar field by the free field Borchers-Uhlmann functor @xmath .
Although both functors are meant to describe the same field, and despite
the correspondence between the descriptions (see the discussion above
and below definition 3.2.3 ), the mathematical situation is very
different. One can check in this concrete example that a Reeh-Schlieder
state for @xmath is also a Reeh-Schlieder state for @xmath (see e.g. [ 3
] theorem 4.16, [ 17 ] ), however, how do we know that such a
Reeh-Schlieder state, defined by a generic vector in the Hilbert space
@xmath , is actually in the state space @xmath ? In other words, how do
we know if such a Reeh-Schlieder state is of any physical interest?

The next question is therefore: how big is the difference between the
state spaces @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath ? Note that both of
these state spaces contain all quasi-free Hadamard states, which are
certainly of physical interest. However, to make @xmath closed under
operations from @xmath , which is required by our definition of a state
space (see definition 2.1.2 ), we included all states that are locally
quasi-equivalent to a quasi-free Hadamard state. This makes the state
space @xmath much larger than @xmath , at least in the sense that a
generic vector in @xmath does not define a Hadamard state on @xmath . To
close this subsection we will make this statement precise, which
requires some more terminology (see e.g. [ 23 ] ).

###### Definition 5.1.2

A @xmath set in a topological space @xmath is a countable intersection
of open sets. An @xmath set is the complement of a @xmath set.

A Baire space is a topological space in which any countable intersection
of dense open sets is a dense set.

We say that a property is generic in a Baire space @xmath iff there is a
dense @xmath in @xmath of elements which have this property.

It is known that every complete pseudo-metric space, and in particular
every Hilbert space, is a Baire space by Baire’s theorem (see [ 23 ]
section 9.2b). Note that for any countable sequence of generic
properties @xmath the property @xmath of having all @xmath is still
generic. It follows from [ 31 ] (see also [ 22 ] ) that the property
that a vector in @xmath defines a Reeh-Schlieder state is a generic
property. We will now argue that the property of not defining a Hadamard
state is also generic. Indeed, a vector @xmath which defines a Hadamard
state must be in the domain of the unbounded field operator @xmath for
every @xmath . Using @xmath we see that @xmath must also be in the
domain of @xmath , which is a self-adjoint operator (see [ 49 ] theorem
2.7.8v). The domain of @xmath , although dense, is the complement of a
dense @xmath :

###### Lemma 5.1.3

The domain of a self-adjoint operator @xmath on a Hilbert space @xmath
is a meagre @xmath , i.e. it is the complement of a dense @xmath .

Proof. For every @xmath we define @xmath , where @xmath denotes the
domain of @xmath . Note that @xmath . To show that @xmath is closed we
choose a Cauchy sequence @xmath such that @xmath . We let @xmath denote
the spectral projection of @xmath on the interval @xmath and compute:
@xmath . Taking @xmath shows that @xmath for all @xmath and hence @xmath
, i.e. @xmath . Finally the sets @xmath are nowhere dense, because
@xmath is unbounded. This completes the proof. @xmath

### 5.2 Some general results on the Reeh-Schlieder property

As a prelude to our study of the Reeh-Schlieder property in curved
spacetimes we will now prove some relatively easy statements which hold
under very general assumptions. In this subsection we will first
consider a fixed globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath and a locally
covariant quantum field theory @xmath with a state space @xmath .

We first prove a well-known consequence of the Reeh-Schlieder theorem
(see e.g. [ 40 ] ).

###### Definition 5.2.1

A vector @xmath in a Hilbert space @xmath is a separating vector for a
@xmath -algebra @xmath of operators on @xmath iff @xmath with @xmath
implies @xmath .

###### Proposition 5.2.2

Let @xmath be a state on the @xmath -algebra @xmath which has the
Reeh-Schlieder property for a cc-region @xmath . Assume that @xmath is
causal and let @xmath be a cc-region, then @xmath is a separating vector
for @xmath .

Proof. Suppose that @xmath for some @xmath , then @xmath for all @xmath
. By the Reeh-Schlieder property the set @xmath is dense, so by
continuity of @xmath we find @xmath for all @xmath and hence @xmath .
@xmath

This result implies that every non-zero positive operator @xmath in
@xmath has a strictly positive expectation value in the state @xmath ,
because if we have @xmath then @xmath .

Next we prove that the Reeh-Schlieder property is stable under
purification, which appears to be a hitherto unknown result:

###### Proposition 5.2.3

Let @xmath be a state which has the Reeh-Schlieder property for a
cc-region @xmath and suppose that @xmath is a mixture of @xmath , i.e.
@xmath with @xmath . Then @xmath also has the Reeh-Schlieder property
for @xmath .

Proof. We fix arbitrary @xmath and @xmath and use theorem 2.1.4 to find
an @xmath such that @xmath . We can then find @xmath such that @xmath ,
by the assumed Reeh-Schlieder property. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence @xmath . @xmath

It is interesting to note that the same purification argument works for
the Hadamard condition on states of the real free scalar field:

###### Proposition 5.2.4

If @xmath is a Hadamard state on @xmath and @xmath with @xmath for any
states @xmath on @xmath , then @xmath is a Hadamard sate.

Proof. By positivity of @xmath we have the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality for
all @xmath : @xmath . In particular, @xmath . If @xmath in @xmath then
@xmath by definition 3.1.1 and the continuity of the canonical
projection @xmath . Hence @xmath , which proves that @xmath is a
continuous state on @xmath . For the two-point distribution we have
@xmath which can be rewritten in terms of Hilbert-space-valued
distributions as @xmath . (Note that these distributions may take values
in different Hilbert spaces.) This implies @xmath and hence by theorem
A.1.6 @xmath . Using the commutation relations and propagation of
singularities as in the proof of proposition 3.1.13 it now follows that
@xmath is Hadamard. @xmath

To conclude this section we prove that for an additive @xmath -algebraic
theory the Reeh-Schlieder property is a local property. This is a new
and interesting result, but we will not need it elsewhere.

###### Theorem 5.2.5

Consider an additive locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath , a
globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath and a state @xmath on @xmath .
Assume that every point @xmath is contained in a cc-region @xmath such
that @xmath has the Reeh-Schlieder property, i.e. such that for every
cc-region @xmath we have @xmath . Then @xmath is a Reeh-Schlieder state.

As a matter of terminology we will say that @xmath has the
Reeh-Schlieder property on @xmath iff @xmath has the Reeh-Schlieder
property. (Cf. definition 5.1.1 ).

Proof. Let @xmath , @xmath be an open covering of @xmath by cc-regions
such that @xmath has the Reeh-Schlieder property on @xmath and let
@xmath be an arbitrary cc-region. We wish to show that @xmath has the
Reeh-Schlieder property for @xmath . This is certainly the case if
@xmath has the Reeh-Schlieder property for a subset of @xmath , so
without loss of generality we may shrink @xmath and assume that @xmath
for some index @xmath . Now suppose for the moment that @xmath has the
Reeh-Schlieder property for @xmath (and not just on @xmath ). Given
arbitrary @xmath and @xmath we can then find @xmath such that @xmath .
Moreover, because the restriction @xmath of @xmath to @xmath is a
Reeh-Schlieder state we can find a @xmath such that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Together this implies that @xmath , so @xmath then has the
Reeh-Schlieder property for @xmath . It remains to prove that @xmath has
the Reeh-Schlieder property for @xmath . For this we prove the following
lemma.

###### Lemma 5.2.6

For all @xmath , @xmath and @xmath there is a @xmath such that @xmath .

Proof. We refer to figure 5.1 for a depiction of the geometry of this
proof.

Let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be given. Because @xmath is connected we
can find a continuous curve @xmath between points @xmath and @xmath .
For each point @xmath we choose @xmath such that @xmath contains the
point @xmath . The image of @xmath is a compact subset of @xmath ,
because it is the continuous image of a compact set. Therefore, we can
find a finite number of points @xmath such that the cc-regions @xmath
cover the image of @xmath . We now choose a subcover inductively as
follows. First we take @xmath . We let @xmath and choose @xmath such
that @xmath . We then set @xmath and choose @xmath such that @xmath . We
proceed in this way until we find an index @xmath with @xmath .
Extending the sequence @xmath by one set if necessary we may assume that
@xmath . Notice that by construction @xmath for @xmath , so we can
choose cc-regions @xmath for @xmath . Using the same calculation as in
equation ( 5.2 ) and the hypothesis that @xmath is a Reeh-Schlieder
state on each @xmath we can find @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and proceed inductively to find @xmath for @xmath such that @xmath .
This provides us with a @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

We resume the proof of theorem 5.2.5 and prove that @xmath has the
Reeh-Schlieder property for @xmath for a fixed but arbitrary index
@xmath . We consider a monomial @xmath where @xmath for some indices
@xmath and set @xmath . We assume that all @xmath are non-zero and we
define @xmath by @xmath . Given @xmath we can then find elements @xmath
for @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Indeed, for @xmath this follows directly from the lemma. We can then
proceed inductively to find @xmath as follows. We notice that @xmath for
@xmath and apply the lemma to choose @xmath such that @xmath . Then we
use the estimate

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

which is ( 5.2 ) for the index @xmath . This provides us with @xmath
such that @xmath .

Now let @xmath be the @xmath -algebra of all (finite) polynomials of
elements in @xmath . Given @xmath and @xmath we can apply the result of
the previous paragraph to each monomial in @xmath and find a @xmath such
that @xmath . In other words, @xmath is dense in @xmath . Notice that
@xmath is the smallest @xmath -algebra that contains all algebras @xmath
and that we have @xmath by additivity, where we take the norm closure.
It follows that @xmath is dense in @xmath . This completes the proof.
@xmath

### 5.3 The Reeh-Schlieder property under spacetime deformation

The existence of Hadamard states of the free scalar field in certain
curved spacetimes was proved in [ 38 ] by deforming Minkowski spacetime
into another globally hyperbolic spacetime. Using a similar but slightly
more technical spacetime deformation argument [ 85 ] proved a
spin-statistics theorem for locally covariant quantum field theories
with a spin structure, given that such a theorem holds in Minkowski
spacetime. In subsection 5.3.2 we will assume the existence of a
Reeh-Schlieder state in one globally hyperbolic spacetime and try to
deduce the existence of such states on a deformed spacetime along the
same lines. As a geometric prerequisite we will state and prove in
subsection 5.3.1 a spacetime deformation result employing similar
methods to the references mentioned above.

#### 5.3.1 Spacetime deformation

First we recall the spacetime deformation result due to [ 38 ] :

###### Proposition 5.3.1

Consider two globally hyperbolic spacetimes @xmath , @xmath , with
space-like Cauchy surfaces @xmath both diffeomorphic to @xmath . Then
there exists a globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath with space-like
Cauchy surfaces @xmath , @xmath , such that @xmath is isometrically
diffeomorphic to @xmath and an open neighbourhood of @xmath is
isometrically diffeomorphic to an open neighbourhood of @xmath .

We omit the proof of this result, because we will prove the stronger
proposition 5.3.3 later on. Note, however, the following interesting
corollary (cf. [ 16 ] section 4):

###### Corollary 5.3.2

Two globally hyperbolic spacetimes @xmath with diffeomorphic Cauchy
surfaces are mapped to isomorphic @xmath -algebras @xmath by any locally
covariant quantum field theory @xmath satisfying the time-slice axiom
(with some state space @xmath ).

Proof. Consider two diffeomorphic globally hyperbolic spacetimes @xmath
for @xmath , let @xmath be the deforming spacetime of proposition 5.3.1
and let @xmath be open neighbourhoods of the Cauchy surfaces @xmath
which are isometrically diffeomorphic under @xmath to the open
neighbourhoods @xmath of the Cauchy surfaces @xmath . We may take the
@xmath and @xmath to be cc-regions (as will be shown in proposition
5.3.3 ), so that the maps @xmath determine isomorphisms @xmath in @xmath
. It then follows from lemma 2.4.4 that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the @xmath are @xmath -isomorphisms. This proves the assertion.
@xmath

At this point a warning seems in place. When @xmath are two Lorentzian
metrics on a manifold @xmath such that both @xmath are objects in @xmath
, corollary 5.3.2 gives a @xmath -isomorphism @xmath between the
algebras @xmath . Hence, if @xmath is a cc-region for @xmath then @xmath
is a @xmath -isomorphism from @xmath into @xmath . However, the image
cannot always be identified with @xmath , because @xmath need not be
causally convex for @xmath , in which case the object is not defined.

We now formulate and prove our spacetime deformation result. The
geometric situation is schematically depicted in figure 5.2 .

###### Proposition 5.3.3

Consider two globally hyperbolic spacetimes @xmath , @xmath , with
diffeomorphic Cauchy surfaces and a bounded cc-region @xmath with
non-empty causal complement, @xmath . Then there are a globally
hyperbolic spacetime @xmath , space-like Cauchy surfaces @xmath and
@xmath and bounded cc-regions @xmath and @xmath such that the following
hold:

1.   there are isometric diffeomorphisms @xmath where @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath and @xmath ,

2.  @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,

3.  @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

Proof. First we recall the result of [ 9 ] that for any globally
hyperbolic spacetime @xmath there is a diffeomorphism @xmath for some
smooth three dimensional manifold @xmath in such a way that for each
@xmath the surface @xmath is a space-like Cauchy surface. The
pushed-forward metric @xmath makes @xmath a globally hyperbolic
manifold, where @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the differential of the canonical projection on the first
coordinate @xmath , which is a smooth time function, @xmath is a
strictly positive smooth function and @xmath is a (space and time
dependent) Riemannian metric on @xmath . The orientation and
time-orientation of @xmath induce an orientation and time-orientation on
@xmath via @xmath . (If necessary we may compose @xmath with the
time-reversal diffeomorphism @xmath of @xmath to ensure that the
function @xmath increases in the positive time direction.) Applying the
above to the @xmath gives us two diffeomorphisms @xmath , where @xmath
as a manifold. Note that we can take the same @xmath for both @xmath by
the assumption that the @xmath have diffeomorphic Cauchy surfaces.

Define @xmath and let @xmath and @xmath be the minimum and maximum value
that the function @xmath attains on the compact set @xmath . We now
prove that @xmath . Indeed, if this were empty, then we see that @xmath
contains @xmath and hence also @xmath and @xmath . In fact, we have
@xmath . Indeed, if @xmath is in @xmath then we can consider a basis of
neighbourhoods of @xmath of the form @xmath . Now, if @xmath is in such
a basic neighbourhood, then the same neighbourhood also contains a point
@xmath . Hence, given a sequence @xmath in @xmath converging to @xmath
we find a sequence @xmath in @xmath converging to @xmath and we conclude
that @xmath . Similarly we can show that @xmath . It then follows that
@xmath and @xmath , so together with @xmath we find that @xmath and
@xmath . This contradicts our assumption on @xmath , so we must have
@xmath . Then we may choose @xmath such that @xmath intersects both
@xmath and @xmath . We define @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

Note that @xmath is compact (see [ 6 ] corollary A.5.4). This means that
we can find relatively compact open sets @xmath such that @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath satisfy @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
We let @xmath and define @xmath and @xmath . It follows from lemma 2.2.2
that @xmath are bounded cc-regions in @xmath . Clearly @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath .

Next we choose @xmath and define @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
Let @xmath be relatively compact connected open sets such that @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We define @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath . Again by lemma 2.2.2 these are
bounded cc-regions in @xmath . Note that @xmath and @xmath .

The metric @xmath of @xmath is now chosen to be of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we have written @xmath , @xmath is a smooth function on @xmath
which is identically @xmath on @xmath , identically @xmath on @xmath and
@xmath on the intermediate region @xmath and @xmath is a strictly
positive smooth function which is identically @xmath on @xmath . It is
then clear that the maps @xmath restrict to isometric diffeomorphisms
@xmath .

The function @xmath may be chosen small enough on the region @xmath to
make @xmath globally hyperbolic. (As pointed out in [ 38 ] in their
proof of proposition 5.3.1 , choosing @xmath small “closes up” the light
cones and prevents causal curves from “running off to spatial infinity”
in the intermediate region.) Furthermore, using the compactness of
@xmath and the continuity of @xmath we see that we may choose @xmath
small enough on this set to ensure that any causal curve through @xmath
must also intersect @xmath and any causal curve through @xmath must also
intersect @xmath . This means that @xmath and @xmath and hence @xmath
and @xmath . This completes the proof. @xmath

The analogue of corollary 5.3.2 for the situation of proposition 5.3.3
is:

###### Proposition 5.3.4

Consider a locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath with a state
space @xmath satisfying the time-slice axiom and let @xmath , @xmath ,
be two globally hyperbolic spacetimes with diffeomorphic Cauchy
surfaces. For any bounded cc-region @xmath with non-empty causal
complement there are bounded cc-regions @xmath and a @xmath -isomorphism
@xmath such that @xmath and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Moreover, if the space-like Cauchy surfaces of the @xmath are
non-compact and @xmath is any bounded cc-region, then there are bounded
cc-regions @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath for @xmath and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the same @xmath -isomorphism as in the first part of
this proposition.

Proof. We apply proposition 5.3.3 to obtain sets @xmath with and
isomorphisms @xmath associated to the isometric diffeomorphisms @xmath .
As in the proof of corollary 5.3.2 the @xmath give rise to @xmath
-isomorphisms @xmath and @xmath is a @xmath -isomorphism from @xmath to
@xmath . Using the properties of @xmath stated in proposition 5.3.3 we
deduce:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here we repeatedly used equation ( 2.2 ) and lemma 2.4.4 (the time-slice
axiom). This proves the first part of the proposition.

Now suppose that the Cauchy-surfaces are non-compact and let @xmath be
any bounded cc-region. We refer to figure 5.3 for a depiction of this
part of the proof.

First choose Cauchy surfaces @xmath such that @xmath . Note that @xmath
is compact, so it has a relatively compact connected open neighbourhood
@xmath . Choosing @xmath appropriately we see that @xmath is a bounded
cc-region in @xmath by lemma 2.2.2 and as usual we set @xmath .

Now let @xmath be Cauchy surfaces such that @xmath and note that @xmath
is again compact, so we can find a relatively compact connected open
neighbourhood @xmath and use lemma 2.2.2 to define the bounded cc-region
@xmath and @xmath .

Next we let @xmath be a connected relatively compact set such that
@xmath . Such an @xmath exists because @xmath is non-compact. We then
define @xmath and @xmath . We see that @xmath is a bounded cc-region and
@xmath where @xmath is a relatively compact open set. In fact, we can
choose @xmath to be connected because @xmath lies in a connected
component @xmath of @xmath . We now define the bounded cc-region @xmath
and @xmath , so that @xmath and @xmath .

So far the geometry of the proof. Now note that @xmath by lemma 2.4.4 on
@xmath and that @xmath . Applying lemma 2.4.4 in @xmath we see that
@xmath and we have @xmath . Putting this together yields the inclusion:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly we have @xmath , @xmath and @xmath by lemma 2.4.4 . This
yields the inclusion:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

#### 5.3.2 Deformation of the Reeh-Schlieder property

We will now describe some of the consequences of the spacetime
deformation argument of the previous subsection for the Reeh-Schlieder
property. Unfortunately it is not clear that we can deform a
Reeh-Schlieder state into another (full) Reeh-Schlieder state, but we do
have the following more limited result:

###### Theorem 5.3.5

Consider a locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath with state
space @xmath which satisfies the time-slice axiom. Let @xmath , @xmath ,
be two globally hyperbolic spacetimes with diffeomorphic Cauchy surfaces
and suppose that @xmath is a Reeh-Schlieder state. Then given any
bounded cc-region @xmath with non-empty causal complement, @xmath ,
there is a @xmath -isomorphism @xmath such that @xmath has the
Reeh-Schlieder property for @xmath .

Moreover, if the Cauchy surfaces of the @xmath are non-compact and
@xmath is a bounded cc-region, then there is a bounded cc-region @xmath
for which @xmath has the Reeh-Schlieder property.

Proof. For the first statement let @xmath and @xmath be as in the first
part of proposition 5.3.4 and note that @xmath gives rise to a unitary
map @xmath . This map is the expression of the essential uniqueness of
the GNS-representation, so that @xmath and @xmath . The Reeh-Schlieder
property for @xmath then follows from the observation that @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly for the second statement, given a bounded cc-region @xmath and
choosing @xmath as in the second statement of proposition 5.3.4 we see
that @xmath . @xmath

The second part of theorem 5.3.5 means that @xmath is a Reeh-Schlieder
state for all cc-regions that are big enough. Indeed, if @xmath is a
sufficiently small cc-region then @xmath is connected (recall that we
work with four-dimensional spacetimes) and therefore @xmath has the
Reeh-Schlieder property for some cc-region in @xmath and hence also for
@xmath itself.

In the remainder of this subsection we consider only @xmath -algebraic
theories, because they allow us to draw stronger conclusions than for
general topological @xmath -algebras. We begin with the following
consequence of theorem 5.3.5 :

###### Corollary 5.3.6

In the situation of theorem 5.3.5 , if @xmath is a causal locally
covariant quantum field theory, then @xmath is a cyclic and separating
vector for the local von Neumann algebra @xmath . If the Cauchy surfaces
are non-compact @xmath is a separating vector for all @xmath where
@xmath is a bounded cc-region.

Proof. Recall that a vector is a separating vector for a von Neumann
algebra @xmath iff it is a cyclic vector for the commutant @xmath ( [ 49
] proposition 5.5.11, see also our proof of proposition 5.2.2 ).
Choosing @xmath as in the first part of proposition 5.3.4 we have @xmath
by the inclusion ( 5.4 ). Therefore the commutant of @xmath contains
@xmath . As @xmath this commutant contains the local algebra of some
cc-region for which @xmath is cyclic. Hence @xmath is a separating
vector for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath .

If the Cauchy surfaces are non-compact, @xmath is a bounded region and
@xmath is as in theorem 5.3.5 , then @xmath contains @xmath , for which
@xmath is cyclic. It follows that @xmath is separating for @xmath .
@xmath

If the theory is nowhere classical then this corollary implies that
there exist non-local correlations between @xmath and any cc-region
@xmath space-like to it, just as in the Minkowski spacetime case (see
e.g. [ 68 ] ). Also, if the Cauchy surfaces are non-compact, any
localised non-trivial positive observable has a strictly positive
expectation value.

If the state space is locally quasi-equivalent and large enough it is
possible to show the existence of full Reeh-Schlieder states. The proof
uses abstract existence arguments, as opposed to the proof of theorem
5.3.5 which is constructive, at least in principle.

###### Theorem 5.3.7

Let @xmath be a locally covariant quantum field theory with a locally
quasi-equivalent state space @xmath which is causal and satisfies the
time-slice axiom. Assume that @xmath is maximal in the sense that for
any state @xmath on some @xmath which is locally quasi-equivalent to a
state in @xmath we have @xmath .

Let @xmath , @xmath , be two globally hyperbolic spacetimes with
diffeomorphic non-compact Cauchy surfaces and assume that @xmath is a
Reeh-Schlieder state. Then @xmath contains a (full) Reeh-Schlieder
state.

Proof. Let @xmath be a countable basis for the topology of @xmath
consisting of bounded cc-regions with non-empty causal complement. (That
every open set contains a cc-region can be seen by using a convex normal
neighbourhood and choosing a sufficiently small region of the form
@xmath , cf. [ 88 ] theorem 8.1.2 and our lemma 2.2.2 ). We then apply
theorem 5.3.5 to each @xmath to obtain a sequence of states @xmath which
have the Reeh-Schlieder property for @xmath . We write @xmath and let
@xmath denote its GNS-triple.

For all @xmath we now find a bounded cc-region @xmath such that @xmath .
For this purpose we first choose a Cauchy surface @xmath and note that
@xmath is compact. Letting @xmath be a compact connected set containing
@xmath in its interior it suffices to choose @xmath for Cauchy surfaces
@xmath to the future, respectively to the past, of @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . Note that @xmath and @xmath are cyclic and separating vectors
for @xmath and @xmath respectively, by @xmath and by corollary 5.3.6 .
Because @xmath and @xmath are locally quasi-equivalent there is a @xmath
-isomorphism @xmath . In the presence of the cyclic and separating
vectors @xmath and @xmath the @xmath -isomorphism @xmath is implemented
by a unitary map @xmath (see [ 49 ] theorem 7.2.9). We claim that @xmath
is cyclic for @xmath . Indeed, by the definition of quasi-equivalence we
have @xmath on @xmath , so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We now apply the results of [ 31 ] to conclude that @xmath contains a
dense set of vectors @xmath which are cyclic and separating for all
@xmath simultaneously. Because each cc–region @xmath contains some
@xmath we see that @xmath defines a full Reeh-Schlieder state. Finally,
because the GNS-triple of @xmath is just @xmath we see that it is
locally quasi-equivalent to @xmath and hence @xmath . @xmath

Although the state space may in general not be big enough to contain
full Reeh-Schlieder states, theorem 5.3.5 is already enough for some
useful applications. As an example we present the following conclusion
concerning the type of local von Neumann algebras:

###### Corollary 5.3.8

Consider a nowhere classical causal locally covariant quantum field
theory @xmath with a locally quasi-equivalent state space @xmath which
satisfies the time-slice axiom. Let @xmath , @xmath , be two globally
hyperbolic spacetimes with diffeomorphic Cauchy surfaces and let @xmath
be a Reeh-Schlieder state. Then for any state @xmath and any cc-region
@xmath the local von Neumann algebra @xmath is not finite.

Proof. We will use proposition 5.5.3 in [ 7 ] , which says that @xmath
is not finite if the GNS-vector @xmath is a cyclic and separating vector
for @xmath and for a proper sub-algebra @xmath . Note that we can drop
the superscript @xmath if @xmath and @xmath are bounded, by local
quasi-equivalence.

First we consider @xmath . For any bounded cc-region @xmath such that
@xmath we can find bounded cc-regions @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath
. By the Reeh-Schlieder property the GNS-vector @xmath is cyclic for
@xmath and hence also for @xmath . Moreover it is cyclic for @xmath and
therefore it is separating for @xmath and @xmath . Now suppose that
@xmath . Then, by causality:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows that @xmath , which contradicts the nowhere-classicality.
Therefore, the inclusion @xmath must be proper and the cited theorem
applies. Of course, if @xmath is a cc-region that is not bounded, then
it contains a bounded cc-region @xmath as above and @xmath isn’t finite
either for any @xmath . (If @xmath is a partial isometry in the smaller
algebra such that @xmath and @xmath then the same @xmath shows that
@xmath is not finite in the larger algebra.)

Next we consider @xmath and let @xmath be any cc-region. It contains a
cc-region @xmath with @xmath , so we can apply theorem 5.3.5 . Using the
unitary map @xmath we see that @xmath contains @xmath , which is not
finite by the first paragraph. Hence @xmath is not finite and the
statement for @xmath then follows again by inclusion. @xmath

Instead of the nowhere-classicality we could have assumed that the local
von Neumann algebras in @xmath are infinite, which allows us to derive
the same conclusion for @xmath . Unfortunately it is in general
impossible to completely derive the type of the local algebras using
this kind of argument. Even if we know the types of the algebras @xmath
and @xmath in the inclusions ( 5.4 ), we can’t deduce the type of @xmath
.

Another important consequence of proposition 5.3.5 in the @xmath
-algebraic case is that corollary 5.3.6 enables us to apply the
Tomita-Takesaki modular theory to @xmath (or to the von Neumann algebra
of any bounded cc-region @xmath which contains @xmath , if the Cauchy
surfaces are non-compact). More precisely, let @xmath be given and let
@xmath be the bounded cc-regions and @xmath the @xmath -isomorphism of
proposition 5.3.4 , so that @xmath . We can then define @xmath and
obtain @xmath . It then follows that the respective Tomita-operators are
extensions of each other, @xmath (see e.g. [ 49 ] ).

### 5.4 The quasi-analytic wave front set and the Reeh-Schlieder
property for scalar fields

After the general results on the Reeh-Schlieder property presented in
sections 5.2 and 5.3.1 we now specialise to the real scalar field,
described by the Borchers-Uhlmann functor @xmath . The main result of
this section is a smoothly covariant condition on the continuous states
of this algebra that guarantees the Reeh-Schlieder property as well as
the fulfillment of the microlocal spectrum condition. This condition,
which we call the quasi-analytic microlocal spectrum condition, is
analogous to the analytic microlocal spectrum condition of [ 80 ] and
the microlocal spectrum condition. As a preparation to the formulation
of our condition we need to study analytic wave front sets in more
detail in subsection 5.4.1 , in particular their relation to the
boundary of the support of a distribution. We refer to appendix A for
the definition of analytic wave front sets and their properties.

#### 5.4.1 Wave front sets and the support

We begin with a definition concerning the boundary of a closed set (see
e.g. [ 47 ] ):

###### Definition 5.4.1

Let @xmath be a closed subset of a smooth manifold @xmath . The exterior
normal set @xmath of @xmath consists of all @xmath such that @xmath and
there is a real-valued function @xmath with @xmath for all @xmath and
@xmath .

The normal set @xmath of @xmath consists of @xmath such that either
@xmath or @xmath .

If @xmath then @xmath cannot be in the interior of @xmath , because an
extremum of a @xmath function @xmath can only be attained in the
interior of @xmath if @xmath , as is well-known. Conversely,

###### Lemma 5.4.2

For a closed subset @xmath of a smooth manifold @xmath the projection of
@xmath on @xmath is dense in the boundary of @xmath .

Proof. See [ 47 ] proposition 8.5.8. @xmath

Thus the normal set characterises the boundary of the closed set @xmath
very well. Moreover, it is by definition a subset of @xmath and it is
seen to be conic by multiplying the function @xmath in the definition by
a positive real number. This means that it can be compared with the wave
front set:

###### Proposition 5.4.3

Let @xmath be a scalar distribution on an open set @xmath , then @xmath
.

Proof. This is [ 47 ] theorem 8.5.6’. @xmath

###### Remark 5.4.4

As an illustration we consider the case where the analytic wave front
set of the distribution @xmath is empty, @xmath . Proposition 5.4.3 then
tells us that @xmath and by lemma 5.4.2 the boundary of @xmath must be
empty. Another way to reach the same conclusion is to notice that @xmath
is an analytic function, so if there is an @xmath which is not in the
support of @xmath , then @xmath on an open subset of @xmath and hence
@xmath by analyticity. The support of @xmath is either all of @xmath or
empty and in any case the boundary of the support is empty. It would be
unreasonable to expect a similar result for the smooth wave front set,
because one can easily construct smooth compactly supported functions.

Another instructive example, which shows that the support of a
distribution cannot be characterised entirely in terms of the analytic
wave front set, is the following. Let @xmath be the Dirac measure on
@xmath at the point @xmath and consider the distribution @xmath on
@xmath . The support of @xmath is all of @xmath , so its normal set is
empty. On the other hand, @xmath . Indeed, @xmath fails to be analytic
only at @xmath , so there must be some @xmath with @xmath and because
@xmath is real-valued we then also have @xmath . The conclusion then
follows because @xmath is conic.

It follows from proposition 5.4.3 and lemma 5.4.2 that the analytic wave
front set gives only an upper bound on the boundary of the support of a
distribution. Moreover, because this result requires the use of analytic
wave front sets it seems that it can only be formulated on an analytic
manifold. Of course every @xmath manifold allows an analytic structure
compatible with the @xmath structure ( [ 44 ] section 2.5), so this is
not really a restriction. However, this analytic structure is highly
non-unique (unlike the @xmath and @xmath structures, which are unique, [
44 ] theorem 2.2.9 and 2.3.4) and there does not seem to be a natural
choice. The following definition helps us to avoid making a choice and
allows us to sharpen the result of proposition 5.4.3 considerably:

###### Definition 5.4.5

Let @xmath be a distribution on a smooth manifold @xmath with values in
a Banach space @xmath . The quasi-analytic wave front set @xmath of
@xmath is defined to be the conic subset of @xmath consisting of all
@xmath such that for every smooth coordinate map @xmath near @xmath we
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath .

The quasi-analytic wave front set is a closed conic subset of @xmath ,
because it is locally the intersection of the sets @xmath which are
closed in @xmath . It is worth noting that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

because of theorem A.2.2 and the closedness of @xmath , but it is not
clear that equality holds in general, because the union over @xmath does
not commute with the intersection over the choices of coordinates. Also
some of the results in theorem A.2.4 , such as the estimate for the wave
front set of a sum, will fail in general for the quasi-analytic wave
front set. Its usefulness is entirely based on the fact that it is by
definition covariant under smooth diffeomorphisms, but at the same time
contains some of the information of the analytic wave front set (in any
given analytic structure on the manifold @xmath ). More precisely:

###### Lemma 5.4.6

Let @xmath be a distribution on an analytic manifold @xmath with values
in a Banach space @xmath . Then @xmath .

Proof. In any choice of local coordinates @xmath we have @xmath , from
which the first inclusion follows. For the second we only need to choose
@xmath to be analytic and use the definition. @xmath

In general neither of these inclusion is an equality. For the second
inclusion we can see this by considering @xmath , where @xmath is an
analytic function on @xmath and @xmath is a smooth diffeomorphism of
@xmath which is not analytic. In this case @xmath cannot be expected to
be analytic. For the first inclusion we can choose @xmath to be a
compactly supported smooth function and use the following sharpening of
proposition 5.4.3 :

###### Proposition 5.4.7

For a distribution @xmath on a smooth manifold @xmath with values in a
Banach space @xmath we have @xmath for all @xmath .

Proof. If @xmath and @xmath is a smooth choice of coordinates near
@xmath then @xmath by proposition 5.4.3 and theorem A.2.2 . @xmath

###### Remark 5.4.8

To see that proposition 5.4.7 is indeed a sharpening of proposition
5.4.3 one can consider the example of a smooth real-valued function
@xmath . We endow @xmath with the usual analytic structure. It is known
that a generic real-valued function in @xmath is nowhere analytic [ 19 ,
25 ] in which case we have @xmath , i.e. the analytic wave front set
could not be larger. The same is presumably true on an analytic
manifold. On the other hand, a generic smooth function is a Morse
function ( [ 44 ] theorem 6.1.2), which can be expressed locally as a
polynomial of degree @xmath in suitable coordinates. In these
coordinates the function is certainly analytic, so in the generic case
we have @xmath . In the two statements above the notion “generic”
actually refers to two distinct topologies on the set of smooth
functions, namely the weak and the strong topology respectively (see [
44 ] section 2.1). However, for a compact manifold these topologies
coincide, which would imply that at least on a compact manifold we
generically have that @xmath is maximal, whereas @xmath . The conclusion
is that the many possible choices of local coordinates allow us to get a
much stricter upper bound of the normal set @xmath .

The following proposition is a microlocal analogue of (a corollary of)
the edge-of-the-wedge theorem (see e.g. [ 78 ] theorem 2.16 and 2.17 or
[ 47 ] theorem 9.3.5):

###### Proposition 5.4.9

Let @xmath be a distribution on a connected smooth manifold @xmath with
values in a Banach space @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is a non-empty open region, @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath .

Proof. If @xmath , then @xmath so by lemma 5.4.7 both @xmath and @xmath
are in @xmath , which contradicts the assumption. This means that @xmath
is empty and hence the boundary of @xmath is empty too by lemma 5.4.2 .
As @xmath is connected and @xmath is not all of @xmath , we must have
@xmath , i.e. @xmath . @xmath

#### 5.4.2 The quasi-analytic microlocal spectrum condition

We are now in a position to prove the Reeh-Schlieder property for states
that satisfy an appropriate microlocal condition. We will first
reproduce the result of [ 80 ] , using an analytic microlocal spectrum
condition. Then we will generalise this to all states that satisfy a
certain quasi-analytic microlocal spectrum condition and we will discuss
the implications and usefulness of this condition.

The analytic microlocal spectrum condition of [ 80 ] is a direct
generalisation of the (smooth) microlocal spectrum condition:

###### Definition 5.4.10

A spacetime @xmath is an analytic spacetime if it is endowed with an
analytic structure in which the metric is analytic. (Equivalently, all
component functions @xmath of the metric are analytic in any choice of
coordinates on the analytic manifold @xmath .)

A state @xmath on the Borchers-Uhlmann algebra @xmath of an analytic
spacetime @xmath satisfies the analytic microlocal spectrum condition (A
@xmath SC) if and only if @xmath for all @xmath .

Note that the A @xmath SC implies the @xmath SC, because @xmath . It
also implies the Reeh-Schlieder property as follows:

###### Theorem 5.4.11

Let @xmath be a state on the Borchers-Uhlmann algebra @xmath of an
analytic globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath that satisfies the A
@xmath SC. Then @xmath has the Reeh-Schlieder property.

Proof. Our proof follows that of [ 80 ] , which is a generalisation of
the proof in [ 78 ] for the case of a Wightman field in Minkowski
spacetime, using the spectrum condition of the Wightman axioms.

Let @xmath be any cc-region and set @xmath . Notice that @xmath is dense
if and only if @xmath . We now suppose that @xmath , which means that
the distribution

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is identically zero on the open neighbourhood @xmath in @xmath for all
@xmath . Now suppose that @xmath for both choices of the sign. By
theorem A.2.4 we then have @xmath , or @xmath by proposition 3.1.8 .
This is a contradiction, which proves that @xmath and hence also @xmath
. We may therefore apply proposition 5.4.9 to conclude that @xmath on
all of @xmath . This in turn implies that @xmath for all @xmath . The
vectors @xmath with @xmath form a dense subspace of @xmath , so we
conclude @xmath , which completes the proof. @xmath

The proof of theorem 5.4.11 can be generalised considerably. In fact,
the A @xmath SC allows us to derive @xmath , but we only need @xmath to
arrive at the conclusion of theorem 5.4.11 . We will now show that the A
@xmath SC can be weakened to a quasi-analytic microlocal spectrum
condition which is still strong enough to make the proof above work.
There is a subtlety involved, however, because theorem A.2.4 does not
hold for quasi-analytic wave front sets without modification. We
therefore define the following:

###### Definition 5.4.12

Let @xmath be a distribution on the @xmath -fold product @xmath of a
smooth manifold @xmath with values in a Banach space @xmath . We define
the wave front set @xmath to be the conic subset of @xmath consisting of
all points @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a smooth coordinate map on a neighbourhood of all @xmath
, @xmath .

Given a finite number of points @xmath we can always find a coordinate
map which contains these points in its domain by theorem 16.26.9 of [ 28
] . Moreover, when these points are distinct we can choose the analytic
structure near every point arbitrarily by theorem 8.3.1 of [ 44 ] .

Notice that @xmath , but the converse is not true. The point of this
definition is the following result, which presumably fails for @xmath :

###### Theorem 5.4.13

Let @xmath be a Hilbert space, @xmath a smooth manifold and @xmath ,
@xmath , two @xmath -valued distributions on @xmath for some @xmath . We
define the distributions @xmath on @xmath by @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. If @xmath then there is a choice of coordinates @xmath near all
@xmath such that @xmath . Theorem A.2.5 therefore implies @xmath and
hence @xmath . This proves one direction of the first statement. On the
other hand, if @xmath with @xmath then there exists a choice of
coordinates @xmath such that @xmath . Now consider any point @xmath . We
can find a choice of coordinates @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath are
in the domain of @xmath ( [ 28 ] loc. cit.). By composing @xmath with a
suitable diffeomorphism we can ensure that the analytic structure
determined by @xmath near @xmath coincides with that of @xmath ( [ 44 ]
loc. cit.). It then follows from theorem A.2.5 that @xmath and @xmath ,
which completes the proof. @xmath

###### Definition 5.4.14

We say that a state @xmath on the Borchers-Uhlmann algebra @xmath of a
globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath satisfies the quasi-analytic
microlocal spectrum condition (qA @xmath SC) iff @xmath for all @xmath .

Note that this condition is well-defined on a smooth spacetime @xmath
and that it is independent of a choice of coordinates. Morever we have

###### Corollary 5.4.15

Let @xmath be a state on the Borchers-Uhlmann algebra @xmath of a
globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath that satisfies the qA @xmath SC.
Then @xmath has the Reeh-Schlieder property.

Proof. The proof is essentially the same as that of theorem 5.4.11 .
Note in particular that for any @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath by theorem 5.4.13 and the qA @xmath SC. @xmath

The qA @xmath SC is a condition that implies the @xmath SC as well as
the Reeh-Schlieder property, but its practical use is limited unless we
can find states that satisfy this condition. Indeed, on a generic smooth
spacetime the class that is singled out by this condition could be
empty. Unfortunately the condition is very hard to work with in this
respect. It is clear that any state that satisfies the A @xmath SC of [
80 ] also satisfies the qA @xmath SC, but in order to find more examples
one would need to have a better understanding of how the analytic wave
front set changes under a smooth diffeomorphism. Even for ground and
KMS-states on a stationary spacetime, states that are known to have the
Reeh-Schlieder property [ 79 ] , it is not clear whether they satisfy
the qA @xmath SC. One approach would be to consider spacetimes whose
metric is analytic in a time-coordinate. For such metrics some unique
continuation results are known [ 71 ] and these can possibly be extended
to our situation, although we were unable to obtain a result in this
direction. Of course this idea may be criticised, because a generic
metric is not analytic in a time coordinate. On the other hand it can be
argued that we are not interested in generic metrics, but only in
solutions to Einstein’s equation, which makes the situation less clear.
In fact, it may well be easier to use another approach to find
Reeh-Schlieder states with the @xmath SC, for example using the
spacetime deformation argument of section 5.3 . This means that the
importance of the qA @xmath SC is largely academic, but it does prove
the existence of a smoothly covariant condition that ensures the @xmath
SC and the full Reeh-Schlieder property.

### 5.5 The Reeh-Schlieder property for the real free scalar field on
Minkowksi spacetime

It is well-known that the Minkowski vacuum @xmath has the Reeh-Schlieder
property (both as a state on @xmath and on @xmath ). It is also known [
22 , 31 ] that @xmath contains a dense @xmath of vectors which define
Reeh-Schlieder states on @xmath , and these include at least all states
of bounded energy [ 40 ] . We now turn to the question whether we can
find many vectors in @xmath that define Reeh-Schlieder states that are
also Hadamard states.

For a first result we consider the space @xmath of Schwartz-functions,
which is a Fréchet space ( [ 47 ] definition 7.1.2), and we define the
following algebra, in analogy with the Borchers-Uhlmann algebra ² ² 2
Actually, Borchers [ 11 ] works in Minkowski spacetime and defines the
algebra @xmath , so by right this algebra can also be called
“Borchers-Uhlmann algebra”. Note however that the notion of
Schwartz-functions cannot be generalised to general manifolds. :

###### Definition 5.5.1

We define the algebra @xmath , (in the algebraic sense), equipped with:

1.   the product @xmath , extended linearly,

2.   the @xmath -operation @xmath , extended anti-linearly,

3.   a topology such that @xmath converges to @xmath if and only if for
    all @xmath we have @xmath in @xmath and for some @xmath we have
    @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath .

This is a topological @xmath -algebra in the same way as @xmath . In
fact, it contains @xmath as a dense linear subspace and the canonical
embedding is a continuous linear map (see [ 47 ] lemma 7.1.8). Note that
the multiplication in @xmath is jointly continuous, because the map
@xmath is jointly continuous. A state @xmath on @xmath consists of a
sequence of @xmath -point distributions @xmath , which are tempered
distributions.

The state @xmath on @xmath has @xmath -point distributions which are
tempered, so if @xmath is the canonical projection map, then the state
@xmath on @xmath can be extended in a unique way to @xmath . We will
denote this extension by @xmath too.

###### Theorem 5.5.2

Consider the Minkowski vacuum state @xmath on @xmath for a positive mass
@xmath and an @xmath such that @xmath . Then there exists a sequence of
elements @xmath such that @xmath in @xmath as @xmath and such that the
vectors @xmath define states on @xmath which restrict to Hadamard
Reeh-Schlieder states on @xmath .

Proof. For all @xmath we set @xmath , where @xmath denotes the Euclidean
norm on @xmath . Notice that @xmath is analytic for all @xmath and that
@xmath in the space @xmath of tempered distributions.

Every element @xmath in @xmath can be approximated by an elements @xmath
of the form @xmath with @xmath and the result for @xmath follows from
that for @xmath . To prove it for an @xmath of this form we define the
@xmath by @xmath , where @xmath denotes the convolution,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We then have @xmath in @xmath and hence @xmath as @xmath .

Now we let @xmath be a sequence such that @xmath as @xmath (see [ 47 ]
theorem 4.1.5 for the existence of such a sequence). For every pair of
functions @xmath we then have (cf. Parseval’s formula, [ 47 ] theorem
7.1.6)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the fact that @xmath (see the notations and conventions in the
preface) and taking the limit @xmath yields:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.6)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

This uses the fact that a distribution on @xmath is uniquely determined
by its action on functions of the form @xmath (see [ 47 ] theorem
5.1.1). Notice that @xmath is a tempered distribution in @xmath , so
using the fact that @xmath is dense ( [ 47 ] lemma 7.1.8) we may extend
equation ( 5.6 ) to all @xmath . We can then write for all @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the expression on the right hand side is well-defined for each
point @xmath . We now substitute @xmath with @xmath so that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.7)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath and @xmath again denotes the Euclidean norm on @xmath . The
Gaussian on the right-hand side ensures that this expression is
well-defined for every @xmath , so @xmath can be extended to a function
on @xmath . Moreover, for all @xmath we can substitute @xmath for @xmath
in equation ( 5.7 ) and use @xmath , where the remainder term @xmath
satisfies @xmath . Using the Gaussian for convergence it follows that
@xmath is complex differentiable and hence analytic. The same is then
true for @xmath .

Notice that @xmath , by @xmath and the joint continuity of the
multiplication in @xmath . So if @xmath then @xmath for all sufficiently
large @xmath . By dropping a finite number of indices at the start of
the sequence we may assume that this holds for all @xmath . We now claim
that each @xmath defines a state that satisfies the A @xmath SC, from
which the result follows. To prove this claim we note the fact that
@xmath is quasi-free, that @xmath and @xmath are analytic for all @xmath
and that @xmath (see [ 80 ] theorem 6.3 and [ 2 ] section 4.2). The
result then follows from definition 3.1.6 and proposition 3.1.8 . @xmath

To conclude this section we prove that the Minkowski vacuum has a
property which is stronger than the Reeh-Schlieder property.

###### Theorem 5.5.3

Consider the Minkowski vacuum state @xmath on @xmath with its
GNS-quadruple @xmath . If @xmath is any non-empty cc-region, then @xmath
is dense in @xmath in the graph topology (see definition 2.1.3 ).

Proof. Recall that we need to find for each @xmath a sequence of vectors
@xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath . We will use the fact that
@xmath is a quasi-free state that satisfies the A @xmath SC. First we
consider the real Hilbert space @xmath and the subspace @xmath with
@xmath as inner product. (See [ 51 ] appendix A1 for a similar
one-particle Reeh-Schlieder result.) If @xmath is in @xmath , where
@xmath refers to the inner product @xmath on @xmath , then the @xmath
-valued distribution @xmath is identically @xmath on @xmath by complex
linearity. By the A @xmath SC we find that @xmath , so @xmath and @xmath
everywhere by proposition 5.4.9 . Hence, for every @xmath we can find a
sequence @xmath of elements in @xmath such that @xmath in @xmath as
@xmath . This also means that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In other words, @xmath in @xmath . If we decompose @xmath as @xmath
where @xmath , then we may apply the previous reasoning to find
sequences @xmath and @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath as
@xmath . This implies that for @xmath we have @xmath and @xmath as
@xmath .

Now consider the two homogeneous elements @xmath and @xmath of @xmath
with @xmath and @xmath . By the previous paragraph we can find sequences
@xmath in @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath as @xmath . We set @xmath
and notice that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.8)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

We wish to show that @xmath as @xmath . For this it is sufficient to
show that each term in equation ( 5.8 ) converges to @xmath , so we
consider a fixed term containing @xmath . Without loss of generality we
may absorb the factor @xmath into @xmath , so that the term looks like

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The norm squared of @xmath of this term is of the form:

  -- -------- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath         
     @xmath                  (5.9)
     @xmath                  
  -- -------- -------- -- -- -------

Using the fact that @xmath is quasi-free we write this as a sum of terms
and show that each term converges to @xmath . To see this we first note
that the sequences @xmath and @xmath remain bounded, so all factors of
the form @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are either @xmath or @xmath ,
remain bounded by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. Next we notice that

  -- -------- -------- -- --
              @xmath      
     @xmath               
  -- -------- -------- -- --

is a compactly supported smooth function of @xmath . If we substitute
for @xmath either @xmath or @xmath , the right-hand side is estimated by
a bounded constant times a compactly supported smooth function of @xmath
. Using these facts we can integrate out all but a few variables in a
summand of equation ( 5.5 ) to obtain:

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is a constant, @xmath , @xmath is either @xmath or @xmath
for some index @xmath and we sum over both permutations @xmath of the
set @xmath . The first term appears whenever the variable @xmath occurs
in @xmath rather than in some @xmath or @xmath . Both terms in equation
( 5.5 ) can be estimated using the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality and are
then seen to converge to @xmath , because @xmath and @xmath converge to
@xmath as @xmath . This proves that the norm-squared in equation ( 5.5 )
converges to @xmath . The same conclusion remains true when we replace
@xmath by a finite sum of homogenous terms and hence @xmath converges to
@xmath in the graph topology.

By definition of @xmath the linear space @xmath is dense in @xmath in
the graph topology (see definition 2.1.3 and theorem 2.1.4 ). We can
approximate every @xmath by a sequence @xmath of elements of the form
@xmath with @xmath . By joint continuity of the multiplication we find
that @xmath converges to @xmath for every @xmath and hence that @xmath
converges to @xmath for all @xmath . Hence, the elements of the form
@xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are the Hilbert space-valued
distributions, are dense in @xmath in the graph topology. By the
previous paragraph every term in this sum can be approximated in the
graph topology by a term of the same form but with @xmath . @xmath

### 5.6 The Reeh-Schlieder property for the real free scalar field

To conclude this chapter we apply the results of the previous sections
to the free scalar and Dirac field as presented in chapters 3 and 4 and
consider what conclusions we may draw. We first consider the free field
Borchers-Uhlmann functor @xmath with the state space @xmath of Hadamard
states defined in chapter 3 :

###### Proposition 5.6.1

Let @xmath be a globally hyperbolic spacetime, let @xmath a bounded
cc-region with non-empty causal complement and assume that the mass
@xmath is strictly positive. Then there is a state @xmath on @xmath
which has the Reeh-Schlieder property for @xmath .

Proof. We can find an ultrastatic (and hence stationary) spacetime
@xmath diffeomorphic to @xmath . Because @xmath we may apply the results
of [ 50 ] , which imply the existence of a regular quasi-free ground
state @xmath on @xmath . This state is a Reeh-Schlieder state (see [ 79
] ) and is Hadamard because it satisfies the microlocal spectrum
condition (see [ 80 , 66 ] ). It follows that @xmath also defines a
Hadamard state @xmath on @xmath . To see that @xmath is a Reeh-Schlieder
state we choose a non-empty cc-region @xmath and compare the
GNS-representations of @xmath and @xmath . Notice that we may take
@xmath with @xmath , by the essential uniqueness of the
GNS-representation (theorem 2.1.4 ). Because we can identify @xmath (see
[ 13 ] proposition 5.2.4) we see that @xmath must be cyclic for @xmath ,
otherwise it would not be cyclic for @xmath . The fact that @xmath has
the Reeh-Schlieder property therefore follows from the fact that @xmath
has it. Now recall that the locally covariant quantum field theory
@xmath and state space @xmath satisfy the time-slice axiom (see
proposition 3.1.17 ). We can therefore apply theorem 5.3.5 with the
state @xmath , from which the result follows immediately. @xmath

As we noticed in subsection 5.3.2 we can draw stronger conclusions when
the theory is @xmath -algebraic:

###### Proposition 5.6.2

Let @xmath be a globally hyperbolic spacetime with a non-compact Cauchy
surface and assume that the mass @xmath is strictly positive. Then there
is a state @xmath on @xmath such that @xmath contains a dense @xmath
@xmath of vectors which define (full) Reeh-Schlieder states. For all
bounded cc-regions @xmath the local von Neumann algebra @xmath is not
finite and if @xmath has non-zero causal complement then each vector
@xmath is cyclic and separating for @xmath .

Proof. The theory is causal, locally quasi-equivalent, satisfies the
time-slice axiom and is nowhere classical (see proposition 3.2.5 ). Note
that @xmath is well-defined, independent of @xmath by local
quasi-equivalence. As in the proof of proposition 5.6.1 we can find a
Reeh-Schlieder state @xmath on @xmath , where @xmath is a spacetime
diffeomorphic (but not isometric) to @xmath . Now theorem 5.3.7 and the
definition of @xmath prove the existence of a full Reeh-Schlieder state
@xmath and the results of [ 31 ] (see also the proof of theorem 5.3.7 )
provide the dense @xmath set @xmath in @xmath . The other conclusions
then follow from proposition 5.2.2 and corollary 5.3.8 . @xmath

Note that stronger results on the type of the local algebras are known [
84 ] , but we have used a different and interesting method of proof.

It seems likely that our deformation results can be extended from
spacetimes to spin spacetimes, so that similar results can be obtained
for the Dirac. In the case of the functors @xmath and @xmath we
formulate:

###### Conjecture 5.6.3

Let @xmath be a globally hyperbolic spin spacetime and let @xmath be a
bounded cc-region with non-empty causal complement. Then there is a
state @xmath on @xmath which has the Reeh-Schlieder property for @xmath
.

Sketch of proof. We can find an ultrastatic (and hence stationary)
spacetime @xmath diffeomorphic to @xmath . There then exists a
quasi-free KMS state @xmath on @xmath , which has the Reeh-Schlieder
property (see [ 79 ] ). By [ 72 ] this state is Hadamard. Because @xmath
is dense in @xmath we see that @xmath defines a Reeh-Schlieder state on
@xmath , which is Hadamard by definition 4.2.14 and hence satisfies the
@xmath SC by proposition 4.2.17 . The locally covariant quantum field
theory @xmath and the state space @xmath satisfy the time-slice axiom
(see proposition 4.2.25 ). The proof then comes down to a generalisation
of theorem 5.3.5 with the state @xmath , from which the result would
follow immediately. @xmath

To find full Reeh-Schlieder states for the free Dirac field we could
again use the @xmath -algebraic approach and a generalisation of theorem
5.3.7 . However, theorem 5.3.7 requires the theory to be causal, which
means that we would have to use @xmath and not @xmath .

###### Conjecture 5.6.4

Let @xmath be a globally hyperbolic spin spacetime with a non-compact
Cauchy surface. Then there is a state @xmath on @xmath such that @xmath
contains a dense @xmath @xmath of vectors which define (full)
Reeh-Schlieder states. For all bounded cc-regions @xmath with non-zero
causal complement each vector @xmath is cyclic and separating for @xmath
.

Sketch of proof. As in the proof of proposition 5.6.3 we can find an
ultrastatic (and hence stationary) spacetime @xmath diffeomorphic to
@xmath and a quasi-free Reeh-Schlieder state on @xmath which is
Hadamard. The restriction of @xmath to @xmath satisfies the @xmath SC by
proposition 4.2.17 and hence @xmath as a state on @xmath satisfies the
@xmath SC, because this condition depends only the @xmath -point
distributions (see definition 4.2.14 ).

In the Hilbert space @xmath we can define the closed subspaces @xmath
respectively @xmath , generated by the even respectively odd polynomials
of elements @xmath , @xmath . Because @xmath is quasi-free we see that
these spaces are orthogonal and hence @xmath is the direct sum @xmath .
The restriction of @xmath to @xmath has the GNS-triple @xmath , by the
essential uniqueness of the GNS-representation (theorem 2.1.4 ). Because
@xmath has the Reeh-Schlieder property we see that for a non-empty
cc-region @xmath the linear space @xmath is dense in @xmath and the
space spanned by the odd polynomials of @xmath with @xmath is dense in
@xmath . The first of these two statements implies that the restriction
of @xmath to @xmath is a Reeh-Schlieder state.

The locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath with the state space
functor @xmath is causal, locally quasi-equivalent and satisfies the
time-slice axiom by proposition 4.2.27 . A generalisation of theorem
5.3.7 and the definition of @xmath (definition 4.2.16 ) would then prove
the existence of a full Reeh-Schlieder state @xmath and the results of [
31 ] (see also the proof of theorem 5.3.7 ) provide the dense @xmath set
@xmath in @xmath . The final conclusion follows from proposition 5.2.2 .
@xmath

To conclude this chapter we return to the question whether Hadamard
states with the (full) Reeh-Schlieder property exist for the free scalar
field in any globally hyperbolic spacetime. Whereas proposition 5.6.1
provides us with Hadamard states that have the Reeh-Schlieder property
only for a fixed but arbitrary region, proposition 5.6.2 provides us
with full Reeh-Schlieder states that are possibly not Hadamard (recall
lemma 5.1.3 ). The main problem is that theorem 5.3.7 is formulated in
the Hilbert space topology, a topology which is not suitable to obtain
results on Hadamard states. We believe that the invariant dense domain
@xmath in the graph topology, where @xmath is any Hadamard state, might
be more suited for this purpose. A first question of interest is whether
this space can be shown to be a Baire space. The result of theorem 5.5.3
may also be of interest for investigations along these lines.

## Chapter 6 Conclusions

In this thesis we have presented and discussed results on several
aspects of locally covariant quantum field theory [ 16 ] .

First of all we have tried to put the theory in a philosophical context
in chapter 1 and described how its morphisms can be interpreted as a
subsystem relation, which makes the framework a model for modal logic.

In chapter 2 we gave a precise mathematical formulation of locally
covariant quantum field theory, following closely the existing
literature except for the sharpened definition of the time-slice axiom
and the introduction of nowhere-classicality.

Chapter 3 and 4 describe two examples of locally covariant quantum
fields, namely the real free scalar field and the free Dirac field. The
scalar field is described in two well-known approaches in chapter 3 ,
namely the distributional approach based on the Borchers-Uhlmann algebra
and the @xmath -algebraic approach which uses the CCR-algebra (or
Weyl-algebra). This chapter also contains the elegant new results that
the Hadamard condition on the two-point distribution of a state
automatically implies the @xmath SC and that all its truncated @xmath
-point distributions are smooth for @xmath , due to the commutation
relations. Chapter 4 describes the free Dirac field as a locally
covariant quantum field and shows that this can be done in a
representation independent way, so that the physics is determined
entirely by the relations between the adjoint map, charge conjugation
and the Dirac operation. This chapter also contains the proof of a
relation between the stress-energy-momentum tensor and the relative
Cauchy evolution, similar to a result that was already known for the
scalar field [ 16 ] .

In chapter 5 we considered the Reeh-Schlieder property in locally
covariant quantum field theories. We discussed the meaning and
importance of this property and proved several general results and their
application to the real free scalar field. The main issue in finding
full Reeh-Schlieder states was the size of the state space. If the state
space is sufficiently large, we can find many such states. However, if
we restrict our attention to Hadamard states, we have only proved the
existence of Hadamard states with the Reeh-Schlieder property for an
arbitrarily given region. The question whether Hadamard states with the
full Reeh-Schlieder property exist in general curved spacetimes is still
open, although we have given a smoothly covariant sufficient condition
in terms of the new notion of quasi-analytic wave front sets. We also
suggested that the use of the graph topology could be useful to answer
it, if it can be shown that @xmath is a Baire space. As a first result
in this direction we proved that the Minkowski vacuum state has a strong
form of the Reeh-Schlieder property.

Finally, the appendix explains the notion of smooth and analytic wave
front set and gives a systematic and elegant treatment of these notions
for distributions with values in a Banach space, including some new (but
expected) results.

## Appendix A Some results on wave front sets

  ‘…[A]s Aristotle expressly declares on page 633 of the Louvre edition:

    Εντελεχέια τις ἔςτι ϰαί λ´ογος του̃ δυνάμιν ἔχοντος
    τοιου̃δι ἔιται.’

  ‘I am not very well versed in Greek,’ said the giant.
  ‘Nor I either,’ said the philosophical mite.
  ‘Why then do you quote that same Aristotle in Greek?’ resumed the
  Sirian.
  ‘Because,’ answered the other, ‘it is but reasonable we should quote
  what we do not comprehend in a language we do not understand.’

Voltaire, Micromegas: a philosophical tale, Ch. 7

In this appendix we will explain the language of wave front sets, which
is used to formulate some of the results in this thesis. We will define
smooth and analytic wave front sets for Banach space-valued
distributions on complex vector bundles and derive a number of useful
results in an elegant way that directly generalises the scalar-valued
cases. For a detailed introduction to scalar distributions we refer to [
47 ] . More information on Hilbert and Banach space-valued distributions
can be found in [ 80 , 35 ] and for distributions on vector bundles we
refer to [ 73 ] and also [ 27 ] .

### a.1 The smooth wave front set

Let @xmath be a Banach space with continuous dual space @xmath and let
@xmath be a @xmath -valued distribution on an open set @xmath , i.e.
@xmath is a continuous linear map, where @xmath is the space of
test-functions on @xmath in the test-function topology. This means that
for every compact subset @xmath there are constants @xmath and @xmath
such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath . The following lemma will come in useful:

###### Lemma A.1.1

Let @xmath be a @xmath -valued distribution on an open set @xmath ,
where @xmath is a Banach space. If @xmath is an open subset, then @xmath
is smooth on @xmath if and only if @xmath is smooth on @xmath for all
@xmath .

Proof. If @xmath is smooth on @xmath then @xmath is smooth on @xmath for
each @xmath , because @xmath is smooth. Notice that we can identify
every continuous function @xmath , and hence also every smooth function,
with a distribution using Bochner integrals (see e.g. [ 43 ] section 7.5
for the definition of Bochner integrals). This works as follows. For
each @xmath the product @xmath is Bochner-integrable and @xmath is the
unique element in @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath . Clearly
@xmath is linear and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

To prove that @xmath is a distribution we note that @xmath attains a
maximum @xmath on any given compact set @xmath , so equation ( A.2 )
implies for @xmath that @xmath , which implies equation ( A.1 ).

For the converse we suppose that @xmath is a distribution on @xmath such
that @xmath is smooth on @xmath for all @xmath . For any compact subset
@xmath we consider the space @xmath of continuous functions on @xmath ,
which is a Banach space in the supremum norm @xmath . The Banach space
dual of @xmath is @xmath , the space of distributions of order @xmath
with support in @xmath , which has the norm @xmath . For each @xmath and
@xmath we then have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some constant @xmath . For each @xmath the map @xmath is a bounded
linear map on @xmath , so we can apply the uniform boundedness principle
( [ 49 ] theorem 1.8.10) to find @xmath for all @xmath . (Here we also
use the fact that the canonical map @xmath is isometric, [ 43 ] theorem
7.2.2, so the norm @xmath can be taken to be the norm in @xmath .)
Moreover, because @xmath is dense we can extend @xmath to a bounded
linear map from @xmath to @xmath . Because we can do this for all
compact subsets @xmath we can obtain a continuous linear map @xmath ,
where @xmath is the space of compactly supported distributions on @xmath
of order @xmath . This space contains the Dirac delta distribution
@xmath at each point @xmath , so we can define a function @xmath by
@xmath . We wish to show that @xmath is smooth and gives rise to the
original distribution @xmath .

For each convex compact subset @xmath and each @xmath we can find a
constant @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath , because the first
order derivatives of the smooth function @xmath remain bounded on @xmath
. Applying the uniform boundedness principle (and the isometry @xmath )
again we find a constant @xmath such that @xmath for @xmath , showing
that @xmath is continuous. For all @xmath and @xmath the Bochner
integral @xmath satisfies @xmath , i.e. @xmath and we may identify
@xmath with the continuous function @xmath on @xmath .

Applying the argument of the previous paragraphs to the distributions
@xmath for each multi-index @xmath gives rise to continuous functions
@xmath . To see that the @xmath really are the derivatives of @xmath we
argue as follows. For each @xmath , @xmath , multi-index @xmath and
@xmath there is a constant @xmath such that for all sufficiently small
@xmath , @xmath we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by Taylor’s theorem. Here @xmath is a basis vector of @xmath and @xmath
is the multi-index obtained from @xmath by increasing @xmath by one. The
maps @xmath are continuous linear maps on @xmath , so by the uniform
boundedness principle we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some constant @xmath . Hence, @xmath is the derivative of @xmath in
the direction @xmath . It follows that all derivatives of @xmath exist
and are continuous, so @xmath is smooth. @xmath

###### Definition A.1.2

A smooth regular direction for a Banach space-valued distribution @xmath
is a point @xmath for which there exist an @xmath with @xmath , a conic
open neighbourhood @xmath of @xmath (i.e. an open neighbourhood such
that @xmath and @xmath imply @xmath ) and a sequence of constants @xmath
, @xmath , such that @xmath for all @xmath , where @xmath denotes the
Euclidean norm.

The wave front set @xmath of @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

It is clear from the definition that the wave front set is a closed
conic subsets of @xmath . The case that @xmath and the general case are
related by the following new theorem, which also gives an alternative
way of defining the wave front set for Banach space-valued
distributions.

###### Theorem A.1.3

@xmath .

Proof. We let @xmath and @xmath denote the set of regular directions for
@xmath and @xmath respectively, where @xmath . If @xmath then there are
an open neighbourhood @xmath of @xmath and an open conic neighbourhood
@xmath of @xmath such that @xmath . For any point @xmath and any @xmath
we then have @xmath , because @xmath where @xmath . Therefore,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To prove the converse of this inclusion we let @xmath . It follows that
there are an open neighbourhood @xmath of @xmath and a conic open
neighbourhood @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath . Now choose a function
@xmath such that @xmath and a conic open neighbourhood @xmath of @xmath
such that @xmath . For each @xmath we can then find constants @xmath
such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath and @xmath by [ 47 ] lemma 8.2.1. We now consider the
family @xmath for all @xmath and for fixed (but arbitrary) @xmath as a
family of bounded linear operators on the Banach space @xmath . By the
estimate ( A.3 ) these linear operators are bounded pointwise on each
@xmath . The uniform boundedness principle ( [ 49 ] theorem 1.8.10)
implies that we can choose constants @xmath independently of @xmath such
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath and @xmath . Hence, @xmath and @xmath and therefore:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

@xmath

Theorem A.1.3 allows some standard results on scalar distributions (see
[ 47 ] ) to be generalised as follows:

###### Theorem A.1.4

If @xmath are @xmath -valued distributions on an open set @xmath and
@xmath is a Banach space, then

1.  @xmath is the projection of @xmath on the first variable,

2.  @xmath if and only if @xmath ,

3.  @xmath ,

4.   if @xmath is a linear partial differential operator on @xmath with
    smooth coefficients and principal symbol ¹ ¹ 1 We refer to [ 6 ]
    definition A.4.2 for the definition of the principal symbol. @xmath
    , then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath ,

5.   if @xmath is a diffeomorphism between open sets @xmath and @xmath ,
    then @xmath , where the wave front set is pulled back as a subset of
    the cotangent bundle @xmath .

Proof. The last three statements follow directly from equation ( A.1 )
and the statements for scalar distributions, which are proved in [ 47 ]
. The second statement follows from the first, so it remains to prove
the first statement.

The distribution @xmath is smooth on the open set @xmath if and only if
@xmath is smooth on @xmath for all @xmath by lemma A.1.1 . This is true
if and only if @xmath for all @xmath , by [ 47 ] section 8.1. In view of
theorem A.1.3 this is true if and only if @xmath . @xmath

The last item of theorem A.1.4 allows us to define the wave front set of
a distribution @xmath on a manifold @xmath as a subset of the cotangent
bundle which is closed in @xmath and which coincides in each coordinate
chart @xmath with @xmath .

If @xmath is an @xmath -dimensional (complex) vector bundle on an @xmath
-dimensional manifold @xmath then the space of compactly supported
smooth sections of @xmath can be given a test-function topology. We can
define the wave front set of a @xmath -valued distribution on such
test-functions in a local trivialisation. Let @xmath be a local frame
for @xmath and define the @xmath -valued distributions @xmath by @xmath
. Then @xmath is determined completely by @xmath . We define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is a different local frame, then @xmath for a local @xmath
-valued function @xmath . Using theorem A.1.4 it follows that @xmath is
independent of the choice of local frame and transforms as a subset of
the cotangent bundle. ² ² 2 Note that @xmath is locally equivalent to a
distribution @xmath with values in the Banach space @xmath and defined
by: @xmath , where @xmath is a basis of @xmath . We can recover @xmath
as @xmath , where @xmath is a basis of @xmath dual to @xmath and the
brackets denote the action of the second factor of @xmath on @xmath . In
this case we have @xmath by theorem A.1.3 .

###### Theorem A.1.5

If @xmath are @xmath -valued distributions on smooth sections of a
complex vector bundle @xmath over a smooth manifold @xmath and @xmath is
a Banach space, then

1.  @xmath is the projection of @xmath on the first variable,

2.  @xmath if and only if @xmath ,

3.  @xmath ,

4.   if @xmath is a linear partial differential operator on @xmath with
    smooth coefficients and (matrix-valued) principal symbol ³ ³ 3 See [
    6 ] definition A.4.2 for the definition of the principal symbol.
    @xmath , then @xmath , where
    @xmath .

Proof. These results follow directly from theorem A.1.4 and the
definition of the wave front set for a distribution on
vector-bundle-valued sections on a manifold, except the second inclusion
of the last statement. For this result we refer to [ 27 ] . @xmath

We now follow [ 80 ] and prove a useful result in the case where @xmath
is a Hilbert space. We refer to definition 4.2.5 for the exterior tensor
product @xmath of two vector bundles.

###### Theorem A.1.6

Let @xmath be a Hilbert space and @xmath , @xmath , two finite
dimensional (complex) vector bundles over smooth @xmath -dimensional
manifolds @xmath with complex conjugations @xmath , i.e. the @xmath are
anti-linear, base-point preserving bundle isomorphisms @xmath such that
@xmath . Let @xmath , @xmath , be two @xmath -valued distributions on
the test-sections of @xmath and let @xmath be the distributions on
sections of the vector bundle @xmath over @xmath determined by @xmath .
Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that @xmath does indeed uniquely define a distribution on sections
of @xmath , essentially by the Schwartz kernel theorem ( [ 47 ] theorem
5.2.1).

Proof. The proof is a straightforward generalisation of the proof of
proposition 3.2 part (iii) in [ 35 ] , where we notice the following. We
may work in local coordinates on @xmath and choose a local frame @xmath
that is real w.r.t @xmath , i.e. such that @xmath . Notice that @xmath
is a local frame for @xmath and for @xmath there is no loss of
generality in using the same frame in both entries, because any two
points in @xmath can be contained in a single local trivialisation
(using [ 28 ] theorem 16.26.9). This, together with the complex
conjugation and theorem A.1.4 part 3), essentially reduces the problem
to distributions on test-functions rather than test-sections. In [ 35 ]
one takes the inner product of two distributions on the same manifold,
but the key ingredient of the proof, the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality,
still works if we allow the manifolds to be different. @xmath

Finally we collect the wave front sets of some useful distributions,
which may be found in [ 66 ] :

###### Proposition A.1.7

Let @xmath be the advanced @xmath and retarded @xmath fundamental
solutions of the Klein-Gordon operator @xmath or of the operator @xmath
of section 4.2.1 on a globally hyperbolic spin spacetime @xmath , then

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath if and only if @xmath or there is an affinely parameterised
light-like geodesic between @xmath and @xmath to which @xmath are
cotangent (and hence @xmath and @xmath are parallel transports of each
other along the geodesic).

Strictly speaking, [ 66 ] only states this proposition for advanced and
retarded fundamental solutions of the scalar Klein Gordon operator, not
for the Lichnerowicz wave operator @xmath . The latter acts on sections
of a vector bundle, which complicates the situation somewhat.
Nevertheless, the principal part is diagonal and this is what determines
the bicharacteristic strips and allows the construction of the advanced
and retarded fundamental solutions. Therefore we believe the result
should still hold, although we could not produce a reference for this
fact.

### a.2 The analytic wave front set

Results for analytic wave front sets are mostly analogous to those for
smooth wave front sets, except that they are more involved to formulate.
The difficulty is that we cannot localise singularities at a point
@xmath by multiplying with a compactly supported analytic function
@xmath with @xmath .

Consider again a @xmath -valued distribution @xmath on an open set
@xmath .

###### Definition A.2.1

An analytic regular direction for @xmath is a point @xmath for which
there exist an open neighbourhood @xmath of @xmath , a conic open
neighbourhood @xmath of @xmath , a bounded sequence of compactly
supported distributions @xmath , @xmath , which equal @xmath on @xmath
and a constant @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath , where
@xmath denotes the Euclidean norm.

The analytic wave front set @xmath of @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Like the smooth wave front set the analytic wave front set is closed and
we have @xmath . Analogous to theorem A.1.3 we have the following
equivalent characterisation of the analytic wave front set of a Banach
space-valued distribution in terms of the analytic wave front sets of
scalar distributions:

###### Theorem A.2.2

@xmath .

Proof. If @xmath is an analytic regular direction for @xmath then there
are an open neighbourhood @xmath of @xmath and an open conic
neighbourhood @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath . For any @xmath any
point @xmath is then an analytic regular direction, because @xmath where
@xmath .

For the converse we suppose that @xmath for @xmath and we choose an open
neighbourhood @xmath of @xmath and a closed conic neighbourhood @xmath
of @xmath such that @xmath . If @xmath is a compact neighbourhood of
@xmath then we may find a sequence @xmath such that @xmath on @xmath and
@xmath for @xmath (see [ 47 ] theorem 1.4.2, cf. the proof of
proposition 8.4.2 and lemma 8.4.4). By [ 47 ] lemma 8.4.4 we then have
for some constants @xmath and all @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now define for each @xmath the Banach space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the inductive limit @xmath , which is a locally convex space (cf. [
10 ] section 3). The estimate ( A.5 ) now means that for a fixed @xmath
the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is bounded. By the (generalised) uniform boundedness principle, theorem
3.4.2 in [ 75 ] , the set @xmath is bounded. This means that @xmath is a
bounded subset for some @xmath ( [ 75 ] 2.6.5) and hence we have for
some @xmath and all @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

We conclude that @xmath . @xmath

Analogously to theorem A.1.4 we can now generalise some results for
scalar distributions:

###### Theorem A.2.3

If @xmath are @xmath -valued distributions on an open set @xmath and
@xmath is a Banach space, then

1.  @xmath is the projection of @xmath on the first variable,

2.  @xmath if and only if @xmath ,

3.  @xmath ,

4.   if @xmath is a linear partial differential operator on @xmath with
    real-analytic coefficients and principal symbol @xmath , then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath ,

5.   if @xmath is an analytic diffeomorphism between open sets @xmath
    and @xmath , then @xmath , where the wave front set is pulled back
    as a subset of the cotangent bundle @xmath .

Proof. The last three statements follow directly from theorem A.2.2 and
the corresponding statements for scalar distributions, which are proved
in [ 47 ] . The second statement follows from the first, so it remains
to prove the first statement.

If the distribution @xmath is analytic on the open set @xmath then
@xmath is analytic on @xmath for all @xmath and hence @xmath by theorem
A.2.2 . Conversely, if @xmath then @xmath is a smooth function by
theorem A.1.4 and the fact that @xmath . It remains to prove that @xmath
is analytic on @xmath . In the case @xmath this is [ 10 ] proposition 9
(see also the references there). For completeness we prove the required
generalisation. Given @xmath we can choose a compact neighbourhood
@xmath of @xmath and functions @xmath as in the proof of theorem A.2.2 .
For each @xmath and @xmath we then have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.7)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Because @xmath is a distribution we have @xmath for some order @xmath ,
which we use to estimate the integral over @xmath . For @xmath we use
the estimate ( A.6 ) with @xmath to find:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath and hence @xmath , which implies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath , using @xmath and @xmath . Now let @xmath be such that
the disc around @xmath with radius @xmath is contained in @xmath . A
general term in the Taylor series of @xmath can then be estimated by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here we used @xmath (by Newton’s binomial theorem) to obtain @xmath .
The Taylor series contains no more than @xmath terms with @xmath , so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Because @xmath for some constant @xmath we can choose @xmath small
enough to ensure that the series is absolutely convergent. For all
@xmath and @xmath within the radius of convergence we then have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This shows that the limit of the series is the function @xmath itself.
@xmath

The last statement of theorem A.2.3 implies that we can define analytic
wave front sets on analytic manifolds as a subset of the cotangent
bundle in a similar way as for the smooth wave front set on smooth
manifolds.

As in the smooth case we can consider an @xmath -dimensional (complex)
real-analytic vector bundle @xmath on an @xmath -dimensional analytic
manifold @xmath and endow the space of compactly supported smooth
sections of @xmath with a test-function topology. Given an analytic
local frame @xmath for @xmath , the analytic wave front set of a @xmath
-valued distribution @xmath on test-sections of @xmath can be defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are @xmath -valued distributions as before. If @xmath is a
different analytic local frame, then @xmath for an analytic local @xmath
-valued function @xmath . Using theorem A.2.3 it follows that @xmath is
independent of the choice of local frame and transforms as a subset of
the cotangent bundle.

###### Theorem A.2.4

If @xmath are @xmath -valued distributions on smooth sections of a
complex, real-analytic vector bundle @xmath over an analytic manifold
@xmath and @xmath is a Banach space, then

1.  @xmath is the projection of @xmath on the first variable,

2.  @xmath if and only if @xmath ,

3.  @xmath ,

4.   if @xmath is a linear partial differential operator on @xmath with
    real-analytic coefficients and (matrix-valued) principal symbol
    @xmath , then @xmath .

Proof. These results follow directly from theorem A.2.3 and the
definition of the wave front set for a distribution on
vector-bundle-valued sections on a manifold. @xmath

Again we can follow [ 80 ] and prove a useful result in the case where
@xmath is a Hilbert space (and again we refer to definition 4.2.5 for
the exterior tensor product @xmath of two vector bundles):

###### Theorem A.2.5

Let @xmath be a Hilbert space and @xmath , @xmath , two finite
dimensional (complex) real-analytic vector bundles over analytic @xmath
-dimensional manifolds @xmath with real-analytic complex conjugations
@xmath . Let @xmath , @xmath , be two @xmath -valued distribution on the
test-sections of @xmath and let @xmath be the distributions on sections
of the vector bundle @xmath over @xmath determined by @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. The proof is a straightforward generalisation of the proof of
proposition 2.6 part 2) in [ 80 ] , where we notice the following. We
may work in local coordinates on @xmath and choose a local frame @xmath
that is real w.r.t @xmath , i.e. such that @xmath . Notice that @xmath
is a local frame for @xmath and for @xmath there is no loss of
generality in using the same frame in both entries, because any two
points in @xmath can be contained in a single local trivialisation
(using [ 28 ] theorem 16.26.9 and [ 44 ] theorem 8.3.1 to guarantee that
we have the right analytic structure near the given points). In [ 80 ]
one takes the inner product of a distribution with itself, but the key
ingredient of the proof, the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, still works if
we take the inner product of two different distributions. @xmath