This thesis considers various aspects of locally covariant quantum field
theory (see Brunetti et al., Commun. Math. Phys. 237 (2003), 31â€“68), a
mathematical framework to describe axiomatic quantum field theories in
curved spacetimes. Chapter 1 argues that the use of morphisms in this
framework can be seen as a model for modal logic. To our knowledge this
is the first interpretative description of this aspect of the framework.
Chapter 2 gives an exposition of locally covariant quantum field theory
which differs from the original in minor details, notably in the new
notion of nowhere-classicality and the sharpened time-slice axiom, which
puts a restriction on the state space as well as the algebras. Chapter 3
deals with the well-studied example of the free real scalar field and
includes an elegant proof of the new general result that the commutation
relations together with the Hadamard condition on the two-point
distribution of a state completely fix the singularity structure of all
@xmath -point distributions. Chapter 4 describes the free Dirac field as
a locally covariant quantum field, using a new representation
independent approach, demonstrating that the physics is determined
entirely by the relations between the adjoint map, charge conjugation
and Dirac operator. It also proves the new result that the relative
Cauchy evolution is related to the stress-energy-momentum tensor in the
same way as for the free scalar field. Chapter 5 studies the
Reeh-Schlieder property, both in the general setting and in specific
examples. We obtain various interesting results concerning this property
in curved spacetimes, most notably by using the idea of spacetime
deformation, but some open questions and opportunities for further
research remain. We will freely make use of smooth and analytic wave
front sets throughout. These concepts are explained in appendix A ,
using a new and elegant way to generalise results for scalar
distributions to Banach space-valued distributions, leading to some new
but expected results.
