##### Contents

-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 Chapter 3 Overview
    -    1.2 Chapter 4 Overview
    -    1.3 Chapter 5 Overview
    -    1.4 Chapter 6 Overview
    -    1.5 Chapter 7 Overview
-    2 The Nonstandard Algebraic Number Theory of Robinson
    -    2.1 Nonstandard Mathematics
        -    2.1.1 Overview of Nonstandard Analysis
        -    2.1.2 Model Theory
        -    2.1.3 The Hyperreals
        -    2.1.4 Applications and Criticisms
    -    2.2 Nonstandard Number Theory
        -    2.2.1 The Quotient Ring @xmath
-    3 The Hyper Riemann Zeta Function
    -    3.1 The Shadow Maps of @xmath
    -    3.2 Nonstandard Tools
        -    3.2.1 Properties of @xmath
        -    3.2.2 Hyperfinite Sums, Products, Sequences and Integrals
        -    3.2.3 Q-Topology
        -    3.2.4 Hyper Exponential and Logarithm Functions
        -    3.2.5 Hyper Gamma Function
    -    3.3 Hyper Riemann Zeta Function
        -    3.3.1 A Hyper Theta Function
    -    3.4 Analytic Properties
        -    3.4.1 The Complex Shadow Map
-    4 The Hyper Dedekind Zeta Function
    -    4.1 Hyper Mellin Transform
    -    4.2 Nonstandard Algebraic Number Theory
        -    4.2.1 Hyper Polynomials and Hyper Algebraic Numbers
        -    4.2.2 Lattices
        -    4.2.3 Hyper Algebraic Integers
        -    4.2.4 Ideals
    -    4.3 Hyper Dedekind Zeta Function and its First Properties
    -    4.4 Functional Equation
        -    4.4.1 A Higher Dimensional Hyper Gamma Function
        -    4.4.2 Hyper Theta Functions
        -    4.4.3 Integral Representation
        -    4.4.4 Hyper Dirichlet Theorem
-    5 Nonstandard Interpretation of @xmath -adic Interpolation
    -    5.1 Mahler’s Theorem
    -    5.2 Interpolation Series
    -    5.3 Interpretation of Interpolation
    -    5.4 Extension
        -    5.4.1 @xmath -adic Functions
-    6 Applications and Double Interpolation
    -    6.1 Morita Gamma Function
    -    6.2 The Kubota-Leopoldt Zeta Function
        -    6.2.1 A Nonstandard Construction
    -    6.3 Double Interpolation
    -    6.4 Riemann Zeta Function
        -    6.4.1 Katz’s Theorem
    -    6.5 A Double Morita Gamma Function
    -    6.6 Triviality
    -    6.7 The Set @xmath
    -    6.8 A Universal @xmath -adic Function
        -    6.8.1 Translated Ideals
        -    6.8.2 Characteristic Functions
        -    6.8.3 The Universal Function
    -    6.9 Double Hurwitz Zeta Function
        -    6.9.1 Nonstandard Teichmüller Character
        -    6.9.2 Double Teichmüller Character
        -    6.9.3 Hurwitz Zeta Function
-    7 The Work of Shai Haran
    -    7.1 Overview
    -    7.2 The Real Integers
        -    7.2.1 Markov Chains
        -    7.2.2 Remarks
    -    7.3 Applications of The Quantum World
        -    7.3.1 The Riemann Zeta Function
        -    7.3.2 Riesz Potentials
    -    7.4 Non-Additive Geometry
        -    7.4.1 The Field Of One Element
        -    7.4.2 Haran
    -    7.5 A Nonstandard Beginning
        -    7.5.1 @xmath -Integers
        -    7.5.2 @xmath -Zeta
        -    7.5.3 Chains

## Chapter 1 Introduction

There are many examples of modern work in number theory being developed
by fusing it with another field of mathematics. Examples include quantum
field theory, with work by D. Broadhurst and D. Kreimer, and the more
well known field of geometry, with the work by A. Connes ( [ Co1 ] and [
Co2 ] ). This enables studying old problems from a new direction. The
other alternatives in tackling number theory include proving a known
theorem in a new way and trying to prove an old problem directly (which
is becoming less popular due to the difficulty of such problems -
Riemann hypothesis, Birch Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture, @xmath ).

The approach in this work is via number-theory-fusion with the area of
nonstandard mathematics. The work splits into four related parts with
the underlying theme being nonstandard mathematics. This chapter and
chapter 2 (first part) are introductory; setting out the work and
introducing nonstandard mathematics from a model theoretic basis. A
review of the main results of Robinson on nonstandard algebraic number
theory is provided as the work in following chapters further develops
his work and approaches. Chapters 3 and 4 (second part) introduce
nonstandard versions of the Riemann and Dedekind zeta functions. They
also prove some nonstandard analytical properties. The third part
consists of chapters 5 and 6 . In the first of these chapters the ideas
of @xmath -adic Mahler interpolation are interpreted in a nonstandard
setting using shadow (standard part) maps (which enables nonstandard
objects to be viewed in a standard setting). These ideas are pursued in
the next chapter by viewing the Morita gamma function and
Kubota-Leopoldt zeta function in a nonstandard way. One advantage of
using nonstandard spaces ( @xmath for example) is the property of being
able to consider finite primes in a symmetrical way (for example
subquotients of @xmath include @xmath and @xmath resulting in functions
on this nonstandard space being able to be interpreted as as @xmath
-adic and @xmath -adic functions). This enables double interpolation
with respect to two distinct finite rational primes to be defined, and
more generally interpolation with respect to a finite set of rational
primes. An example given is the double interpolation of the Riemann zeta
function. The final chapter (the final part) is on the work of Shai
Haran. A review of some of his work is given in conjunction with a
review of other authors’ work which relates to his. A small section is
dedicated to the beginning of a nonstandard interpretation of his work.

### 1.1 Chapter 3 Overview

The first application of nonstandard analysis in this work is in
relation to the Riemann zeta function. A nonstandard version of the
Riemann zeta function, the hyper Riemann zeta function, is defined. In
particular some of the first analytical properties are examined.

The framework developed from the model theory provides a foundation for
most of the work. Further (analytical) tools are needed and in
particular the shadow maps. They exist in a general setting on hyper
topological spaces with a shadow map corresponding to a non trivial
absolute value. Essentially they link (part of) an object on a
nonstandard space to a related object on the standard space. On @xmath
the shadow map of interest is the real shadow map corresponding to the
real prime @xmath and the usual absolute value (definition 3.1.1 ). This
map can also be extended to a shadow map on @xmath (definition 3.4.16 ).
Further it is shown how the shadow map can act on functions (definition
3.1.7 ) which is of most use in this chapter. Other tools introduced
include the hyperfinite version of sums, products and integrals along
with hyper sequences.

The central object in this chapter is the new function, the hyper
Riemann zeta function , @xmath . The definition follows from defining
the internal ideals of @xmath and their corresponding norm. These
internal ideals are in bijection with the elements of @xmath (lemma
LABEL:L1 ). Also in order to define @xmath the definitions of @xmath
(the hyper exponential function ) and @xmath (the hyper logarithm
function ) are needed in order to define the power function @xmath for
general @xmath . The approach taken with these hyper functions is
different to those in the literature, for example [ S-L ] , section 2.4.
In this work most objects are defined from first principles for
completeness.

Combining the ideas from the previous paragraph gives definition 3.3.1

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The first analytical properties are proved in the @xmath -topology which
is the finer topology. The rest of section 2.3 develops these results
along with the first parts of section 2.4. Examples include the region
of @xmath -convergence and continuity in the hyper half plane @xmath .
Like the classical function there is also a product decomposition into
"Euler factors" via proposition 3.3.5

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The product above is taken over all positive primes in @xmath . @xmath
is a ring so primes (or prime ideals) can be defined. Some of the @xmath
-analytical results require some hyper complex analysis which is taken
from the work of Robinson, for example the hyper Cauchy theorem.

The rest of the chapter is spent proving the main result in this chapter
(theorem 3.4.12 and corollaries 3.4.13 and 3.4.14 ), the functional
equation and @xmath -analytic continuation of @xmath .

###### Theorem 3.4.12.

@xmath .

Here @xmath is the completed hyper Riemann zeta function, that is the
Euler product of all the local zeta functions including the contribution
from the prime at infinity @xmath .

###### Corollary 3.4.13.

@xmath can be Q-analytically continued on @xmath .

###### Corollary 3.4.14.

@xmath can be Q-analytically continued on @xmath ,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

with a pole at s=1 and trivial zeros at @xmath .

Contained in this expression and in the proof are nonstandard versions
of classical functions, many of which introduced are new objects.

The most basic is the hyper gamma function which is a (hyperfinite)
product for the hyper naturals (the hyper factorial ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath with @xmath (definition 3.2.13 ). The definition of the hyper
gamma function for general hyper complex numbers follows by
interpolation of the hyper factorial (definition 3.2.22 )

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The functional equation for this function is given by theorem 3.2.25

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The method of proof of the functional equation follows the classical
version involving theta functions. A hyper theta function is defined
(via definition 3.3.7 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . In order to obtain this, hyper Fourier transforms and hyper
Poisson summation are needed. Results in this area require evaluation of
definite hyper integrals and the interchanging of hyper products and
hyper integrals. As a result the functional equation is given by

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The functional equation of @xmath follows from this as @xmath can be
expressed as a hyper integral involving @xmath .

The main methods of proof are a combination of some analysis and a
transfer of results from the classical setting for @xmath . It is
emphasized that results do not transfer directly and so some analytical
methods have to be used to bind the proofs together. A common example of
proof is when one has a function which is a sum over @xmath and has a
classical counterpart which is a sum over @xmath . Usually only
properties of "an approximation" to the hyper function can be deduced
from the classical counterpart which can then be extended to the hyper
function using analysis. From the basic definitions of the hyper
functions it is seen that they have a similar definition to their
classical counterparts and it is unsurprising that proofs of nonstandard
results follow a similar structure to the classical case.

### 1.2 Chapter 4 Overview

This chapter can be considered as a further application of the
nonstandard and analytical tools from the previous chapter. Just as the
Dedekind zeta function generalises the Riemann zeta function so the
hyper Dedekind zeta function generalises the hyper Riemann zeta function
by being a zeta function for hyper number fields. The obvious question
is why the first chapter is included since it can be deduced from the
work of this chapter. The main reason is that the first chapter serves
to introduce some nonstandard tools not covered in the introduction to
model theory and techniques of proof used in later chapters. Also some
of the nonstandard versions of classical functions are used in this
chapter (for example the hyper gamma function) and in other chapters.
The above reasons could have yielded a chapter focussing on nonstandard
tools and some classical functions in a nonstandard setting. With some
extra work the hyper Riemann zeta function and some of its properties
have been proven.

In order to define the hyper Dedekind zeta function a small amount of
nonstandard analytic number theory is needed to give a solid meaning to
hyper (algebraic) number fields and their properties. An important
characteristic of any hyper number field is the ring of hyperintegers,
section 3.2.3. This naturally leads into ideals which have been studied
to an extent by Robinson (detailed in chapter 2 ). Finally combining all
the above the hyper Dedekind zeta function for a given hyper number
field @xmath can be defined (definition 4.3.1 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the sum runs over the set of internal ideals of the ring of
hyperintegers of @xmath and @xmath is the norm of such an ideal. The
first properties in the @xmath -topology are given including convergence
and a product formula.

The second half of the chapter is devoted to proving the main result of
the chapter; the functional equation @xmath -analytic continuation of
@xmath to @xmath (corollary 4.4.24 ).

###### Corollary 4.4.24.

@xmath has a Q-analytic continuation to @xmath . It has a simple pole at
@xmath with residue

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It also satisfies the functional equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The proof follows a similar approach to that of the chapter 3 but in the
higher dimensional case, for example introducing a higher dimensional
hyper gamma function and a higher dimensional hyper theta function
(definition 4.4.5 ) which can be defined for each complete lattice (
@xmath ) in the hyper Minkowski space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a hermitian scalar defined in section 3.2.

The functional equation (theorem 4.4.12 follows from a Poisson summation
type formula,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the dual lattice defined in theorem 4.4.11 .

To finish off the proof a relationship between @xmath and @xmath (for
some lattice) is needed in order to use the functional equation of the
hyper theta function. This is provided essentially by a hyper Mellin
transform (section 3.1).

These first two chapters do follow, and rely upon, the classical theory
for the reasons given in the previous section. The reason for including
them are that several nonstandard objects are defined rigorously with
the hope they may have uses outside of the work in later chapters (which
include in chapter 5 the hyper Riemann zeta function and hyper gamma
function being @xmath -adically interpolated in a nonstandard setting.
It should also be noted that for a concise and non-repetitive
presentation some of the arguments are not detailed in depth, for
example the evaluation of definite hyper integrals. This is because in
the first chapter rigorous proofs have been given and the method is the
same each time, though clear referencing is given to enable the result
to be proven in depth if so required.

### 1.3 Chapter 5 Overview

The concept of @xmath -adic interpolation is wide in its application and
in the actual method of obtaining a @xmath -adic object from a real
object. This chapter takes the concept of @xmath -adic interpolation by
the method of Mahler and interprets it in a nonstandard way via @xmath
-adic shadow maps. There are two main theorems in this chapter 5.3.1 and
5.4.1 with the latter a strengthening of the former.

###### Theorem 5.3.1.

Let @xmath be a uniformly continuous function, with respect to the
@xmath -adic metric, on @xmath and let @xmath be the extension to its
hyper function. Then @xmath is the the unique @xmath -adic function
obtained by Mahler interpolation.

Here @xmath is defined in definition 3.1.7 , as it is not defined on all
of @xmath since it contains unlimited elements.

###### Theorem 5.4.1.

Let @xmath be a uniformly continuous function, with respect to the
@xmath -adic metric, on @xmath . Then there exists a hyper function
@xmath such that @xmath is the the unique @xmath -adic function obtained
by Mahler interpolation.

Mahler interpolation (theorems 5.1.1 and 5.1.2 ) can be stated in two
stages. Firstly any uniformly continuous function @xmath can be extended
to a uniformly and continuous function @xmath such that if @xmath then
@xmath . The second part shows that any continuous function @xmath can
be written as a series over @xmath . The first theorem ( 5.3.1 ) shows
how this interpolation can be viewed in a nonstandard way. Indeed, any
function @xmath can be extended to a hyperfunction @xmath (using the
tools of the introduction by regarding @xmath ( @xmath ) modulo the
equivalence relation) with @xmath for @xmath . Applying the @xmath -adic
shadow map to this function does not give the original function @xmath
because @xmath . As shown in chapter 2 this result is stronger as @xmath
. So actually a function @xmath with @xmath for @xmath is obtained. The
main work in the theorem is showing that the resulting function @xmath
from the @xmath -adic shadow map is indeed the function which would have
been obtained by Mahler interpolation of @xmath .

The proof shows that the hyper function ( @xmath ) can be written as a
sum over @xmath which is basically the sum over @xmath for @xmath with
added nonstandard terms (proposition 5.2.6 ). The properties of @xmath
can now be partially deduced from the properties of @xmath and some more
analysis, in particular showing the continuity and convergence
properties. Some care is needed when taking the shadow map. Although the
properties of convergence and continuity carry through actually taking
the shadow map on a sum over @xmath is not trivial unlike taking it over
a hyperfinite set.

The second main theorem uses the fact that @xmath . So instead of
considering Q-continuous hyper functions with values lying in @xmath
consider the subset of it @xmath and in particular uniformly
Q-continuous hyper functions of the form @xmath , which is the set of
all @xmath -adically uniformly Q-continuous functions from @xmath to
@xmath . This theorem shows that the shadow map is a surjective
homomorphism from @xmath to @xmath , the space of @xmath -adically
uniformly continuous functions from @xmath to @xmath . Showing the map
is a homomorphism and that the map lies in @xmath follows from the
definition of the @xmath -adic shadow map. The hardest part is to show
that the map is surjective. To show this a hyper sequence of hyper
functions ( @xmath ( @xmath )) is constructed from the original
function. It is eventually shown that there exist hyper functions in
this hyper sequence ( @xmath ) which are infinitely close to the
original function by placing a hyper norm on @xmath . This hyper norm is
based on the classical norm acting on functions in @xmath . In
particular it is shown that functions of @xmath have a monad (hyper
functions of @xmath which are infinitely close to a given function under
the hyper norm). In each monad there is only one standard function
infinitely close to the original function. This can also be interpreted
as the hyper norm is defined for functions in @xmath and in @xmath and
for each @xmath there exists at least one hyper function in @xmath such
that the @xmath -adic shadow map of this function is @xmath .

A potential advantage of considering Mahler interpolation in this form
is that on one level the notion of @xmath -adic spaces almost
"disappears" as the interpolated function is essentially a hyper
function @xmath which has many of the same properties as functions from
@xmath to @xmath . In future this could make work studying Mahler
interpolation simpler.

### 1.4 Chapter 6 Overview

The theme of this chapter is @xmath -adic interpolation but in a more
general setting than the previous chapter. There are many more methods
of @xmath -adic interpolation such as those used to interpolate the
Riemann zeta function or the gamma function. There is no reason why
these cannot be viewed from a nonstandard viewpoint as well.

The gamma function provides an ideal candidate for interpolation and the
study of the Morita gamma function is in some ways easier than Mahler
interpolation. In a lot of literature on nonstandard analysis calculus
and certain elements of analysis are presented and defined entirely in a
nonstandard way. This philosophy can be carried through to @xmath
-adically interpolating the gamma function. The aim of the interpolation
is to find a uniformly @xmath -continuous hyper function from @xmath to
@xmath which interpolates the gamma function. Simply defining the hyper
factorial (definition 3.2.13 ) does not work due to lack of continuity
from the powers of @xmath . By defining a restricted factorial (as in
section 5.1) such a hyper function can be found, for all @xmath with
@xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . It is shown in section 5.1 that it has a functional
equation . One can now study this object as the interpolation of the
gamma function. Naturally the link to the standard world is provided by
the @xmath -adic shadow map and results in the Morita gamma function.

The next section searches for a version of the Kubota-Leopoldt zeta
function in the nonstandard world. A key point is that the hyper Riemann
zeta function is used to provide values which combine to give the
nonstandard function which interpolates the Riemann zeta function. By
proving continuity properties the Kubota-Leopoldt function is obtained
under the @xmath -adic shadow maps. One observation is the role of the
hyper Riemann zeta function. In section 2.4.1 it was shown that the
shadow map onto the complex numbers takes @xmath to @xmath and similarly
in this section @xmath is mapped to the Kubota-Leopoldt zeta functions
via the @xmath -adic shadow maps by

###### Theorem 6.2.6.

For a fixed @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(Here @xmath are the branches from the classical Kubota-Leopoldt
function and @xmath is the nonstandard function interpolating the
Kubota-Leopoldt function defined in section 6.2.1 .) In this way @xmath
can be seen as a source of these zeta functions.

Probably one of the most important concepts contained in this work is
that of double interpolation , that is interpolating a real object with
respect to two distinct finite primes. Such a concept in the standard
world is seemingly not possible, apart from the trivial case when the
values lie in @xmath , because such a double interpolated function would
have to take values in @xmath and @xmath which are non-isomorphic. By
treating interpolation from a nonstandard perspective a solution can be
found. An interpolating set of hyper values are needed with the
requirement that they are uniformly @xmath -continuous with respect to
both prime valuations. This is not too restrictive and they form a
subset of hyper functions which are interpolated with respect to a
single prime. The nonstandard space of @xmath provides an ideal
sanctuary for such hyper functions since the only requirement is that
the values lie in @xmath . So a function for double interpolation is
going to be of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By taking the respective shadow maps standard functions are obtained.
The aim of double interpolation is the same as that of single
interpolation in that by looking at a real problem from a different
perspective new information about the object can be found. As a note the
process of double interpolation extends to interpolation with respect to
a finite set of primes and in a special case to all finite primes.

An explicit example of double interpolation is given of the Riemann zeta
function. The ideal choice of numbers to interpolate would be the set
@xmath . This follows from the work on the Kubota-Leopoldt zeta
function. Firstly these need to be made continuous and by use of the
Kummer congruences the double interpolation can take place. The next
part of this looks at the resulting @xmath -adic function (one only
needs to consider one of the primes by symmetry) coming from the shadow
map of the double Riemann zeta function. By extending some results of
Katz on @xmath -adic measures (in particular theorem 6.4.9 ) it is shown
that a @xmath -adic measure exists (lemma 6.4.11 ) which corresponds to
the @xmath -adic function and enables it to be written as an integral
over @xmath (lemma 6.4.18 )

###### Theorem 6.4.9.

Let @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . Also let @xmath , @xmath . Then for
all @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath and

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.4.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Although the Morita gamma function was simple to interpolate using
nonstandard methods the "double gamma" function is the trivial value 1.
The actual problem in determining its trivial existence is from
elementary number theory. The problem is as follows. Let @xmath where
@xmath and @xmath are fixed primes. Then does there exist a @xmath with
@xmath such that @xmath has an inverse in @xmath and @xmath for all
@xmath (where @xmath can be considered as a multiplicative set of
elements modulo @xmath )? The proof is given in theorem 6.6.1 .

As stated above there is a special case of interpolation with respect to
all finite primes (which would not be possible for the Riemann zeta
function because it would be the interpolation of the trivial function
1). It is the function @xmath for some fixed @xmath . This section shows
that there is a hyper function which is continuous with respect to each
finite prime and by taking the shadow map for any prime @xmath the
original @xmath function is obtained.

The final section gives a method of constructing a nonstandard
Teichmüller character. It has the feel of an artificial method (section
5.8.1) as the hyperfunction is constructed based on a set of properties
it is expected to have. Using this a definition is given for a double
Hurwitz zeta function but none of the properties are explored. Finally a
brief mention is given of the difficulty in constructing double @xmath
-functions.

### 1.5 Chapter 7 Overview

This final chapter gives a conceptual overview of the work of Shai
Haran. The central aim of this chapter is to translate my extensive
studies of his work into a simplified version. Much of his work is
contained in his book, Mysteries of the Real Prime ( [ Ha1 ] ). In some
extended lectures on his work he gave several years after its
publication he described his own book as "very condense and hard to
read" and as a result very few people understand this and hence his
research. The hope is that this chapter may be useful on its own to help
people who may wish to study his book (perhaps as an overview of his
work before tackling his book) enabling the reader to have clear ideas
of what his work involves. Naturally the aim of any research is to try
and produce some original work. The final section of this chapter
contains some very basic attempts to view some parts of his work in a
nonstandard way.

Shai Haran’s work is centred around the dictionary between arithmetic
and geometry. Although this dictionary is very powerful there are a two
main problems with it. The first problem relates the geometric property
of adding the point at infinity to the affine line which produces
projective geometry. The analogue of @xmath in the arithmetic picture is
the real prime ( @xmath ). This is not an unfamiliar object for example
the completion of @xmath with respect to @xmath is @xmath . What is
unfamiliar are the real integers, corresponding to the @xmath -adic
integers. What is @xmath ?

The second problem is the lack of, what he calls, an arithmetical
surface. For example in geometry the product of two affine lines is a
plane yet the corresponding entities in the arithmetic picture is
trivial as the product in the category of commutative rings of @xmath is
simply @xmath . The hunt is then for a category where this does not
happen.

Much of his work could be defined as ultimately trying to find a new
language in which the dictionary between arithmetic and geometry is more
complete. His way of doing this is to try and view all primes of @xmath
(finite @xmath and the real prime @xmath ) on an equal footing. Many of
his methods in his book are examples of this technique.

His book mainly covers work in the direction of the first problem. By
taking the view that the real integers should be in some way comparable
to the @xmath -adic integers a @xmath -adic approach can be made to the
real integers since plenty of information is known about @xmath . This
approach is refreshing given that for the past century real results have
been applied in the @xmath -adic world yet the @xmath -adic world in
some respects is simpler. His "tool of comparison" is the @xmath
(uantum)-world. He shows that this world interpolates between the real
and @xmath -adic worlds of several objects. By looking at limits of when
@xmath and @xmath he obtains @xmath -adic objects and real objects
respectively. By considering a certain @xmath version of well studied
@xmath -adic Markov chains he gives an interpretation of some aspects of
the real integers by looking at the chain when @xmath . It should be
stressed that it his work is an interpretation and future work will show
the validity of this work. Also, in one sense quite separate from this,
though related to the @xmath -world, is the second half of his book
where he works on the Riemann zeta function which is closely related to
the work of Connes ( [ Co1 ] and [ Co2 ] ).

The second problem is in its infancy and his work takes quite a
different direction to the work which is already being developed in this
area. The main object is the "field of one element" ( @xmath ). Most
other work examines objects related to this such as schemes, varieties
and zeta functions over this "field". Haran differs in his approach and
tries to develop a new geometric language based on, what he calls @xmath
-rings. These are certainly related to the "field of one element" but in
a less than obvious way. Also in this part I make a small review of the
other, more traditional, work related to the "field of one element".

## Chapter 2 The Nonstandard Algebraic Number Theory of Robinson

### 2.1 Nonstandard Mathematics

Throughout the history of mathematics infinitely large numbers and, more
commonly, infinitely small numbers (infinitesimals) have caused problems
in establishing their existence. Infinitesimals initially appeared in
the mathematical work of the Greek atomist philosopher Democritus when
he put forward the question of whether it is possible to generate a cone
by piling up circular plane surfaces with decreasing diameter and in his
argument for the existence of atoms. (This problem and similar ones
related to the the concept of the continuum. The concepts of
discreteness and continuity are still of interest today for example in
philosophy and in the nature of time.) Archimedes also used
infinitesimals to give results regarding areas and centres of gravity
but did not state them as proofs because he did not believe in them.
Most well known is the work of Leibniz in the development of calculus
and (the differential notation @xmath ) though this was later replaced
by the @xmath method of the nineteenth century as the transfer principle
of Leibniz (that results in the reals can be extended to the
infinitesimals) could not be rigorously justified.

The concept of infinitely large numbers has a similar history beginning
with the Indians in the ancient Yajur Veda (c. 1200–900 BC) which states
that "if you remove a part from infinity or add a part to infinity,
still what remains is infinity". It continued with Greeks (for example
the paradoxes of Zeno) and to the modern work in axiomatic set theory.

The rigorous logical framework for infinitely large and small numbers
was pioneered by Robinson in the 1960s via nonstandard mathematics, a
branch of mathematical logic - model theory. A basic fact in model
theory is that every infinite mathematical structure has nonstandard
models (this basically means that there are non-isomorphic structures
which satisfy the same elementary properties). The existence of
nonstandard models has been known since the 1920s from the work of
Thoralf Skolem. More interest began in the fifties but it was not until
Robinson applied this model theoretic machinery to analysis that
nonstandard analysis was founded.

Robinson’s original presentation ( [ Ro1 ] ) was considered by most
mathematicians to be unnecessarily complicated because of the logical
formalism needed. Several other approaches appeared and there exists at
least eight different (simpler) presentations of the methods of
nonstandard analysis. They fall into two categories: semantic , or
model-theoretic, approach and the syntactic approach. The most used
presentation is the via superstructures (which is model theoretic like
Robinson’s original work) introduced by Robinson and Zakon (it was also
the first one to be purely set-theoretic in nature).

The syntactic approach was created by Nelson in the 1970s using less
model theory by introducing an axiomatic formulation of non-standard
analysis, called internal set theory .

#### 2.1.1 Overview of Nonstandard Analysis

This section introduces some of the basic notions of nonstandard
analysis without focussing on the detailed and specific formulation
which follows later. In approaching it in this generality some logical
rigour is sacrificed but an initial feel can be obtained. The
fundamental object in defining nonstandard analysis is a universe.

###### Definition 2.1.1.

A universe, @xmath , is a non empty collection of "mathematical objects"
that is closed under subsets and closed under basic mathematical
operations. These operations are union of sets, intersection of sets,
set difference, ordered pair, Cartesian product, powerset and function
set. A universe is also assumed to contain (copies of) @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Further @xmath is assumed to be transitive
( @xmath ).

One point of interest is the notion of "mathematical objects". These are
taken to include all the objects of mathematics (numbers, sets,
functions, relations, ordered tuples, Cartesian products, etc. ). In
fact sets are actually enough and all the objects can be formalized in
the foundational framework of Zermelo-Fraenkel axiomatic set theory.
(For example a function @xmath can be identified with the set of pairs
@xmath which is a subset of the Cartesian product @xmath . Conversely a
function from @xmath to @xmath can be defined set theoretically.)

The nonstandard universe is obtained via a star map . This is a
one-to-one map @xmath between two universes that maps object @xmath to
its hyper-extension (or sometimes termed nonstandard extension) @xmath .
Further it is assumed that for all @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

The star map has a powerful property in that it preserves a large class
of properties of the standard universe. This is the transfer principle
(or often called the Leibniz principle). In a non-rigorous way let
@xmath be a property of standard objects @xmath which has a bounded
formalization in a language is true iff it is true about the
corresponding hyper-extensions @xmath . This will be made more precise
by using mathematical logic.

Combining the previous two paragraphs leads to the following definition.

###### Definition 2.1.2.

A model of nonstandard analysis is a triple @xmath where @xmath is a
star-map satisfying the transfer principle.

The other fundamental principle of nonstandard analysis is the
saturation property. Saturation has a precise definition is model
theory, which will be detailed later. However in terms of set theory
saturation can be given an elementary formulation as an intersection
property.

###### Definition 2.1.3.

An internal set is any @xmath with @xmath for some standard @xmath . An
external set is an element of the nonstandard model that is not
internal.

###### Definition 2.1.4.

Let @xmath be a set with @xmath a family of subsets of @xmath . Then the
collection @xmath has the finite intersection property, if any
subcollection @xmath has non-empty intersection @xmath .

###### Definition 2.1.5 (@xmath-Saturation).

Let @xmath be an infinite cardinal. Then the @xmath -saturation
principle states that if @xmath is an index set with cardinality @xmath
and @xmath is a family of internal sets of an internal set @xmath having
the finite intersection property, then @xmath .

Robinson’s original presentation contained a weaker form of saturation
where he used concurrent relations. It was Luxemburg who introduced
@xmath -saturation as a fundamental tool in nonstandard analysis and in
particular for the nonstandard study of topological spaces. The final
point relates to the existence of a star map which can be constructed
using ultraproducts.

#### 2.1.2 Model Theory

Mathematical logic, like many areas of mathematics, has various
branches. One branch is the study of mathematical structures by
considering the first order sentences true in these structures and sets
definable by first order formulae: model theory . The two main, but
connected, reasons for studying model theory are finding out more about
a mathematical structure using model theoretic techniques and given
theories proving general theorems about their models. Some recent
results from model theory have been related to number theoretic
problems. The two main results are the Mordell-Lang conjecture ¹ ¹ 1 The
generalised Mordell-Lang conjecture states that the irreducible
components of the Zariski closure of a subset of a group of finite rank
inside a semi-abelian variety are translates of closed algebraic
subgroups. (for function fields in positive characteristic) and another
proof of the Manin-Mumford conjecture ² ² 2 One way of stating the
Manin-Mumford conjecture is that a curve C in its Jacobian variety J can
only contain a finite number of points that are of finite order in J,
unless C = J. , both were proved by Hrushovski. For a concise overview
of model theory see [ Mar ] and for a more detailed introduction the
textbook of [ C-Kei ] provides a solid grounding in this area of logic.

The fundamental objects are structures and the components of a language.

###### Definition 2.1.6 (Language).

A language is a collection of symbols of three types:

-    set of function symbols ( @xmath ) and a @xmath for each @xmath ;

-    set of relation symbols ( @xmath ) and @xmath for each @xmath ;

-    set of constant symbols ( @xmath ).

The numbers @xmath and @xmath are the arities of the function @xmath and
relation @xmath respectively.

A simple example is given by the language of rings @xmath where @xmath
and @xmath are binary function symbols and 0 and 1 are constants.

###### Definition 2.1.7 (@xmath-Structure).

A @xmath -structure @xmath consists of the following:

-    a non empty set @xmath (the universe of @xmath );

-    for each function symbol @xmath a function @xmath ;

-    for each relation symbol @xmath a set @xmath ;

-    for each constant symbol @xmath an element @xmath .

@xmath and @xmath are the interpretation of the symbols @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath respectively.

When there is no confusion the superscript @xmath is often dropped.
Naturally maps can be considered between @xmath -structures and the ones
of interest are those which preserve the interpretation of @xmath .

###### Definition 2.1.8.

Suppose @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -structures with universes @xmath
and @xmath respectively. Then an @xmath -embedding @xmath is a
one-to-one map @xmath such that:

-    for all @xmath and @xmath , @xmath ;

-    for all @xmath and @xmath , @xmath iff @xmath ;

-    for @xmath , @xmath .

Further @xmath is a substructure of @xmath (or @xmath is an extension of
@xmath ) if @xmath and the inclusion map is a @xmath -embedding. A
bijective @xmath -embedding is called a @xmath -isomorphism and in the
case @xmath it is called a @xmath -automorphism. Finally the cardinality
of @xmath is @xmath .

An example of a structure is @xmath which is an @xmath -structure where
@xmath with @xmath is a binary function and @xmath a constant. The
structure @xmath is a substructure of @xmath .

In any language (mathematical or linguistical) one aim is to use it to
use it to convey ideas (often via sentences). In logic the first step is
to create formulae to describe properties of @xmath -structures.
Formulae are strings built using the symbols of @xmath and the (assumed
disjoint) set of logical symbols (which consists of logical connectives
( @xmath and @xmath ), parentheses ( @xmath ), quantifiers ( @xmath and
@xmath ), the equality symbol ( @xmath ) and variable symbols).
Simplistically terms are expressions obtained from constants and
variables by applying functions.

###### Definition 2.1.9.

The set of @xmath -terms is the smallest set @xmath such that

-    for each @xmath , @xmath ,

-    each variable symbol is an element of @xmath , and

-    if @xmath and @xmath then @xmath .

A @xmath -term (t) has a unique interpretation in a @xmath -structure
@xmath as a function @xmath . For a subterm @xmath of a term @xmath and
@xmath . @xmath can be defined inductively

-   if @xmath is the constant symbol @xmath then @xmath ,

-   if @xmath is the variable @xmath then @xmath ,

-   if @xmath is the term @xmath (where @xmath is a function symbol of
    @xmath and @xmath are terms) then @xmath .

Finally the definition of @xmath -formulae can be given.

###### Definition 2.1.10.

@xmath -formulae are defined via atomic @xmath -formulae. An object
@xmath is said to be an atomic @xmath -formula if @xmath is either
@xmath (for terms @xmath , @xmath ) or @xmath (for @xmath and @xmath
terms). Then the set of @xmath -formulae is the smallest set @xmath
containing the atomic formulae such that

-    if @xmath is in @xmath then so is @xmath ,

-    if @xmath and @xmath are in @xmath then so are @xmath and @xmath ,
    and

-    if @xmath is in @xmath then so are @xmath and @xmath (where @xmath
    is a variable).

The set of @xmath -formulae split into two depending on the variables of
the formula. Indeed a variable is said to be bound in a quantifier if it
occurs inside a @xmath or @xmath quantifier, otherwise it is said to be
free. A formula is called a sentence if it has no free variables
otherwise it is called a predicate.

The next concept is satisfaction . That is given an @xmath -formula (
@xmath are free variables) and a @xmath -structure @xmath the notion of
@xmath being true in @xmath , @xmath is an @xmath -tuple of elements in
@xmath . This is denoted by @xmath with the negation denoted by @xmath .

###### Definition 2.1.11.

The notion of @xmath is defined inductively by

-    If @xmath is @xmath then @xmath if @xmath ;

-    If @xmath is @xmath (a @xmath -ary relation) then @xmath if @xmath
    ;

-    If @xmath is @xmath then @xmath if @xmath and @xmath ;

-    If @xmath is @xmath then @xmath if @xmath or @xmath ;

-    If @xmath is @xmath then @xmath if @xmath ;

-    If @xmath is @xmath (where the free variables of @xmath are among
    @xmath ) then @xmath if there is a @xmath such that @xmath ;

-    If @xmath is @xmath then @xmath if @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Definition 2.1.12.

A @xmath -theory is a set of sentences of the language @xmath . A model
of a theory @xmath is a @xmath -structure @xmath which satisfies all the
sentences of @xmath , denoted @xmath . Further a @xmath -theory, @xmath
, is satisfiable iff there exists a model of @xmath and it is consistent
iff a formal contradiction can be derived from @xmath .

(It can be shown as a corollary from the completeness theorem below that
@xmath is satisfiable iff @xmath is consistent.)

###### Definition 2.1.13.

Let @xmath and @xmath be @xmath -structures with @xmath . @xmath is an
elementary substructure of @xmath (or @xmath is an elementary extension
of @xmath ), denoted @xmath , iff for any formula @xmath and tuple
@xmath from @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Further a map @xmath is called an elementary embedding iff it is an
embedding and @xmath .

###### Definition 2.1.14.

Let @xmath be an @xmath -sentence and @xmath an @xmath -theory. A proof
of @xmath from @xmath is a finite sequence of @xmath -formulae @xmath
such that @xmath and @xmath or @xmath follows from @xmath by a simple
logical rule for each @xmath . ( @xmath if there is a proof of @xmath
from @xmath .)

These definitions lead to some important theorems including the very
important compactness theorem , one of the crucial tools of model
theorists.

###### Theorem 2.1.15 (Completeness Theorem).

Let @xmath be an @xmath -theory and @xmath an @xmath -sentence, then
@xmath if and only if @xmath . Moreover, if @xmath has infinite models
then @xmath has a model where the model has cardinality @xmath , for all
@xmath .

###### Theorem 2.1.16 (Compactness Theorem).

A @xmath -theory @xmath has a model iff every finite subset of @xmath
has a model.

A proof of the compactness theorem can be given via ultraproducts though
it is also a consequence of the completeness theorem.

It is often useful to work in a very rich model of a theory, for example
it is often easier to prove things in an algebraically closed field of
infinite transcendence degree and in the context of this work the
nonstandard methods in assuming there are infinite elements when dealing
with the reals. This is made precise by the use of types and the
property of saturation .

For an @xmath -structure @xmath let @xmath be the expansion of the
language by adjoining constant symbols. This leads onto the method of
diagrams but this is not needed in this introduction. Instead suppose
that for some @xmath -structure @xmath , @xmath then let @xmath be the
set of all @xmath -sentences, @xmath , such that @xmath .

###### Definition 2.1.17 (Types).

An @xmath -type over @xmath is a set of @xmath -formulas in free
variables @xmath that is consistent with @xmath . A complete @xmath
-type is a maximal @xmath -type. Let @xmath be the set of complete
@xmath -types over @xmath .

A formula @xmath is said to be consistent with a @xmath -theory @xmath
iff there exists a model @xmath which realises @xmath (iff for some
@xmath -tuple of elements satisfies @xmath in @xmath ). A more expansive
definition is to say that a complete @xmath -type is a set @xmath of
@xmath -formulae consistent with @xmath in the free variables @xmath
such that for any @xmath -formula, @xmath , either @xmath or @xmath .

###### Definition 2.1.18.

Let @xmath be an infinite cardinal. A structure @xmath is @xmath
-saturated if for every @xmath , @xmath and @xmath then @xmath is
realized in @xmath . Induction shows that in this case every @xmath
-type over @xmath is also realized in @xmath . @xmath is said to be
saturated if it is @xmath -saturated.

Finally a nonstandard model can be defined.

###### Definition 2.1.19.

A nonstandard model of, a @xmath structure, @xmath is a saturated
elementary extension of @xmath which is usually denoted by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As mentioned at the end of section 2.1.1 an important point is the
existence of a nonstandard model. One method of existence is via
ultraproducts. In fact this is a basic method of constructing models in
general and originated in the work of Skolem in the 1930s and has been
used extensively since the work of Łos in 1955.

###### Definition 2.1.20 (Filters and Ultrafilters).

Let @xmath be a set. A filter on @xmath is a subset @xmath of (the power
set of @xmath ) @xmath satisfying the following properties:

1.  @xmath , @xmath ;

2.   if @xmath and @xmath then @xmath ;

3.   if @xmath then @xmath .

An ultrafilter on @xmath is a filter on @xmath which such that for any
@xmath either @xmath or @xmath .

An ultrafilter ( @xmath ) on a set @xmath is principal if there is
@xmath such that @xmath (so @xmath . An ultrafilter is non-principal if
it is not principal. The existence of ultrafilters is provided by
following theorem and corollary

###### Theorem 2.1.21 (Ultrafilter Theorem).

If @xmath and @xmath has the finite intersection property then there
exists an ultrafilter @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath .

(A proof can be found in proposition 4.1.4 of [ C-Kei ] .)

###### Corollary 2.1.22.

Any proper filter of @xmath can be extended to an ultrafilter over
@xmath .

###### Definition 2.1.23 (Cartesian Products of @xmath-Structures).

Let @xmath be an index set, @xmath a fixed language and @xmath a family
of @xmath -structures. Then the @xmath -structure @xmath is defined as
follows:

-    universe - the cartesian product of @xmath s (the set of sequences
    @xmath such that @xmath for each @xmath .

-    constant symbol - for each @xmath (constant symbol) of @xmath
    define @xmath .

-    relation symbol - for @xmath an @xmath -ary relation symbol define
    @xmath .

-    function symbol - for @xmath a @xmath -ary function symbol and
    @xmath then @xmath .

Let @xmath be a set and @xmath a filter on this set. Let @xmath be a
cartesian product of @xmath -structures with @xmath the related family
of @xmath -structures. An equivalence relation ( @xmath ) can be put on
@xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The equivalence class of the element @xmath is denoted by @xmath . This
is used to define another @xmath -structure.

###### Definition 2.1.24 (Reduced Products of @xmath-Structures).

The reduced product of the @xmath s over @xmath is denoted by @xmath .
It is the quotient structure defined by:

-    universe - the quotient of @xmath by @xmath .

-    the interpretation of a constant symbol @xmath of @xmath is @xmath
    .

-    for @xmath an @xmath -ary relation symbol, @xmath an @xmath -ary
    function symbol in @xmath and @xmath (represented by @xmath ) then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

This quotient structure is well-defined by the properties of filters. In
the special case when @xmath is an ultrafilter then @xmath is called the
ultraproduct of the @xmath s with respect to @xmath .

The key result is Łos’ theorem which basically connects what formulae
are satisfied in the ultraproduct and in the original structure. The
proof is by structural induction on the complexity of the formulae.

###### Theorem 2.1.25 (Łos Theorem).

Let @xmath be a set, @xmath an ultrafilter on @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath
) a family of @xmath -structures. Let @xmath be an @xmath -formula, and
let @xmath be represented by @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Corollary 2.1.26.

Let @xmath be a set, @xmath an ultrafilter on @xmath and @xmath an
@xmath -structure. Then the natural map @xmath , @xmath , is an
elementary embedding. (Here @xmath is the equivalence class of the
sequence with all terms equal to @xmath .)

#### 2.1.3 The Hyperreals

Putting all the work of the previous section together enables the
hyperreals to be defined. Let @xmath and let @xmath be a nonprincipal
ultrafilter (such ultrafilters exist on @xmath by the axiom of choice,
see [ Go ] corollary 2.6.2 for a proof). Let @xmath be the language of
abelian ordered groups (with @xmath and @xmath binary function symbols,
@xmath a binary relation symbol and 0 a constant) and endow @xmath with
its natural @xmath -structure to get a @xmath -structure @xmath . Let
@xmath for all @xmath Let @xmath . Then by the corollary 2.1.26 @xmath
is an elementary extension of @xmath and further it is saturated (see
chapter 6 of [ C-Kei ] ) - hence it is a nonstandard model of @xmath ,
therefore let @xmath . The map of the corollary is the @xmath -map
desired with the transfer principle provided by the map being an
elementary embedding. By applying the transfer principle (to the
corresponding statement for @xmath ) the structure @xmath is a complete
ordered field. One could also check this by going through the axioms for
a field and checking they hold for @xmath .

Corollary 2.1.26 implies that @xmath can be considered as embedded in
@xmath but are these the only elements? (In fact a general nonstandard
model @xmath does contain elements distinct from those in the original
structure because of saturation.) For the existence of such elements in
@xmath consider the sets @xmath for each @xmath . Then @xmath is a
countable family of sets satisfying the finite intersection property.
Therefore the intersection of their image ( @xmath ) is non-empty in
@xmath . Then any such element ( @xmath ) of the intersection satisfies
@xmath for all @xmath . The set of infinite numbers is the set @xmath .
The set of infinite integers are often called hyperfinite integers . A
number @xmath is said to be limited (or finite ) if @xmath for some
@xmath .

A similar construction can be used to show that infinitesimal elements
exist by considering the sets @xmath for @xmath . The set of
infinitesimals are denoted by @xmath .

An equivalence relation ( @xmath ) can be defined for @xmath by @xmath
iff @xmath . This leads to the real shadow map from limited elements of
@xmath to @xmath . It is shown in full details in definition 3.1.1 that
if @xmath is limited then there exists a unique @xmath such that @xmath
enabling the definition of the shadow/standard part of @xmath to be
@xmath .

A very important concept is to be able to descend from the nonstandard
model to the standard model. This can be done for a general topological
space with a valuation (for example see [ Mac1 ] ). For the hyperreals
there is the real shadow map, denoted @xmath , briefly described in the
previous paragraph and developed in full detail in chapter 3.

In the construction of @xmath via ultrafilters, one essentially views
elements of @xmath as infinite sequences of real numbers. This
construction can also be used to define functions and subsets on @xmath
. For example the important concept of an internal set can be defined.
Suppose there is a given sequence of subsets @xmath of @xmath then a
subset @xmath of @xmath can be defined by specifying that for each
@xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the equivalence class of @xmath modulo the ultrafilter
@xmath . This can be shown to be well-defined ( [ Go ] , 11.1). A set
which is not internal is said to be external . Examples of internal sets
include @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Full details of internal
sets of @xmath can be found in [ Go ] , chapter 11. Similar
constructions using sequences of functions can be used to create hyper
functions, and internal functions can also be defined in an analogous
way to internal sets.

A problem with @xmath , and more generally for a nonstandard enlargement
of a topological space, is the lack of a canonical topology. Given a
topological space @xmath , with topology @xmath , and enlargement @xmath
there are two main topologies which can be put on this hyper space - the
@xmath (tandard)-topology and the finer @xmath -topology.

-   The basis of fundamental neighbourhoods for the @xmath -topology are
    generated by @xmath (where @xmath runs through the open subsets of
    @xmath ).

-   The basis of fundamental neighbourhoods for the @xmath -topology are
    @xmath (where @xmath is the set of fundamental neighbourhoods in
    @xmath ).

In the case of the hyperreals the @xmath -neighbourhoods are of the form
@xmath where @xmath and @xmath . The @xmath -open sets are the union of
@xmath -neighbourhoods and the @xmath -open sets form the @xmath
-topology on @xmath . The @xmath -neighbourhoods are of the form @xmath
for @xmath and @xmath . Further details can be found in chapter 4 of [
Ro1 ] .

All the analytical results in this work are proven in the @xmath
-topology as it is the finer topology.

To summarize the hyperreals can be "explicitly" considered as certain
elements of @xmath or just @xmath with added elements which are
"infinitely close" to each element of @xmath and "infinitely large".
Most of the properties of @xmath hold in the hyperreals by using the
transfer principle. It should be noted that the construction of the
hyperreals is not unique because of the choice of ultrafilter. In fact
if the continuum hypothesis is assumed it can be shown that all
quotients of @xmath with respect to nonprincipal ultrafilters on @xmath
are isomorphic as ordered fields ( [ Go ] , 3.16). A guide to the
hyperreals can be found in the form of [ Go ] .

A slightly more general construction is instead of considering a
structure with universe @xmath is to consider a superstructure . Indeed
let @xmath be a non empty set of atoms (where atoms are objects that can
be elements of sets but are not themselves and are "empty" with respect
to @xmath ). Usually it is assumed that (a copy of) the natural numbers
@xmath .

###### Definition 2.1.27.

The superstructure over @xmath is defined to be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and by induction @xmath ( @xmath is the powerset of @xmath
).

Note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is a simple exercise to check that the conditions for a universe are
satisfied by the superstructure. Superstructures enable a mathematical
object @xmath to be investigated by ensuring that (a copy of) @xmath is
contained in @xmath . The set elements of @xmath are called the entities
of @xmath and the individuals of @xmath are the elements of @xmath .

###### Definition 2.1.28.

A superstructure based on a set of atoms @xmath is the set @xmath
together with the notions of equality and membership on the elements of
@xmath : @xmath .

(The notion of equality is assumed given for individuals and equality
between entities (no atom equals any entity) is when they have the same
elements.)

As a solid example consider the superstructure ( @xmath ) based on the
natural numbers as the atoms. The basic algebra of @xmath is part of
@xmath . For example addition can be taken to be the following entity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Further number systems can be obtained as entities of @xmath by taking
pairs of entities. For example @xmath is formed from ordered pairs of
@xmath , @xmath is formed from pairs of @xmath and @xmath from Dedekind
cuts. Virtually anything occurring in classical analysis is an entity of
@xmath .

Using the model theory above it has a nonstandard extension along with
the transfer principle. From a formal view an advantage of a
superstructure is that all the "useful" objects such as functions,
metrics,… are already extended to the nonstandard setting. The
definition of internal is clearer as an object @xmath is internal if
@xmath for some @xmath . Internal objects are important as from the
definition of the transfer principle; transfer takes place from standard
objects to internal objects. For example induction only takes place on
internal subsets of @xmath . For a full introduction to nonstandard
analysis via superstructures see [ S-L ] .

In this work there is some abuse of notation, for example an element of
a nonstandard space @xmath should be written as @xmath but generally the
@xmath is dropped without confusion.

#### 2.1.4 Applications and Criticisms

As a final point it should be mentioned about the uses of nonstandard
analysis and the potential criticism. So far nonstandard analysis has
been successfully applied to many areas such as probability theory (for
example certain products of infinitely many independent, equally
weighted random variables), mathematical economics (for example the
behaviour of large economies) and mathematical physics.

There was initial expectation that nonstandard analysis might
revolutionize the way mathematicians reasoned with the real numbers but
it never happened. Due to the construction of nonstandard analysis any
nonstandard proof can be reinterpreted using standard techniques. This
does not reduce nonstandard analysis to a mere redundant method of proof
since the methods can actually be quite powerful not only in simplifying
standard proofs, proving/refuting conjectures but also in giving precise
meaning to many informal notions/concepts which do not make sense
classically (like infinitesimals). Despite these points there is still
skepticism about just how much nonstandard methods add to mathematics. A
(well-)known critic is Alain Connes, as he mentioned in his famous book
Non Commutative Geometry ( [ Co3 ] ). The reader is left to make their
own opinions.

(Further it cannot be over looked that the 300 year old problem of
formalizing infinitesimals was solved by Robinson using the power of
20th century logic in the form of nonstandard analysis. In [ Kei ] he
shows how integral and differential calculus can be developed entirely
using hyperreal numbers.)

Future progress and applications of nonstandard analysis, and of model
theory, can be found in [ Fe1 ] and [ Fe2 ] .

### 2.2 Nonstandard Number Theory

One of the first applications of nonstandard mathematics was to
algebraic number theory. Unsurprisingly Robinson produced much work in
this area and there have been important contributions from Roquette and
from MacIntyre. This section gives a brief summary of some of the work
in this area both to give an application of nonstandard mathematics and
to form a basis for which this thesis is an extension.

The main work of Robinson in this area is contained in the papers [ Ro2
] – [ Ro5 ] and the joint paper with Roquette ( [ R-R ] ). The first few
papers make use of a certain external nonstandard ideal in a nonstandard
extension of a Dedekind ring in order to look at properties of ideals in
the standard Dedekind ring.

#### 2.2.1 The Quotient Ring @xmath

Let @xmath be a Dedekind domain which possesses at least one proper
ideal (where a proper ideals is any ideal other than @xmath or the zero
ideal). @xmath can be enlarged to give an integral domain @xmath . (To
obtain this extension @xmath and @xmath are embedded in a structure
@xmath and then @xmath is enlarged. From the work above this is done so
as to be consistent in making references to hyperfinite integers and
other nonstandard objects.) Further let @xmath be the set of ideals of
@xmath and this enlarges to the set of internal ideals of @xmath ,
@xmath .

###### Definition 2.2.1.

Define the monad @xmath to be the intersection of all proper standard
ideals in @xmath . (An internal ideal @xmath is standard if there exists
an ideal @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath .)

The following properties of @xmath are easy to establish and full proofs
can be found in section 3 of the first paper in [ Ro2 ] .

###### Proposition 2.2.2.

1.  @xmath is an external ideal in @xmath .

2.   The only element of @xmath in @xmath is the zero element.

3.   For any ideal, @xmath , in @xmath then @xmath iff @xmath .

4.   There exists an internal proper ideal @xmath in @xmath such that
    @xmath .

###### Definition 2.2.3.

Let @xmath be the quotient ring of @xmath with respect to @xmath ,
@xmath .

The main result from this paper is the following theorem.

###### Theorem 2.2.4.

There exists a one-to-one multiplicative mapping from the proper ideals
of @xmath into the classes of associated elements of @xmath .

The second paper of [ Ro2 ] continues the above development. In
particular the factorization laws of internal ideals in @xmath are
examined and the introduction of prime ideals. There are several
theorems in the paper but the most important is in section 7 regarding
the factorization of elements of @xmath in terms of prime elements of
@xmath .

###### Theorem 2.2.5.

Let @xmath be an element of @xmath , which can be regarded as a subset
of @xmath . Further decompose @xmath in @xmath into its prime ideals as
@xmath . Then there exists representative primes @xmath of @xmath and a
unit, @xmath , such that the following decomposition is unique @xmath .

Details of nonstandard finite factorization can be found in section 7 of
[ Ro2 ] .

The final paper in this series is [ Ro3 ] . This paper relates @xmath to
the theory of @xmath -adic numbers and adeles. In the previous papers
the enlargements were constructed by the use of concurrent relations. In
this one ultrapowers are used in a condensed way, similar to the
previous chapter. This construction is required to prove the following
theorem.

###### Theorem 2.2.6.

Let @xmath be a countable Dedekind ring (not a field) such that the
quotient rings @xmath are finite. (Here @xmath is a non-trivial prime
ideal in @xmath .) Let @xmath be a comprehensive enlargement then the
ring @xmath is isomorphic to the strong direct sum of @xmath -adic
completions of @xmath .

In section 5 of [ Ro4 ] the results regarding @xmath -adic completions
and adeles are extended to algebraic extensions. This is also summarized
in section 2 of [ Mac1 ] .

The penultimate paper moves on from the work of the properties of @xmath
and to some other topics in algebraic number theory. These areas move
into, for example, infinite Galois theory and class field theory. This
work is not pursued in this thesis.

The work in [ Ro5 ] continues with work on ideals. In particular the
theory of entire ideals in an infinite algebraic extension of @xmath
(and also some class field theory which is not mentioned here because
this thesis does not develop this area). In the previous works the
quotient ring @xmath has been studied for Dedekind rings and finite
algebraic number fields. This work looks at the quotient ring in
infinite algebraic extensions of @xmath .

Indeed let @xmath be an infinite algebraic extension of @xmath with
rings of integers @xmath and @xmath respectively. The nonstandard
enlargements can be considered, with @xmath an enlargement of @xmath and
@xmath an enlargement of @xmath . Further let @xmath be a tower
subfields of @xmath such that @xmath , each @xmath a finite extension of
@xmath and @xmath . In the enlargement @xmath is a mapping from @xmath
into the subfields of @xmath with @xmath and @xmath for finite @xmath .
In particular for any infinite @xmath (set @xmath ) @xmath .

###### Definition 2.2.7.

Let @xmath be the subset of @xmath defined as @xmath and @xmath is
divisible by all non zero standard rational integers @xmath .

This naturally leads to the quotient ring @xmath and the canonical
mapping @xmath . Since @xmath does not contain any standard elements it
follows that @xmath injects @xmath into @xmath . Further let @xmath then
@xmath can be identified with a subring of @xmath . Let @xmath be the
restriction of @xmath to @xmath so that it maps @xmath on @xmath and
injects @xmath into @xmath . The main theorem (3.2) proved is the
following.

###### Theorem 2.2.8.

Let @xmath be the set of internal ideals in @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath
). Then @xmath is invertible in @xmath iff all prime ideals @xmath which
divide the ideal @xmath generated by @xmath in @xmath have norms @xmath
that are powers of nonstandard primes.

The final papers of interest are [ R-R ] and [ Mac1 ] . The paper by [
R-R ] is extremely important in nonstandard number theory. It gives a
new and simplified proof of the finiteness theorem of Siegel-Mahler
theorem concerning Diophantine equations by the use of nonstandard
methods. The main idea is to relate the algebraic geometry of a number
field @xmath and the nonstandard arithmetic of a nonstandard enlargement
of @xmath , @xmath . So an algebraic function field in one variable over
a algebraic number field @xmath can be viewed as a field of functions
over @xmath and as a subfield of @xmath . The Siegel-Mahler theorem can
then be restated as

###### Theorem 2.2.9.

If @xmath is an algebraic function field in one variable over some fixed
number field @xmath such that @xmath , and if @xmath has genus @xmath ,
then every non constant element @xmath of @xmath admits at least one
nonstandard prime divisor of @xmath in its denominator.

The method of proof is based on a transfer principle which can
symmetrically translate arguments of @xmath into equivalent functional
properties of @xmath . A key facet of the proof is that it does not use
the Mordell-Weil theorem ³ ³ 3 The Mordell-Weil theorem states that for
an abelian variety A over a number field K, the group A(K) of K-rational
points of A is a finitely-generated abelian group. (although there are
areas of the proof which are similar to areas of the Mordell-Weil
theorem). This enables the revelation of an effective bound relative to
effective bounds in Roth’s theorem ⁴ ⁴ 4 Given an algebraic number
@xmath and a given @xmath the inequality @xmath has only a finite set of
solutions for coprime integers @xmath and @xmath , see section 7 in [
Mac1 ] .

[ Mac1 ] builds on the work in [ R-R ] . The work was originally given
as a talk intended to outline model-theoretic methods in Diophantine
geometry. The main result relates to another formulation of Weil’s
theory of distributions via a "covering theorem" relating geometric and
arithmetical ideles.

## Chapter 3 The Hyper Riemann Zeta Function

### 3.1 The Shadow Maps of @xmath

The shadow (or sometimes termed standard) maps enable a standard entity
to be taken from a nonstandard entity. In this work they are extremely
important. In @xmath the shadow maps used in this work correspond
directly to the valuations of @xmath . The simplest one to develop is
the real shadow map.

###### Definition 3.1.1 (Real Shadow Map).

Let @xmath be the standard archimedean valuations on @xmath extended to
a hyper valuation on @xmath .

1.   Two elements @xmath are said to be infinitesimally close with
    respect to @xmath (denoted @xmath ) if @xmath is an infinitesimal
    element of @xmath . Define @xmath .

2.   Define the monad of an element @xmath to be the set of elements
    which are infinitely close with respect to @xmath , @xmath .

3.  @xmath is said to be limited if there exists @xmath such that @xmath
    . Define @xmath .

4.   For @xmath define @xmath to be the unique element of @xmath to
    which @xmath is infinitesimally close.

This definition and the justification for the final statement can be
found in [ Go ] . He further goes onto define (in chapter 18) the @xmath
-adic shadow maps but in quite an explicit way unlike the concise way
for the real shadow map. Indeed define the natural map

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This is a surjective homomorphism with kernel:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This extends to @xmath by setting

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(with @xmath in lowest form). For this to be defined it is required that
@xmath . In fact this map is well defined for @xmath . This is also a
ring homomorphism and has kernel @xmath

So I define the @xmath -adic shadow maps on @xmath using the @xmath
-adic valuation directly.

###### Definition 3.1.2 (@xmath-adic Shadow Map).

-    Let @xmath , @xmath is @xmath -adically infinitely close to @xmath
    (denoted @xmath ) if there exists @xmath such that @xmath .

-    The @xmath -adic monad of @xmath is defined to be @xmath .

-    For @xmath , @xmath is defined to be the unique element of @xmath
    which is infinitely close in the @xmath -adic valuation to @xmath .

The last statement is proved by the following theorem.

###### Theorem 3.1.3.

Every @xmath is infinitely close to exactly one number in @xmath .

Proof: Let @xmath . Dealing with uniqueness first. Assume @xmath is
infinitely close to two elements in @xmath , @xmath and @xmath with
@xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath . Both of these are infinitesimal by
definition and hence @xmath . This is a contradiction since @xmath and
therefore @xmath .

Now for existence. As @xmath there exists an expansion,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is not negative unlimited ( @xmath ), otherwise @xmath
would not be in @xmath . Also @xmath . Then let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

this is the standard part of @xmath . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is the nonstandard part of @xmath . Thus, @xmath . Claim @xmath ,
equivalently @xmath . From basic @xmath -adic analysis, if the sum
@xmath is absolutely @xmath -adically convergent for some @xmath then
@xmath By transfer this can be applied to finding @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath the result follows since @xmath is nonstandard.

@xmath

###### Theorem 3.1.4 (Properties of @xmath).

Let @xmath then

1.  @xmath

2.  @xmath

3.  @xmath if @xmath .

4.  @xmath

Proof: The three statements are basic exercises in manipulation of the
@xmath -adic expansions of @xmath and @xmath then use the definition of
theorem 3.1.3 . The final property is very similar in nature and relies
on a proof by cases.

Firstly suppose @xmath . Then @xmath where @xmath thus @xmath and @xmath
. However @xmath and so @xmath .

In the other case @xmath such that @xmath with @xmath . Thus @xmath and
@xmath . By the definition of the @xmath -adic shadow map @xmath and
@xmath .

@xmath

###### Lemma 3.1.5.

@xmath is a surjective map with kernel @xmath .

Proof: The map is surjective because @xmath and @xmath acts trivially on
@xmath .

The kernel is @xmath By the definition of the @xmath -adic shadow map
this happens precisely when @xmath .

@xmath

###### Corollary 3.1.6.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In both the infinite and the finite prime cases the associated shadow
maps are surjective ring homomorphisms such that @xmath and @xmath

The shadow maps can be extended from acting on just the above spaces to
the functions on them.

###### Definition 3.1.7 (Shadow Image).

For a function @xmath (where @xmath and @xmath are sets upon which the
hyper valuation @xmath is defined) the shadow image of @xmath (with
respect to the valuation @xmath ) is denoted by @xmath . This is a
function with domain consisting of the standard parts @xmath ( @xmath )
such that @xmath is infinitely close with respect to the valuation to a
standard element in @xmath . This gives the image consisting of these
@xmath for @xmath in the domain.

Further details of the real shadow map acting on functions can be found
in [ Go ] .

### 3.2 Nonstandard Tools

In order to develop the analytical theory one needs some basic notions
in nonstandard analysis.

#### 3.2.1 Properties of @xmath

To define the hyper Riemann zeta function one first needs the idea
notion of ideals for @xmath .

Let @xmath and @xmath be the sets of all prime ideals in @xmath and all
internal prime ideals in @xmath respectively. Also, let @xmath and
@xmath be the sets of primes numbers in @xmath and @xmath respectively.

###### Lemma 3.2.1.

I is an internal prime ideal in @xmath @xmath @xmath for a unique @xmath
@xmath .

Proof:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Conversely,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath

For @xmath define the norm of the ideal to be N(I) @xmath . This
definition can be transferred to @xmath , N(I) @xmath .

Further properties of @xmath can be found in [ Go ] , [ Ro1 ] and in the
papers by Robinson on algebraic integers and Dedekind rings in [ Ro2 ] ,
[ Ro3 ] and [ Ro4 ] .

#### 3.2.2 Hyperfinite Sums, Products, Sequences and Integrals

Internal functions can be constructed out of internal sets and the full
definition can be found in chapter 12 of [ Go ] .

In order to define hyperfinite summation the symbol ’ @xmath ’ has to be
defined for nonstandard integers. This can be found in chapter 19 of [
Go ] enabling @xmath to be defined for all internal @xmath and unlimited
@xmath . This enables the following definition:

###### Definition 3.2.2.

Let @xmath be an internal function then the infinite sum exists, @xmath
, if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In an analogous way the hyperfinite product can also be defined. Let
@xmath be a complex function then a finite product can be defined for
@xmath ; @xmath . @xmath can be regarded as a function from finite
sequences to the complex numbers - where the finite sequence is @xmath .
By transfer (see chapter 19 of [ Go ] ) @xmath extends to act on all
internal hyperfinite sequences. So @xmath is then defined for any @xmath
and internal hyper complex functions.

###### Definition 3.2.3.

Let @xmath be an internal function then the infinite product exists,
@xmath , if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As already seen above chapter 19 of [ Go ] enables hyper finite internal
sequences and internal sequences to be defined.

Indeed let @xmath be an internal function. Then a hyper internal
sequence is defined to be @xmath where @xmath .

###### Definition 3.2.4.

1.   A hyper internal sequence @xmath Q-converges to a limit @xmath if
    @xmath .

2.   Let @xmath be a hyper internal sequence in @xmath then @xmath is a
    hyper internal Cauchy sequence in @xmath if @xmath .

###### Proposition 3.2.5.

If a hyper internal sequence @xmath Q-converges then it is a hyper
Cauchy internal sequence.

Proof: Suppose @xmath Q-converges to @xmath . By definition of
Q-convergence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Under these conditions and by using the triangle inequality,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

@xmath

###### Proposition 3.2.6.

If @xmath is a hyper internal Cauchy sequence then it Q-converges to a
limit in @xmath .

Proof: Using the transfer principle and the definition of a hyper
internal Cauchy sequence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This implies @xmath for @xmath is a Cauchy sequence in @xmath . By the
standard theorem this converges to a limit, A say, in @xmath . By the
transfer principle

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

The work on defining hyperfinite integrals can be found beginning in
chapter 5 of [ Ro1 ] .

#### 3.2.3 Q-Topology

Consider a nonstandard set @xmath with a hypermetric @xmath

###### Definition 3.2.7.

1.   A @xmath is the set @xmath for @xmath and @xmath .

2.   A set @xmath is called a @xmath of @xmath if it contains a ball
    @xmath .

3.   A set is @xmath if it is a Q-neighbourhood of each of its elements.

4.   The complement of a Q-open set with respect to @xmath is termed to
    be @xmath with respect to @xmath .

Using the triangle inequality it follows that every Q-ball is Q-open.
Naturally many more properties can be defined and results developed via
the transfer principle from the standard case but these are not relevant
for this work. The only property needed is the analogue of compactness
in the nonstandard case.

###### Definition 3.2.8.

1.   Consider an internal collection of Q-open sets. These form a @xmath
    for @xmath if @xmath is contained in the union of these sets. A
    @xmath is a subcollection with the same property.

2.   A @xmath @xmath of @xmath is a Q-open covering of @xmath consisting
    of a hyperfinite number of sets.

These lead to the definition of compactness in the nonstandard case.

###### Definition 3.2.9.

A set @xmath is @xmath with respect to the Q-topology iff every Q-open
covering of @xmath contains a hyperfinite Q-subcovering.

#### 3.2.4 Hyper Exponential and Logarithm Functions

On @xmath take the usual metric and when extended to @xmath it makes
@xmath into a hyper metric space where the metric takes values in @xmath
.

###### Definition 3.2.10.

Let @xmath with @xmath @xmath . Define the hyperreal part to be @xmath
and the hyper imaginary part to be @xmath .

###### Definition 3.2.11.

Let @xmath be a hypercomplex function. @xmath is Q-continuous if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 3.2.12.

The limit function of a uniformly Q-convergent internal sequence of
Q-continuous functions is itself Q-continuous.

Proof: Suppose that the functions @xmath are Q-continuous and uniformly
Q-converge to @xmath on a set E. For any @xmath , @xmath can be found
such that @xmath @xmath E. Let @xmath be a point in E. As @xmath is
Q-continuous at @xmath , @xmath such that @xmath @xmath with @xmath .
Under the same conditions on z,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath

###### Definition 3.2.13.

Let @xmath and define the hyper factorial inductively by @xmath and
@xmath . So @xmath This function is interpolated by the hyper gamma
function to be defined below.

###### Definition 3.2.14.

Suppose @xmath is an internal hypercomplex function then @xmath is the
Q-derivative of @xmath at @xmath if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 3.2.15.

Let @xmath be a set of points in @xmath @xmath as above). Then @xmath is
Q-analytic in @xmath if @xmath is infinitely Q-differentiable at all
points of @xmath .

###### Definition 3.2.16.

Let @xmath and define the hyper exponential as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 3.2.17.

Properties of @xmath .

1.  @xmath uniformly Q-converges @xmath , so @xmath .

2.  @xmath is Q-analytic @xmath .

3.  @xmath .

4.  @xmath ( @xmath ). In particular @xmath .

5.  @xmath is a group is a group isomorphism.

Proof:

1.  Let @xmath and define @xmath . In the classical case @xmath
    converges uniformly @xmath .

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.  The arguments of 3.4.1 , 3.4.5 and 3.4.6 , see below, will give the
    results.

3.  Since, by 2, @xmath is Q-analytic it remains to find the derivative.
    In the standard case @xmath .

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

4.  By 3: @xmath Using this and the product rule gives for some constant
    @xmath : @xmath So @xmath ,constant ( @xmath ). Let @xmath then
    @xmath . Now let @xmath and the result follows. In particular @xmath
    which implies @xmath is never zero.

5.  In the standard case @xmath .

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Conversely,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

@xmath

###### Definition 3.2.18.

@xmath . It is the inverse to @xmath . @xmath is a root of the equation
@xmath . This equation has infinitely many solutions so the hyper
logarithm is multivalued. So define the principal value of the hyper
logarithm to be @xmath where @xmath and @xmath . Also define @xmath to
be a root of the equation @xmath @xmath provided @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.2.19.

1.  @xmath iff @xmath .

2.  @xmath is Q-analytic @xmath . Also in this region, @xmath .

Proof:

1.  Let @xmath and @xmath then @xmath and @xmath satisfy @xmath and
    @xmath . By 3.2.17 (4) @xmath and the result follows since from the
    definition 3.2.18 and the proof in the classical case.

2.  For the first part use the arguments of 3.4.1 , 3.4.5 and 3.4.6
    below with @xmath . For the second part use the arguments of 3.2.17
    (3).

    @xmath

###### Definition 3.2.20.

For @xmath and @xmath define @xmath , where the principal value of the
hyper logarithm is used.

###### Lemma 3.2.21.

Let @xmath and @xmath .

1.  @xmath is not true in general. It does hold when lemma 3.2.19 1
    holds.

2.  @xmath .

3.  @xmath .

Proof:

1.  Suppose that @xmath and @xmath satisfy the properties of lemma
    3.2.19 then

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

2.  -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

3.  Using the chain rule,

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

@xmath

#### 3.2.5 Hyper Gamma Function

###### Definition 3.2.22.

Hyper gamma function. For @xmath and @xmath and @xmath define

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Proposition 3.2.23.

@xmath is absolutely Q-convergent for @xmath .

Proof: In the standard case

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is absolutely convergent for @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath . Let

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

So @xmath form a hyper internal Cauchy sequence with limit function
@xmath .

@xmath

###### Lemma 3.2.24.

For @xmath , @xmath .

Proof: The classical result for @xmath is @xmath . Using a similar
method as the previous proposition. Let @xmath . Then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

###### Theorem 3.2.25.

Functional equation of @xmath : @xmath

Proof: @xmath . Integrating by parts and then using 3.2.24 gives,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

@xmath

###### Corollary 3.2.26.

@xmath and for @xmath @xmath .

Proof: Using the classical result @xmath and transfer using the same
method as 3.2.24 but with @xmath gives @xmath . Similarly for @xmath .

Let @xmath and using 3.2.25 repeatedly gives the result.

@xmath

###### Proposition 3.2.27.

@xmath has simple poles at @xmath and is non-zero.

Proof: The standard gamma function, @xmath has a simple pole at @xmath ,
since the integral diverges. Using the functional equation the only
other poles are simple and are at @xmath . Let

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So there is a pole at @xmath . Using 3.2.25 , and as in the classical
case, the other poles are at the negative hyperintegers.

The function being non-zero again follows from the functional equation
and by transfer principle as @xmath is non zero.

@xmath

### 3.3 Hyper Riemann Zeta Function

###### Definition 3.3.1.

Following the definition of the classical Riemann zeta function,
naturally define,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath @xmath . From classical results, @xmath is absolutely
convergent for @xmath @xmath and the functions @xmath @xmath converge
uniformly for @xmath . The aim of this section is to develop similar
results for @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.3.2.

@xmath are Q-continuous functions @xmath , @xmath .

Proof:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath

###### Proposition 3.3.3.

@xmath @xmath Q-converges uniformly to @xmath for @xmath , for every
@xmath .

Proof:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The @xmath form a hyper internal Cauchy sequence and a limit function
exists. Fixing @xmath and letting @xmath shows that the limit function
is @xmath . The uniform Q-convergence also implies absolute
Q-convergence of @xmath for @xmath .

@xmath

###### Corollary 3.3.4.

@xmath is Q-continuous for @xmath .

###### Proposition 3.3.5.

For @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

.

Proof: Let @xmath and let @xmath be the set of all primes @xmath . So,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the above sum @xmath is the set of all @xmath such that the prime
factors of @xmath are elements of @xmath . Let @xmath . Classically
@xmath converge absolutely for @xmath ( @xmath to @xmath . So by the
transfer principle,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath and by 3.3.3 , @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath
and using the triangle inequality,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Hence the result as the two sequences converge to the same limit
function.

@xmath

###### Lemma 3.3.6.

@xmath has no zeros for @xmath .

Proof: In the standard case @xmath for @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

#### 3.3.1 A Hyper Theta Function

###### Definition 3.3.7.

Hyper Theta Function: For @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Classically the theta function, @xmath , is absolutely convergent @xmath
with @xmath .

###### Proposition 3.3.8.

@xmath is absolutely Q-convergent @xmath with @xmath .

Proof: Let @xmath and define @xmath for @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

##### Hyper Fourier Transform

###### Definition 3.3.9.

Hyper Schwartz Space: Let @xmath be the space of internal Q-smooth
functions of @xmath and define the hyper Schwartz space to be:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 3.3.10.

Hyper Fourier Transform: Let @xmath and define its Fourier transform to
be,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In order to examine properties of this transform the idea of hyper
distributions need to be introduced.

###### Definition 3.3.11.

Hyper Dirac Distribution:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath .

Using this definition the following properties can be derived.

###### Proposition 3.3.12.

1.  -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

2.   Let @xmath be a Q-continuous hyper real function. Then

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

3.  -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

4.  -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

###### Proposition 3.3.13.

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Proof: In the standard case this result is true. So let @xmath and let
@xmath for @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

###### Proposition 3.3.14.

Let @xmath then @xmath .

Proof: Using the results of the previous two propositions:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

@xmath

##### Hyper Poisson Summation

Recall Fejér’s fundamental theorem concerning Fourier series. Let @xmath
be a bounded, measurable and periodic of period 1. Then the Fourier
coefficients of f are given by,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath . The partial sums are defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

When @xmath is continuous and @xmath then the function is represented by
the absolutely convergent Fourier series

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath and periodic of period 1 ( @xmath ). @xmath is a real valued
function and since @xmath , @xmath is a bounded, measurable function of
period 1. By the transfer principle the Fourier coefficients @xmath and
partial sums @xmath , defined above, can be defined @xmath . So,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath is represented by the absolutely Q-convergent hyper Fourier
series @xmath

###### Lemma 3.3.15.

@xmath

Proof: Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . Then use the argument of 3.3.13 .

@xmath

###### Lemma 3.3.16.

Hyper Poisson Summation: Let @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof: Let @xmath then @xmath where @xmath . This periodicity enables
@xmath to be written as @xmath where @xmath Using the result of the
previous lemma.

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

###### Lemma 3.3.17.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof: Standard result: @xmath . Using a similar method to 3.2.23 let,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath

###### Lemma 3.3.18.

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Proof: In the standard case @xmath . Let @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

@xmath

###### Lemma 3.3.19.

Let @xmath then @xmath is its own Fourier transform.

Proof: @xmath Differentiating,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Integrating by parts and using 3.3.17 . Thus, @xmath for some constant
C. Letting @xmath gives @xmath (using 3.3.18 ) and the result.

@xmath

###### Theorem 3.3.20.

Let @xmath then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof: Using hyper Poisson summation, 3.3.18 and 3.3.19 ,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

@xmath

###### Corollary 3.3.21.

Functional equation for the hyper theta function:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Proof: Let @xmath and set @xmath . Then 3.3.20 gives the functional
equation @xmath .

@xmath

### 3.4 Analytic Properties

Classically @xmath is an analytic function of s with @xmath . It has
analytic continuation to the whole of @xmath with a simple pole at
@xmath .

###### Lemma 3.4.1.

@xmath is Q-analytic @xmath and @xmath .

Proof:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

From standard complex analysis a theorem of Weierstrass’ enables the
deduction that the limit function of a uniformly convergent sequence of
analytic functions is analytic. The proof of this relies on Cauchy’s
theorem.

###### Theorem 3.4.2.

@xmath is Q-analytic in a region @xmath iff

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for every cycle, @xmath , which is homologous to zero in @xmath .

Proof: See section 6.2.3 of [ Ro2 ] .

@xmath

###### Theorem 3.4.3.

1.   Let f be Q-analytic on and inside and on a cycle @xmath . Then, if
    @xmath is inside @xmath ,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.   With the same conditions,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Proof: See section 6.2.3 of [ Ro1 ] .

@xmath

###### Theorem 3.4.4.

Suppose @xmath is analytic in @xmath and @xmath Q-converges to a limit
function @xmath in a region @xmath , Q-uniformly on every hypercompact
set (with respect to the Q-topology) of @xmath . Then @xmath is
Q-analytic in @xmath .

Proof: By hyper Cauchy’s theorem:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where C is a hyper disc @xmath contained in @xmath . In the limit @xmath
and by uniform Q-convergence,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and so @xmath is Q-analytic in the disc. Any hypercompact (with respect
to the Q-topology) subset of @xmath can be covered by a hyperfinite
number of such closed discs and therefore convergence is Q-uniform on
every hypercompact (with respect to the Q-topology) subset.

@xmath

###### Corollary 3.4.5.

@xmath is a Q-analytic function for @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.4.6.

@xmath Q-converges uniformly to @xmath for @xmath .

Proof: Identical statement as in 3.3.3 with @xmath replaced by @xmath .

@xmath

###### Definition 3.4.7.

1.  @xmath .

2.  @xmath .

###### Proposition 3.4.8.

1.  @xmath is a Q-analytic function with poles at @xmath .

2.  @xmath Q-converges for @xmath .

Proof:

1.  The only poles of @xmath are those of @xmath .

2.  By composition of functions the Q-convergence is dependent on the
    Q-convergence of @xmath since @xmath is Q-convergent on @xmath apart
    from at its poles.

@xmath

###### Lemma 3.4.9.

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Proof: Use the argument of 3.3.13 .

@xmath

###### Lemma 3.4.10.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
                       
                       
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

@xmath

###### Lemma 3.4.11.

For @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also, for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof: Using the methods of 3.3.18 and the corresponding standard
results but with @xmath @xmath and @xmath gives the results

@xmath

###### Theorem 3.4.12.

@xmath .

Proof:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
                       
                       
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This is true for @xmath however the integral of the last line converges
and absolutely @xmath . The standard integral in last line converges
absolutely and uniformly @xmath . Using the transfer principle this last
integral does Q-converge absolutely and uniformly for @xmath . Indeed,
for @xmath and @xmath let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Apply the transfer principle as in 3.2.23 . Also the last integral is
invariant under @xmath by substitution. The result follows.

@xmath

###### Corollary 3.4.13.

@xmath can be Q-analytically continued on @xmath .

###### Corollary 3.4.14.

@xmath can be Q-analytically continued on @xmath with a pole at s=1 and
trivial zeros at @xmath .

Proof: From the definition of @xmath ,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Using 3.2.27 the only poles of @xmath in the numerator are at @xmath and
in the denominator @xmath . Evaluating at @xmath in the equation
corresponds to the pole @xmath since by the transfer principle @xmath
has a pole at @xmath . For @xmath in the equation leads to zeros at
@xmath since the left hand side is Q-analytic and non-zero at these
values and the poles of the hyper gamma function cancel with the zeros
of the zeta function. The other values above lead to the same
conclusion. These are termed the trivial zeros.

@xmath

It has been shown that apart from the trivial zeros above any other zero
( @xmath ) must lie in the region @xmath . Following the standard case,

###### Conjecture 3.4.15.

If @xmath and @xmath is not a trivial zero then @xmath .

#### 3.4.1 The Complex Shadow Map

The real shadow map can be extended to act on the hyper complex numbers.
Recall the standard norm on @xmath given for @xmath by @xmath . This
then extends to @xmath by transfer. Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath , where @xmath .

###### Definition 3.4.16 (Complex Shadow Map).

Let @xmath with @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

All the properties of the real shadow map carry through. As a simple
application of this map consider the action on @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.4.17.

For all @xmath with @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof: Let @xmath with @xmath . Then as @xmath there exist positive
@xmath such that @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For a fixed @xmath then @xmath is a hyperreal series which is an
extension of the real series @xmath . Using the work in [ Go ] (6.10)
one finds that @xmath for any @xmath . Using the work above there exists
an @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath for some fixed @xmath . Then by a
simple application of the triangle inequality

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- --

Therefore @xmath .

@xmath

###### Corollary 3.4.18.

For @xmath and @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By using very basic complex analysis a complex sequence can be
considered in terms of its real and imaginary parts and a direct
application of the above leads to the following.

###### Corollary 3.4.19.

For @xmath and @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For general @xmath and @xmath one uses the properties of the shadow map.
Indeed since each term in @xmath is limited,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This last equality follows from the fact that for all @xmath @xmath . By
the absolute Q-convergence of @xmath , @xmath and so the following is
proven.

###### Theorem 3.4.20.

For @xmath and @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

## Chapter 4 The Hyper Dedekind Zeta Function

### 4.1 Hyper Mellin Transform

###### Definition 4.1.1.

Let @xmath be an internal Q-continuous function with @xmath existing.
Define the set of all such functions to be @xmath . Then define the
hyper Mellin transform to be the integral

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

provided this integral exists.

###### Definition 4.1.2.

Suppose @xmath and @xmath are internal hyper complex functions. Define
the notation @xmath as @xmath iff

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem 4.1.3 (Mellin).

Let @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath and positive constants @xmath . Suppose these hyper functions
satisfy

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

for some hyperreal number @xmath and some hyper complex number @xmath .
Then

1.   The integrals @xmath and @xmath Q-converge absolutely and uniformly
    in @xmath . They are therefore Q-holomorphic on this space and admit
    Q-holomorphic continuations to @xmath .

2.   The hyper Mellin transforms have simple poles at @xmath and @xmath
    with residues @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

3.   They satisfy the functional equation

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Proof: The Q-convergence follows from the methods used in the first
chapter by looking at partial Mellin transforms

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and transfer.

Now let @xmath then the hyper Mellin transform can be rewritten by
splitting up the interval of integration

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the second integral make the substitution @xmath and use @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This Q-converges absolutely and uniformly for @xmath by using an
identical method to the above. Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then similarly

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These integrals Q-converge absolutely and locally uniformly on the whole
complex plane, so they represent Q-holomorphic functions. Moreover it is
clear that @xmath and @xmath .

@xmath

### 4.2 Nonstandard Algebraic Number Theory

In order to define the hyper Dedekind zeta function one needs to develop
the notions of algebraic numbers and integers in a nonstandard setting.

#### 4.2.1 Hyper Polynomials and Hyper Algebraic Numbers

Consider a ring commutative ring @xmath and the set of polynomials
@xmath . Both of these sets can be enlarged in an nonstandard framework
to give a hyper commutative ring @xmath and the set of internal
hyperpolynomials @xmath (which is different from the set of finite
polynomials with coefficients from @xmath , @xmath ). By transfer the
notion of the degree of a hyperpolynomial carries through.

###### Definition 4.2.1.

A number @xmath is a hyper algebraic number if there exists a @xmath
with @xmath not all zero and @xmath . Further if @xmath is the root of a
monic @xmath then it is said to be a hyper algebraic integer.

###### Theorem 4.2.2.

Let @xmath be a hyper algebraic number. Then there exists a unique
hyperpolynomial @xmath which is monic, irreducible and of smallest
degree such that @xmath . Moreover, if @xmath and @xmath then @xmath .

Proof:

Let @xmath be the set of hyper algebraic numbers and @xmath . Then by
transfer

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Suppose this @xmath is not irreducible then it can be written as a
product of two lower degree polynomials in @xmath , say @xmath . So
@xmath . By transfer @xmath is a hyper integral domain and so either
@xmath or @xmath which is a contradiction.

For uniqueness suppose there are two such polynomials @xmath and @xmath
satisfying the above then @xmath and @xmath which implies @xmath .

@xmath

###### Definition 4.2.3.

Let the degree of @xmath be given by the degree of @xmath , the minimal
internal hyperpolynomial of @xmath .

###### Definition 4.2.4.

A hyper field @xmath is a hyper algebraic number field if its dimension
over @xmath is hyper finite. The dimension of @xmath over @xmath is
called the degree of @xmath .

###### Theorem 4.2.5.

Let @xmath , @xmath be hyper algebraic numbers then there exists a hyper
algebraic number @xmath such that @xmath

Proof:

Using the transfer principle

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

###### Corollary 4.2.6.

For @xmath let @xmath be a set of hyper algebraic numbers then there
exists @xmath such that @xmath

For a given hyper algebraic number, @xmath , let @xmath be its minimal
internal hyperpolynomial of degree @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be the
conjugates of @xmath . Then @xmath ( @xmath ) is a conjugate field to
@xmath . Moreover the maps @xmath are embeddings of @xmath into @xmath .
There are @xmath embeddings which can be split into hyperreal and hyper
complex embeddings depending on whether or not the conjugate root is
hyperreal or hyper complex. The hyper complex ones then split into pairs
because of hyper complex conjugation. Let @xmath be the number of
hyperreal embeddings and @xmath the number of hyper complex embeddings.
Then @xmath .

Minkoswki’s ideas, on a simplistic level, interpreted an algebraic
number field @xmath over @xmath in terms of points in @xmath
-dimensional space. The following extends this in the natural way to the
nonstandard algebraic number fields @xmath over @xmath of hyperfinite
degree @xmath . There is a canonical mapping resulting from the @xmath
hyper complex embeddings ( @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This @xmath -vector space is equipped with a hermitian scalar product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath represents hyper complex conjugation. Also related to the
embeddings is a @xmath -vector space (the hyper Minkowski space @xmath )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which consists of points of @xmath which are invariant under the
involution of hyper complex conjugation. These are the points @xmath
such that @xmath . The restriction of the hermitian scalar product from
@xmath to @xmath yields a scalar product. There is also the mapping
@xmath since for all @xmath , @xmath . This mapping can be used to give
lattices in the hyper Minkowski space, see the following section on
lattices.

Minkoswki’s theory also exists in a multiplicative form and the @xmath
canonical mapping can be restricted to a homomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In a similar way there is the space @xmath .

There is a homomorphism on @xmath given by the product of the
coordinates

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The usual norm defined below on @xmath is related to this norm by @xmath
. The restriction leads to the norm @xmath being defined on the hyper
Minkowski space.

#### 4.2.2 Lattices

Let @xmath ( @xmath ) and let @xmath be a set of linearly independent
vectors in @xmath . The additive subgroup of @xmath generated by this
set is called a lattice of dimension @xmath . A lattice is called
complete if @xmath .

A hyper metric can be placed on @xmath . Indeed let @xmath and define
@xmath . With this hyper metric closed balls can be introduced. Let
@xmath and @xmath then @xmath A subset @xmath is bounded if @xmath for
some @xmath . A subset of @xmath is discrete if and only if it
intersects every @xmath in a hyperfinite set. Let @xmath be the set of
additive subgroups of @xmath , let @xmath be the set of discrete
subgroups of @xmath and let @xmath be the set of lattices of @xmath .

###### Theorem 4.2.7.

An additive subgroup of @xmath is a lattice iff it is discrete.

Proof:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The converse is proved in an identical manner.

@xmath

For each lattice (generated by @xmath ) a fundamental domain @xmath can
be defined which consists of all elements @xmath ( @xmath ) with @xmath
.

The next important concept to introduce is the notion of volume. To
generalise a little the spaces being dealt with consider @xmath , a
euclidean vector space (a @xmath -vector space of hyperfinite dimension
@xmath with a symmetric, positive definite bilinear form @xmath ). On
@xmath a notion of volume exists with the cube spanned by an orthonormal
basis @xmath has volume 1 while the general parallelpiped, @xmath
spanned by @xmath linearly independent vectors @xmath has volume

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the matrix of the base change. Now let @xmath be a
lattice and @xmath be the associated fundamental domain then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 4.2.3 Hyper Algebraic Integers

Let @xmath be a hyper algebraic number field of degree @xmath over
@xmath and define @xmath to be the set of algebraic hyperintegers. A
simple check shows that this is a ring. Using the transfer principle and
an the proof of 4.2.2 gives the following lemma.

###### Lemma 4.2.8.

For @xmath , its minimal hyperpolynomial is monic and an element of
@xmath

###### Lemma 4.2.9.

Let @xmath then there exists @xmath such that @xmath .

Proof:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

Since @xmath is a vector space over @xmath there exists a @xmath -basis,
@xmath for @xmath . Let @xmath be the set of all bases for @xmath over
@xmath .

###### Definition 4.2.10.

Let @xmath then it is said to be an integral basis if @xmath for all
@xmath and @xmath Let @xmath be the set of integral bases for @xmath
over @xmath .

###### Lemma 4.2.11.

For all @xmath there exists an integral basis.

Proof:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

In analogue to the standard case the norm and trace can be defined. As
@xmath is a hyperfinite vector space over @xmath and linear maps can be
defined. For any @xmath define a map

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Then the trace can be defined by @xmath where @xmath is the usual trace
of a linear map. Similarly the norm can be defined by @xmath where
@xmath is the determinant of a linear map. The discriminant of @xmath
can also be defined,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is an integral basis for @xmath and @xmath is a conjugate
of @xmath .

###### Definition 4.2.12.

For a module @xmath with submodule @xmath define the index of @xmath in
@xmath (denoted @xmath ) by the number of elements in @xmath .

#### 4.2.4 Ideals

Some aspects of ideals in hyper algebraic number fields have been
examined by Robinson (reference). These works have mainly looked at
purely nonstandard ideals. Let @xmath be the set of proper internal
ideals of @xmath . The norm of an internal ideal @xmath , denoted by
@xmath , is its index in @xmath . Let @xmath be the set of internal
primes ideals of @xmath .

These ideals could be called integral internal ideals as there are also
internal fractional ideals of @xmath . These can be defined as an @xmath
-module contained in @xmath , @xmath , such that there exists @xmath
with @xmath . By taking @xmath any internal integral ideal is
necessarily an internal fractional ideal. Let @xmath be the set of
internal proper fractional ideals of @xmath .

###### Lemma 4.2.13.

For each internal prime ideal @xmath there is an internal fractional
ideal @xmath such that @xmath .

Proof:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

###### Lemma 4.2.14.

For any @xmath , it can be written uniquely as a product of prime
ideals.

Proof:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

Using an identical method of proof this result can be extended to
internal fractional ideals.

###### Lemma 4.2.15.

For any @xmath , it can be written uniquely as a quotient of products of
prime ideals.

Two internal fractional ideals @xmath and @xmath can be defined to be
equivalent (written @xmath ) if there exists @xmath such that @xmath .
It can be simply checked that this relation is an equivalence relation.
Let @xmath be the set of equivalence classes of internal ideals of
@xmath . A binary operation can be placed on this set by defining a
product of @xmath and @xmath in @xmath to be the equivalence class of
@xmath where @xmath and @xmath are two representatives of @xmath and
@xmath respectively. It can be easily checked that this product is well
defined and a group is formed - the internal ideal class group - with
the equivalence class containing the internal principle ideals as the
identity.

###### Definition 4.2.16.

Denote by @xmath the cardinality of the internal ideal class group, the
class number.

###### Theorem 4.2.17.

hypclass For all hyper algebraic number fields @xmath , @xmath is
hyperfinite.

Proof:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

Ideals of hyper algebraic integers lead to complete lattices in the
Minkowski space.

###### Proposition 4.2.18.

Let @xmath then @xmath is a complete lattice in @xmath with @xmath .

The proof is almost identical to that in [ N ] , page 31.

### 4.3 Hyper Dedekind Zeta Function and its First Properties

###### Definition 4.3.1.

Let @xmath and define the hyper Dedkind zeta function,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The partial hyper Dedekind zeta function can be defined for any @xmath
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 4.3.2.

@xmath ( @xmath ) Q-converges uniformly to @xmath for @xmath for every
@xmath .

Proof:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath form a hyper internal Cauchy sequence and a limit function
exists and is @xmath .

@xmath

###### Lemma 4.3.3.

The hyper Dedekind zeta function is absolutely and uniformly
Q-convergent for @xmath for every @xmath .

Proof: The uniform Q-convergence follows from the previous lemma. By
letting @xmath , for all @xmath the absolute Q-convergence can be
established by transfer almost identical to the previous lemma.

@xmath

###### Lemma 4.3.4.

@xmath is a Q-continuous function for all @xmath , @xmath ( @xmath ).

###### Corollary 4.3.5.

@xmath is Q-continuous for @xmath for any @xmath .

The proof of the lemma is identical to that of lemma 3.3.2 and the
corollary follows from this result and lemma 3.2.12 .

###### Theorem 4.3.6.

For @xmath (for any @xmath ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

here @xmath runs through all prime ideals of @xmath .

Proof: Let @xmath and let @xmath be the set of prime ideals with @xmath
. So,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the set of ideals such that all its prime ideal factors
are elements of @xmath . By letting @xmath one can proceed in an
identical manner to proposition 3.3.5

@xmath

### 4.4 Functional Equation

Like the Riemann zeta function the Dedekind zeta function can also be
extended to a meromorphic function on @xmath but with a simple pole at
@xmath . In the nonstandard setting a similar result is expected.

###### Definition 4.4.1 (Partial Zeta Function).

Let @xmath and define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the sum is only over internal integral ideals. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This expression can be simplified by the following lemma. For any
fractional ideal @xmath , @xmath acts on the set @xmath . The set of
orbits is denoted by @xmath

###### Lemma 4.4.2.

Let @xmath and @xmath the class of @xmath . There is a bijection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof: Let @xmath , then @xmath is an integral ideal and lies in @xmath
. Suppose @xmath then @xmath so @xmath and hence injectivity. The map is
also surjective. Indeed let @xmath then @xmath with @xmath .

@xmath

In order to rewrite the partial zeta functions one uses the hyper
Minkowski space ( @xmath ) and the norm on it. In the special case of a
principal internal ideal @xmath of @xmath . Let @xmath be an integral
basis of @xmath then @xmath is an integral basis of @xmath . Let @xmath
be the transition matrix @xmath .

Therefore for any @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It has been shown in proposition 4.2.18 e that @xmath forms a complete
lattice in the hyper Minkowski space with volume @xmath ( @xmath

#### 4.4.1 A Higher Dimensional Hyper Gamma Function

In order to define a higher dimensional hyper gamma function some
analogues of the one dimensional case are needed, for example the Haar
measure and the integration space. Let @xmath be the hyper Minkoswki
space introduced in the above section. Recall @xmath where @xmath and
@xmath . Now define analogues of @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The analogue of the upper half plane can also be defined as @xmath . Two
functions can be defined, @xmath and @xmath which act on each component
as their hyperreal analogues. Using hyper complex exponentiation @xmath
can be defined for @xmath not a negative hyperreal or zero by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A Haar measure exists on @xmath . One is fixed by the following. Clearly

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the product is over the hyper conjugation classes @xmath and
@xmath when @xmath is hyperreal and @xmath when hyper complex. Define
the isomorphism @xmath by @xmath when @xmath is hyperreal and @xmath
when @xmath is hyper complex. Together these result in an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The usual Haar measure on @xmath , @xmath can give a product measure on
@xmath which will be called the canonical measure, denoted @xmath .

###### Definition 4.4.3.

For @xmath such that @xmath define the gamma function associated to
@xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The study of this function reduces to to the hyper gamma function using
the isomorphism defined above. Indeed by the product decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition 4.4.4.

For @xmath hyperreal, @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath hyper complex, @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

.

Proof: For the hyperreal case, @xmath which is just the usual gamma
integral because the norm is simply the identity in this case.

In the hyper complex case

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
                       
  -- -------- -------- --

@xmath

This decomposition shows that this gamma integral converges for @xmath
with @xmath and admits a Q-analytic continuation to all of @xmath except
for poles corresponding to those of the hyperreal gamma function.

#### 4.4.2 Hyper Theta Functions

A hyper theta function was introduced in the second chapter and
naturally there are many generalizations of these functions.

###### Definition 4.4.5.

For every complete lattice @xmath of @xmath define the theta series for
@xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition 4.4.6.

The above theta series Q-converges absolutely and uniformly for all
@xmath with @xmath for @xmath and @xmath .

Proof: From the definition of a lattice @xmath where @xmath is aa basis
of @xmath with @xmath in @xmath . Define a partial theta function by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath Then @xmath Q-converges to @xmath by transfer
from the classical case. Using an identical method of proof by transfer
from proposition @xmath gives uniform Q-convergence. Absolute
Q-convergence follows from applying the proof to the function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

Hyper Schwartz functions can be defined on @xmath . Let @xmath be the
space of Q-smooth functions @xmath .

###### Definition 4.4.7.

Define the hyper Schwartz space

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

.

###### Definition 4.4.8.

Let @xmath and define its Fourier transform to be,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Proposition 4.4.9.

The function @xmath is its own Fourier transform.

Proof: To perform the hyper integration an isometry can be used to
identify the euclidean vector space @xmath with @xmath . The Haar
measure @xmath becomes the Lebesgue measure @xmath . As @xmath
decomposes as @xmath the Fourier transform is then @xmath . From the
case @xmath (dealt with above) the result follows.

@xmath

###### Proposition 4.4.10.

Let @xmath be a linear transformation of @xmath and define the function
@xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the adjoint transformation of @xmath .

Proof: From the definition of the Fourier transform,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Making a change of variable @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --
     @xmath      
                 
  -- -------- -- --

@xmath

Using this proposition the Poisson summation formula can then be proven.

###### Theorem 4.4.11.

Let @xmath be a complete lattice in @xmath and define its dual lattice

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then for any hyper Schwartz function @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof: Consider the complete lattice @xmath then there exists an
invertible map, @xmath , to @xmath . Thus @xmath and @xmath . Clearly
the lattice @xmath is self dual and for all @xmath then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Therefore @xmath with @xmath . Then the statement to be proved becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath . Via transfer this function is absolutely and uniformly
Q-convergent. It is also clearly periodic as for all @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is also a hyper Schwartz function. Indeed as @xmath is a hyper
Schwartz function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for almost all @xmath and @xmath varying in a Q-compact domain..
Therefore @xmath is majorized by a constant multiple of the convergent
series @xmath . This argument can be repeated for the partial
derivatives of @xmath to show that @xmath is a @xmath function (where a
@xmath function is defined in the Hyper Fourier Transform section of
chapter 2). Combining these observations suggests that it should have
some form of hyper Fourier expansion. One can just extend the results of
the one dimensional case to obtain an expansion

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . Therefore

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

@xmath

The reason for the developing this Poisson summation formula is to prove
a transformation equation for the hyper theta function.

###### Theorem 4.4.12.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof: As both sides of the transformation are Q-holomorphic in @xmath
it is sufficient to check the identity for @xmath with @xmath . Let
@xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the self-adjoint transformation of @xmath , @xmath ,
clearly this has determinant @xmath . Then using propositions 4.4.10 and
4.4.9 with the function @xmath in combination with Poisson summation
gives the result.

@xmath

#### 4.4.3 Integral Representation

A theta series can be associated with the partial zeta function,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem 4.4.13.

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

with the series

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof: In the integral of the hyper higher dimensional gamma function
substitute @xmath . Then

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

This can be summed over a full system of representatives of @xmath and
gives the result. The only point which needed to be checked was the
interchange of summation and integration. This is just an extension of
the result in one dimension.

@xmath

The Euler factor at infinity can be defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The aim is to relate this to the hyper theta function introduced above.
The problem is that the series @xmath is not over all @xmath like the
hyper theta series. To overcome this problem a new measure is
introduced.

#### 4.4.4 Hyper Dirichlet Theorem

Recall the @xmath map which embeds @xmath into @xmath . There is then
the map from this space to @xmath given by the hyper logarithm acting on
acting on the absolute value of each component. This can be represented
diagrammatically

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Subgroups of these groups can be considered.

In particular let @xmath - this is called the norm one hypersurface. Let
@xmath with @xmath . Then @xmath is contained in this set. Every @xmath
can be written in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath and @xmath . This gives a decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By transfer there exists a unique Haar measure on @xmath such that the
Haar measure @xmath on @xmath becomes the product measure

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The group @xmath acts quite naturally on @xmath . Recall the logarithm
map @xmath given by @xmath Clearly this takes @xmath to the trace zero
space @xmath .

Let @xmath be the composite map of the @xmath map, @xmath map and the
@xmath map; from @xmath to @xmath . By restriction @xmath lies in @xmath
and be transfer

###### Lemma 4.4.14.

Under the @xmath map @xmath is taken to a complete lattice @xmath in
@xmath .

A fundamental domain, @xmath , for the above action can be taken to be
the preimage of an arbitrary fundamental mesh of the lattice @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.4.15.

The function @xmath is the Mellin transform, @xmath , of the hyper
function

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

with @xmath # @xmath the number of roots of unity of @xmath .

Proof: From the decomposition of @xmath and the definition of @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . By the definition of the fundamental domain @xmath ,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

This is a disjoint union. Consider a transformation of @xmath , @xmath .
This leaves the Haar measure invariant, by definition, and maps @xmath
to @xmath . Therefore

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The factor @xmath appears as the kernel of the map @xmath Indeed let
@xmath and let @xmath be an embedding. Then @xmath and thus @xmath . For
the converse let @xmath which implies @xmath Therefore for each
embedding @xmath , @xmath . This then means that @xmath lies in a
bounded domain of @xmath . Recall that the @xmath map of ideals leads to
complete lattices in @xmath and in particular @xmath is a point of the
lattice @xmath . Hence @xmath can contain only a hyperfinite number of
elements. To finish this off the following lemma is needed.

###### Lemma 4.4.16.

Let @xmath be a hyperfinite subgroup of @xmath . Then @xmath consists of
roots of unity.

This follows directly from the transfer principle.

@xmath

The functional equation for the completed partial zeta function derives
from the hyper theta transformation formula. To achieve this a dual
lattice is needed for @xmath and the volume of @xmath with respect to
@xmath is needed.

###### Definition 4.4.17.

Let @xmath Then define the different of @xmath to be the fractional
inverse of @xmath

###### Lemma 4.4.18.

The lattice @xmath which is dual to the lattice @xmath is given by
@xmath . Here the @xmath represents the involution @xmath on @xmath .

Proof: Using the definition of @xmath and of the dual lattice

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The final condition in the middle set ( @xmath ) implies @xmath . Using
the definition of the inverse different @xmath for all @xmath @xmath .

@xmath

###### Definition 4.4.19.

Let @xmath and @xmath be a set of fundamental units of @xmath . Define
the regulator, @xmath , of @xmath to be the absolute value of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath if @xmath is real and @xmath if @xmath is complex. The
embeddings are written as @xmath @xmath .

###### Lemma 4.4.20.

Let @xmath be a fundamental domain of @xmath then with respect to @xmath

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where @xmath is the number of infinite places.

Proof: Recall the decomposition @xmath This isomorphism is given by
@xmath It transforms the canonical measure into the product measure
@xmath . With respect to @xmath the set @xmath so @xmath is also the
volume of @xmath with respect to @xmath and the volume of @xmath with
respect to @xmath . From above there are isomorphisms

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

. Let @xmath be the composite of these. Then @xmath is transformed into
the Lebesgue measure on @xmath as already mentioned above resulting in

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath with @xmath or @xmath depending on whether @xmath is real or
complex respectively. Using the definition of @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is the fundamental mesh of the unit lattice @xmath in the
trace zero space @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is the parallelpiped spanned by the vectors @xmath with @xmath span
the fundamental mesh. This volume is @xmath times the absolute value of
the determinant

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The usual matrix operations, which carry through by transfer, can be
used. In particular adding the first @xmath lines to the last one makes
all entries zero apart from the last one which is @xmath . The matrix
above these zeros leads to the regulator when the determinant is taken.

@xmath

###### Proposition 4.4.21.

The hyper function @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof: Let @xmath be a lattice in @xmath then by above this has volume
@xmath . The lattice dual to this is given by @xmath . @xmath and so
@xmath . Moreover @xmath The transformation @xmath leaves @xmath
unchanged and maps @xmath to the fundamental domain @xmath . Also
observe that @xmath for @xmath . Using these observations and the
transformation formula for the hyper theta function.

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
                       
                       
                       
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

In order to prove the second part

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The summands of the integrand are of the form @xmath with @xmath and
@xmath Also @xmath for all @xmath which results in @xmath and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath and @xmath # @xmath Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

###### Theorem 4.4.22.

The function @xmath admits a Q-analytic continuation to @xmath and
satisfies the functional equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , the ideal class of @xmath . It has simple poles at @xmath
and @xmath with residues @xmath and @xmath respectively.

Proof: Let @xmath and @xmath then the previous proposition implies that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and @xmath , @xmath with @xmath . Using the section on the hyper Mellin
transform enables the Q-analytic continuation of the hyper Mellin
transforms of @xmath and @xmath . Also the functional equation is
obtained

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with the simple poles of @xmath at @xmath and @xmath with residues
@xmath and @xmath respectively. By the above proposition @xmath and so
@xmath admits a Q-analytic continuation to @xmath with simple poles at
@xmath and @xmath with residues @xmath and @xmath respectively. Moreover
it satisfies the functional equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

This theorem about the partial zeta functions then enables similar
results to be obtained for the completed zeta function and the hyper
Dedekind zeta function of @xmath .

###### Corollary 4.4.23.

@xmath admits a Q-analytic continuation to @xmath and satisfies the
functional equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It has simple poles at @xmath and @xmath with residues @xmath and @xmath
respectively.

Using @xmath it is seen that the bracketed term is only zero at @xmath
so it cancels the pole of @xmath at this point.

###### Corollary 4.4.24.

@xmath has a Q-analytic continuation to @xmath . It has a simple pole at
@xmath with residue

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It also satisfies the functional equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

## Chapter 5 Nonstandard Interpretation of @xmath-adic Interpolation

### 5.1 Mahler’s Theorem

The classical problem of interpolation is well known. For example,
interpolating the factorials, @xmath @xmath , is solved by noting that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence finding a continuous function @xmath taking the value of @xmath
for @xmath results in

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the familiar gamma function.

Fix a finite prime @xmath then the @xmath -adic analogue (of
interpolation) has no direct solution since @xmath as @xmath , where
@xmath is the standard archimedean metric on @xmath . In many ways it is
more natural to consider

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as a @xmath -adic factorial.

@xmath -adic interpolation is not one fixed method. It consists of many
ideas with the aim of obtaining a @xmath -adic object from a real
object. There are many ways of achieving this aim.

-   Mahler interpolation uses the topological property of taking a
    function on a dense subset of @xmath (for example @xmath or @xmath )
    and using the natural extension to give a function on @xmath .

-   As an extension of the previous idea the function can be @xmath
    -adically analytically continued to a larger domain using ideas of
    Washington. [Example: @xmath for @xmath .]

-   @xmath -adic integration as used for the @xmath -adic version of
    L-functions, the Riemann zeta function and Eisenstein series among
    others.

-   Interpolation via a twist of the original function. [Example: @xmath
    -adic Hurwitz zeta function.]

-   Replacing a function in a variable with a @xmath -adic variable
    where this makes sense. [Example: @xmath -adic L-functions.]

In many cases interpolation is a combination of the above ideas and more
techniques as well. The natural question is why interpolate? In many
ways this question is specific to the actual problem being considered.
Though a clear answer is to learn more about a function from a @xmath
-adic perspective by creating a @xmath -adic function. Often this @xmath
-adic function is a simpler function to work with compared to the
original function. This enables a problem to be tackled from various
aspects. By studying interpolation from a @xmath -adic perspective one
hopes to obtain new interpretations of this standard problem.

In more detail the problem of @xmath -adic Mahler interpolation is
derived as follows. Suppose there is a sequence @xmath with @xmath
(where @xmath is a fixed finite prime). This sequence can be encoded as
a function @xmath with @xmath . Then when does there exist a continuous
function @xmath such that @xmath @xmath ? Since @xmath is compact,
@xmath must be uniformly continuous and bounded ( [ M ] ). This can be
stated as,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular this is true @xmath as @xmath . Then as @xmath @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus necessary conditions are that @xmath is uniformly continuous and
bounded @xmath -adically.

Conversely suppose that @xmath is uniformly continuous and bounded. Then
a continuous function @xmath can be constructed. For @xmath let @xmath
be a sequence of integers tending to @xmath and define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A simple exercise shows that this function is well-defined because of
the uniform continuity of @xmath .

This can be stated in the following theorem.

###### Theorem 5.1.1.

[ M , 112–113] Let @xmath be uniformly continuous on @xmath . Then there
exists a unique function @xmath which is uniformly continuous and
bounded on @xmath , and @xmath if @xmath .

In a certain sense @xmath -adic interpolation is trivial because when a
function is defined on a dense subset of @xmath (for example @xmath or
@xmath ) it has a continuous extension to all of @xmath .

Returning to the @xmath -adic gamma function. Let @xmath then it is
easily checked (essentially Wilson’s theorem) that @xmath . So by making
a slight sign adjustment in @xmath they give a uniformly continuous
function on @xmath and can be @xmath -adically interpolated using the
above theorem to give the @xmath -adic gamma function ( @xmath ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and define @xmath Thus @xmath is a uniformly continuous function for
@xmath . This construction is due to Morita ( [ Mo ] ).

Mahler’s theorem can be interpreted as a @xmath -adic analogue of a
classical theorem of Weierstrass which states that a continuous function
on a closed interval can be uniformly approximated by polynomials.

###### Theorem 5.1.2 (Mahler: [M], chapters 9 and 10).

Suppose @xmath is continuous and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath as @xmath and the series

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

converges uniformly in @xmath . Moreover,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The aim of this chapter is to view this interpolation in terms of the
nonstandard shadow map. It begins with some definitions in nonstandard
mathematics. Then it proceeds to demonstrate that the natural extension
of a continuous function to its hyper function can have an
interpretation (with some extra conditions) via the @xmath -adic shadow
map to classical Mahler interpolation.

### 5.2 Interpolation Series

In order to investigate Mahler interpolation from a nonstandard
perspective it seems reasonable to consider functions of the form @xmath
. As has been previously described functions can be extended their hyper
functions @xmath . To investigate these functions further the necessary
constraint of @xmath -adic Q-uniform continuity will be considered in
order to write the corresponding hyper function as a series and for
interpolation.

###### Definition 5.2.1.

-    For @xmath the classical definition of the binomial symbol gives

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    This can be extended to all @xmath and @xmath by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Naturally in the latter expression for @xmath this agrees with the
former definition. It takes integer values for @xmath and has properties
such as @xmath and for @xmath (with @xmath ) @xmath . By the transfer
principle, the above definition of the binomial symbol extends to @xmath
. By using the identity for @xmath one only needs to consider the
transfer principle applied to the classical definition of the binomial
symbol to obtain a definition for @xmath . Also the following result is
true.

###### Lemma 5.2.2.

@xmath .

In order to develop interpolation series some basic results are needed
about the binomial symbol.

###### Lemma 5.2.3 (Binomial Inversion Formula).

Let @xmath be a set of values in @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Corollary 5.2.4 (Orthogonality).

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Both of these results are simple exercises which are easy to verify
directly by the same proofs as the classical cases.

###### Definition 5.2.5.

For @xmath and @xmath define

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

This hypersum is well defined since the binomial symbol is defined in
the previous section and @xmath extends to @xmath by the transfer
principle. Also the sum is hyperfinite because @xmath for @xmath . In
the case when f is a standard function then the coefficient is the same
as that found in any text on @xmath -adic Mahler interpolation.

###### Proposition 5.2.6.

Let @xmath be a function. Then for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof: This result follows from the binomial inversion formula. In the
formula in lemma 7 let @xmath and @xmath . The result follows.

@xmath

### 5.3 Interpretation of Interpolation

###### Theorem 5.3.1.

Let @xmath be a uniformly continuous function, with respect to the
@xmath -adic metric, on @xmath and let @xmath be the extension to its
hyper function. Then @xmath is the the unique @xmath -adic function
obtained by Mahler interpolation.

This gives a natural interpretation of @xmath -adic interpolation in a
nonstandard setting.

Proof: As discussed in the previous section @xmath can be written as a
hyper finite sum for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This function can be extended to all hyper integers by using this sum
and noting that for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and defining for all @xmath with @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To check that @xmath is Q-convergent it is required to show the
nonstandard case of convergence in the @xmath -adic metric. Classically,

###### Theorem 5.3.2.

For @xmath , a @xmath -adic series

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

converges if and only if @xmath as @xmath .

This result extends by transfer to @xmath since it is @xmath complete
with respect to the extended @xmath -adic metric.

###### Proposition 5.3.3.

Let @xmath be as in theorem 5.3.1 and @xmath as defined in definition
5.2.5 then @xmath as @xmath .

Proof: This is a slightly adapted proof given in [ RM , 61–63] and is
based on a proof of Bojanic. As @xmath is uniformly Q-continuous,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath and @xmath then @xmath . @xmath is bounded in the @xmath
-adic metric and @xmath is uniformly continuous on @xmath it is also
bounded there. Let @xmath . One can replace @xmath by @xmath so that
@xmath for all @xmath . So without loss of generality assume that @xmath
for all @xmath .

From the definition of @xmath , @xmath and properties of the metric,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

To continue several lemmas are needed to enable a more precise bound to
be put on values of @xmath .

###### Definition 5.3.4.

Let @xmath be as above and @xmath then define the difference operators:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 5.3.5.

For @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof of lemma: Using the definition of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Using corollary 8 the inner sum is zero unless @xmath and in this case
it is equal to @xmath . Then by applying @xmath to each side gives the
result.

@xmath

###### Lemma 5.3.6.

Let @xmath be any function and define,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof of lemma: (Note that this definition of @xmath agrees with the
previous but is a little more general as there are no conditions on the
function.) For @xmath it is the definition of @xmath . By the previous
lemma,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However from the definition of the difference operators,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Then letting @xmath in the previous equation gives,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Putting these three equations together gives the result.

@xmath

This lemma is now used in conjunction with the formula for @xmath to
give,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From elementary number theory @xmath divides @xmath for each @xmath in
the first sum. Also using the estimates on the uniform continuity of
@xmath at the beginning of the proof one finds,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

since @xmath . The above argument can be repeated by @xmath in the
penultimate inequality to get,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Repeating this argument @xmath times gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, @xmath as @xmath .

@xmath

This proposition gives that @xmath as @xmath . Using theorem 5.3.2 the
sum for the function @xmath converges for all @xmath .

###### Proposition 5.3.7.

@xmath @xmath .

Proof of proposition: Returning to the original function @xmath the
binomial inversion formula can be used in the classical setting to give
the classical analogue of proposition 5.2.6 .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are defined in theorem 2. Similarly it can be extended to
give function on @xmath . From the definition of @xmath it is seen that
@xmath since @xmath @xmath (from the definition of extending a function
to its hyper function). To show the result it is required to demonstrate
that @xmath is limited for all @xmath . Let @xmath ( @xmath ) and also
@xmath ( @xmath ). Classically @xmath converges absolutely to @xmath ( [
RM , chapter 5] ). By the transfer principle @xmath Q-converges
absolutely to @xmath . (Note that for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is the
extension of @xmath to nonstandard @xmath .) Hence,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

A bound now needs to be put on @xmath . Classically the @xmath -adic
valuation satisfies for all @xmath @xmath . By induction, for all @xmath
and @xmath ( @xmath ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By the transfer principle this result extends to all @xmath and @xmath .
This is now applied below.

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.3.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The following lemma examines the nonstandard values of @xmath . It looks
at the nonstandard part of a @xmath -adically Q-convergent sequence and
is the analogue of the real case found in chapter 5 of [ Go ] .

###### Lemma 5.3.8.

Let @xmath be a convergent of @xmath -adic numbers in @xmath . This
sequence naturally extends to a @xmath -adically Q-convergent sequence
@xmath in @xmath for all @xmath . (See for example chapter 5 of [ Gv ]
.) Then for all @xmath , @xmath .

Proof: Suppose there exists an @xmath and an @xmath such that @xmath .

As the sequence is convergent, by definition @xmath as @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular choosing @xmath gives that for all @xmath , with @xmath ,
@xmath .

Using the transfer principle on the above logical statement gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Again choose @xmath but this this time note the transfer principle
enables the deduction that for all @xmath , with @xmath , @xmath . This
is a contradiction as @xmath .

@xmath

This lemma is applied to the sequence @xmath to deduce that @xmath .

From proposition 5.3.3 , @xmath as @xmath . The previous lemma shows
that for nonstandard @xmath , @xmath . As already stated @xmath @xmath
so @xmath (for @xmath ) or @xmath (for @xmath ). In both cases @xmath .
Therefore using equation 5.3.2

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

here @xmath .

Finally for some @xmath to be chosen below:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Equation 5.4.1 enables @xmath to be chosen such that @xmath . Thus
@xmath and therefore @xmath .

@xmath

Applying the definition of the @xmath -adic shadow map to the function
@xmath and using the previous proposition gives a domain consisting of
@xmath . To determine the exact nature of the function the values @xmath
need to be investigated.

Let @xmath then @xmath can be taken of @xmath by the previous
proposition.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is a ring homomorphism and as the sum is absolutely Q-convergent,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The second term vanishes. Indeed, in the classical case ( [ Gv ,
corollary 4.1.2] ) consider a convergent infinite series @xmath ( @xmath
) then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By the transfer principle the following lemma will hold.

###### Lemma 5.3.9.

Let @xmath ( @xmath ) be a Q-convergent infinite series then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This lemma is applied to the infinite sum @xmath ( @xmath ) and @xmath (
@xmath ). It is Q-convergent by proposition 5.3.3 and theorem 5.3.2 .
Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since @xmath for @xmath . However,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

because @xmath . Proposition 5.3.7 implies @xmath for all @xmath .
Therefore

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and the the second term does vanish in equation ( 5.3.4 ) leaving

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As already stated in theorem 3.1.4 @xmath is a ring homomorphism. By
using induction the following is true for all @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the transfer principle this statement becomes true for all @xmath
. In particular taking @xmath nonstandard implies that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

This is true because one could define @xmath for @xmath . Or
alternatively note that @xmath . Thus equation ( 5.3.5 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Again using the ring homomorphism property,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the proof of proposition 17 it was showed that @xmath for @xmath .
Therefore @xmath and @xmath This results in

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Finally for all @xmath and @xmath , @xmath . The numerator has a finite
number of terms and the denominator is standard. Therefore with a final
application of the ring homomorphism property:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Putting all this together gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It has already been proved that the domain of this function is @xmath
and the values lie in @xmath . Further this is identical to the function
that would have been obtained via Mahler @xmath -adic interpolation ( [
R , chapter 4(2.3)] ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The identification @xmath is made and the theorem is proven.

@xmath

Graphically the above process can be displayed as follows:

@xmath

@xmath

(hyper extension),

@xmath

@xmath

@xmath

(extend to @xmath ),

@xmath

@xmath

@xmath

( @xmath -adic shadow map),

@xmath

@xmath ,

( @xmath -adic interpolated function).

### 5.4 Extension

In the previous section I have obtained a nonstandard interpretation of
Mahler’s theorem. This work strengthens that result by showing that all
continuous @xmath -adic functions @xmath can be viewed as functions
@xmath .

###### Theorem 5.4.1.

Let @xmath be a uniformly continuous function, with respect to the
@xmath -adic metric, on @xmath . Then there exists a hyper function
@xmath such that @xmath is the the unique @xmath -adic function obtained
by Mahler interpolation.

#### 5.4.1 @xmath-adic Functions

###### Definition 5.4.2.

Let the set of @xmath -adically uniformly continuous functions from
@xmath to @xmath be denoted by @xmath .

By restriction of a function in @xmath to @xmath gives a map to @xmath .
By Mahler’s theorem this map is an isomorphism.

Consider the nonstandard space consisting of @xmath -adically uniformly
Q-continuous functions @xmath . There exists a map from this space to
@xmath , the @xmath -adic shadow map ( @xmath ) acting on functions. The
definition of this map has been given above. It is defined for all
@xmath because @xmath and @xmath and are also surjective maps. This
suggests that the @xmath -adic shadow map acting on functions should
also be surjective. By the definition of this map the image of @xmath is
contained in @xmath .

By Mahler’s theorem any @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath and @xmath as @xmath . This theorem extends to the
nonstandard space @xmath by the previous section. In particular as
@xmath any @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath and @xmath as @xmath . The @xmath -adic shadow map acts on
this hyperfinite sum since for any @xmath , @xmath for @xmath .
Properties of the @xmath -adic shadow map are used from above.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

However from the definition of the the image of the @xmath -adic shadow
map

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.4.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here @xmath . By equating these two equations at values of @xmath it is
easily shown that @xmath for all @xmath and also @xmath for all @xmath .

In order for the two equalities to hold in general and by the previous
paragraph @xmath for all @xmath . This implies that @xmath for these
values of @xmath .

One question which can be asked is what is the kernel of the shadow map.
@xmath By the previous paragraphs this kernel is equal to @xmath .

For the surjectivity consider an @xmath . Then this can be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular for each @xmath , @xmath and let @xmath . Then by the
series expansion for @xmath -adic numbers

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath as @xmath and @xmath @xmath . Now define a function @xmath
by @xmath . Since @xmath @xmath . Using the classical norm on @xmath
with @xmath then @xmath as @xmath . Now consider the nonstandard
extension of these functions @xmath to @xmath . These are going to be
functions of the form @xmath . Using the previous work on Mahler
interpolation it can be shown that in fact @xmath Moreover the classical
norm on functions can also be extended to the nonstandard functions.

For @xmath define @xmath . This is well defined because it has already
been shown that for @xmath that @xmath . Since @xmath there exists at
least one @xmath (for some @xmath ) with @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It can be easily shown that this norm satisfies the triangle inequality.

For each @xmath define the monad of @xmath to be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is the notion of two elements being infinitesimally close
with respect to the norm. That is @xmath iff @xmath where @xmath . It is
clear that this is an equivalence relation. Moreover

###### Lemma 5.4.3.

The only element of @xmath which is an element of @xmath is @xmath .

Proof: Dealing with uniqueness first. Suppose there are two distinct
elements ( @xmath and @xmath ) of @xmath in @xmath . Then by the
transitive property of @xmath , @xmath which is a contradiction since
both functions are standard. Hence @xmath .

The existence requires examination of the shadow map of @xmath . Using
the above work

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By the definition of the @xmath -adic shadow map each of the above
values is infinitesimal and hence so is the value of the norm.

@xmath

Similar definitions hold for elements of @xmath with the shadow map of
any element being zero and the monad of any element being @xmath and the
@xmath map in @xmath .

Returning to any @xmath there exists a sequence of functions @xmath
converging to @xmath . In particular for @xmath , @xmath . Hence @xmath
and the @xmath -adic shadow map on functions is surjective.

In conclusion @xmath is surjective and this map provides an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As a final remark to this section this result extends my nonstandard
work on Mahler interpolation. This can be displayed graphically

@xmath

@xmath

(hyper extension),

@xmath

@xmath

@xmath

( @xmath -adic shadow map),

@xmath

@xmath ,

( @xmath -adic interpolated function).

The reason for looking at Mahler interpolation in this way is two fold.
Firstly a nonstandard perspective can often provide a different view
point and in this case could also simplify the work since it deals with
functions on @xmath which are potentially simpler than those on @xmath .
Secondly the possibility of working with more than one prime at the same
time would provide different approach to @xmath -adic analysis. The
development of this begins in the next chapter.

## Chapter 6 Applications and Double Interpolation

The previous chapter showed how one form of @xmath -adic interpolation,
Mahler interpolation, could be viewed as the @xmath -adic shadow map of
a certain hyper function. In the introduction it was stated that there
are a variety of methods which can be used for @xmath -adic
interpolation. Some of these are now developed from a nonstandard
perspective culminating in interpolation with respect to two or more
primes.

### 6.1 Morita Gamma Function

The gamma function has been studied since the 1700s with its importance
realised by Euler and Gauss. It occurs at one solution to the problem of
finding a continuous function of real or complex variable that agrees
with the factorial function at the integers.

###### Definition 6.1.1 (Gamma Function).

For @xmath with @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and functional equation for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From the @xmath -adic perspective the aim is to find a @xmath -adically
continuous function extending the factorial function. One solution was
found by Morita which extended the restricted factorial

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The interpolated function is the Morita gamma function.

###### Definition 6.1.2 (Morita Gamma Function).

This is the @xmath -adically continuous function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

that extends @xmath for @xmath .

This is quite an attractive function to try and view from a nonstandard
perspective. Indeed, define for all @xmath with @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . By applying Wilson’s theorem in a nonstandard setting this
hyper function is @xmath -adically Q-continuous. It also satisfies the
functional equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As the function lies in @xmath the @xmath -adic shadow map can be taken
leading to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and it satisfies @xmath for all @xmath . By the properties of the shadow
map @xmath is @xmath -adically continuous. Thus as these two @xmath
-adically continuous functions agree on a dense subset of @xmath they
must be equal. Alternatively one can take this construction as the
definition of the Morita gamma function. So one sees that the set @xmath
determines the non natural @xmath -adic values of the Morita gamma
function.

###### Lemma 6.1.3.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It can easily be checked that the @xmath -adic shadow map preserves all
the properties of @xmath . For example taking the @xmath -adic shadow
map of @xmath leads to @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath for all @xmath . In many ways it is a lot easier to work with
a function in the integers or hyper integers than in @xmath .

### 6.2 The Kubota-Leopoldt Zeta Function

For many years the value of the Riemann zeta function at integer points
has attracted many mathematicians. In particular the value at negative
integers lead to work in the @xmath -adic area and the discovery of the
@xmath -adic Riemann zeta function of Kubota and Leopoldt in 1964 ( [
Kub-L ] ).

The value of @xmath at negative integers was originally derived by Euler
using divergent series. These values are related to the Bernoulli
numbers ( @xmath ) which are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 6.2.1.

For all @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular as @xmath for @xmath and odd, ( @xmath )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The idea of @xmath -adic interpolation is obtain a @xmath -adic function
which has similar properties to the original real or complex function.
The aim is to learn more about the original function by recasting the
problem in the @xmath -adic world which can often be simpler. In the
case of the Riemann zeta function the interpolation is based on its
values at negative integers. In order for the resulting @xmath -adic
function to be @xmath -adically continuous the Riemann zeta function is
modified by removing the @xmath -Euler factor. Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then for all @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It should be noted than the factor @xmath is not needed because when
@xmath the @xmath -Euler factor is equal to zero and so the modified
zeta function is also zero.

There are now several ways to develop the @xmath -adic Riemann zeta
function; Kubota-Leopoldt, Iwasawa theory, and Mazur measures and @xmath
-adic integration. Each @xmath -adic zeta function has @xmath branches.
Initially define for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The @xmath -adic zeta function interpolates these numbers.

###### Definition 6.2.2.

Let @xmath be a prime and fix @xmath . Then define the @xmath -adic zeta
function by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Here @xmath is a @xmath -adic integer with @xmath a sequence of natural
numbers which @xmath -adically converges to @xmath . The case @xmath is
excluded and dealt with below.

It should be remarked that the @xmath -adic zeta function @xmath
interpolates the zeta function @xmath at negative integer values @xmath
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath . The continuity properties are deduced from the
Kummer congruences.

###### Theorem 6.2.3.

Suppose @xmath , @xmath and @xmath a prime with @xmath . if @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For some fixed @xmath let @xmath with @xmath then for some @xmath @xmath
. Now let @xmath and @xmath then @xmath and by the Kummer congruences

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath is uniformly continuous on @xmath since @xmath is dense in
@xmath . This also proves the uniqueness of the @xmath -adic zeta
function by the interpolation property.

One should note that in the case when @xmath (the odd congruence
classes) gives the zero function since for such @xmath , @xmath . This
only leaves the even congruence classes and the case @xmath . The latter
case will enable the zeta function to be defined for @xmath and @xmath
since the only congruence class is @xmath .

Let @xmath then for @xmath definition 6.2.2 can be applied. For @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This can be viewed as a pole of the @xmath -adic zeta function as in the
case of the Riemann zeta function. This can be seen more clearly in
terms of @xmath -adic integration.

#### 6.2.1 A Nonstandard Construction

###### Definition 6.2.4.

1.  @xmath

2.   The hyper Bernoulli numbers are defined by @xmath

###### Lemma 6.2.5.

For @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The proof of this result can derived in an identical manner to the
classical case. In a similar manner to the classical construction of the
previous section the @xmath -Euler factor can be removed for some fixed
standard prime, @xmath . Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now define a nonstandard function.

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This function can be used for the @xmath -adic continuation of the
Riemann zeta function as in the standard case. Indeed let @xmath and
@xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

For @xmath even the value of the Bernoulli number is zero for all @xmath
. So only odd @xmath needs to be considered. This function is @xmath
-adically continuous for a fixed @xmath . Indeed let @xmath , @xmath
(for some @xmath .) The Kummer congruences also carry through in the
nonstandard setting and imply @xmath @xmath The Kummer congruences also
imply @xmath for @xmath and so @xmath for all @xmath . This enables the
@xmath -adic shadow map to be taken. Using work in Goldblatt ( [ Go ] ,
chapter 18)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The @xmath -adic shadow map preserves continuity so @xmath is @xmath
-adically continuous on @xmath . Moreover

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As these continuous functions agree on a dense set in @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath .

This leaves the case @xmath . For @xmath the same definition of the
nonstandard function above can be used to define @xmath for all primes.
So let @xmath then for all @xmath , @xmath From classical results
transferred to the nonstandard setting this function is @xmath -adically
continuous and @xmath for all @xmath thus the shadow map can be taken
and a function is obtained

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath for all @xmath As these functions agree are on a dense set
in @xmath and are continuous then they are equal, proving the following
theorem.

###### Theorem 6.2.6.

For a fixed @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 6.3 Double Interpolation

The ideas and techniques behind @xmath -adic interpolation have been
discussed in various parts throughout this work. The previous sections
show that some forms of @xmath -adic interpolation can be viewed from a
nonstandard perspective. This interpretation lends itself to extending
interpolation. In particular the possibility of interpolating a function
or set of numbers with certain properties with respect to more than one
prime. Initially the case of interpolating with respect to two distinct
primes @xmath and @xmath will be considered. The range of functions
which can be interpolated is reduced because of conditions required with
respect to two primes rather than a single prime.

In the standard world double interpolation does not seem possible. The
main reason being that an interpolated function would have to have a
domain consisting of @xmath and @xmath and possibly a range of values in
@xmath and @xmath . It appears very difficult to achieve this because
the fields @xmath and @xmath are not isomorphic. In a nonstandard
setting these problems are removed since one can just consider the
spaces @xmath (or @xmath ) and @xmath . This is the first restriction on
functions which can be interpolated, one has functions of the form
@xmath and not with values in @xmath or @xmath like standard
interpolation. The next condition relates to the continuity. For any
hope of double interpolation @xmath must be uniformly continuous and
bounded when considered in the @xmath -adic and @xmath -adic valuation.
This ensures any interpolated function is a continuous extension of
@xmath . Given these conditions one constructs the nonstandard extension
of @xmath , @xmath . Since the original function was assumed to be
bounded in both valuations the actual function is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This also enables the shadow maps to be taken leading to a @xmath -adic
function @xmath and a @xmath -adic function @xmath These correspond to
the single interpolation of @xmath . This can de displayed graphically

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Why may double interpolation be of any use? The main reason is the same
as for single prime interpolation which is often specific to the problem
being considered. In general the aim is to learn more about a function
from the @xmath -adic function which share some special values (though
sometimes they are twisted). Often the @xmath -adic function is easier
to examine and so enables the original problem from various aspects. By
using double interpolation one hopes that another aspect is added to the
methods of looking at a problem.

### 6.4 Riemann Zeta Function

In this section attempts are made to double interpolate the Riemann zeta
function. Ideally one would like to choose the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This seems a sensible choice based on the nonstandard work on the
Kubota-Leopoldt zeta function, by removing the @xmath and @xmath Euler
factors. This also is symmetric with respect to the prime factors. In
the single prime case the continuity was deduced from the Kummer
congruences. These can be extended slightly, in a symmetrical way to
take account of the extra Euler factor. Recall the Kummer congruences

###### Theorem 6.4.1.

If @xmath and @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath is distinct from @xmath and still assume the conditions in the
theorem

@xmath and so by Euler’s theorem

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The one case when this is not true is when @xmath and the congruence
holds trivially. Combining this observation with the Kummer congruences
gives

###### Corollary 6.4.2.

If @xmath , @xmath

and @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This can be made symmetrical by including further conditions on @xmath
and @xmath .

###### Corollary 6.4.3.

If @xmath , @xmath ,

@xmath

, @xmath and @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As in the single prime case branches are considered. Firstly define

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This function is not Q-continuous with respect to either prime. Let
@xmath and without loss of generality assume @xmath and let @xmath . Due
to the symmetry only the @xmath case will be considered. Let @xmath then
define

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

For fixed @xmath as above this function is @xmath -adically
Q-continuous. The extended Kummer congruences then give this result. The
Kummer congruences also give @xmath for @xmath which shows the function
actually lies in @xmath . The shadow map leads to a @xmath -adic
function.

For @xmath with @xmath the same definition of the nonstandard function
can be given. The case @xmath corresponds to a pole.

So with the double interpolated zeta function defined one also has new
@xmath -adic functions defined. The next section tries to gain
information about these functions by using @xmath -adic measures. As a
final note on this section it is clear that this method generalises to a
finite set of primes for interpolation.

#### 6.4.1 Katz’s Theorem

Katz’s theorem on @xmath -adic measures follows directly from the work
on @xmath -adic interpolation by Mahler. A proof can be found in chapter
3 of [ Hi ] .

###### Definition 6.4.4.

A @xmath -linear map @xmath (where @xmath is defined in 5.4.2 ) is
called a bounded @xmath -adic measure if there exists a constant @xmath
such that @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Theorem 6.4.5.

Consider a bounded sequence of numbers @xmath in @xmath . Let @xmath be
a @xmath -adically continuous function and @xmath the Mahler
coefficients. Then a uniquely bounded @xmath -adic measure @xmath can be
defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover the measure satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . All bounded measures on @xmath are obtained in this
way.

###### Corollary 6.4.6.

Each bounded @xmath -adic measure having values in @xmath is uniquely
determined by its values at all monomials @xmath ( @xmath ).

One of the applications of this theorem is to develop the @xmath -adic
measure of the Riemann zeta function and again [ Hi ] is the reference.

###### Theorem 6.4.7.

Let @xmath be the Riemann zeta function. Also let @xmath with @xmath and
@xmath . Then for all @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.4.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

###### Corollary 6.4.8.

Let @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . Then there exists a unique @xmath
-adic measure @xmath on @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath .

The central result in this section is generalizing theorem 6.4.7 and
corollary 6.4.8 with the following results.

###### Theorem 6.4.9.

Let @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . Also let @xmath , @xmath . Then for
all @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath and

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.4.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

From this theorem 6.4.7 is a special case of the above when @xmath . To
begin the proof the following short lemma is needed.

###### Lemma 6.4.10.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof: From the definition, @xmath only for the multiples of @xmath .
Hence the sum will consist of only @xmath terms.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Only the final term is divisible by @xmath thus the other @xmath terms
have value 1.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The same method can be used to show the second equality as @xmath .

Proof of theorem 6.4.9 : Consider the polynomial

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using classical results the cotangent function satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Letting @xmath then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.4.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The expression for @xmath can be rewritten using the @xmath function.

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Now let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The last equality follows from lemma 6.4.10 .

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.4.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The proof continues in two separate parts depending on whether @xmath is
odd or even.

For the even case use equation 6.4.3 and let @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By letting @xmath gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath has trivial zeros at @xmath the theorem is proved for even
@xmath .

For the odd case use equation 6.4.3 and let @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the functional equation for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and substituting @xmath gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The theorem is then proved.

@xmath

An application of this theorem in combination with theorem 6.4.5 leads
to a slightly modified @xmath -adic measure, comparable to corollary
6.4.8 for the Riemann zeta function.

###### Lemma 6.4.11.

Let @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . Then there exists a unique @xmath
-adic measure @xmath on @xmath having values in @xmath such that for all
@xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof: In the proof of theorem 6.4.7 Katz showed that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath with @xmath . (These numbers are the Stirling numbers of the
second kind divided by @xmath .) The uniqueness of such a modified
@xmath -adic Riemann zeta function measure is guaranteed by corollary
6.4.6 . The sequence of numbers @xmath is bounded in @xmath because the
classical case by Katz gives that @xmath and as @xmath , @xmath . In
order to show the existence of the measure it is required to show that
@xmath is bounded.

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This last inequality follows from the classical result in theorem 6.4.7
. So the proof now only requires the last term to be bounded. Let @xmath
and @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Properties of the differential operator @xmath are known via the
classical results of Katz. The proofs can be found in [ Hi ] .

###### Lemma 6.4.12.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 6.4.13.

Let @xmath Then @xmath is a ring and stable under the action of @xmath
for all @xmath .

From the definition of @xmath it is apparent that @xmath and by the
previous lemma @xmath . Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath with @xmath . Thus @xmath and for all @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence in the case @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

It should be noted that for the prime @xmath the conditions in the
corollary also prove that a @xmath -adic measure @xmath exists.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.4.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

##### Single Interpolation

Without loss of generality let the following analysis be completed with
the prime @xmath (as the @xmath case is identical). The reason that the
new @xmath -adic measure has been constructed above is to try and find
measures which corresponds to the single interpolation of the double
interpolated set of numbers.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 6.4.14.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In fact a slightly more general version will be proven.

###### Theorem 6.4.15.

Let @xmath be a locally constant function on @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof: As @xmath is locally constant it is going to be constant on the
classes modulo @xmath for some @xmath . Let @xmath and define @xmath by
the Fourier inversion formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then by [ Ka ] , page 85, @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where for @xmath , @xmath is the measure associated to @xmath via the
work above. In particular it has been shown above that associated to the
function @xmath is the measure @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- --

Recall that @xmath which can be rewritten as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then by simple calculation and using the definition of @xmath

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

@xmath

In particular choosing @xmath (the characteristic function of @xmath ).
Then as @xmath , @xmath and the above theorem reduces to

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Definition 6.4.16.

Let @xmath be finite distinct primes in @xmath and for all @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By the corollary above

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It should be noted that the expression on the right does not depend on
@xmath . Suppose @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . Then by the definition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since both equal @xmath .

###### Definition 6.4.17.

Fix @xmath For @xmath ( @xmath if @xmath ) define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath congruent to @xmath (mod @xmath ) ( @xmath ) then @xmath In
the case @xmath when @xmath the denominator vanished. Using the above
equality @xmath it follows that the excluded case corresponds to @xmath
and so has a pole at @xmath .

###### Lemma 6.4.18.

For @xmath fixed and @xmath as above the function @xmath is a continuous
function of @xmath that does not depend upon the choice of @xmath with
@xmath and @xmath .

Proof: The continuity is clear from standard @xmath -adic analysis. The
independence of @xmath is established as follows. Let @xmath with @xmath
and @xmath then the two functions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

agree whenever @xmath is an integer greater than zero since in both
cases the value of the function is @xmath . So both functions agree on
the set of non-negative integers which is dense in @xmath and hence are
equal.

@xmath

This is of course the function obtained by the shadow map of the double
interpolation function.

##### Questions

Initial attempts at proving theorem 6.4.11 tried to use the proof of
theorem 6.4.5 directly. Instead of introducing the new power series
@xmath the power series @xmath was used as in the work of Katz but
introducing a different differential operator. So in trying to prove the
boundedness of @xmath the integral was rewritten

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

By the proof of lemma 6.4.11 it is known that @xmath .

Questions:

-   Does there exist a proof of lemma 6.4.11 more @xmath -adic in
    nature? That is, following directly from the proof of theorem 6.4.5
    instead of having to work via power series evaluated at @xmath .

-   Does there exist a closed form for @xmath for all @xmath ?

-   Is @xmath stable under @xmath for all @xmath ?

##### The Measure on Sets

There are several ways to view a @xmath -adic measure. It has been seen
above that one way to define a measure is via a bounded sequence. Two
other methods include a definition by power series in @xmath and a
definition by the open sets of @xmath . The power series can be easily
deduced from the bounded sequence method (for the details see section
3.5 of [ Hi ] ). Of potentially more interest is the definition via the
open sets. For example corollary 6.4.8 establishes the existence of a
@xmath -adic measure for the Riemann zeta function. Work by Mazur
establishes the existence of this measure from the definition of open
sets via the Bernoulli distributions.

Recall that in the @xmath -adic topology all sets of the form @xmath are
both open and closed. An integration theory can be developed over such
sets, see chapter 2 of [ K ] . An equivalent definition of a @xmath
-adic measure can be established via sets and distributions.

###### Definition 6.4.19.

Suppose @xmath is a compact-open subset of @xmath . A @xmath -adic
distribution, @xmath , on @xmath is an additive map from the set of
compact-open sets in @xmath to @xmath . Thus, if @xmath is a disjoint
union of compact-open sets @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 6.4.20.

A distribution @xmath of @xmath is called a @xmath if there is a
constant @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all compact-open @xmath .

@xmath has a basis of open sets consisting of all sets of the form
@xmath for @xmath and @xmath . Thus any open set of @xmath is a union of
open subsets of this type. Hence any distribution, and measure, is
determined by the values on such sets, see chapter 7 of [ RM ] or
chapter 2 of [ K ] for information on this and p-adic integration.

The aim of this section is to find a method which establishes the action
of a @xmath -adic measure on open sets of @xmath directly from a measure
defined by a bounded sequence. This action is unique from classical
results on @xmath -adic measures. I have such a method but it is
entirely numerical in nature and although gives a solution it does so
only one set at a time rather than give a general form of the measure.

From above the open sets of @xmath are of the form @xmath with @xmath
and @xmath . Define a characteristic function of an open set.

###### Definition 6.4.21.

Let @xmath be an open set of @xmath then its characteristic function is
given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then by the definition of the @xmath -adic integral with respect to a
@xmath -adic measure @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By defining a @xmath -adic measure by an the integral of @xmath for
@xmath enables the integral of @xmath -adic polynomials and power series
using classical results. Indeed let @xmath be a continuous function on
@xmath in terms of its Mahler series. Let @xmath be a bounded sequence
used to define a @xmath -adic measure @xmath with @xmath for all @xmath
. As in the first section let @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.4.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The middle equality follows from classical results due to the Mahler
series converging (section 5, [ R ] ). Here @xmath is also a bounded
sequence by theorem 6.4.5 .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It should be noted that equation 6.4.7 converges since by Mahler’s
theorem @xmath as @xmath and @xmath is bounded.

Returning to the characteristic function it is continuous and has a
Mahler series

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.4.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This expression enables @xmath to be numerically calculated for all open
sets of @xmath . By some initial calculations it appears that in general
extensive calculations are needed to calculate the sequence @xmath and
then the coefficients @xmath . Unless either one or both of these sets
of numbers take a closed form or particularly simple form then this
method does not appear greatly practical.

As an example suppose one only knew that the Riemann zeta function
measure was defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Could it then be deduced that using the method outlined above results in

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is the integral part function. This now leaves a search for
another method which, like the closed form for the Riemann zeta function
measure, may specific to a problem rather than the general approach
considered above.

The reason why such a process may be necessary is that it may

be interesting to see if a closed form of @xmath and related measures
exists and in particular if they involves any Bernoulli polynomials.

### 6.5 A Double Morita Gamma Function

An extension of the Morita gamma function is the double Morita gamma
function which is a @xmath -adically and @xmath -adically Q-continuous
function in @xmath . A naive attempt would be to define for odd distinct
primes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The problem is that this is not continuous in either valuation. The
reason is due to the generalized Wilson’s theorem not being applicable.
Focussing on the prime @xmath ; by removing elements divisible by @xmath
one does not always have an inverse for elements in @xmath so the
product of elements is not a unit in this group. So the search is for
the double Morita gamma function of the form (for @xmath )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is a set of conditions on @xmath depending on @xmath and
@xmath . (As an example the naive attempt had @xmath .) @xmath must
contain the conditions @xmath and @xmath otherwise there can be no form
of continuity.

Initial attempts at finding an appropriate @xmath revolve around at
trying to get some inverse residues for each @xmath . So fix a
representation of @xmath to be @xmath . To explain, as @xmath each such
@xmath is invertible in @xmath ( @xmath ) and @xmath ( @xmath ). The
problem is that the inverse in @xmath may be divisible by @xmath and so
will not be in the product (similarly for the @xmath -divisible case).
So really one wants to include only those @xmath such that for each
@xmath , the inverse residue of @xmath in @xmath is not divisible by
@xmath and in @xmath is not divisible by @xmath . Let @xmath be the set
of such @xmath . Then for all @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The immediate problem regards the elements in @xmath . Clearly @xmath
but are there any other? It is also known that if there is another
element then there are an infinite number of elements because of residue
inverses for @xmath in all the rings @xmath and @xmath . If it could be
shown that @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath then the double Morita gamma
function (and all finite sets of primes version) is trivial as the
minimum conditions have been imposed to gain continuity. If the sets are
not trivial then this would be a pleasant solution to an elementary
number theory problem but would not lead to a solution of the double
Morita gamma function directly because the resulting products may not be
continuous.

### 6.6 Triviality

###### Theorem 6.6.1.

For all distinct primes @xmath and @xmath , @xmath .

###### Corollary 6.6.2.

The double Morita gamma function is identical to 1.

Proof: Let @xmath be an integer greater than @xmath such that for every
positive integer @xmath and @xmath the remainder of the inverse of
@xmath is prime to @xmath and @xmath and the remainder of the inverse of
@xmath is prime to @xmath . Clearly @xmath and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath and for all @xmath , @xmath .

It is well known that the sequence @xmath is periodic so there exists an
@xmath such that for all @xmath , @xmath .

Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then by periodicity,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Suppose now that @xmath then in the case @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so is @xmath , a contradiction.

In the remaining cases, @xmath , so for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is divisible by @xmath by Euler’s theorem and hence so is @xmath ,
a contradiction.

@xmath

### 6.7 The Set @xmath

Before proving the result in theorem 6.6.1 I looked at the problem from
a numerical perspective and I present some results below which although
elementary I have not seen in the literature.

As an initial attempt to tackle the problem in theorem 6.6.1 consider
the integer 2. The inverses of 2 in @xmath and @xmath are @xmath and
@xmath respectively. The conditions for 2 not to lie in @xmath are
@xmath and @xmath for some @xmath . As @xmath and @xmath are odd it
follows that the conditions become @xmath and @xmath with @xmath and
@xmath . So for any odd primes @xmath and @xmath if one of the two
congruences is soluble then @xmath - this is a necessary condition.
Immediately one knows this is true when one of the primes has a
primitive root of the other. This leaves the case when neither prime has
the other as a primitive root.

To begin with choose a primitive root @xmath for @xmath . Then there
exists integers @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . Putting these
together

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This final equation is just a linear congruence which can be solved for
@xmath @xmath gcd @xmath . In fact this can not always be solved to give
the actual value of @xmath . Indeed let the order of @xmath in @xmath be
@xmath (the order has to be even for a solution to the necessary
condition). Then by basic congruences @xmath giving @xmath . An example
of where it does not work is given by @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath .

Considering just the classes modulo @xmath ; if the necessary condition
on @xmath is not satisfied then further conditions can be investigated.
For example the inverse of @xmath in @xmath also must not be divisible
by @xmath for @xmath (the case @xmath is already covered by the original
conditions since @xmath ). The problem of finding these inverses is
given by the following lemma.

###### Lemma 6.7.1.

Let @xmath and let @xmath be maximal in satisfying @xmath (that is
@xmath ). Then the inverse, @xmath , of @xmath in @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(if the leading term is negative ( @xmath is odd) then @xmath is added
to put the inverse in the range @xmath ).

Proof: As @xmath it has an inverse @xmath satisfying @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now let @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which implies the existence of a @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.7.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Viewing this modulo @xmath shows that @xmath can be written as @xmath
satisfying

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.7.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Reducing this equation modulo @xmath leads to @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.7.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This can be reduced modulo @xmath again to give @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.7.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is of the same form as equation 6.7.2 . In total @xmath reductions
modulo @xmath can be taken reducing to the equation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.7.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the solution is currently in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath the equation can only be reduced modulo @xmath . This gives a
solution of the form @xmath Therefore the solution is

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Induction can be trivially used to show that for any @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath is an odd prime @xmath and hence @xmath . Therefore @xmath and
it is clear that for even @xmath , @xmath and for odd @xmath , @xmath so
the solution is given by @xmath .

@xmath

The general method of solving a linear congruence of the form @xmath is
by Euclid’s algorithm. One of the implications from the above lemma is
that if one tried to calculate an inverse of @xmath in @xmath for
specific @xmath and @xmath using Euclid’s algorithm then one knows the
parity of the number of steps in the algorithm before the algorithm is
even carried out, it simply is the parity of @xmath .

One now has more necessary conditions for @xmath . One looks at the
@xmath integrality of the inverse found in the lemma (and similarly for
the @xmath case and @xmath -integrality). Of course these inverses have
inverses in @xmath and so on. (For example more lemmas can be given to
find these inverses such as the inverse of @xmath is @xmath . Of course
this process can be carried out for any integer not just 2. Hopefully
one can now see how a chain of elements of @xmath can be found given an
element (not 1) in @xmath .

An example can be given for @xmath . One then proceeds to find the
necessary inverses in @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One immediately sees that the primes @xmath already occur in the
inverses as a divisor thus implying that @xmath for those @xmath above.

The above lemma 6.7.1 can be extended to other residue classes.

###### Corollary 6.7.2.

Let @xmath . Also let @xmath and @xmath be maximal in satisfying @xmath
(that is @xmath ). Then the inverse, @xmath , of @xmath in @xmath is
given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(if the leading term is negative ( @xmath is odd) then @xmath is added
to put the inverse in the range @xmath ).

Proof: Let @xmath then the condition for finding the inverse becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is the same as equation 6.7.1 .

@xmath

The most general form of the lemma is given by the following.

###### Corollary 6.7.3.

Let @xmath with @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be maximal in satisfying
@xmath . Then the inverse, @xmath , of @xmath in @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath satisfies @xmath .

The proof is identical in nature to the above. The only problem with
this corollary is the almost circular argument used for finding the
inverse of t in @xmath . In the lemma and first corollary this inverse
is simple to find and so the result is useful. The advantage is that for
fixed @xmath and @xmath the inverse @xmath can be found using Euclid’s
algorithm and the second corollary provides a useful result for finding
other inverses having only used Euclid’s algorithm once.

One can even investigate ways of finding @xmath simply or more generally
the inverse of a @xmath . The inverse of @xmath is going to be of the
form @xmath . For example if @xmath then @xmath or if @xmath then @xmath
. The value of @xmath depends on @xmath . Indeed one needs @xmath .

For the more general integer @xmath it is more difficult because in
general an inverse residue to @xmath cannot just be written down like it
was done for the case @xmath above, different cases modulo @xmath have
to be examined.

### 6.8 A Universal @xmath-adic Function

The Riemann zeta function provided the first example of double
interpolation and in fact of interpolation with respect to a finite set
of primes. This next example shows that interpolation can take place
with respect to all primes. For the Riemann zeta function this was not
possible because removing all the Euler factors would result in
something trivial.

#### 6.8.1 Translated Ideals

The open sets of @xmath are an essential part of @xmath -adic analysis
(for example in some forms of @xmath -adic measures and integration).
These open sets are translated ideals of @xmath ; @xmath for @xmath .
Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(The point at infinity accounts for the trivial ideal.) To find a
nonstandard version of these ideals in @xmath one studies its translated
ideals. The ideals of @xmath are of the form @xmath for @xmath . In
analogy with @xmath define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There is a natural connection between these two sets and that is via the
@xmath -adic shadow map restricted to @xmath (in this case it is the
same as the map described by [ Gv ] , chapter 16). It is defined by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

It is a homomorphism and surjective, along with other properties.

###### Lemma 6.8.1.

Let @xmath be an ideal of @xmath then @xmath is an ideal of @xmath .

Proof: Using properties of the @xmath -adic shadow map @xmath which
means @xmath is defined for all @xmath . Therefore it is defined on all
sets of @xmath . Now the basic definition of an ideal is used. Let
@xmath .

Firstly, @xmath , @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath . Also let @xmath and
@xmath . Then using the homomorphism property of the @xmath -adic shadow
map,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

.

Secondly, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath . Also let
@xmath and @xmath . Then using the homomorphism property of the @xmath
-adic shadow map,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

.

Therefore @xmath is an ideal of @xmath for all @xmath . So for some
@xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

###### Corollary 6.8.2.

Let @xmath then @xmath

Proof: As @xmath , @xmath . So one can write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath , in particular @xmath

@xmath

###### Lemma 6.8.3.

Let @xmath be an ideal of @xmath . Let @xmath with @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . Then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof: Let @xmath Firstly suppose @xmath . Then @xmath , @xmath . Then
for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath .

In the second case suppose @xmath . This is then split into two further
cases. Suppose @xmath then @xmath and there exists solutions to
equations of the form @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . This implies there
exist solutions to @xmath with @xmath . So for @xmath it can be written
as @xmath with @xmath . Under the shadow map @xmath maps to an element
in @xmath . However as @xmath @xmath it follows that @xmath . Hence
@xmath .

In the second subcase suppose ( @xmath ). Then @xmath for @xmath . So
for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore @xmath

@xmath

###### Corollary 6.8.4.

Consider @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here let @xmath then @xmath .

#### 6.8.2 Characteristic Functions

Choose a @xmath and set @xmath Then this number in some ways acts as a
generic finite rational prime. For example it has already been seen
above that @xmath for all finite primes @xmath and @xmath . By looking
at translated ideals @xmath under the shadow maps translated ideals in
@xmath are obtained. These ideas can be extended to look at
characteristic functions. For example set @xmath to be the
characteristic function of @xmath . Taking the @xmath -adic shadow map
of this function leads to @xmath . Similarly defining a characteristic
function on the ideal @xmath leads to @xmath and in the same manner for
translated ideals.

#### 6.8.3 The Universal Function

Classically the @xmath -adic interpolation of the function @xmath is
performed to give a @xmath -adic continuous function @xmath with @xmath
and @xmath . This is proved (in [ Gv ] , 127–133) using the binomial
theorem. This function can be looked at in a nonstandard setting to
obtain a nonstandard function for a fixed @xmath

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This function is given explicitly by the @xmath -adic convergent sum

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By taking the @xmath -adic shadow map one obtains the classical @xmath
-adic function.

At this point one wonders if double interpolation can take place. That
is interpolation with respect to two finite distinct primes ( @xmath and
@xmath ). In the previous work this was done. An @xmath was fixed and
the same binomial expansion gave a function which was @xmath -adically
and @xmath -adically convergent. Moreover taking the respective shadow
maps lead to the classical functions.

The next step is to consider interpolation with respect to all finite
primes. This has to be carried out in a nonstandard space so one has the
relevant congruence. For interpolation of @xmath with respect to each
prime ( @xmath ) it is required that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This means one needs to consider @xmath with @xmath , ( @xmath ). (It
will become clear that one could consider any nonstandard @xmath as all
that matters is that @xmath is divisible by all standard primes.)

The ’local’ information can then be gathered into a ’global’ equivalence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Equivalently

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For such an @xmath define a function on @xmath with values in @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 6.8.5.

The function @xmath is @xmath -adically uniformly continuous and
convergent with respect to every finite prime @xmath in @xmath .

Proof: Continuity: It is the case that @xmath or equivalently there
exists @xmath such that @xmath . Using the binomial theorem on this last
expression gives @xmath Therefore @xmath . Continuity is then
established since the last expression implies @xmath .

Convergence: It has to be shown that the series @xmath is a null
sequence in each @xmath -adic norm. Since @xmath for all @xmath and
@xmath prime one needs only consider the coefficients @xmath . For a
prime @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Thus @xmath is a null sequence with respect to each prime.

@xmath

###### Lemma 6.8.6.

For all @xmath , @xmath .

Proof: As @xmath , @xmath for all @xmath . Raising to the power @xmath ,
@xmath . So @xmath for all @xmath .

@xmath

This last lemma enables the @xmath -adic shadow map to be taken for each
prime. This is done by my work on nonstandard interpolation.

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This is the classical @xmath -adic function because the function is
defined on all of @xmath . Moreover using the results of section 3, the
resulting function is defined on all of @xmath because @xmath . At first
glance this is quite surprising because in the nonstandard set @xmath
the only standard integer, in fact only standard number, is 1. Yet the
respective shadow maps produce the required integers @xmath and @xmath
-adic integers to produce the ideals @xmath .

Returning to the choice of @xmath . In the above proof the only point
which matters is that @xmath with @xmath for all finite primes. The fact
that @xmath is @xmath -integral for all p enables the shadow map to map
@xmath to @xmath rather than @xmath if some power of @xmath divided
@xmath . As was seen in section 3 all the shadow map ’cares’ about is
the @xmath -part and with @xmath @xmath -integral there is no effect on
the final translated ideal. Similarly with the choice of @xmath it does
not affect the shadow map.

In conclusion the nonstandard function @xmath acts as a source of the
@xmath -adic function @xmath for all finite prime @xmath .

### 6.9 Double Hurwitz Zeta Function

This problem is more difficult for the Hurwitz zeta function because
interpolation is based on a twisted Hurwitz zeta function. The actual
numbers interpolated are explicitly dependent on the prime @xmath in the
@xmath -adic interpolation. So to find the correct numbers for double
interpolation they have to depend explicitly on @xmath and @xmath which
can be achieved by two potential methods.

-   Define an analogue of the Teichmüller character which explicitly
    depends on @xmath and @xmath .

-   View the Teichmüller character as a Dirichlet character.

The second approach potentially leads onto the ideas of a double @xmath
-function but are not considered here.

#### 6.9.1 Nonstandard Teichmüller Character

Before trying to find a double version it would be prudent to find a
nonstandard version. Let @xmath be defined for standard prime @xmath by

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath

The first condition implies that there exists @xmath such that @xmath .
Now the second condition can be used to determine the value(s) of @xmath
or it will show that such a function does not exist. Using the binomial
theorem,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

A version of Hensel’s lemma in @xmath cannot be used to obtain a value
of @xmath because of lack of completeness. Instead one looks at
properties of the surjective @xmath -adic shadow map ( @xmath ). Then
for each @xmath there exists a @xmath such that @xmath . Moreover by the
properties of the shadow map @xmath and @xmath . Therefore it satisfies
the defining properties of the Teichmüller character. Using these
observations one can define a (non-unique) nonstandard Teichmüller
character @xmath such that the shadow map is the standard Teichmüller
character. In the case of @xmath define @xmath . There is no unique
nonstandard character because for any two such nonstandard characters
the value taken by both for a given @xmath lie in the same monad.

#### 6.9.2 Double Teichmüller Character

In searching for an initial interpretation of this function the
following conditions should be included in the definition. Let the
double Teichmüller character initially be a function defined

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The obvious extension to @xmath is given by @xmath for @xmath or @xmath
and @xmath otherwise. From the definition of the Teichmüller character
in its natural @xmath -adic setting @xmath should satisfy for all @xmath

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath .

Suppose such a function exists then the shadow map with respect to one
of the primes will lead to a function which agrees with the respective
Teichmüller character but is defined on a slightly smaller set due to
the @xmath part in the original definition.

A function satisfying the first two conditions is trivial to find, just
set @xmath for some hyper natural number @xmath . The last two
conditions are equivalent to @xmath and @xmath where @xmath and @xmath .
In order to apply the methods of finding a nonstandard character as in
the previous section one needs to determine whether or not for each
@xmath the following subset of @xmath is empty

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the case that it is non-empty then a (non-)unique double nonstandard
character could be defined by setting @xmath to be equal to an element
in the above subset. All the properties desired are then satisfied.

In solving this problem one could consider it in a slightly more general
setting. Given any two distinct primes @xmath and @xmath let @xmath and
let @xmath . The problem is to determine whether ot not the following
set is empty

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The first case to consider is when @xmath and are distinct. Elements
@xmath can be written in the form @xmath and @xmath for some @xmath and
@xmath . Without loss of generality suppose @xmath and fix nonstandard
values of @xmath and @xmath . Then the problem reduces to solving the
linear equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is soluble because @xmath .

This process can be applied to the non-natural elements of @xmath and
@xmath . Indeed let @xmath and @xmath . Then let @xmath and @xmath ,
clearly @xmath . If there exists some @xmath then it can be written in
the form @xmath and @xmath for some @xmath and @xmath . As above a
linear equation results and as @xmath one has basically the same problem
as above and is soluble as @xmath .

This can then be used to find a double version of the @xmath -adic
function defined for @xmath @xmath . Then for @xmath with @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

THen taking the shadow map for a given @xmath leads to the @xmath -adic
or @xmath -adic @xmath .

#### 6.9.3 Hurwitz Zeta Function

Pick a nonstandard double Teichmüller character @xmath such that @xmath
. The problem is that the nonstandard version cannot be viewed as a
hyper Dirichlet character as it is not a multiplicative homomorphism.
This is due to the condition on it not being an exact @xmath root of
unity just infinitely close to being one (similarly in the @xmath case).
It is the same for the single nonstandard Teichmüller character. So
instead of considering a Dirichlet @xmath -series consider the following
@xmath -function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the comparison test this Q-converges absolutely for at least
@xmath . Using the hyper Hurwitz zeta function the above can be written
as

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Q-analytic continuation of this L-function is then established via the
Q-analytic continuation of the hyper Hurwitz zeta function. Therefore
for @xmath

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where @xmath is the n-th hyper Bernoulli polynomial. Thus

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Of particular importance is the Hurwitz zeta function and finding a
double interpolation of it. As a first attempt consider the following
function for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Since the sum is hyperfinite the actual values of this function lie in
@xmath . Moreover for all @xmath the sum lies in @xmath by the von
Staudt-Clausen theorem. By the properties developed above the shadow
maps can be taken of @xmath for @xmath . Since @xmath the shadow map is
trivial and so one is just left to deal with @xmath . For the shadow map
to be defined on this term it is required that @xmath and @xmath are not
infinitesimal. (Under the shadow maps this last requirement corresponds
to the pole of the @xmath -adic or @xmath -adic Hurwitz zeta function.)
This suggests defining the @xmath -adic Hurwitz zeta function for @xmath
as

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

## Chapter 7 The Work of Shai Haran

### 7.1 Overview

The dictionary between arithmetic and geometry is a fascinating area of
mathematics having been developed by many great mathematicians from
Kummer and Kronecker to Artin and Weil. The analogy begins with @xmath
in arithmetic and with @xmath (the ring of polynomials in one variable
over a field @xmath ) in geometry. By choosing a prime @xmath of @xmath
the @xmath -adic integers @xmath and field of fractions @xmath are
obtained. Similarly for a prime @xmath of @xmath the geometric analogues
are @xmath and the field of Laurent series @xmath . This dictionary
extends a lot further but there are two anomalies, that is two
constructions in the geometric picture which have no "obvious" analogue
in the arithmetic picture.

1.  To produce theorems in geometry the change is made from affine to
    projective geometry. To the affine line the point at infinity is
    added which corresponds to the ring @xmath and its field of
    fractions @xmath . The analogue of @xmath for @xmath is the real
    prime (denoted by @xmath ). The associated field is @xmath but there
    is no analogue @xmath of @xmath . By following the definition for
    finite primes @xmath , @xmath but this is not closed under addition.

2.  The second problem refers to tensor products. By taking the product
    of given geometrical objects a new geometrical object is obtained.
    For example the affine plane ( @xmath ) is the product of the affine
    line ( @xmath ) with itself. This corresponds to the tensor product
    of two polynomial rings @xmath and @xmath , in the category of
    @xmath -algebras, and is equal to the ring of polynomials in two
    variables, @xmath . Trying to find the corresponding arithmetical
    surface it is found that in the category of commutative rings @xmath
    (the surface reduces to the diagonal). In fact in any geometry based
    on rings the arithmetical surface reduces to the diagonal since
    @xmath . So does there exist a category in which absolute Decartes
    powers @xmath do not reduce to the diagonal?

Much of Shai Haran’s work has been trying to resolve these two issues.
The bulk of this chapter will review Haran’s attempts to find an
interpretation of the first point. Work in the direction of resolving
the second point is still very much in its infancy and so only a small
amount of space will be dedicated to the theory of non-additive geometry
and a new language between arithmetic and geometry.

### 7.2 The Real Integers

Almost all Haran’s work in the search of the real integers is found in
his book Mysteries of the Real Prime which in his own words is "very
condense and hard to read". Only very recently have some lecture notes
become available which expand on parts of his book. So the references
for this work are the chapters 1–9 of his book [ Ha1 ] and chapters 0–4
and 7 of these lecture notes.

-    Aims: For the @xmath -adic integers there are three important
    inverse limit expressions which rely upon reduction modulo @xmath .

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    The aim is to understand the real analogue of these not by reduction
    of points but by "reduction" of certain complex valued functions.

-    Techniques: Initial studies of Markov chains enable the above
    @xmath -adic limits to be viewed as boundaries of certain trees. The
    @xmath -world is used to construct chains which generalise the
    @xmath -adic chains but in the limit @xmath the @xmath -adic chains
    are recovered. Moreover in the limit @xmath a real chain is
    obtained. By interpreting the real chain as an analogue of the
    @xmath -adic chain certain deductions are made regarding properties
    of the real prime.

-    Philosophy: The historical tendency is to develop results in the
    @xmath -adic setting from the corresponding ones in the real
    setting. This is based on the human perception of macroscopic
    ’reality’ as many aspects of everyday life are based, to a good
    approximation, on the real numbers and measuring distances using the
    absolute value. Given early mathematics, engineering, physics,
    @xmath were influenced by the physical world it is not surprising
    that the real results far outnumber those of the @xmath adic numbers
    in the Platonic mathematical world. Often results in the @xmath
    -adic setting are simpler and more natural than those in the real
    setting so by studying the reals from the @xmath -adic perspective
    it is hoped to find new results.

#### 7.2.1 Markov Chains

###### Definition 7.2.1.

A Markov chain consists of a state space, a set @xmath , and transition
probabilities, a function @xmath satisfying @xmath for all @xmath .

The source of @xmath -adic chains for his work is derived from graph
theory and to begin with trees. Indeed let @xmath be a tree with root
@xmath . For @xmath let @xmath then @xmath , a disjoint union. The
boundary, @xmath , is defined as the inverse limit of the sets @xmath .
The important result relating to this is the following theorem.

###### Theorem 7.2.2.

Let @xmath be the set of probability measures on the boundary. Then
there is a one-to-one correspondence between @xmath and Markov chains on
@xmath .

In the constructions used in the proof it is shown that there exists a
special probability measure, the harmonic measure. From this probability
measure it can be shown that it leads to a probability measure on @xmath
and an associated Hilbert space @xmath . The key observation is that
there is a unitary embedding @xmath and an orthogonal projection from
@xmath onto the subspace @xmath . Similarly on the boundary there is the
Hilbert space @xmath , unitary embedding @xmath and orthogonal
projection @xmath onto @xmath . These Hilbert spaces (and in particular
the orthogonal bases) are probably the most important aspect of the
work.

In order to deal with the real and @xmath -chains the above theory has
to be extended to chains which are not trees. One of the
characterizations of a chain which is a tree is that the boundary is
totally disconnected. Therefore non-tree chains also include ones which
have continuous boundaries. The theory is based around harmonic
functions. Given a chain with state space @xmath and transition
probabilities @xmath then @xmath can be regarded as a matrix over @xmath
with entry 0 if two points are not connected. Further @xmath can be
regarded as an operator on @xmath by @xmath .

###### Definition 7.2.3.

A function @xmath is called harmonic if @xmath and @xmath .

The collection of all harmonic functions is a convex set, denote this by
@xmath . This decomposes in the standard way of a convex set: @xmath
where @xmath and @xmath be those functions which are not non-extreme.
This leads to a decomposition of the boundary, @xmath . Indeed the
boundary is the compactification of @xmath with respect to the Martin
metric which itself is derived from the Martin kernel and the Green
kernel. Here the Green kernel is an operator on @xmath given by @xmath
and the Martin kernel is given by @xmath .

###### Theorem 7.2.4.

For the general Markov chain there is a one-to-one correspondence
between the harmonic functions on @xmath and the probability measures on
@xmath .

In particular the constant function is clearly harmonic and the
corresponding unique measure is called the harmonic measure.

##### A @xmath-adic Beta Chain

The actual chain of considerable use is the non-symmetric @xmath -adic
@xmath chain. The next stage is calculations. Given the chain the
harmonic measure, boundary, Hilbert spaces, @xmath can all be
calculated. They are lengthy calculations and so do not appear in an
explicit way in his book though really to most readers they can just be
accepted. To others they form an extensive set of exercises which would
probably double the length of his book.

The symmetric @xmath chain on @xmath is very complicated so a chain is
considered on the tree @xmath where @xmath is a semidirect product.

In summary this chain has the state space @xmath . The state space can
be identified with @xmath by the following pararmetrization

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The explicit identification with @xmath can be found in chapter 4 of [
Ha1 ] . The transition probabilities are given for @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The boundary is @xmath with harmonic measure the gamma measure. This is
defined as @xmath where @xmath is the local component of the completed
Riemann zeta function.

The key calculation is that of the orthogonal bases. On the boundary the
basis for the associated Hilbert space, @xmath , is called the @xmath
-adic Jacobi basis ( @xmath ). On the finite dimensional Hilbert spaces
the basis of @xmath is given by the @xmath -adic Hahn basis ( @xmath ).
The most important observation is reduction @xmath . This reduction
takes place between the two bases using integration against the Martin
kernel since the embeddings and projections mentioned above can be given
in terms of the Martin kernel. In particular the projection, or what can
be referred to as reduction @xmath from @xmath to @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is this interpretation which is sought initially in the @xmath case
and then the real case to give reduction of certain complex polynomials
@xmath .

The initial problem encountered by Haran is finding the "correct" real
chain as there are many candidates ranging from expanding a real number
with some fixed base to the use of continued fractions. Haran uses the
@xmath -chains to justify his choice of real chain as the correct one.

A @xmath -chain is a @xmath -interpolation between a @xmath -adic chain
and the real chain. The @xmath world is extensive in interpolating
between the @xmath -adic and real numbers. In this world the continuum
@xmath is approximated by @xmath which resembles the @xmath -adic @xmath
. Recent work can be found in the papers [ Ki1 ] - [ Ki9 ] , [ KKuW ] ,
[ KuW ] , [ KuWY ] and [ KuOW ] . Chapter 6 of [ Ha1 ] provides a
concise introduction to the @xmath -world.

##### The @xmath-Beta Chain

Let the state space be @xmath and define the transition probabilities
for @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Clearly this is not a tree. As it is a @xmath -chain (interpolating
between the @xmath -adic @xmath chain and the real @xmath chain) it has
the special property that taking the @xmath -adic limit ( @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath ) converges to the @xmath -adic @xmath chain
introduced above. Moreover in the real limit ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath ) a new chain is obtained and this is the real @xmath chain.

##### The Real Beta Chain

The state space remains @xmath , @xmath with @xmath and the transition
probabilities become

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The relevant calculations can be carried out and the resulting boundary
is @xmath and the harmonic measure on the boundary is the real beta
measure with finite approximation @xmath ( @xmath and @xmath is the beta
function). The beta measure is defined as the product of two gamma
measures on the real plane which is then projected onto @xmath . Using
these calculations the Hilbert spaces can be examined but the most
important aspect is to find the relations (the ladder structure) between
them analogous to the structure discussed above on trees.

Let the finite Hilbert spaces be denoted by @xmath and on the boundary
by @xmath . Recall in the @xmath -adic case the orthogonal bases were
found by using the relations between the spaces. In this case
integration against the Martin kernel does not lead to embeddings or
projections. The theory relies on difference operators, which in his
work are developed in relation to the @xmath -beta chain and follow in
the real case by taking the real limit. The difference operator @xmath
and its adjoint @xmath are defined as

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

These operators satisfy the Heisenberg relation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This shows that a constant multiple of the identity operator is obtained
for the difference in going down and up this "ladder". Moreover the
constant function is characterised by the equation @xmath which means
that @xmath can be regarded as an annihilation operator, @xmath a
creation operation and the constant function as the vacuum. Using these
observations the orthogonal basis @xmath , the real Hahn basis. This
process is repeated for the boundary with difference operators,
satisfying the Heisenberg relation, creating the ladder structure.
Ultimately they lead to the real Jacobi basis @xmath . The link between
the Hilbert space on the boundary and those on the finite sets is also
defined via the Martin kernel as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Martin kernel on the boundary. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This relates the real Jacobi and Hahn basis. The interpretation is
"reduction @xmath ", analogous to the @xmath -adic case. So this gives
an interpretation to the inverse limit for @xmath in terms of complex
polynomials.

Hopefully the basic method can be seen in how an interpretation of
complex polynomials can be given. In order to "view" the inverse limits
for the other two problems suitable chains with boundary @xmath and
@xmath are needed. In fact both chains can be deduced from the beta
chain.

##### Gamma Chain

For the beta chain taking the limit @xmath leads to the gamma chain.
Unfortunately in the real case this reduces to the unit shift walking
from the origin to @xmath . However taking the appropriate normalized
limit @xmath of the above operators @xmath and @xmath and of the real
Jacobi polynomials leads to the Laguerre polynomials. This is an
orthogonal basis for the boundary space @xmath where @xmath is the real
gamma measure defined by @xmath . This can be also be derived from the
@xmath -beta chain by taking appropriate limits. Haran does not make
clear the interpretation of this in terms of the real limit of the
additive problem initially stated. A problem is that he does state that
the real Laguerre basis should be considered as the interpretation in
the introduction but this is not developed in the book at any stage. I
believe part of the problem is the lack of a real chain, there are no
non-trivial finite Hilbert spaces and hence no reduction type operator.
Further what is the real chain with boundary @xmath ? These thoughts
were confirmed when reading the appendix in the lecture notes where as a
problem he asks what is the real gamma chain and what is the finite real
Laguerre basis?

##### The Real Units

In the @xmath -adic case a non-trivial chain can be obtained with
boundary @xmath by taking the limit @xmath of the @xmath -adic beta
chain. The harmonic measure on the boundary is just the multiplicative
Haar measure on @xmath normalized by @xmath . Since a real beta chain
exists taking limits @xmath should lead to a similar chain. Indeed it
does with transition probabilities of @xmath on the same state space as
for the real beta chain. On this chain the Hilbert spaces exist with
difference operators which lead to orthogonal bases. In this case the
basis on the boundary is given by the real Hermite polynomials

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the finite layers the basis is essentially given by the elementary
symmetric functions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the @xmath -th elementary symmetric function of @xmath
variables. Again it is implied that the interpretation for @xmath is the
Hermite polynomials while for the approximations to @xmath are given by
the symmetric functions above. What is not made clear is the process of
reduction @xmath and I think this is another problem in need of
resolution.

##### Higher Dimensional Theory

The theory developed above has a natural extension to global chains. By
considering restricted direct products of chains one can obtain chains
over the finite adeles. So far there is little to comment on in this
area because all the properties of these global chains follow from the
local chains. Of more interest is the theory of higher dimensions. In
the one dimensional theory all the @xmath chains of interest have been
constructed from the products and semi-direct products of the basic
chain. This has state space @xmath and transition probabilities given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For example the @xmath -gamma chain is constructed as the product of the
basic chain @xmath and the unit shift chain @xmath . The @xmath -beta
chains are also constructed from the non-stop (semi-direct) products of
just two basic chains. The next step is to consider non-stop
(semi-direct) products of @xmath basic chains. This construction leads
to higher dimensional beta chains.

#### 7.2.2 Remarks

In many areas of mathematics there is often a deeper theory underlying a
set of results. Following Tate’s thesis and the subsequent Langland’s
program arithmetic problems are translated into representation theory of
adelic groups. This takes place in an elegant way in which although the
computations are done in representation theory the flavour is algebraic
geometry. At this stage the usual consequence is to study the local
objects, whatever they are, and glue the results to the adeles (the
method of Langlands). What Haran proposes is the alternative of whether
the local objects can be put on an equal footing.

Using this approach Haran tries to attack the Riemann hypothesis by
using the interpolating @xmath -objects. (See the next section for full
details.) The rest of his work searches for the "correct" local object
which can capture representation theories of all local fields - a
non-trivial question. Where does one begin this search? The fragments of
information Haran uses are special functions which are only glimpses of
representation theory. Haran’s process of using chains is one way of
building these interpolating functions. The functions can be studied
without this process and one can check properties and limits to show
that they are matrix elements in representations of @xmath for all local
fields. An advantage of Haran’s process is that in defining some of the
objects above he is able to give an interpretation of @xmath . Future
work will show whether or not these interpretations are the correct
ones.

### 7.3 Applications of The Quantum World

As mentioned in the previous section one of the main areas of Haran’s
work has been in attacking the Riemann hypothesis using @xmath
-interpolating objects.

-    Aims: To prove the Riemann hypothesis.

-    Techniques: The work is based on @xmath -interpolating objects. The
    particular objects of interest are the explicit sums of Weil and the
    Reisz potential.

#### 7.3.1 The Riemann Zeta Function

The completed zeta function is defined via the product of the local
factors to give a global zeta function which is related to certain
operators acting on the adeles, full details can be found in the opening
of chapter 13 of [ Ha1 ] .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here the product is over all primes including the real prime. The local
factors are defined as @xmath for the finite primes and @xmath .
Although the functional equation is well known Haran views it from the
perspective of the Heisenberg group to obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with simple poles at @xmath and residues @xmath . There are numerous
reformulations of the Riemann hypothesis and the main one Haran develops
are the explicit sums.

For any @xmath there exists a Mellin transform of it @xmath . Then using
the residue theorem and properties of the completed zeta function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Weil distribution defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the finite primes there is a closed expression for the Weil
distribution

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So essentially the sum of @xmath over the zeros of @xmath is "equal" to
the weighted sum of @xmath over the prime powers. Moreover for finite
@xmath , @xmath implies @xmath . The contribution of the real prime
cannot be ignored. There are several ways to write the real Weil
distribution in a finite closed form, for example

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Euler constant. This formula is obtained by Haran by
introducing @xmath -Weil distributions and taking the real limit. The
@xmath -adic limit leads to the @xmath -Weil distribution as expected.
The importance of the Weil distributions is in relation to the Riemann
hypothesis. The Mellin transform takes multiplicative convolutions of
functions to multiplication of functions. Applying this to the explicit
sums

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the multiplicative convolution and @xmath is the adjoint
function. Without loss of generality it can be assumed that @xmath .
Then the Riemann hypothesis is @xmath implies @xmath which is equivalent
to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore the Riemann hypothesis is equivalent to the positivity of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 7.3.2 Riesz Potentials

Haran’s next step is finding a connection between the Weil distributions
and the Riesz potentials.

Let @xmath be the Fourier transform then the Riesz potential @xmath can
be formulated for all primes acting on functions on @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem 7.3.1 (Local Formula).

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The main advantage of this theorem is that it enables the Weil
distribution to be written in the form of the trace of an operator in at
least one way. One operator to consider is the operator on @xmath given
by @xmath where @xmath is the unitary action of the multiplicative group
( @xmath ) and @xmath is the operator of multiplication by the
characteristic function of @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Taylor expansion is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There are other versions of writing the Weil distributions locally
including work by Connes using cut off operators [ Co1 ] .

Indeed, let @xmath if @xmath and @xmath otherwise. This can be viewed as
a projection on @xmath . The dual projection is given by @xmath .
Further let @xmath where the normalized multiplicative measure is given
by @xmath with @xmath for finite primes and @xmath for the real prime.

###### Theorem 7.3.2.

For all @xmath and as @xmath

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The next step is to provide global formulae. These provide
reformulations of the Riemann hypothesis. Let @xmath where @xmath . A
function @xmath a function on @xmath can be associated to it @xmath ,
further let @xmath for @xmath and @xmath .

###### Theorem 7.3.3 (Global Formula).

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There also exist global trace formulae whose positivity implies the
Riemann hypothesis. In a simplistic one way of stating this is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is the constant term in the Taylor series about @xmath .

This is very similar to the work of Connes, in fact he has rewritten the
global trace formulas using the tools of non-commutative geometry.

In Haran’s work he claims that his work involving global trace formula
provides a proof of the Riemann hypothesis for the function field case
but this is not the case as he conceded himself. Whether or not this
method can be used to prove the Riemann hypothesis in either the
function field case or the number field case is yet to be resolved.

### 7.4 Non-Additive Geometry

This section gives a very narrow introduction of what little theory
exists regarding the second problem of the arithmetic-geometry
dictionary - the arithmetic surface. In many ways this is closely
related to the first problem. Indeed in trying to consider @xmath as the
interval @xmath the problem was it not being closed under addition. So
why not abandon addition? This process has led to the consideration of
the "field with one element". A detailed overview can be found in [ Du ]

#### 7.4.1 The Field Of One Element

The conception of the "field of one element" (denoted @xmath ) was in
group theory in the work of Jacques Tits. Without going into detail the
"the field of one element" was thought of/defined as @xmath where @xmath
is a Chevalley group scheme over @xmath and @xmath is its Weyl group. On
the face of it the idea is absurd since fields by definition must have
at least two elements. However there is plenty of evidence that
something like it exists, essentially using the ideas of Tits. With
finite fields, @xmath ( @xmath a power of a prime), there are numerous
formula for counting structures on projective spaces over @xmath . In
these formula taking @xmath gives results for finite sets. As a very
basic example the number of maximal flags in an @xmath -dimensional
vector space over @xmath is the @xmath -factorial @xmath , where @xmath
. Taking @xmath gives the value @xmath , which is the number of ways to
order a set with @xmath elements. This analogy extends a lot deeper and
is considered so powerful that the interpretation of finite sets is as
projective spaces over the "field with one element", @xmath . With this
interpretation and "existence" of a "field with one element" further
interpretations and definitions are made. This was, and perhaps still
is, a set of suggestions and results based on these in order to find the
"correct" approach to dealing with such an entity.

One must not forget that the main aim from a number theory point of view
is to be able to use geometrical methods for solving number theoretical
problems. Central to this is to view @xmath as a curve over some field.
In this case some of the well known conjectures of arithmetic (Riemann
hypothesis, ABC, @xmath ) become easy theorems in the geometric analogue
of a curve @xmath over a finite field since the surface @xmath can be
formed.

This speculation began several decades after Tits’ work with Manin
suggesting possible zeta functions over @xmath ( [ Ma1 ] ). The possible
geometrical theorems associated to @xmath continued with a category of
varieties over @xmath in [ So ] , derivations over @xmath in [ KuOW ]
and more recently work by Deitmar on schemes over @xmath , the related
cohomology and zeta functions.

Part of Soulë’s work seems to have been inspired by Manin as he gives a
definition of zeta functions over @xmath . Indeed a starting point is to
view @xmath as the base field of @xmath . This means that any variety
over @xmath must have a base change over @xmath , which is an algebraic
variety over @xmath . This base change is found in several of the works
above. In order to define a variety over @xmath it has been suggested,
in unpublished work by Kapranov and Smirnov, that @xmath should have an
extension @xmath given by adjoining roots of unity suggesting that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is @xmath , the ring of functions on the affine group scheme of
@xmath -th roots of unity.

###### Definition 7.4.1.

A variety over @xmath is a covariant functor @xmath from the category
@xmath (with objects @xmath and their finite tensor products) to finite
sets. For @xmath there is the natural inclusion @xmath where @xmath is a
variety over @xmath . There is also a further condition (universal
property) which relates to functors.

Unfortunately this category of varieties over @xmath does not contain
@xmath .

From Weil’s work a local zeta function can be defined for a scheme of
finite type over @xmath , @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a prime number. Soulé considered the condition that
there exists a polynomial @xmath with integer coefficients for every
prime @xmath and @xmath with @xmath . He then defines

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The second equality follows by setting @xmath . For example @xmath

Zeta functions over arbitrary @xmath -schemes were first defined in
Deitmar’s work on schemes. He shows that the condition on requiring
@xmath can be made slightly weaker, by the following theorem, which
enables the zeta functions to be defined.

###### Theorem 7.4.2.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -scheme defined over @xmath . Then there exists
@xmath and @xmath such that for every prime power @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The condition determines the zeta polynomial of @xmath , @xmath ,
uniquely.

The zeta function of an arbitrary @xmath -scheme, @xmath , can then be
defined via the zeta polynomial ( @xmath ) as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Explicit calculations of zeta functions are found in [ K ] who also
defines the Euler characteristic as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 7.4.2 Haran

An important aspect arising from [ KuOW ] is the building the theory of
@xmath on multiplication only - losing addition. Supposing that @xmath
is a "curve" over @xmath then derivations should exist. If the concept
of @xmath -linearity is removed and one only considers the Leibniz rule
then the result is derivations. This idea of losing additivity/ @xmath
-linearity is applied to other @xmath objects in the form of a
(forgetful) functor from objects over @xmath . This idea is used by
Deitmar to define schemes and is a starting point in Haran’s work.

Haran’s input in the study of the "field with one element" area is
different from the other work in this area. He uses his work on the real
prime as guidance in particular the concept that by abandoning addition
the real integers become a real object.

The initial seed for the work comes from the work of [ KuOW ] as they
interpret vector spaces over @xmath as finite pointed sets. This
combined with a hint of the real prime leads to the definition of a
category @xmath which has objects finite sets and arrows as partial
bijections. He chooses to use this as a model for the "field with one
element". The actual connection with the previous work in this area is
not made clear. Clearly there is a form of connection because the
objects can also be taken to be vector spaces over @xmath with certain
maps related to the real integers. So unlike the previous work he has
taken the two problems, initially stated about the arithmetic-geometric
dictionary, and combined them to search for some
answers/interpretations. Again this is an interpretation as the theory
in his paper can be taken for a category @xmath with two symmetric
monoidal structures @xmath , @xmath , the unit element ( @xmath ) for
@xmath is the initial and final object of @xmath , @xmath is
distributive over @xmath and it respects @xmath ( @xmath ).

From this definition various structures are imposed on @xmath . One of
the most important is the @xmath -ring.

###### Definition 7.4.3.

A @xmath -ring is a category @xmath with objects @xmath and arrows
@xmath containing the arrows of @xmath . This means there is a faithful
functor @xmath which is the identity on objects.

As examples of these he shows that there is a functor from commutative
rings to @xmath -rings. The @xmath -ring associated to a commutative
ring @xmath has morphisms which are matrices with values in @xmath . The
most important example is that relating to the real integers. Let @xmath
and let @xmath denote the real vector space with inner product having
@xmath as an orthonormal basis. Then for @xmath there is a norm @xmath .
There is also the related operator norm for a real linear map @xmath ,
@xmath . Then the @xmath -ring, @xmath , is defined to have morphisms

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Haran also defines the residue field of @xmath to be the @xmath -ring of
partial isometries ( @xmath )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These can be generalised to any number field, @xmath , and @xmath a real
or complex prime. In the real case he simply mentions that these
constructions are analogous to the @xmath -adic integers. In future work
I think these @xmath -rings may play an important role.

The rest of the paper sets about developing the language of geometry
using @xmath -rings. This naturally starts with the definition of
modules, submodules and ideals of an @xmath -ring. An @xmath -module of
a @xmath -ring @xmath is basically a collection of sets with maps which
are compatible with @xmath . An @xmath -submodule @xmath of @xmath is a
collection of subsets of @xmath which are closed under the maps which
are used to define @xmath . In the special case of @xmath then the
@xmath -submodule is called an ideal. A clear example following on from
the @xmath -rings are the modules of a commutative ring. Under the
functor @xmath the modules become modules of an @xmath -ring. The main
emphasis is placed on ideals in order to develop prime ideals, @xmath
and schemes.

The ideals which he uses are called @xmath (omogeneous)-ideals. A normal
ideal @xmath is a collection of subsets @xmath which are closed under
the functors @xmath , @xmath and under composition @xmath of maps. The
@xmath -ideals are a subset of ideals with the property that an ideal
@xmath is generated by @xmath where @xmath . An application of Zorn’s
lemma gives

###### Theorem 7.4.4.

Every @xmath -ring contains a maximal (proper) @xmath -ideal.

Naturally there is a notion of a prime @xmath -ideal. A @xmath -ideal
@xmath is called prime if @xmath is multiplicative closed: @xmath . The
set of prime ideals of @xmath is denoted by @xmath .

As an example he takes the @xmath -ring of real "integers", @xmath and
states that @xmath is the unique maximal @xmath -ideal of @xmath . With
these ideas in place he can then define a Zariski topology on @xmath .
The closed sets are given for a set @xmath , @xmath and for a @xmath
-ideal, @xmath , generated by @xmath , @xmath . The closed sets of the
Zariski topology on @xmath are @xmath .

The theory of localization of a @xmath -ring is almost identical to that
of commutative rings due the multiplicative theory. This enables @xmath
-ringed spaces to be defined and a category of Zariski- @xmath -schemes.
So far this work is in setting the stage for actual applications and
progress towards finding the arithmetical surface. Based on the other
work I would also expect zeta functions to be developed for the schemes
introduced by Haran.

### 7.5 A Nonstandard Beginning

The q-world is vast and varied in nature but in this work some of the
aspects which Shai Haran chose to examine are looked at through a
nonstandard view point.

#### 7.5.1 @xmath-Integers

###### Definition 7.5.1.

Let q be an indeterminate which can be considered in the real field. For
any integer @xmath define the @xmath -integer @xmath . This definition
in fact holds for any @xmath , the non-symmetric @xmath -numbers.

From this the nonstandard non-symmetric @xmath -numbers can be defined.

###### Definition 7.5.2.

Let @xmath and @xmath then define @xmath .

This is a function @xmath . Of particular interest are the values of the
function within @xmath .

Consider @xmath then for some fixed infinitesimal @xmath , @xmath and
take @xmath to lie in @xmath so the @xmath -shadow map can be taken. In
particular for @xmath as above and @xmath , @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
                       
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Here for all @xmath , @xmath is a monic hyperpolynomial of degree @xmath
. This sum is absolutely Q-convergent (by the properties of the
functions). From the convergence properties of the standard function it
can be deduced that @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Since the nonstandard terms are zero by above and the standard terms,
apart from the leading one, are zero since the delta part is
infinitesimal while @xmath is standard leading to an infinitesimal term.
Therefore the only term remaining is the first one and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath and @xmath . This corresponds to the standard case

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There also exists other special values. For example let @xmath be an
infinitesimal of the form @xmath where @xmath and @xmath (an
infinitesimal) Let @xmath and define @xmath (also an infinitesimal).
Then by an analogous method as above

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This example shows that the function is not Q-continuous. This is due to
terms of the form @xmath , where both are infinitesimals. This makes the
nonstandard function quite interesting because given two values of the
function given by infinitesimals @xmath and @xmath it does not follow
that @xmath and @xmath are infinitely close.

Naturally for other basic functions, such as the non-symmetric @xmath
-numbers, special values exist and the real shadow map of these
corresponds to the standard limits.

#### 7.5.2 @xmath-Zeta

One definition for the @xmath zeta function is given for @xmath and
@xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One important limit of this function is when @xmath ( @xmath prime) and
@xmath with @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To consider this from a nonstandard perspective one considers a
nonstandard function @xmath with nonstandard arguments. To find an
analogy to the limit consider an infinitesimal @xmath and a prime @xmath
setting @xmath and for @xmath set @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using classical analysis this product is absolutely Q-convergent because
clearly @xmath is absolutely Q-convergent.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From the basic properties of the real shadow map and for all @xmath with
@xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular choosing @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 7.5.3 Chains

One of the main approaches in investigating the real prime is via Markov
chains. To interpolate between the real gamma chains and @xmath -adic
gamma chains @xmath -chains are used.

##### @xmath-Gamma Chain

###### Definition 7.5.3.

Let @xmath be the @xmath -gamma chain where the state space is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the transition probabilities are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There are two approaches to considering this in the nonstandard setting.
The methods both use shadow maps to obtain the standard objects.

##### Real Shadow Map

Consider the following extension to the @xmath -gamma chain given by
@xmath with state space @xmath ( @xmath ) and transition probabilities
as above but defined for all nonstandard natural numbers and @xmath and
@xmath . Special values of this chain exist for a prime @xmath and let
@xmath for some @xmath and consider the chain @xmath with @xmath . The
shadow map can be taken for all @xmath leading to transition
probabilities @xmath . The state space is @xmath . This is the @xmath
-adic gamma chain.

As a note consider the case when @xmath is not necessarily prime but
@xmath for some @xmath . The above holds as there was no use made of r
being prime. Taking the shadow map results in a chain @xmath . In
particular for @xmath then the resulting chain under the shadow map has
a harmonic measure consisting of harmonic measures relating to the
primes divisors of @xmath . (This follows from the basic results on
@xmath -adic numbers ( @xmath ) given by Mahler. These @xmath -gamma
chains are almost "handmade" rather than resulting from some natural
structure as in the @xmath -adic gamma chains ( [ Ha1 ] , chapter 4).

If instead one considers @xmath and considers a tree

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One can think of this chain as a @xmath -adic expansion with an edge
@xmath going to its @xmath pre-images in @xmath . The boundary is given
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath are the @xmath -adic integers as described in Mahler. ( [ M
] , chapter 5). These numbers have a decomposition as a direct sum of
the @xmath -adic integers with @xmath . On this boundary there is a
harmonic measure @xmath which can be decomposed as a direct sum of
@xmath for @xmath . This measure induces a unique chain on this tree.
Moreover the measure is invariant under the @xmath action and a quotient
chain is obtained. The structure of the chain is determined by the
number of distinct prime factors of @xmath . For example when @xmath is
prime the chain is the @xmath -adic gamma chain as in Haran. Explicit
examples can be easily given. I have yet to find any use for these
chains in the same way there is little use for general @xmath -adic
numbers compared to @xmath -adic numbers. These chains are different
from the ones arising from the shadow map, hence the term "handmade" for
the shadow map chains.

##### @xmath-adic Shadow Maps

The second approach to the gamma chains relies on the other shadow maps
of @xmath . Choose a nonstandard integer @xmath and consider the set
@xmath (a hyperfinite set of primes) and the product of primes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is a hyperfinite product.

###### Lemma 7.5.4.

For all @xmath there exists a non-unique @xmath such that for some
non-unique @xmath , @xmath which in particular is equivalent for
standard primes to @xmath .

Proof: Fix a set of @xmath simply by choosing a @xmath for each @xmath .
Then it is required to solve the system of equations @xmath . Since
@xmath for all distinct primes the Chinese remainder theorem in a
nonstandard setting can be used to obtain a solution @xmath . Any two
solutions of @xmath for a particular set of @xmath differ by a multiple
of @xmath . In particular for all standard primes @xmath and by taking
the @xmath -adic shadow map @xmath .

@xmath

The non-uniqueness needs to be considered and perhaps some form of
equivalence relation could be used but this will be dealt with later.
For the moment suppose some set @xmath has been fixed along with a
solution @xmath . For such a @xmath a hyper chain will be constructed
based on the @xmath -gamma chain. Take a state space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the transition probabilities let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In order for the shadow maps to be taken @xmath has to be an element of
@xmath for all standard @xmath and if the real shadow map is to be taken
then also for @xmath the real prime. As an initial investigation just
let @xmath . For these values of @xmath the @xmath -adic shadow map
acting on the chain leads to the @xmath -adic gamma chain with value
@xmath for all finite @xmath , since @xmath . Moreover for these values
of @xmath , @xmath and a chain is obtained which is the real gamma chain
(the unit shift chain to the right). So the initial nonstandard chain
leads to all the @xmath -gamma chains (for all standard primes and the
real prime) by an application of the respective shadow map.

The problem is, of course, the restrictive nature of the values of
@xmath . Suppose the set of values for @xmath is enlarged to contain
@xmath then the in general the @xmath -adic shadow maps cannot be taken
because @xmath is irrational. Suppose instead it is taken to be @xmath
then one obtains a chain based on a @xmath -adic number which is a
"handmade" chain for a @xmath -adic number instead of just real numbers
considered above. Even so their use appears limited meaning the
"maximal" set for beta is @xmath . Can a topology be put on chains in
order to look at sequences of chains?

The next option to consider is the transition probabilities as above but
with the enlargement of the state space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

My problem with this state space is taking the shadow map. For all
nonstandard @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The standard chain which results from the @xmath -adic shadow map
contains @xmath but also subsets of @xmath . At the moment I am unsure
of how this "fits in" with this chain.