##### Contents

-    Introduction
-    1 Algebraic part
    -    1.1 The Tits construction and symmetric pairs
    -    1.2 More structure on Jordan algebras
    -    1.3 Identifying the isotropy representations
    -    1.4 Constructing symmetric invariants
    -    1.5 Important identities and proofs of Lemmas 18 & 19
-    2 Geometric part
    -    2.1 Summary of the algebraic results
    -    2.2 @xmath structures and intrinsic torsion
    -    2.3 @xmath -geometries and their torsion
    -    2.4 @xmath -structures with characteristic torsion
    -    2.5 @xmath geometries with characteristic torsion
    -    2.6 Decompositions of two- and three-forms
    -    2.7 Locally reductive @xmath -geometries
    -    2.8 Proofs of Lemmas 34, 35 & 41

## Introduction

### Special geometries with characteristic torsion

It is common in differential geometry to express a specific geometric
structure on a manifold in terms of a reduction of the frame bundle to a
subbundle with some structure group @xmath ( @xmath being the dimension
of the manifold), i.e. a @xmath structure. Such a reduction naturally
distinguishes a class of compatible connections, namely those
connections on the frame bundle, which restrict to a connection on the
@xmath structure. We call the latter integrable iff it admits a
torsion-free compatible connection.

In particular, an @xmath structure is always integrable, with unique
torsion-free connection, namely the Levi-Civita connection of the
corresponding Riemannian metric. If we thus wish to reduce the
orthonormal frame bundle to a @xmath structure with @xmath we readily
notice that the latter is integrable iff the Levi-Civita connection is
compatible with respect to it. It then follows that integrability of a
@xmath structure implies reduction of the Riemannian holonomy group to a
subgroup of @xmath

Such reduced Riemannian holonomy groups are classified by the celebrated
Berger’s theorem, stating that the holonomy of an irreducible, simply
connected, and not (locally) symmetric Riemannian manifold is either the
entire special orthogonal group, or one of the groups corresponding to a
Calabi-Yau, Kähler, hyper-Kähler, quaternion-Kähler, @xmath or @xmath
structure. These are usually referred to as (integrable) special
Riemannian geometries and have been extensively studied (in the context
of holonomy) throughout last fifty years.

Willing to consider more general geometries, one needs to relax the
torsion triviality condition. Observe that the bundle @xmath the torsion
of a metric connection on a Riemannian manifold @xmath is a section of,
decomposes into @xmath irreducibles as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One thus sees that there are in general @xmath classes of metric
connections with respect to their torsion. In what follows, we shall
focus on @xmath structures admitting a compatible connection whose
torsion is completely skew, i.e. a section of @xmath

The first structures studied in this context where those present on
Berger’s list, and it is a common feature of these, that a @xmath
connection with skew torsion, provided it exists, is unique . It has
been thus called the characteristic connection, and its torsion tensor
(determining the connection itself) – the characteristic torsion.

Let us now return for a moment to a general @xmath structure on a
manifold @xmath Being able to describe @xmath as a stabilizer of certain
set of @xmath tensors, one can introduce the @xmath structure by means
of an analogous set of tensors on @xmath the subbundle is then defined
to consist of frames mapping the distinguished @xmath tensors into the
distinguished tensors on @xmath (point-wise).

To be specific, let us for the sake of simplicity assume that @xmath is
the stabilizer of a single tensor @xmath ; a @xmath structure on an
@xmath dimensional manifold @xmath is then defined by a tensor @xmath
such that (locally) in some adapted coframe @xmath one has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath The fibre above @xmath of the corresponding frame
subbundle is the set of frames @xmath such that @xmath The structure
group is clearly the stabilizer of @xmath i.e. @xmath Finally, the
compatible connections, viewed as connections in the tangent bundle, are
those with respect to which @xmath is parallel.

Proceeding again to the Riemannian case, with @xmath being the
orthogonal stabilizer of @xmath we easily see that the @xmath structure
is integrable iff @xmath is parallel with respect to the Levi-Civita
connection @xmath One is then tempted to ask whether a weaker condition
on @xmath would guarantee existence of a @xmath connection with skew
torsion. It is not difficult to check, as it has been noticed by
Nurowski [ 1 ] , that the existence of such a connection implies
vanishing of the symmetric part of the derivative ¹ ¹ 1 i.e. demanding
that @xmath be a Killing tensor. :

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

a condition we shall call the nearly-integrability of (the @xmath
-structure defined by) @xmath One may hope that the converse would also
hold in some cases (whether it does, is a purely algebraic question
referring to @xmath ). As only the symmetric part of @xmath enters the
latter equation, it is clear that we should restrict our attention to
symmetric tensors @xmath and their orthogonal stabilizers.

### Examples of geometries defined by a symmetric tensor

The simplest interesting example, thoroughly investigated by Bobienski
and Nurowski [ 2 ] , involves an irreducible @xmath structure on a
five-dimensional Riemannian manifold @xmath The authors first consider
the symmetric space @xmath and the corresponding symmetric pair:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The adjoint action of @xmath on @xmath defines an irreducible
5-dimensional representation of the group, which is moreover
self-adjoint, so that @xmath as @xmath modules via an invariant scalar
product @xmath

It can be further shown, that @xmath is the stabilizer of a tensor
@xmath satisfying the relation

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

where abstract index notation is assumed, together with the
identification of @xmath with its dual. ² ² 2 Equation ( 2 ) is
equivalent to demanding that the trivial representation of @xmath appear
only once in the decomposition of @xmath Since the representation is
irreducible, the tensor is also obviously required to satisfy @xmath

As it has been already described, one defines the @xmath structure by
means of a tensor @xmath on @xmath such that in a (local) adapted
coframe @xmath one has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Equivalently, one may simply demand that @xmath satisfy the analog of
equation ( 2 ) with respect to @xmath

One then finds that such five-dimensional @xmath geometries indeed
behave in the way we are looking for: nearly integrability of @xmath
(recall equation ( 1 )) implies existence of a compatible @xmath
connection with skew torsion, and the latter is moreover unique (that
is, characteristic) [ 2 ] .

It is now natural to ask, whether a similar setting can be found in
other dimensions. Guided by the defining identity on @xmath i.e.
equation ( 2 ), Nurowski checked that the latter can be satisfied for a
symmetric third-rank tensor exactly in four distinguished dimensions,
namely: 5, 8, 14 and 26 [ 1 ] . The corresponding symmetric spaces are:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

(all four appearing on Cartan’s list of irreducible symmetric Riemannian
spaces, cf. [ 3 , 4 ] ). The result of Nurowski is then that nearly
integrability implies existence of compatible connection with skew
torsion in dimensions 5, 8 and 14, while such a connection is unique in
dimensions 5, 14 and 26.

The next step would thus be to consider geometries modelled after other
symmetric spaces from Cartan’s list. These in particular include
symmetric spaces related to a construction known as the Magic Square of
Lie algebras, and investigation of corresponding special geometries is
the task proposed in [ 1 ] . As we shall soon see, there are three
families of such spaces, the first one being exactly ( 3 ). One may
expect the geometries modelled after all of these spaces to exhibit
similar properties regarding nearly integrability and characteristic
connection. ³ ³ 3 Actually, the problem of uniqueness of the
characteristic connection has been recently completely solved by Nagy [
5 ] .

### Freudenthal-Tits Magic Square and related symmetric spaces

The Magic Square of Lie algebras is an outcome of the constructions
developed by Freudenthal and Tits mainly in effort to provide a direct
construction of the exceptional groups. When performed over the reals,
the Tits construction yields algebras corresponding to the following
‘magic’ square of compact Lie groups:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

together with natural inclusions denoted by the arrows (the word ‘magic’
referring to the symmetry of the table, which is not explicit in its
original construction, see later).

Let us now consider the ‘quotient’ of the second column by the first one
(with respect to the inclusions), namely the homogeneous spaces:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Observe that these are exactly the spaces we have already considered in
context of a symmetric third rank tensor. Repeating this procedure for
the next pair of columns (2&3), we obtain spaces which are unfortunately
not irreducible: their isotropy representations possess a
one-dimensional invariant subspace. This can be resolved by augmenting
the subgroup by an extra @xmath so that the corresponding four spaces
are:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These are another four irreducible symmetric Riemmanian spaces from
Cartan’s list, and thus the second of three advertised families (the way
this extra @xmath sits in the groups is to be explained in the sequel).
Moreover, the generator of the additional @xmath defines a complex
structure making these symmetric spaces into Kähler manifolds.

Similar situation occurs for the last pair of columns (3&4). Here
however one has to add extra @xmath so that the third family cosists of
the following irreducible symmetric spaces ⁴ ⁴ 4 The product with @xmath
is taken with respect to the adjoint (i.e. isotropy) representation. In
fact, @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In this case the generators of the additional @xmath define a
quaternionic structure making these symmetric spaces into
quaternion-Kähler manifolds.

These are the three families of irreducible compact symmetric Riemannian
spaces. Nurowski [ 1 ] worked out the first one, and proposed the task
of investigating the next two:

  ‘It is interesting if all these geometries admit characteristic
  connection. Also, we do not know what objects in @xmath reduce the
  orthogonal groups @xmath to the above mentioned structure groups. Are
  these symmetric tensors as it was in the case of the groups @xmath
  [i.e. @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ]?’

We answer these questions and provide a systematic approach rooted in
the theory of Jordan algebras. ⁵ ⁵ 5 The problem of symmetric defining
invariants is addressed in a very original and self-contained way by
Cvitanović in his remarkable book on Group Theory [ 6 ] , where he also
discusses the Magic Square. While we do not use his approach and
results, we have to acknowledge that the latter work has been an
important source of inspiration. In particular, many of the technical
calculations contained in the present paper have been initially carried
using Cvitanović’s graphical notation, only later to be translated to
the conventional one.

### Overview

The work is split into two parts (chapters), which we have tried to make
possibly independent of each other.

The first one begins citing known results on Jordan algebras and the
Tits construction, providing the minimal theory needed to make sense of
the symmetric pairs corresponding to the spaces of our interest, fitting
them into a single structure. We then review some further constructions,
mainly due to Freudenthal, again introducing just the minimum set of
objects needed to describe the isotropy representations of the symmetric
spaces. Having the latter done, we finally find the symmetric invariants
giving the desired reductions (on a Lie-algebraic level) and prove some
of their properties.

The second part, building on the results outlined above, deals directly
with the main subject of the work, i.e. geometries related to the
symmetric spaces. We first summarize the results on isotropy
representations and the invariant tensors: we claim their existence and
properties they satisfy, in such a way that no reference to the
Jordan-related objects is needed. Then, we review the subject of
intrinsic torsion and characteristic torsion of @xmath -structures:
these results are known, but not particularily accessible in the
literature, so that we prove most of them, also in order to make the
reader familiar with the general setting. Finally, @xmath -geometries
are defined and their properties are investigated. Additionally, we
provide a classification of @xmath -geometries with characteristic
torsion and prove existence of naturally reductive examples, whose
characteristic torsion does not vanish.

The most important original results obtained in the present work are:

-   Proposition 3 , describing the isotropy representations.

-   Proposition 4 , describing symmetric invariants giving desired
    reductions.

-   Propositions 7 , 9 and 12 , expressing intrinsic torsion of @xmath
    -structures in terms of geometric data.

-   Propositions 10 and 13 , providing a geometric condition on
    existence of a natural (quaternion-)Kähler structure on the
    geometries.

-   Theorem 1 , stating the equivalence of nearly-integrability of the
    symmetric tensor defining a second-family geometry and existence of
    a characteristic connection.

-   Theorem 2 and Proposition 25 , providing a simple criterion for
    existence of naturally reductive examples with nontrivial
    characteristic torsion.

### Strominger’s superstrings with torsion

Having argued about the geometric significance of studying special
geometries with characteristic torsion, one should not overlook an
inspiring motivation coming from physics, found by Strominger in his
1986 paper [ 7 ] .

Strominger considers the geometric setting for compactification of the
common sector of type II Superstring Theory, i.e. a 6-dimensional spin
manifold @xmath equipped with a global nonvanishing spinor field @xmath
. In absence of Yang-Mills fields and with constant dilaton, the
conditions for @xmath to generate supersymmetry transformations read [ 7
]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----

where @xmath is the strength of the Kalb-Ramond @xmath -field, i.e. the
background field coupling to massless skew-symmetric excitations of the
string, and the dot indicates Clifford action of differential forms on
spinor fields ( @xmath moreover obeys certain integrability condition
involving the Riemannian curvature).

Strominger now introduces a tangent bundle connection @xmath whose
torsion is @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath In terms of this new connection, equation ( 4 ) reads
simply

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

i.e. @xmath is parallel with respect to @xmath . This in turn is
equivalent to a reduction of the holonomy ⁶ ⁶ 6 Indeed, existence of a
parallel spinor in dimension six implies holonomy reduction to @xmath .
In the conventional approach this condition is applied to the
Levi-Civita connection, leading to compactification on Calabi-Yau
threefolds. of @xmath to (a subgroup of) @xmath (in its @xmath
-dimensional representation, not to be confused with the @xmath
-dimensional one mentioned earlier). We thus end up with a @xmath
-structure with characteristic torsion, namely @xmath (indeed a
compatible connection with skew torsion for a @xmath -structure is
unique). Moreover, all further equations can be cast in terms of the
@xmath structure (i.e. an almost hermitian structure and a complex
@xmath -form), so that the latter describes both supersymmetry and the
@xmath -field [ 7 ] .

Thus, Strominger found that 6-dimensional backgrounds for supersymmetric
compactification are naturally described by @xmath -structures admitting
characteristic torsion. Just as a Yang-Mills field strength is
interpreted as the curvature of a connection on a principal bundle, the
Kalb-Ramond field strength is then identified with a torsion of the
unique connection associated with the @xmath -structure ⁷ ⁷ 7 A much
more elaborate approach to a geometric interpretation of the @xmath
field has been developed in the last decade in terms of gerbes with
connection [ 8 ] .

This development attracted the attention of mathematicians, who started
studying the problem of characteristic torsion, parallel spinors and
relation of torsion to curvature, initially for @xmath -structures
related to Berger’s classical list of irreducible Riemannian holonomies
(see [ 9 ] and references therein). In the present work we address only
the question of characteristic torsion. Moreover, one should note that
the dimensions of the geometries we wish to investigate situate them
rather remotely from the usual area of interest of fundamental theories.
⁸ ⁸ 8 Nevertheless, the homogeneous spaces related to the Magic Square
also find their place in supergravity-related physics [ 10 , 11 ] ,
although without direct relation to the characteristic torsion problem.

### Conventions

All the vector spaces and algebras considered in this work are over the
reals, unless stated otherwise. All manifolds and maps are assumed to be
smooth. Stating general results, we shall often use @xmath as a generic
@xmath -dimensional vector space, possibly equipped with a generic
positive definite scalar product @xmath .

We will often make use of the abstract index notation [ 12 ] , using
various sets of letters to index both spaces and tensors, so that a
homomorphism of vector spaces @xmath can be written as @xmath while its
contraction with a vector @xmath is @xmath These indices never refer to
any specific frame. They are simply labels, which do not assume any
(numerical) values.

Most of the spaces we deal with are equipped with a symmetric scalar
product, and we explicitly declare that the latter is used to identify a
space with its dual. Accordingly, has such an identification been
performed, the position of indices becomes irrelevant. The map @xmath
given as an example above is then written @xmath and as such it needn’t
be distinguished from the adjoint @xmath (of course if we have
identified @xmath and @xmath ).

We will often encounter tensors @xmath with @xmath Then by @xmath where
@xmath we mean @xmath and the order of the vectors @xmath is contracted
with does matter (unless @xmath is symmetric). We sometimes use also
partial application as in

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which means

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in this very order (i.e. the components of a tensor product are
contracted from the left).

Being given a group @xmath with a Lie algebra @xmath we denote both the
action of @xmath and @xmath on arbitrary tensor products of @xmath and
@xmath simply by @xmath and @xmath where @xmath and @xmath This should
be clarified by the example of @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Whether a map is to be considered as acting via a group action, or Lie
algebra action, should be clear from context. An exception is e.g. a
complex structure, which can be viewed both as an orthogonal map, and as
spanning a @xmath algebra: in this case, we shall by default assume the
group action.

Special indexing conventions are introduced for spaces that are to be
considered over @xmath These are described in Remark 1 , which shall be
recalled explicitly whenever needed.

Finally, being given a manifold @xmath we will also use letters to index
tensor products of @xmath and @xmath (being identified when a metric
tensor is given). This is extended to the @xmath -modules of
tangent-bundle-valued differential forms, so that for example a local
metric connection form can be written as @xmath

### Acknowledgements

I would like to thank my supervisor, Pawel Nurowski, for suggesting the
subject of my research, introducing me into the field, his assistance,
help and sharing his knowledge and experience with me throughout nearly
two years of our cooperation. In particular, his critical remarks were
important for the form of the present paper.

At the early stage I benefited from discussions with A. Rod Gover, who
spent numerous hours patiently listening to my exposition of some of the
initial results I obtained in the first months of 2007.

In autumn 2007 I had the opportunity to give a talk to the group of Ilka
Agricola and Thomas Friedrich at HU Berlin. I am grateful for their
hospitality, support and valuable remarks. In particular, Ilka Agricola
made me aware of her lecture notes [ 13 ] containing a comprehensive
presentation of the general theory of @xmath -structures with skew
torsion.

Finally, I would like to thank Andrzej Trautman, both for agreeing to
write a review of my thesis and, even more importantly, for the
beautiful lectures he gave each year in Warsaw. The latter, unique for
their clarity and elegance, were a major influence on my interest in
differential geometry.

## Chapter 1 Algebraic part

### 1.1 The Tits construction and symmetric pairs

The construction of Magic Square ¹ ¹ 1 Interesting generalisations can
be found in [ 14 , 6 ] algebras given by Tits [ 15 ] produces a Lie
algebra out of two basic ‘building blocks’: a normed division algebra,
i.e. @xmath or @xmath and a Jordan algebra of 3x3 hermitian matrices
with entries in a second normed division algebra. Eventually thus, it
gives a Lie algebra for every pair of normed division algebras, fitting
into a 4x4 table with rows and columns labelled by @xmath and @xmath

We shall first introduce the usual algebraic structures on
aforementioned ‘building blocks’ (in particular, their automorphism
groups and derivation algebras), whose combination will – in a fairly
natural way – lead to a Lie algebra structure on the outcome of Tits’
construction.

All algebras and representations used in this section are to be
considered over the reals.

#### 1.1.1 Four normed division algebras @xmath

As a warm-up we will now recall some well-known facts which hold in
general for all the four algebras (see e.g. [ 16 , 17 ] ). Although
these are rather obvious, we expose them quite carefully to show that
analogous structure appears in the Jordan case. As the octonions are the
most complex, with their noncommutativity and nonassociativity, it is
useful to have this algebra in mind when reading subsequent statements.
For their simpler subalgebras, some terms and spaces become trivial,
however the formulas, given in their most general form, are still
correct.

We thus let @xmath be one of the four algebras: @xmath and @xmath We
introduce the commutator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

nontrivial for the quaternions and octonions, and the associator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

nontrivial only for the octonions (where alternativity of the latter
implies that the associator is antisymmetric in its three arguments).

These maps are useful when describing the automorphism group @xmath i.e.
a subgroup of @xmath preserving the product. Its Lie algebra, the
derivations @xmath i.e. a subalgebra of maps in @xmath satisfying the
Leibniz rule, is then made accessible by the following Lemma (see [ 16 ]
for a proof):

###### Lemma 1.

Let us introduce a map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then the algebra @xmath is exactly the image of @xmath Moreover, @xmath
is equivariant with respect to @xmath

The automorphism groups are found to be [ 17 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

More structure on @xmath is provided by a natural trace, namely the real
part @xmath Combined with the product, it gives rise to a positive
definite scalar product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One can decompose @xmath into the real line, spanned by the unit, and
its orthogonal complement, namely the imaginary subspace (trivial for
the reals):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is then easy to check that:

###### Lemma 2.

The automorphisms @xmath preserve the scalar product and the
decomposition ( 1.1 ), acting irreducibly on @xmath

Observe moreover, that the map @xmath is nontrivial only on @xmath
Finally, it is convenient to introduce an antisymmetric product on the
imaginary subspace, being simply a restriction of the usual one:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Clearly, this map is also preserved by the automorphisms of @xmath

#### 1.1.2 Four Jordan algebras @xmath

Jordan algebras emerged in an attempt to axiomatize the properties of
hermitian operators representing observables in quantum mechanics. While
the original program turned out to be unsuccessful, it was realized that
these algebras are interesting in their own right, allowing a rich
theory as somewhat a counterpart of Lie algebras [ 18 , 19 ] . Indeed,
they are characterized by a commutative product satisfying an identity
which may be thought of as playing a role analogous to that of the
Jacobi identity for a Lie bracket:

###### Definition 1.

A commutative (yet possibly not associative) algebra @xmath is called
Jordan iff for arbitrary two elements @xmath the following holds:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular, the algebras of @xmath by @xmath hermitian matrices with
entries in either the reals, complex numbers or quaternions, equipped
with anticommutator as the product, are Jordan. The three infinite
families are denoted @xmath and @xmath For the octonions, however, there
is only a single one, called the exceptional Jordan algebra, or Albert
algebra, namely @xmath

In what follows we will only use 3x3 matrices, so that a corresponding
Jordan algebra exists for all four normed division algebras. Let thus
@xmath be one of @xmath and @xmath We define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

together with a product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the right hand side features usual matrix multiplication. We then
have:

###### Lemma 3 (Jordan [20]).

The algebra @xmath is Jordan.

We shall now follow the way we used to describe the algebra @xmath
itself. We thus begin with the automorphism group @xmath and its Lie
algebra, the derivations @xmath For the latter, we again have a
convenient map, denoted with a slight abuse of notation by the same
letter:

###### Lemma 4 (cf. [19]).

Let us introduce a map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then the algebra @xmath is exactly the image of @xmath Moreover, @xmath
is equivariant with respect to @xmath

The automorphism groups are found to be [ 21 , 22 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

More structure on @xmath is given by a natural trace, namely the usual
matrix trace @xmath Combined with the product, it gives rise to a
positive definite scalar product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Multiplication in the algebra is then symmetric with respect to the
scalar product:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One can decompose @xmath into the real line, spanned by the unit, and
its orthogonal complement, namely the traceless subspace:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath One then finds that:

###### Lemma 5.

The automorphisms @xmath preserve the scalar product and the
decomposition ( 1.2 ), acting irreducibly on @xmath

Observe moreover, that the map @xmath is nontrivial only on @xmath
Finally, it is convenient to introduce a symmetric product on the
traceless subspace, being simply a restriction of the usual one:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Clearly, this map is also preserved by the automorphisms of @xmath

#### 1.1.3 The Magic Square of Lie algebras

We are now ready to construct the Magic Square. As the algebras to be
constructed are parametrized by a pair of normed division algebras, let
us introduce two symbols, @xmath and @xmath allowing each of them to be
one of @xmath and @xmath

Taking @xmath and @xmath as our building blocks, we can form the product
algebra @xmath The automorphism group of the latter is simply the
product of @xmath and @xmath so that the corresponding derivation
algebra is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recalling the decompositions of @xmath and @xmath we have in particular
the largest irreducible subspace @xmath Let us consider the direct sum
of the derivation algebra and its irreducible module:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Our aim will be to equip the latter with a Lie algebra structure. We
keep @xmath as a subalgebra with its original Lie bracket. Its action on
the module provides the mixed bracket:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath and @xmath

We still need a bracket of two elements of @xmath Recalling the
structure introduced so far, one sees that there are three natural
(equivariant w.r.t. the derivations) maps form @xmath to @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and the most general derivation-equivariant bracket is a linear
combination thereof. The factors are determined by demanding that the
Jacobi identity be satisfied, so that finally we arrive at the following

###### Lemma 6 (Tits [15], cf. [23]).

The space @xmath becomes a Lie algebra with the bracket defined by:

1.   The natural bracket on @xmath

2.   Equation ( 1.3 ) for an element of @xmath and an element of @xmath

3.   The following bracket for two elements @xmath and @xmath of @xmath

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (1.4)
      -- -------- -- -------

The outcome of this procedure is summarized in the following

###### Proposition 1 (Tits [15]).

The algebras @xmath are isomorphic (over the reals) to the ones in the
table, with columns indexed by @xmath and rows by @xmath

           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath

Two remarks have to be made in this place. First, the algebras in the
square appear in their compact form, an important virtue of Tits’
construction. Second, as we have warned before, certain parts of the
construction become trivial for @xmath being @xmath or @xmath In
particular, we have @xmath and @xmath so that simply @xmath

#### 1.1.4 Cayley-Dickson and induced decompositions

We shall now recall the Cayley-Dickson decomposition of the complex
numbers, quaternions and octonions, namely:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and check that, when applied to @xmath they naturally lead to
decompositions of the magic square algebras @xmath into symmetric pairs.
Let us then from now on assume @xmath One easily checks that the
Cayley-Dickson construction defines a @xmath grading on @xmath that is:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and moreover @xmath and @xmath are orthogonal with respect
to @xmath whenever @xmath

Using the latter and Lemma 1 , we can decompose the derivation algebra
of @xmath into a symmetric pair:

###### Lemma 7.

Let us define

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -- -- -------
           (1.6)
  -- -- -- -------

where @xmath

###### Proof.

Using the formula for @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which implies ( 1.6 ). Then, using equivariance of @xmath ( 1.5 )
follows immediately. Now, since @xmath is the image of @xmath under
@xmath it is clear that @xmath It remains to check that the intersection
of these spaces is zero. But that already follows from ( 1.6 ). ∎

We are now interested in identifying the algebras @xmath Note first,
that it is a property of the Cayley-Dickson construction, that every
element of the even subspace may be represented as a product of two
elements of the odd subspace – thus the representation of @xmath on
@xmath is necessarily faithful ² ² 2 Indeed, assume that @xmath acts
trivially on @xmath . Then it acts trivially on entire @xmath and thus
@xmath . and there exists an injective homomorphism @xmath In fact, one
finds that it is also surjective:

###### Lemma 8.

@xmath

###### Proof.

Trivial for @xmath and straightforward for @xmath with @xmath generated
by @xmath

The octonionic case, however, is more involved. As @xmath we shall
construct two homomorphisms form @xmath to @xmath and check that they
combine into an isomorphism from @xmath to @xmath

To this end, we consider the usual Lie algebra @xmath of imaginary
quaternions with the commutator as a bracket. This algebra acts with
left and right multiplications on @xmath preserving the decomposition (
@xmath is some imaginary octonion orthogonal @xmath ). This gives rise
to four irreducible four-dimensional, and necessarily equivalent,
representations of the algebra, namely:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath There in particular exists an orthogonal intertwiner of left
multiplications

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath and @xmath Orthogonality implies @xmath

We now define the maps

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath      @xmath   
     @xmath      @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

One readily checks that each of these is a Lie algebra homomorphism and
that @xmath commutes with @xmath for @xmath (this is because left and
right multiplications commute, and @xmath is left-equivariant). It is
also clear that the kernel of @xmath is trivial. Thus we find that
@xmath is an injective Lie algebra homomorphism from @xmath to @xmath
Moreover, the elements of its image explicitly preserve the
decomposition @xmath

The last step is to show that @xmath and @xmath for @xmath are
derivations (for the moment we write the first argument in a subscript).
We have to check the Leibniz formula patiently for the products @xmath
@xmath and @xmath where @xmath The first case is obvious (clearly,
@xmath and @xmath restricted to @xmath are derivations of the
quaternions). Evaluating the next one, we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

To handle expressions like @xmath we use the orthogonality of @xmath and
multiply equation ( 1.7 ) with @xmath on the right and @xmath on the
left to obtain @xmath Then, setting @xmath we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can now check the following:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This way we have checked that the image of @xmath is indeed in @xmath
Finally then, there is an injective homomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and thus an isomorphism. ∎

The maps @xmath and @xmath will be used once again in the sequel, so let
us mention them in a separate

###### Corollary 1.

There is an isomorphism of Lie algebras

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath have been introduced in the proof of Lemma 8 .
When restricted to @xmath the image of @xmath is @xmath while @xmath is
trivial.

#### 1.1.5 Symmetric pairs related to the Magic Square

Let us recall the definition of our magic square algebras:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where, as before, @xmath We can now apply the Cayley-Dickson and induced
decompositions to @xmath and @xmath in the latter formula, and try to
group the resulting subspaces into a symmetric pair. A natural candidate
for the latter is easily found, and we have the following

###### Lemma 9.

The decomposition @xmath with

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath            @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

yields a symmetric pair.

###### Proof.

Let us for the sake of brevity omit @xmath writing simply @xmath and
@xmath What has to be checked is that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note first, that @xmath commutes with @xmath and acts only on the @xmath
factor in @xmath so we already have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The other conditions basically follow from Lemma 7 . Indeed, the latter
implies that @xmath is itself a symmetric pair. Moreover, as @xmath
preserves the Cayley-Dickson decomposition, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore, as @xmath maps @xmath into @xmath we have @xmath Using (
1.4 ), the definitions of Lemma 7 and orthogonality of the
Cayley-Dickson decomposition, we also find that @xmath Combining these
gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We finally have to check the @xmath bracket. Recalling that @xmath is in
the odd subalgebra of the derivations, and that it maps @xmath to @xmath
we have @xmath Using ( 1.4 ) once again, we also find that @xmath Thus
we have checked that @xmath which completes the proof. ∎

What we claim now, is that the pairs @xmath are exactly the ones
corresponding to the symmetric spaces described in the introduction.
Recall, that we wanted the subgroups in the three families to be,
respectively, those of the first column, those of the second column
times an additional @xmath and those of the third column times an
additional @xmath We will first show that the algebras @xmath are indeed
of this form.

###### Proposition 2.

There are isomorphisms of Lie algebras:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

###### Proof.

In the first case, we have immediately @xmath In the second one, we
recall that @xmath is generated by @xmath and thus preserves @xmath It
then follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with the rightmost expression being a direct sum of Lie algebras.
Finally, in the last case, we recall from corollary 1 , that @xmath with
the first @xmath acting on @xmath as the derivations @xmath and the
other one – trivially. We then have

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

with the rightmost expression being again a direct sum of Lie algebras.
∎

Our next goal is to describe the adjoint representations of @xmath on
@xmath showing, in particular, that they are faithful and irreducible.
It will then turn out, that the connected subgroups of @xmath resulting
from exponentiating the adjoint representation of @xmath are indeed the
magic square groups (admitting a nice description in terms of
invariants), possibly augmented by an additional @xmath or @xmath
corresponding to a complex or quaternionic structure on @xmath

### 1.2 More structure on Jordan algebras

Before we can perform what has just been indicated, we need to introduce
some further structure on the Jordan algebras @xmath and their related
Freudenthal Triple Systems (FTS, to be defined).

#### 1.2.1 The determinant and Freudenthal product on @xmath

If the dimension of a (commutative) algebra is finite, it is clear that
subsequent powers of an element of the algebra cannot be linearily
independent. Instead, they satisfy a characteristic equation, polynomial
in the element of the algebra. In case of the algebras of our interest,
@xmath the characteristic equation is of degree three:

###### Lemma 10 (cf. [21, 18]).

There exist natural maps @xmath respectively linear, quadratic and
cubic, such that for each @xmath the following holds:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

They may be expressed using the product and trace, as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The cubic form @xmath is usually referred to as the norm . One can
however check, that for all four @xmath it exactly conincides with the
matrix determinant, and we will use this more familiar notion in the
sequel. To avoid explaining the subtleties of an octonionic determinant
and proving the identity, we simply define the symbol @xmath using the
formula given in the Lemma:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath

We are now naturally interested in the isotropy groups of the
determinant. These are related to what is called the structure alebra
@xmath namely the Lie algebra generated by all multiplications

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath

Recalling Lemma 4 , one has @xmath and naturally @xmath for a derivation
@xmath It thus follows, that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath Multiplications by multiples of identity generate the
centre, and one can decompose @xmath where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath The latter is called the reduced structure algebra of @xmath

Exponentiating these algebras to connected subgroups of @xmath one
obtains respectively the structure group @xmath and reduced structure
group @xmath with @xmath We then have:

###### Lemma 11 (cf. [22, 21, 23]).

The stabilizer of the map @xmath in @xmath is precisely the reduced
structure group @xmath

These groups are found to be ³ ³ 3 Wangberg [ 24 ] interestingly argues,
that in certain sense @xmath “ @xmath ”. [ 22 , 21 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

(recall that @xmath is the group of quaternionic matrices with the
quaternionic determinant equal one, so that their Lie algebra @xmath
consists of matrices with vanishing real part of the trace). Note that
these are non-compact forms of the second column of the magic square
algebras.

Another incarnation of the natural cubic form, useful in formulas, is
the symmetric Freudenthal product,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath together with a corresponding multiplication map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and a quadratic map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Expressing the latter using powers of @xmath and their traces, and
comparing with the formulae of Lemma 10 , one finds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 1.2.2 Fts @xmath and the triple product.

Freudenthal [ 25 , 26 , 27 , 28 ] originally constructed the group
@xmath as the automorphism group of certain algebraic object, namely the
space @xmath equipped with a symmetric triple product, mapping three
elements of the space to a fourth one and satisfying certain identities
with respect to a natural symplectic form on this space. This
construction has been extended in many ways (see [ 29 , 30 , 31 , 32 ]
). We shall be interested in four FTS associated with the four Jordan
algebras @xmath (where the case @xmath corresponds to the original
construction).

Let us thus define the space of the FTS associated with @xmath to be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and equip it with a natural symplectic form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath

Next, we introduce a quartic map @xmath such that for

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath one has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The symmetric triple product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is then defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath

We are now interested in the automorphism groups @xmath defined to be
the ones preserving both the symplectic form @xmath and triple product
@xmath so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath and @xmath The corresponding Lie algebra, called the
derivations @xmath is given by the following

###### Lemma 12 (cf. [23, 25]).

The derivations of the FTS @xmath are the following subspace of @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the maps

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as operators on @xmath

###### Sketch of a Proof.

This form of the derivation algebra of @xmath is usually presented for
@xmath as a construction of the exceptional algebra @xmath However, the
same reasoning works equally well for @xmath Indeed, let us write a
generic element of @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath @xmath and @xmath where @xmath is a basis in @xmath
consisting of matrices with one nonzero element. Then, expanding the
equation

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and expressing @xmath as in ( 1.9 ), one can solve it using the fact
that a general map in @xmath stabilizing @xmath is @xmath for @xmath
@xmath and its conjugate w.r.t. @xmath is @xmath A general solution
turns out to be the one given in the Lemma. One then checks, that it
also preserves @xmath and thus is a derivation. Conversely, every
derivation, preserving @xmath and @xmath must also preserve @xmath ∎

The argument we have just sketched leads to the following

###### Corollary 2 (cf. [23]).

The stabilizer of the map @xmath in @xmath is precisely the automorphism
group @xmath

These groups are found to be [ 33 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Note that these are non-compact forms of the third column of magic
square algebras.

For later use, we also equip @xmath with a scalar product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath

### 1.3 Identifying the isotropy representations

We have so far encountered three families of isotropy groups for certain
structures, namely: Jordan algebra automorphisms @xmath stabilizer of
the determinant @xmath and FTS automorphisms @xmath While the first
family forms exactly the first column of the magic square, the other two
are non-compact forms of the second and third column. In what follows,
we shall construct their compact forms in terms of unitary defining
representations.

We will need the following simple fact:

###### Lemma 13.

Let @xmath be a real vector space equipped with a scalar product @xmath
and @xmath a semisimple Lie algebra acting irreducibly on @xmath . The
scalar product gives rise to a decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

corresponding to @xmath

Consider now the complexification @xmath equipped with a hermitian inner
product given by a sesquilinear extension of @xmath , as well as the
complexification of the algebra, @xmath Let now

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

be the antihermitian subalgebra of @xmath Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and is the compact real form of @xmath It moreover acts
complex-irreducibly on @xmath

###### Proof.

The form of @xmath follows simply from the consideration of @xmath where
first two summands are antihermitian, while the other two – hermitian.
Moreover, being a semisimple subalgebra of the compact algebra @xmath ,
@xmath is compact.

Finally, assume that there is a complex subspace of @xmath preserved by
@xmath The subspace is necessarily of the form @xmath with @xmath . An
element @xmath maps @xmath to @xmath while @xmath maps the same to
@xmath Clearly, @xmath for each @xmath Hence, @xmath is fixed by the
original @xmath But then @xmath is either empty of @xmath Thus @xmath is
irreducible. ∎

Our isotropy represntations will turn out to be described by the
following spaces:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where @xmath and @xmath are complex vector spaces equipped with
hermitian inner products being sesquilinear extensions of the scalar
products on, respectively, @xmath and @xmath defined in the previous
sections. The spcae @xmath is moreover equipped with a symplectic form
being the linear extension of @xmath The interesting algebras acting on
these spaces are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are the antihermitian subalgebras of,
respectively, @xmath and @xmath as described in Lemma 13 .

Using the Lemma and examining (anti)symmetry of elements of algebras
defined in the previous section, we have the explicit forms:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the maps @xmath and @xmath of Lemma 12 have been extended by
linearity.

We now exponentiate @xmath , @xmath , to obtain connected subgroups
@xmath . In particular, @xmath and @xmath are compact forms of the ones
described in the previous section, as given in the following table:

  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  -------- -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We now arrive at the main point of this section:

###### Proposition 3.

The isotropy representations of the magic square symmetric spaces are
extensions of those of @xmath on @xmath with @xmath in, respectively,
first, second and third family, i.e.:

1.   There exist isomorphisms (respectively of Lie algebras and of
    vector spaces)

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    such that, for each @xmath and @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.   There exist isomorphisms (respectively of Lie algebras and of
    vector spaces)

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    such that, for each @xmath and @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Moreover, as Lie algebras,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Once we use @xmath to identify @xmath with @xmath a generator @xmath
    of this extra @xmath acts on @xmath as @xmath In other words, it
    defines a complex (hermitian) structure, with respect to which
    @xmath

3.   There exist isomorphisms (respectively of Lie algebras and of
    vector spaces)

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    such that, for each @xmath and @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Moreover, as Lie algebras,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Once we use @xmath to identify @xmath with @xmath the generators
    @xmath of this extra @xmath act on @xmath as @xmath given explicitly
    by:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.12)
      -- -------- -- --------

    In other words, they define a quaternionic (hermitian) structure,
    with respect to which @xmath

###### Corollary 3.

1.   The adjoint representation

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    is faithful and irreducible.

2.   Let @xmath be the connected subgroup of @xmath obtained by
    exponentiation of the image of @xmath under the adjoint
    representation on @xmath Let us moreover identify @xmath with @xmath
    using @xmath with @xmath for, respectively, @xmath Then:

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    where the @xmath is generated by the natural complex structure on
    @xmath and the @xmath is generated by the natural quaternionic
    structure (induced by @xmath and the hermitian inner product) on
    @xmath

The rest of this section is devoted to proving the Proposition (and may
be skipped by the inpatient reader). We first need to complete the
discussion of @xmath started in Lemma 8 . Recall that in Corollary 1 we
have stated that the subalgebra @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath via the
maps @xmath and @xmath To parametrize @xmath we introduce for each
@xmath a map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath

Recall that @xmath maps @xmath to @xmath The action on @xmath is given
in a useful form by the following

###### Lemma 14.

Let @xmath be orthogonal unit imaginary quaternions. Then for @xmath the
following holds:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

###### Proof.

First, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used the alternativity of @xmath (i.e. antisymmetry of the
associator, equivalent to @xmath ) and the fact that elements of @xmath
anticommute with elements of @xmath Then, we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we used the fact that orthogonal imaginary quaternions
anticommute, and checked explicitly that @xmath for @xmath This proves
the Lemma. ∎

It is clear that the maps @xmath @xmath and @xmath cannot be
independent. Indeed, one can check that @xmath (note that the map @xmath
is quadratic in @xmath so that the latter sum is simply a polarised
version of @xmath evaluated on the @xmath -invariant quadratic element).
We choose two combinations of @xmath and @xmath , adapted to the goal of
constructing the intertwiner @xmath

###### Lemma 15.

Let us define two maps @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a bijection.

The proof is by direct calculation with help of computer algebra.
Finally, the adjoint action of @xmath on @xmath is given by the
following

###### Lemma 16.

Let us use @xmath to identify @xmath with @xmath Then the adjoint action
of @xmath on @xmath is:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and, for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let us compute the commutator of @xmath and @xmath for @xmath being unit
imaginary quaternions:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we used the equivariance of @xmath and the identity @xmath In
particular,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The commutator of @xmath and @xmath is simply

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This proves the Lemma. ∎

We are now ready to prove the Proposition.

###### Proof of Proposition 3.

We first notice, that it is enough to check the intertwining property

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

– then the fact that @xmath is an isomorphism between the vector spaces
of two faithful representations already implies that @xmath is an
isomorphism of Lie algebras.

In the first family, the algebra is @xmath and the representation space
is @xmath On the other hand, since @xmath is trivial, we have @xmath
which is naturally identified with @xmath and @xmath The maps @xmath and
@xmath can be simply set to identity, and point 1 of the Proposition
follows.

In the second family, the algebra is @xmath and the representation space
is @xmath On the other hand, since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The subspace @xmath is @xmath We now define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath and @xmath where @xmath

Now, we check that, for @xmath @xmath and @xmath where @xmath the
intertwining property holds:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

It remains to notice that the the generator of the remaining subspace
@xmath namely @xmath acts as multiplication by @xmath in @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Thus point 2 of the Proposition follows.

In the third family, the algebra is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the representation space is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand, we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the derivations are identified with certain quaternionic spaces:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

To relate the latter spaces to the former ones, we note that the space
@xmath becomes an irreducible left @xmath module with the action
assigning to @xmath an operator @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As its dimension is four, there exists an intertwiner

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath where @xmath is the left multiplication by @xmath in @xmath

As the reader may expect, @xmath will relate the @xmath factor in @xmath
to the quaternionic factors in @xmath One also needs to note that the
@xmath spaces on the FTS side must be decomposed into @xmath as the Tits
construction features only the traceless subspaces. Clearly, the traces
are then to be identified with certain elements of @xmath

It is convenient to identify the two representation spaces with an
intermediate one, namely @xmath so that we have the isomorphisms

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath where @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath and @xmath We define the intertwiner to be their composition,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, for @xmath where @xmath and @xmath in the same manner, and @xmath
we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Clearly, the image of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that @xmath

To check the intertwining property, we must find the action of both
@xmath and @xmath on @xmath (via the identifications @xmath ) and show
that they agree.

As the action on the FTS side contains the maps @xmath and @xmath on
@xmath we have to decompose them with respect to @xmath and express in
terms of @xmath the multiplication map corresponding to the product
@xmath Recalling @xmath and using the defining indentity for @xmath
(Lemma 10 ), we find that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath Now, regarding the expressions on the r.h.s as elements of
@xmath we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath and @xmath where @xmath and @xmath

Using these formulas and the definitions of @xmath and @xmath we find
that the element

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

corresponds via @xmath to the following operator on @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We now have to find the action of the image of @xmath under @xmath
namely

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

an element of @xmath while @xmath is identified with @xmath via @xmath

Acting with the @xmath part is easy, as we have already found all the
necessary formulas while discussing the octonionic derivations in the
present section. We still need to compute the following commutator in
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for @xmath @xmath and @xmath a unit imaginary quaternion. Having all
that done, we arrive at precisely the same operator as in ( 1.3 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as claimed.

Finally, we need to check the action of the remaining @xmath on @xmath
Using once again the formulas for octonionic derivations, we find that
@xmath acts on @xmath via

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the right multiplication map on the quaternions.

Thus the corresponding algebra @xmath acting on @xmath is generated by
three complex structures, which we choose to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

These can be brought to the form demanded by the Proposition once the
intertwiner @xmath is set to:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then we indeed have, for @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Compared with the formulas for the inner product and symplectic form,
this completes the proof. ∎

### 1.4 Constructing symmetric invariants

Now that we have found that the isotropy representations of our
symmetric spaces are in fact the natural representations of certain
automorphism or isotropy groups (up to complexification), extended by
the action of a natural complex or quaternionic structure, we can get
the symmetric invariants almost for free.

While the situation is clear in case of the first family, the spaces

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of other two families can be viewed either over @xmath or over @xmath .
Since we will ultimately be dealing with real geometry, the next lemma
and proposition are referring to the real vector spaces @xmath (although
the proofs will in turn utilize the complex point of view). These are
naturally equipped with a positive-definite scalar product, denoted in
both cases by @xmath and defined as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath This is the scalar product the word ‘orthogonal’ will be
referring to. The spaces @xmath are moreover left @xmath modules, with
the action of a quaternion @xmath being @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are the maps defined in point 3 of Proposition 3 .

Observe that the problem is to turn the invariants of @xmath into maps
invariant under the action of the complex or quaternionic structure.
This is fairly simple in the second family. The same task for the third
family invariants is fulfilled with help of the following lemma, which
produces an @xmath equivariant tensor on @xmath from a symmetric tensor
on @xmath

###### Lemma 17.

Given a tensor @xmath define the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to be the dual, with respect to the natural scalar products, of the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath where @xmath and @xmath

Then @xmath is equivariant in the following sense:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and @xmath We have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the natural scalar product on @xmath (induced by
the one on @xmath ). Nondegeneracy of the latter implies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is dual to @xmath with respect to the scalar product. ∎

Finally, the invariants defining @xmath are given by the following

###### Proposition 4.

Let us identify @xmath with @xmath where @xmath for, respectively,
@xmath as in Corollary 3 ; consider all of them as real vector spaces.
Let @xmath be some nonzero constants (introduced to simplify further
formulas). Then:

1.  @xmath is the isotropy group of the tensor

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for @xmath

2.  @xmath is a connected component of the orthogonal isotropy group of
    the tensor

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for @xmath where @xmath and @xmath

3.  @xmath is a connected component of the orthogonal isotropy group of
    the tensor

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for @xmath where @xmath is the natural norm on @xmath (induced by
    the scalar product) and @xmath is defined as in Lemma 17 .

The rest of this section is occupied by the proof. We first need to set
up some notation.

###### Remark 1.

Consider on @xmath and @xmath a complex structure given by
multiplication by @xmath in the @xmath factor. (corresponding on @xmath
to @xmath defined in point 3 of Proposition 3 ). In the following, it
will be the distinguished complex structure on these spaces, the terms
complex-linear and antilinear refer to.

Let us from now on assume @xmath and @xmath to be fixed. The (complex)
space of complex-valued oneforms on @xmath decomposes into the
complex-linear and antilinear part, which we denote using, respectively,
@xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

One extends the decomposition to complex-valued alternating and
symmetric forms, so that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the elements of @xmath (resp. @xmath ) are alternating (resp.
symmetric) forms expressed as sums of expressions linear in @xmath and
antilinear in @xmath arguments. We shall make use of the natural
isomorphisms

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

defined as orthogonal projections in @xmath

The duals to @xmath and @xmath are the genuinely complex spaces @xmath
and @xmath and there is a complex-linear isomorphism @xmath and an
anti-isomorphism @xmath i.e. complex conjugation. One can view @xmath
(resp. @xmath ) as the space of linear (resp. antilinear) maps from
@xmath to @xmath .

The hermitian inner product on @xmath is represented by a tensor @xmath
inverse to @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and defines isomorphisms @xmath and @xmath We now introduce the abstract
index notation with lower latin indices @xmath indexing copies of @xmath
and unbarred and barred greek indices, resp. @xmath and @xmath ,
indexing copies of resp. @xmath and @xmath Upper indices of the same
kind naturally index dual spaces. Greek indices corresponding to latin
ones denote subspaces. In this manner, the real scalar product @xmath
defined previously, is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Via the scalar product, we have @xmath so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular, @xmath The hermitian product @xmath and the inverse
@xmath are used to lower and raise indices. The generator of @xmath
corresponding to the complex structure is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On @xmath there is moreover a distinguished two-form, denoted by slight
abuse of notation by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a linear extension of the symplectic form @xmath on
@xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath The subgroup of @xmath
preserving @xmath is @xmath with the Lie algebra @xmath consisting of
maps @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath

In general, @xmath defines an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The complex structures of Proposition 3 are @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath itself satisfies @xmath These three generate the @xmath

We can now start proving the Proposition.

###### Proof of points 1 & 2 of Proposition 4.

1.  In the first family, the group @xmath is simply @xmath acting in the
    natural way on @xmath Now, the automorphisms of @xmath automatically
    preserve the trace, the latter decomposition and the scalar product
    on both @xmath and @xmath They moreover act faithfully on the latter
    space. It thus follows that they are the isotropy group of the cubic
    form @xmath on @xmath or – equivalently – of the cubic form @xmath
    on @xmath But the latter is, up to the constant @xmath the tensor
    @xmath

2.  In the second family, we consider a rescaled linear extension of the
    determinant,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and its complex conjugate, the antilinear cubic

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for @xmath Our tensor @xmath is then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    projecting under the isomorphism ( 1.15 ) onto a multiple of

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    by a combinatorial factor. Let now @xmath be given by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Then

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    and as such must both vanish independently if @xmath is to preserve
    @xmath

    The projection of @xmath onto @xmath is proportional to

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    vanishing iff @xmath since

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    The projection of @xmath onto @xmath is proportional to

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    vanishing iff @xmath with @xmath Thus, if @xmath preserves @xmath
    then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    must preserve @xmath As the latter is the linear extension of the
    determinant, it follows that @xmath and finally

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Thus @xmath preserves @xmath iff @xmath and @xmath which proves
    point 2 of the Proposition.

∎

Proving the last point is considerably more involved. We consider a
rescaled linear extension of the quartic on @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and its complex conjugate, the antilinear quartic

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath

As the tensor @xmath has been defined in a rather obscure form, we need
some more convenient formula. Note first, that, being a symmetric rank
eight tensor, invariant with respect to @xmath it must be in @xmath
(invariance follows from Lemma 17 ). We now have the following lemma, to
be proved in the next section:

###### Lemma 18.

The projection of @xmath onto @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the projection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

on the subspace corresponding to the Young diagram with two rows of four
boxes each, and @xmath denotes the map taking @xmath to @xmath

From now on, we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to claim the following:

###### Lemma 19.

1.   Introducing @xmath and @xmath the tensor @xmath satisfies the
    following identities:

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

2.   Let us introduce a map

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Then, with respect to the decomposition

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    the map @xmath is given by:

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    It also satisfies:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

This one is also proved in the next section. We are at last ready to
check the stabilizer of @xmath We shall deal with it in two long lemmas,
splitting @xmath into @xmath and its complement.

Note that the term @xmath in our expression for the @xmath component of
@xmath is itself an element of @xmath i.e. it is completely linear. It
is then convenient to consider only the @xmath component of elements of
@xmath so that a map @xmath is represented by @xmath (the isomorphism
@xmath is implicit). The algebra @xmath decomposes into the symplectic
subalgebra and its complement, such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the isomorphism is given by @xmath as in ( 1.16 ). In the
following we will omit indicating the complexifications of algebras
explicitly – it is clear that the final stabilizer is an intersection of
a complexified one with the real algebra @xmath

###### Lemma 20.

The stabilizer algebra of @xmath in @xmath is @xmath

###### Proof.

Let @xmath with @xmath and @xmath Clearly, @xmath and @xmath Now,
according to the previous lemma, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the properties of @xmath and @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which under the action of @xmath yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However terms involving @xmath shall obviously vanish, it is instructive
to keep them for the sake of verification. We shall contract the latter
expression with two copies of @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In order to simplify bookkeeping, we introduce the following maps:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

so that our condition becomes @xmath

Expanding the projection @xmath and utilising the symmetry of @xmath we
have (for some irrelevant combinatorial constant @xmath ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and, similarly,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We will show that both @xmath and @xmath are linear combinations of
@xmath and @xmath where the domain of @xmath is trivially extended onto
entire @xmath (so that @xmath is its kernel). To this end we first get
rid of the symmetrizers:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and then perform contractions:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where in the last lines we used the following identities:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we have introduced

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that @xmath since we assume @xmath to be traceless (note also that
the last term is indeed zero for @xmath ). We perform the same
operations for @xmath expand symmetrizers,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and contract @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where in the last line we used one more identity:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we have introduced a map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that @xmath and @xmath The square of @xmath appearing in the second
line, reads

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We thus have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Using @xmath @xmath @xmath and @xmath @xmath @xmath and substituting
@xmath in

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are nonzero for @xmath (note that terms involving @xmath
vanish as expected). Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The converse is obviously true form the definition of @xmath

∎

###### Lemma 21.

The subspace of @xmath stabilizing @xmath is spanned by @xmath and
@xmath

###### Proof.

We shall repeat the procedure applied in the previous proof. Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have @xmath Let us demand vanishing of the part in @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Acting with @xmath on five barred indices we obtain:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath Contracting the latter with @xmath yields:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Expanding symmetrizers:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and performing contractions gives:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we used the identities and maps introduced in the previous proof,
the latter understood as mapping @xmath to itself, namely:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Collecting all terms gives:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Recalling the eigenvalues of the (commuting) operators @xmath and @xmath
one finds that the latter equation is satisfied only for

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath is a linear combination of @xmath and @xmath

∎

At last, we arrive at the final step:

###### Proof of point 3 of Proposition 4.

Let us consider @xmath Then @xmath with @xmath and @xmath and the
components map @xmath into independent subspaces:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath Let now @xmath with @xmath and @xmath Clearly, @xmath so
that @xmath We can now apply the lemmas to @xmath and @xmath to find
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and finally @xmath as claimed. ∎

### 1.5 Important identities and proofs of Lemmas 18 & 19

The invariants of @xmath are essentially derived from certain product
maps: the traceless product @xmath Freudenthal product @xmath and @xmath
the triple product on a FTS. As usually, finite dimension of the spaces
the maps operate on leads to some characteristic equations; these in
turn are translated to certain identities the tensors @xmath @xmath and
@xmath satisfy under contraction (the constants @xmath and @xmath of
Proposition 4 have been introduced in order to simplify these
identities).

#### 1.5.1 First family

###### Lemma 22.

Let @xmath denote the (left) multiplication map for @xmath Then:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.17)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.18)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.19)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

for @xmath

###### Proof.

Identities ( 1.17 ) and ( 1.18 ) follow from irreducibility of @xmath as
a representation of @xmath where in the second case we employ Schur’s
lemma and check the formula for some simple @xmath to find the
proportionality constant.

To prove ( 1.20 ) we recall Lemma 10 , substituting @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used @xmath Taking the scalar product of this expression with
@xmath and using symmetry of @xmath yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Using @xmath to index @xmath with the identification given by @xmath we
introduce the structure constants of @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

With @xmath identities ( 1.17 , 1.18 , 1.20 ) read:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Contraction of the latter one with @xmath yields:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

proving ( 1.19 ). ∎

###### Corollary 4.

Let us set @xmath where @xmath Using @xmath to index @xmath with the
identification given by @xmath we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath

Notably, the last identity is, up to a proportionality constant, the one
used by Nurowski in [ 2 ] to define his cubic invariant (without
referring to all the Jordan machinery).

###### Lemma 23.

Let us introduce a map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, with respect to the decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the map @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let us first consider the familiar map into derivations (Lemma 4 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since the map ( 1.21 ) is symmetric and its image is @xmath it follows
that it vanishes on @xmath It then follows from equivariance, that its
action on @xmath is a multiple of identity. We thus have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some constant @xmath Then, demanding

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and substituting the dimensions of @xmath one finds @xmath and the lemma
follows. ∎

#### 1.5.2 Second family

It is convenient to consider the following general result, which shall
prove useful in both second and third family. The idea is to use some
abstract real spaces @xmath instead of @xmath (recall Remark 1 ):

###### Lemma 24.

Let us introduce two spaces @xmath and maps

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

such that @xmath and @xmath become respectively @xmath and @xmath under
the isomorphisms @xmath Taking the traces over @xmath we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.23)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

for @xmath and @xmath

###### Proof.

Identities ( 1.22 ) and ( 1.24 ) are obvious, as we trace maps which
swap the (sub)spaces @xmath and @xmath Formula ( 1.23 ) follows, up to
the constant, from Schur’s lemma: indeed, let us complexify @xmath and
identify them complex-linearily with @xmath respectively. Then ( 1.23 )
defines a sesquilinear form on @xmath – as the latter is an irreducible
representation of @xmath , the form must be a multiple of the hermitian
inner product. The factor can be found by checking for some simple
@xmath and @xmath

To prove ( 1.24 ), we introduce some extra notation: we shall use @xmath
to index @xmath and @xmath to index @xmath and the same for their duals.
We introduce a tensor @xmath so that @xmath with its inverse satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The determinant defines tensors @xmath and @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will use @xmath and its inverse to lower and raise indices, so that
the maps @xmath and @xmath are simply given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Equation ( 1.23 ) is expressed as:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We now recall that @xmath for @xmath Utilising the isomorphisms @xmath
we can write this identity as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath                     
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Contraction with @xmath yields:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we used ( 1.23 ). Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is equivalent to ( 1.24 ). ∎

For @xmath and @xmath where @xmath are the duals of the (complex) spaces
of linear and antilinear complex forms on @xmath as in ( 1.14 ), we
readily have the following

###### Corollary 5.

Let us set @xmath where @xmath Recalling the conventions introduced in
Remark 1 , we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We shall further make use of the following:

###### Lemma 25.

Let us introduce a map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, with respect to the decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the orthogonal complement of @xmath in @xmath the map
@xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

It also satisfies:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

It is easy to check that @xmath Now, let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath (still in @xmath due to hermiticity of @xmath ) and

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we used Corollary 5 and @xmath Thus, when restricted to @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, since @xmath is hermitian, it splits the space @xmath orthogonally
into @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using @xmath we can compute the dimensions of @xmath and identify @xmath
as @xmath ∎

#### 1.5.3 Third family

###### Lemma 26.

Let @xmath be the left multiplication map for @xmath Then:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Moreover, let @xmath be the map given by @xmath Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

The equation ( 1.26 ) follows from symmetry of @xmath and antisymmetry
of @xmath and ( 1.28 ) is easy to check directly. On the other hand,
proving ( 26 ) will require considerably more effort, and some extra
notation.

To use the results of Lemma ( 24 ), we introduce spaces

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the same manner as in the proof of Lemma ( 24 ), the scalar product
on @xmath is extended to a tensor

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we introduce for later convenience the normalised forms on the real
lines @xmath denoted

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We shall now use @xmath to index @xmath and @xmath to index @xmath and
the same for their duals. Indices are lowered and raised with help of
the tensor

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and its inverse, @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The determinant defines tensors @xmath and @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath and @xmath vanishing on @xmath and @xmath so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The maps @xmath and @xmath are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath and @xmath in @xmath and identities of Lemma 24 are expressed
as:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Using corresponding uppercase letters to index full @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

etc., and the scalar product and symplectic form on this space is
represented by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The quartic defining the triple product is @xmath and, recalling that
@xmath is given in terms of @xmath the expression we wish to compute is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Projecting onto subspaces of @xmath the components of the symmetric
tensor @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Recalling that we contract @xmath with

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

we find that the following expressions need to be computed:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Using these we evaluate the components of @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Finally, it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is equivalent to ( 26 ). ∎

Passing to the complexification @xmath we readily have the following

###### Corollary 6.

Let us set @xmath where @xmath Recalling the conventions introduced in
Remark 1 , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Moreover, @xmath i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These lead us directly to the missing proof:

###### Proof of Lemma 19.

1.  The only formula absent in Corollary 6 is @xmath with @xmath being
    the complex dimension of @xmath But this follows by contraction from
    ( 1.30 ).

2.  Let @xmath Then @xmath and

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    so that @xmath Then, since @xmath is hermitian, it splits the space
    @xmath orthogonally into @xmath with

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Now, using ( 1.29 ), one easily checks that @xmath It thus follows
    that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Using @xmath we can compute the dimensions of @xmath and identify
    @xmath as @xmath Finally, it turns out that one can further simplify
    @xmath and @xmath so that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

∎

#### 1.5.4 Explicit formula for @xmath

We now wish to prove Lemma 18 , which gave us an explicit expression for
the projection of @xmath onto @xmath We first state a simpler result,
which essentially expands the result of applying the construction of
Lemma 17 to a one-form:

###### Lemma 27.

Let @xmath be a real linear map @xmath Let @xmath be the quadratic map
given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Using the expressions for @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

reducing to the former expression. ∎

With indices present, the formula reads

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is now easy to extend this result to multilinear maps. This leads us
to the following

###### Proof of Lemma 18.

Let us introduce on @xmath a representation of an orthonormal basis in
@xmath @xmath Recalling the definition @xmath we expand it as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath ranging from 1 to 4, where @xmath is defined as in Lemma 17
:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath

Perfofming the sums over @xmath separately, we can apply the former
lemma to obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where symmetrization in @xmath is indicated, producing @xmath terms on
the right hand side. Projecting onto @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Now, using @xmath and @xmath we find that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are symmetrized separately. It is now easy to
see that the expression on the right hand side is @xmath Inverting the
omegas on the left, we obtain the lemma.∎

## Chapter 2 Geometric part

### 2.1 Summary of the algebraic results

We wish to keep this part of our work possibly independent of the
Jordan-algebra-related theory developed in the previous chapter. We will
now recall the results we need, in a form which claims the existence of
certain tensors subject to a number of identities.

Still, the symbols @xmath and @xmath denote, respectively, one of @xmath
and one of @xmath Pairs @xmath enumerate compact Riemannian symmetric
spaces collected in the following table:

           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
  @xmath                              
  @xmath            @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath            @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath            @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath            @xmath   @xmath   @xmath

Let @xmath denote the corresponding symmetric space and @xmath its
underlying isotropy group, with a Lie algebra @xmath The isotropy
representation is denoted @xmath

Abstract index notation, including the conventions introduced in Remark
1 , is assumed. Moreover, for given @xmath and @xmath the following
symbols are defined:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath for @xmath

The following statements are reformulations or simple corollaries of:
Corollary 3 , Proposition 4 , Lemmas 18 , 19 , 23 , 25 , and Corollaries
4 , 5 .

#### 2.1.1 First family

Set @xmath and choose @xmath Let @xmath be a real vector space of
dimension @xmath equipped with a positive definite scalar product @xmath
identifying @xmath

There exists a tensor @xmath reducing the group @xmath to @xmath acting
on @xmath in the isotropy representation of @xmath with @xmath as the
preserved scalar product.

This tensor moreover satisfies the following identities:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The latter shows that, up to rescaling, @xmath is the same tensor as the
one used by Nurowski in [ 1 ] .

An operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

acts as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are projections corresponding to the orthogonal
decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

being the isotropy algebra of @xmath

#### 2.1.2 Second family

Set @xmath and choose @xmath Let @xmath be a complex vector space of
(complex) dimension @xmath equipped with a hermitian inner product
@xmath giving rise to a positive definite real scalar product @xmath on
(the realification of) @xmath

Let @xmath and @xmath denote the spaces of @xmath -linear @xmath
-antilinear, respectively symmetric and antisymmetric, complex-valued
forms on @xmath

There exists a real tensor @xmath reducing the group @xmath to a
subgroup whose connected component is @xmath acting on @xmath in the
isotropy representation of @xmath with @xmath as the preserved scalar
product.

Recall that @xmath gives rise to an identification

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath In particular, the orthogonal isotropy algebra of @xmath is
a subalgebra in @xmath

There moreover exists a tensor @xmath such that @xmath satisfying the
following identities:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The algebra @xmath is a direct sum

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of the orthogonal stabilizer algebra of @xmath and a @xmath spanned by
multiplication by @xmath The latter is the centre of @xmath

There is a @xmath -invariant operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath acting as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath @xmath and @xmath are projections corresponding to the
orthogonal decomposition into @xmath -invariant spaces:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 2.1.3 Third family

Set @xmath and choose @xmath Let @xmath be a real vector space of
dimension @xmath equipped with a positive definite scalar product @xmath
and a quaternion-hermitian structure, i.e. three hermitian structures
@xmath subject to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There exists a tensor @xmath reducing the group @xmath to a subgroup
whose connected component is @xmath acting on @xmath in the isotropy
representation of @xmath with @xmath as the preserved scalar product.

Consider now @xmath as a complex vector space of dimension @xmath with
one of the three hermitian structures, for concreteness @xmath as the
complex structure. Let @xmath and @xmath denote the spaces of @xmath
-linear @xmath -antilinear, respectively symmetric and antisymmetric,
complex-valued forms. By polarisation, the scalar product @xmath gives
rise to a hermitian inner product @xmath Moreover, by the identification

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

one has a symplectic form @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In this context, @xmath There moreover exists a tensor @xmath such that
the projection of @xmath onto @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where barred and unbarred indices are symmetrized separately. Following
identities are satisfied:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Let @xmath denote the symplectic group preserving the quaternionic
structure, and @xmath the group generated by @xmath Let @xmath and
@xmath be the corresponding Lie algebras. From the complex viewpoint,
with @xmath the distinguished complex structure, one has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, @xmath gives rise to an identification

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

via

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The orthogonal isotropy algebra of @xmath can be decomposed as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the orthogonal stabilizer of @xmath

An operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

acts as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are projections corresponding to the
decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 2.2 @xmathstructures and intrinsic torsion

@xmath -structures provide a covariant description of additional
structure introduced on a manifold (be it Riemannian, complex, CR etc.).
While they are defined as reductions of the frame bundle, or simply
principal bundles equipped with a soldering form, related objects are
pulled back to the mainfold and its tangent bundle by means of local
sections, i.e. adapted frames.

One can also introduce somewhat weaker structure directly on the tangent
bundle, specifying endomorphisms of the latter corresponding to the Lie
algebra @xmath of the original structure group @xmath Under certain
technical assumption, the latter can be then reconstructed up to
connected components, so that in general one ends up, locally, with
several associated @xmath structures (although these may fail to be
globally defined on a manifold which is not simply connected).

Finally, we shall discuss structures defined in terms of invariant
tensors. However, the groups @xmath we are interested in are in general
defined only as identity components of the isotropy groups. Selecting a
@xmath structure requires thus an extra choice of a frame in a single
point of each connected component of the manifold, and may fail due to
global problems even if the tensor is globally defined.

#### 2.2.1 @xmathstructures and the intrinsic torsion

Recall, that a @xmath structure @xmath on an @xmath dimensional
Riemannian manifold @xmath for @xmath being a subgroup of @xmath is a
reduction

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of the orthonormal frame bundle @xmath to a subbundle @xmath with
structure group @xmath acting on @xmath by restriction of the action of
@xmath on @xmath Its local sections will be called adapted frames .

A connection on the bundle @xmath is said to be compatible with @xmath
iff the associated horizontal distribution @xmath is tangent to @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In terms of a connection form @xmath the compatibility condition reads
simply ¹ ¹ 1 Indeed, consider a vector @xmath Then @xmath is horizontal,
where @xmath denotes the vertical vector field associated to @xmath by
the structure group action. Demanding @xmath implies @xmath so that
@xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Lie algebra of @xmath If it is satisfied, @xmath
becomes a connection on @xmath (since @xmath acts on @xmath by
restriction of its action on @xmath ).

###### Definition 2.

A @xmath structure is said to be integrable iff it admits a torsion-free
compatible connection.

Following Agricola [ 13 ] , we consider the Levi-Civita connection
@xmath and decompose its restriction to @xmath orthogonally:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

so that @xmath and @xmath

###### Lemma 28 (cf. [13]).

1.  @xmath is a connection on @xmath

2.  @xmath is a horizontal one-form of type @xmath on @xmath

The usual name for the @xmath is the intrinsic torsion of @xmath (in
fact, this notion can be defined also for a general @xmath structure,
not necessarily Riemannian, although it becomes less explicit [ 34 ] ).

The form @xmath can be extended by covariance to a connection on entire
@xmath with values in the orthogonal orbit of @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the associated covariant derivative:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath -module @xmath Recall that a point @xmath in the frame
bundle @xmath is an orthogonal isomorphism @xmath where @xmath is
equipped with some fixed positive definite scalar product. Introducing
the soldering form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we have the torsion of @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recalling that the Levi-Civita connection is torsion-free and using (
2.5 ), one finds

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

It then follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath Conversely, it turns out that @xmath determines the
horizontal form @xmath (it needn’t be true in the non-Riemannian case,
cf. [ 13 ] ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for @xmath where @xmath denotes the scalar product on @xmath

Note that a @xmath compatible connection is necessarily metric. Thus a
torsion-free @xmath compatible connection, provided it exists,
necessarily coincides with the Levi-Civita one. This leads us to the
following obvious

###### Proposition 5 (cf. [13, 34]).

Let @xmath be a @xmath structure on an @xmath dimensional Riemannian
manifold @xmath with @xmath The following are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is integrable.

2.   The intrinsic torsion of @xmath is trivial.

3.   The Levi-Civita connection on @xmath is compatible with @xmath

Each of these implies reduction of the Riemannian holonomy group @xmath
to a subgroup of @xmath

Particular examples one should have in mind are the almost-hermitian and
almost-quaternion-hermitian structures, with structure groups @xmath and
@xmath respectively (their integrable cases being featured in the
celebrated theorem of Berger). The geometries modelled on the second and
third family of symmetric spaces described so far fall into these
categories.

#### 2.2.2 Tangent bundle view

Choosing a local section @xmath i.e. an adapted frame, one can pull
@xmath and @xmath back to @xmath so that @xmath gives rise to a
connection in the tangent bundle, and @xmath becomes a well-defined
tensorial one-form.

It is however instructive to consider the structure which appears on the
tangent bundle independently of any section. In what follows, we use
@xmath to identify @xmath Observe first that, having fixed a point
@xmath the image of @xmath under (the extension of) @xmath where @xmath
and @xmath does not depend on the choice of @xmath from the fibre of
@xmath over @xmath Indeed, for every two frames @xmath there exists
@xmath such that @xmath ; on the other hand, @xmath so that @xmath We
shall denote this subspace as @xmath

It thus follows, that a @xmath structure equips @xmath with an
orthogonal splitting

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

into subbundles such that at each point @xmath the subspace

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a Lie subalgebra isomorphic to @xmath

A natural question is to what extent can one reconstruct the original
@xmath structure from the data given by ( 2.6 ). In what follows we
shall assume that:

1.  @xmath is connected

2.  @xmath contains no one-dimensional @xmath invariant subspace

(these are true for @xmath as one can check in Section 2.6 . Point 2 is
needed in particular for the following result to hold:

###### Lemma 29.

The set of all orthonormal frames mapping @xmath to @xmath forms a
principal bundle with a structure group whose identity component is
@xmath

###### Proof.

Consider an orthonormal frame @xmath at a fixed point @xmath such that
@xmath Every other frame at @xmath is of the form @xmath for some @xmath
so that @xmath maps @xmath to @xmath iff @xmath It thus follows that all
such frames at @xmath form a fibre of a principal bundle with structure
group

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The corresponding Lie algebra is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now, every @xmath is of the form @xmath with @xmath and @xmath so that
@xmath where automatically @xmath and @xmath since @xmath Thus @xmath
iff @xmath Then the assumption we have made on @xmath implies that every
such @xmath is zero, so that finally @xmath and @xmath has @xmath as its
component of identity. ∎

One moreover obtains a characterization of compatible connections:

###### Lemma 30.

A metric connection @xmath in the tangent bundle, lifted to a connection
on the frame bundle, is compatible with the @xmath structure iff it
preserves the splitting ( 2.6 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Choose (locally) an adapted frame, i.e. a (local) section @xmath A
compatibility condition for a connection form @xmath on the frame bundle
@xmath is @xmath Consider now the corresponding connection @xmath in the
frame bundle, whose local connection form in the adapted frame @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then the compatibility condition is equivalent to @xmath

On the other hand, @xmath preserves @xmath iff for each @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From the assumption on @xmath via an argument given in the proof of
Lemma 29 , it follows that @xmath preserves @xmath iff @xmath Hence the
lemma. ∎

###### Corollary 7.

The @xmath structure is integrable iff the Levi-Civita derivative of
each section of @xmath is @xmath valued.

Recall now, that a difference of two connections in the tangent bundle
is a well-defined tensor ² ² 2 By @xmath we mean the element of @xmath
obtained by evaluation of @xmath on @xmath , acting on @xmath . :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where in particular @xmath for metric connections. We have the following

###### Lemma 31.

There exists a unique metric connection @xmath preserving @xmath such
that the difference tensor of @xmath and the Levi-Civita connection
@xmath is @xmath valued, i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Choose (locally) an adapted frame @xmath Then the local connection form
of @xmath is uniquely decomposed with respect to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath One easily checks that @xmath transforms as a
connection form corresponding to some connection @xmath in the tangent
bundle, while @xmath is a well defined tensor. It further follows that,
irrespectively of the frame,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

It is not difficult to check, that @xmath coincides with a pull-back by
an arbitrary section @xmath of the intrinsic torsion @xmath introduced
in the previous subsection:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As the reader may expect, @xmath is equivalent to the torsion @xmath of
@xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 2.2.3 Invariant tensors

Finally, we consider the following structure: let @xmath be the
orthogonal stabilizer group of a tensor @xmath with @xmath its identity
component and @xmath the Lie algebra. Then a @xmath structure on an
@xmath dimensional manifold @xmath can be defined by a tensor

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that at each point @xmath there exists an orthonormal frame @xmath
such that @xmath Clearly, the set of all such frames at @xmath forms a
fibre of a principal bundle with structure group @xmath a reduction
@xmath of the orthonormal frame bundle.

In a typical situation, we will however be interested in having a @xmath
structure @xmath , where @xmath is the identity component of possibly
not connected @xmath A reduction of @xmath to @xmath is always possible
locally (i.e. on @xmath for @xmath a neighbourhood of a point on @xmath
), by choosing a single point @xmath declaring it to be a member of
@xmath and identifying the latter by continuity. It may however fail to
yield a @xmath structure over entire @xmath , even if @xmath and thus
@xmath are globally defined. Such a situation is illustrated by the
following:

###### Example 1.

A simple flat geometry related locally to the symmetric space @xmath
Consider first the (real) space @xmath whose tangent spaces carry a
natural complex structure and a fixed complex-linear identification with
@xmath so that they become equipped with a metric @xmath and a parallel
tensor @xmath being a real section of @xmath The latter defines a
trivial @xmath structure on @xmath and restricting to holomorphic frames
gives a reduction to a trivial @xmath structure, @xmath .

Introduce now the natural complex coordinates @xmath such that @xmath
and consider a (real) manifold @xmath obtained by identifying points
subject to the equivalence relation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Considering the projection @xmath one finds that @xmath inherits a
metric and orientation (complex conjugation on a space of even complex
dimension has determinant one). The tensor @xmath is also uniquely
pushed forward to @xmath on @xmath since @xmath

We thus have a @xmath structure on @xmath , where @xmath is the full
orthogonal isotropy group of @xmath with @xmath as its identity
component. However, as we have just noted, @xmath also contains an
antiunitary component, in particular the complex conjugation map, @xmath
A local @xmath structure can be defined by picking a frame at a single
point, say the one obtained by projecting the natural holomorphic frame
at the origin of @xmath to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However, parallel transporting @xmath along a closed loop, given by the
projection of a curve joining @xmath with @xmath in @xmath one ends with
@xmath which clearly belongs to a different connected component of the
fibre than the original frame. One thus fails to define a global @xmath
structure (which is already implied by the fact that the complex
structure of @xmath does not descend to @xmath ). Note that this problem
is not resolved by fixing an orientation.

Nevertheless, ignoring global questions and considering any of the local
@xmath structures defined by @xmath we can recover most of the local
information about the former from geometric data given by the latter
(i.e. @xmath and its Levi-Civita derivatives). Note first, that in an
adapted frame @xmath we have @xmath a constant @xmath valued function,
so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for a connection @xmath with local connection form @xmath This leads to
the following

###### Lemma 32.

A connection @xmath in the tangent bundle is compatible with a local
@xmath structure defined by @xmath iff @xmath

###### Proof.

Choose an adapted frame @xmath Then for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The latter is the compatibility condition for @xmath ∎

###### Corollary 8.

A local @xmath structure defined by @xmath is integrable iff @xmath

While @xmath being parallel implies vanishing of the intrinsic torsion,
it turns out that entire @xmath can be reconstructed from @xmath Since
@xmath is the complement of the isotropy algebra of @xmath we have the
following obvious

###### Lemma 33.

The kernel of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is trivial.

###### Corollary 9.

There exists a @xmath -equivariant map @xmath such that, independently
of the choice of an adapted frame @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Set @xmath to be the left inverse of @xmath which exists due to the
Lemma. Then, in an adapted frame @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

∎

###### Remark 2.

We can derive a more direct result for a symmetric tensor

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

assuming @xmath to be @xmath -irreducible. Since @xmath is @xmath
invariant, irreducibility implies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath where @xmath Similarily, the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

restricted to @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath where @xmath are projections onto @xmath irreducible
subspaces of @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We finally introduce the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and, performing the contractions, easily find that @xmath

If we thus calculate @xmath and check that @xmath for @xmath we can
express the intrinsic torsion as in Corollary 9 with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath As one can find in Section 2.6 , the space @xmath in case of
@xmath structures decomposes into at most two subspaces. Thus the
projections @xmath with @xmath can be expressed as combinations of
@xmath and the identity map (provided @xmath ). This will provide us
with explicit expressions for @xmath in terms of @xmath and @xmath

### 2.3 @xmath-geometries and their torsion

We will now finally define the geometries we are to investigate. Our
choice is to consider Riemannian manifolds equipped with the sole
invariant tensor, disregarding global existence of a @xmath -structure
and its local choice. When referring to a local @xmath -structure
associated with the @xmath -geometry, we mean any of the possible ones
(i.e. any connected component of the full bundle of frames defined on
some region of the manifold and preserving the special form of the
tensor). ³ ³ 3 In particular, the tensor gives global @xmath -structures
on a simply connected manifold. This can be seen noting, that every loop
lifted to the full bundle of adapted frames (i.e. the one whose
structure group is the full isotropy group of the tensor) must
necessarily start and end in the same connected component of a fibre.

Recall the conventions summarized at the beginning of this chapter. In
particular, @xmath is any of @xmath and @xmath is set to @xmath in,
respectively, first, second and third family. We have defined @xmath To
avoid index clutter, we abandon the convention of writing @xmath in
favour of @xmath provided @xmath is clear from context.

#### 2.3.1 First family

The following definition essentially coincides with that of the
geometries studied by Nurowski [ 1 ] :

###### Definition 3.

A @xmath -geometry is a @xmath dimensional Riemannian manifold @xmath
equipped with a tensor

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that at each @xmath there exists an orthonormal frame @xmath such
that @xmath

Let thus @xmath be a @xmath -geometry. Since in the first family the
groups @xmath are the precise isotropy groups of @xmath it follows that
the global principal bundle of all frames mapping @xmath to @xmath has
@xmath as its structure group:

###### Proposition 6.

A @xmath -geometry possesses a natural global @xmath -structure.

In what follows, we shall use @xmath to index @xmath when referring to
tensors and tensor-valued forms, so that we have e.g.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

###### Proposition 7.

The intrinsic torsion of the @xmath -structure associated with a @xmath
-geometry @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The proof is by application of the procedure described in Remark 2 . The
decompositions of @xmath given in Section 2.6 show that @xmath is always
irreducible; one has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

according to the summary presented in the first section of this chapter.
One thus uses the formula ( 2.7 ) with @xmath @xmath and @xmath while
the projection is simply identity. Having the map @xmath expressed using
@xmath the Proposition follows from Corollary 9 . ∎

#### 2.3.2 Second family

###### Definition 4.

A @xmath -geometry is a @xmath dimensional Riemannian manifold @xmath
equipped with a tensor

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that at each @xmath there exists an orthonormal frame @xmath such
that @xmath where @xmath is considered as a real vector space.

Let thus @xmath be a @xmath -geometry. As it has been demonstrated in
Example 1 , there may be in general no globally defined @xmath
-structure associated to @xmath However, one has a global split

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath as a Lie subalgebra of @xmath Recall that the algebra @xmath
has a one-dimensional centre spanned by the hermitian complex structure
of @xmath The same is true of each @xmath so that defining a bundle

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath defining the centre, we have the following

###### Proposition 8.

A @xmath -geometry @xmath is naturally equipped with a one-dimensional
subbundle @xmath spanned locally by an almost hermitian structure.

Each fibre @xmath contains exactly two complex structures on @xmath
(singled out by normalization), and there is a priori no way to
distinguish between these. A particular choice of one complex structure
at a single point of @xmath can be extended by continuity to a
neighbourhood, but may fail to yield a globally defined almost hermitian
structure on @xmath (cf. Example 1 ).

Before we proceed, an algebraic consideration is necessary:

###### Lemma 34.

Reintroducing @xmath we have:

1.  @xmath

2.   Let us introduce a map

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Then, with respect to the decomposition

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    the map @xmath is given by

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

The proof is given in Section 2.8 . We are now ready to express the
intrinsic torsion in terms of @xmath and its derivative. In the
following we use @xmath to index @xmath

###### Proposition 9.

The intrinsic torsion of a local @xmath -structure associated with a
@xmath -geometry @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

###### Proof.

The proof is by application of the procedure described in Remark 2 . The
decompositions of @xmath given in Section 2.6 show that @xmath
decomposes into two irreducible subspaces:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The map @xmath and the contraction @xmath is found in Lemma 34 , so that
one uses the formula ( 2.7 ) with @xmath @xmath @xmath and @xmath while
the projections are (having checked that @xmath for @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Having the map @xmath expressed using @xmath the Proposition follows
from Corollary 9 . ∎

Recall that, by Proposition 8 , normalized local sections of @xmath give
local almost hermitian structures on @xmath . These are integrable iff
@xmath is parallel, i.e. iff

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath has this property, it follows that in this case the
intrinsic torsion must satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath Expressed in an adapted frame @xmath the condition reads

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

i.e. the antiunitary component, obtained by projecting onto @xmath must
vanish. Applying the projection ( 2.8 ) to the intrinsic torsion
expressed in Proposition 9 the following formula is readily proved:

###### Proposition 10.

A @xmath -geometry @xmath possesses a natural local Kähler structure,
given by a unit local section of @xmath iff

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 2.3.3 Third family

###### Definition 5.

A @xmath -geometry is a @xmath dimensional Riemannian manifold @xmath
equipped with a tensor

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that at each @xmath there exists an orthonormal frame @xmath such
that @xmath

Let thus @xmath be a @xmath -geometry. There exists a global split

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath at each @xmath Recall that @xmath decomposes under its
adjoint representation into two a direct sum

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath generated by a quaternionic structure on @xmath The same is
true of each @xmath , so that defining a bundle

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we have the following

###### Proposition 11.

A @xmath -geometry @xmath is naturally equipped with a three-dimensional
subbundle @xmath spanned locally by three almost hermitian structures
subject to the algebra of imaginary quaternions.

Note that the full orthogonal isotropy group of @xmath necessarily
preserves the structure constants of @xmath and thus an orientation on
this space, so that it acts on it as @xmath This in turn implies that
the images of @xmath under different adapted frames are related by
automorphisms of the unique quaternionic structure. Hence the following
⁴ ⁴ 4 There are many equivalent ways of introducing (almost)
quaternion-hermitian structures on a manifold – e.g. by means of a
4-form, or a 2-sphere bundle in @xmath . For reference, see [ 34 , 35 ,
36 ] .

###### Corollary 10.

A @xmath -geometry @xmath is naturally equipped with a unique global
almost quaternion-hermitian structure defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in an arbitrary adapted frame @xmath

Once again some algebra is needed before we can express the intrinsic
torsion:

###### Lemma 35.

Reintroducing @xmath we have:

1.  @xmath

2.   Let us introduce a map

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Then, with respect to the decomposition

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    the map @xmath is given by

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

The proof can be found in Section 2.8 . We are now able to read the
intrinsic torsion from @xmath and its derivative:

###### Proposition 12.

The intrinsic torsion of a local @xmath -structure associated with a
@xmath -geometry @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Before we give the proof, we must sadly admit that even after @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath have been substituted by numbers for given @xmath the
constants remain unreasonably complicated.

###### Proof.

The proof is by application of the procedure described in Remark 2 . The
decompositions of @xmath given in Section 2.6 show that @xmath
decomposes into two irreducible subspaces:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The map @xmath and the contraction @xmath is found in Lemma 35 , so that
one uses the formula ( 2.7 ) with

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and @xmath while the projections are (having checked that @xmath for
@xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Having the map @xmath expressed using @xmath the Proposition follows
from Corollary 9 . ∎

The condition for integrability of the almost-quaternion-hermitian
structure described in Corollary 10 is that the Levi-Civita parallel
transport preserve a bundle of unit 2-spheres in @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which under this condition becomes the natural twistor bundle of the
quaternion-Kähler structure (cf. [ 34 ] ). It is equivalent to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath has this property, it follows that in this case the
intrinsic torsion must satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath Expressed in an adapted frame @xmath the condition reads

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

i.e. the component in @xmath must vanish. Applying the projection ( 2.9
) to the intrinsic torsion expressed in Proposition 12 the following
formula is readily proved:

###### Proposition 13.

A @xmath -geometry @xmath possesses a natural quaternion-Kähler
structure, given by the 2-sphere bundle

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

iff

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 2.4 @xmath-structures with characteristic torsion

In the previous section we have at last defined the geometries modelled
after the Magic Square symmetric spaces, and expressed their intrinsic
torsion in terms of geometric data, i.e. the defining tensorial
invariant and its Levi-Civita derivative. It is of course natural to
investigate at first the integrable case, that is, manifolds with
parallel @xmath @xmath or @xmath However, we immediately have the
following

###### Proposition 14 (Corollary of Berger’s theorem).

Let @xmath be a @xmath -geometry, whose underlying local @xmath
-structures are integrable. Then @xmath is either a locally symmetric
space or a product of Riemannian manifolds of lower dimension, with the
product metric tensor.

###### Proof (sketch).

Integrability implies that the connected holonomy group @xmath
considered via some adapted frame as a subgroup of @xmath must be
contained in @xmath Simple dimension count shows that none of the
irreducible Riemannian holonomy groups listed in Berger’s theorem meet
this requirement. Thus, @xmath cannot be irreducible and not locally
symmetric. ∎

A larger variety of geometries is available once one relaxes the
integrability condition to some extent. While integrability is
equivalent to existence of a compatible connection with trivial torsion,
we can consider a milder condition of vanishing all but one of the
torsion’s irreducible components. The torsion tensor of a connection on
a Riemannian manifold @xmath is a section of the bundle @xmath which
decomposes under the action of the orthogonal group into three (for
@xmath ) irreducible components:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Particularily interesting classes of connections are those with
completely skew ( @xmath ) and vectorial ( @xmath ) torsion, where the
associated projections act on @xmath as:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In what follows, we shall restrict our attention to the skew case
(information about the vectorial one can be found e.g. in [ 37 ] ),
mostly following the exposition given in [ 13 ] . A geometric
characterisation of this class is given by the following

###### Proposition 15 (cf. [13]).

A metric connection @xmath in the tangent bundle of a Riemannian
manifold @xmath has completely skew torsion iff its unparametrised
geodesics conincide with those of the Levi-Civita connection on @xmath

Let us first introduce a simple

###### Lemma 36.

Let @xmath be a metric connection in the tangent bundle of a Riemannian
manifold @xmath and @xmath its difference tensor with the Levi-Civita
connection:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath has completely skew torsion @xmath iff @xmath is completely
skew, i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, in such case @xmath as a section of @xmath

###### Proof.

The torsion of @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Vanishing of l.h.s. is equivalent to complete antisymmetry of @xmath
while vanishing of r.h.s. is equivalent to complete antisymmetry of
@xmath ∎

###### Proof of Proposition 15.

Let @xmath be a curve in @xmath and @xmath a vector field defined on
some neighbourhood of @xmath such that @xmath is tangent to @xmath Then
@xmath is (unparametrised) geodesic of @xmath iff

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some function @xmath The latter is equivalent to @xmath being a
Levi-Civita geodesic iff @xmath is a multiple of @xmath . However, since
@xmath is skew, @xmath must be simply zero. Demanding it for every curve
@xmath is equivalent to @xmath for each @xmath i.e. @xmath completely
skew. This in turn, via the previous Lemma, is equivalent to complete
antisymmetry of the torsion of @xmath ∎

#### 2.4.1 @xmath-structures with skew torsion

Let us now consider a general @xmath -structure @xmath on an @xmath
-dimensional Riemannian manifold @xmath as described in subsection 2.2.1
. The basic result is the following:

###### Proposition 16 (cf. [13]).

A @xmath -structure @xmath on @xmath admits a compatible connection with
completely skew torsion iff there exists a function @xmath (of the
natural type) such that for each @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the intrinsic torsion of @xmath and @xmath the soldering
form.

We first give a simple

###### Lemma 37.

A connection @xmath compatible with a @xmath -structure @xmath has skew
torsion iff

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The torsion of @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we introduced @xmath so that @xmath is horizontal of type @xmath
We now have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where vanishing of l.h.s is equivalent to complete antisymmetry of the
torsion. ∎

###### Proof of Proposition 16.

Assume that indeed @xmath satisfies this condition for some @xmath Then

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where @xmath One easily checks that @xmath defines a connection on
@xmath Now, we have @xmath and by Lemma 37 the torsion of @xmath is
skew.

Conversely, the same lemma implies that the difference of a connection
@xmath with skew torsion and the Levi-Civita connection is a completely
skew tensor, and the function @xmath is simply given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and projecting on @xmath proves the Proposition. ∎

Having stated a condition for existence of a compatible connection with
skew torsion, it is natural to ask how many such connections can be
found. A particularily interesting case occurs when the connection is
unique. There is a well known, purely algebraic condition:

###### Proposition 17 (cf. [13]).

A compatible connection with skew torsion on a @xmath -structure @xmath
is unique, provided it exists, iff

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

Assume @xmath and @xmath are two such connections. Then, by Lemma 37 ,
the function @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for @xmath is completely skew. Thus, if the intersection of @xmath and
@xmath is trivial, one has @xmath

Conversely, let @xmath be the unique compatible connection with skew
torsion and @xmath a function of the natural type. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath defines a connection on @xmath and by Lemma 37 its torsion is
skew. Now, if the intersection of @xmath and @xmath was nontrivial,
@xmath and there would exist different compatible connections with skew
torsion. As it contradicts the uniqueness of @xmath the intersection
must be trivial. ∎

If such a connection is indeed unique, it is called the characteristic
connection of the @xmath -structure, and its torsion tensor – the
characteristric torsion. It is not very difficult to check the
intersections ( 2.10 ) for classical irreducible holonomy groups, and
the result is that a skew-torsion connection is unique in all those
cases [ 13 ] . Moreover, there is a recent important result of Nagy,
which solves the problem of computing the l.h.s. of ( 2.10 ) completely:

###### Proposition 18 (Nagy [5]).

Let @xmath be proper and act irreducibly on @xmath . Then the
intersection ( 2.10 ) is trivial, unless @xmath compact simple and
@xmath as a @xmath -module. In the latter case, it is one dimensional
and spanned by the structure constants of @xmath .

Considering the case with nontrivial intersection (i.e. no
characteristic connection), we have:

###### Corollary 11.

Let @xmath be simple, with @xmath proper in @xmath and @xmath as a
@xmath -module. Then a @xmath -structure on @xmath admits either no
compatible connections with skew torsion, or precisely a one-parameter
family thereof. In the latter case, the torsion tensors of connections
in this family differ by a section of a one-dimensional invariant
subbundle @xmath . Choosing an adapted frame @xmath , an intertwiner
@xmath , and defining @xmath , we have a fibre of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the @xmath -structure. Every connection @xmath on @xmath
with skew torsion @xmath is uniquely defined by the latter, since (cf.
Lemma 36 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can introduce a function @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath

On the other hand, two such connections @xmath differ by a horizontal
one-form of type @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath and thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Assume now that there exists a skew-torsion connection @xmath on @xmath
. It thus follows, that if we identify each skew-torsion connection
@xmath on @xmath with the corresponding function @xmath , the space of
all such connections at a point @xmath is the affine space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can now apply Proposition 18 to find that the intersection is spanned
by the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath where @xmath is an intertwiner. Pulling everything back to
@xmath via some adapted frame, i.e. a (local) section @xmath , we arrive
at the Corollary. ∎

We shall refer to such a family as the one-parameter family of
skew-torsion connections. Their torsion can be considered to be
‘characteristic modulo @xmath ’.

#### 2.4.2 Invariant tensors and nearly-integrability

We shall finally focus on structures defined on a Riemannian manifold
@xmath by a symmetric tensor @xmath as in Subsection 2.2.3 . The first
important fact is a necessary condition for the existence of a
compatible connection with skew torsion, first discussed by Nurowski [ 1
] :

###### Proposition 19.

Let a local @xmath structure defined by a symmetric tensor @xmath admit
a compatible connection with skew torsion. Then the symmetrized
Levi-Civita derivative of @xmath vanishes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be such a connection. Clearly, @xmath Then, recalling Lemma
36 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the torsion of @xmath a section of @xmath Indexing
@xmath with @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

due to the antisymmetry of @xmath ∎

The next natural step is to ask when is ( 2.11 ) sufficient. After [ 1 ]
, we give an algebraic condition on the tensor @xmath mapped to @xmath
in adapted frames:

###### Lemma 38.

Let us introduce a map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then ( 2.11 ) implies existence of a compatible connection with skew
torsion iff

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Choose locally an adapted frame @xmath We have, at each @xmath

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Thus, @xmath for each @xmath iff @xmath for each @xmath

Now, if ( 2.11 ) implies exsistence of a compatible connection with skew
torsion, then @xmath must be contained in @xmath as the Levi-Civita
connection can be expressed as a sum of the compatible connection and
half of its torsion. However, Proposition 19 implies that @xmath Thus
these must be equal.

Conversely, if the kernel of @xmath is @xmath then ( 2.11 ) implies that
@xmath can be decomposed (not necessarily in a unique way) into a @xmath
-valued local connection form and a skew difference tensor. Lemma ( 36 )
completes the proof. ∎

The condition ( 2.11 ) will be referred to as nearly-integrability of
the geometric structure defined by @xmath (or of the tensor itself).
There exists an interesting geometric interpretation:

###### Lemma 39.

A @xmath -structure defined by @xmath is nearly-integrably iff for each
parametrised geodesic @xmath the value of @xmath evaluated on @xmath is
constant along the geodesic.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be such a geodesic, @xmath . We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now, @xmath is nearly integrable iff the latter expression vanishes for
every parametrised geodesic, at every point. This in turn is equivalent
to the evaluation of @xmath on @xmath being constant. ∎

It follows that for a nearly-integrable @xmath -structure there is a
well-defined notion of geodesics which are null with respect to the
tensor. The spaces of such geodesics seem to be interesting in their own
right.

### 2.5 @xmathgeometries with characteristic torsion

We return now to the @xmath -geometries defined in Section 2.3 , and
collect results on skew-torsion connections compatible with related
@xmath -structures.

The problem of uniqueness of a skew-torsion connection for the first
family has been already investigated by Nurowski [ 1 ] , while
uniqueness for the other two families can be readily estabilished once
on knows an analogous result for almost-Kähler and
almost-quaternion-Kähler structures. Currently however, we can present
it as a simple corollary of Nagy’s general result:

###### Proposition 20 (Corollary of Proposition 18).

Let @xmath be a @xmath -geometry admitting a skew-torsion compatible
connection. The such a connection is unique, unless @xmath and @xmath .
In the latter case, there is a one-parameter family of such connections,
whose torsion differ by a section of a one-dimensional @xmath -invariant
section of @xmath .

###### Proof (sketch).

We apply Proposition 18 to @xmath as subalgebras of @xmath . These
algebras are clearly proper and act irreducibly. The only case when
@xmath is the geometry modelled after @xmath , i.e. @xmath and @xmath
(it suffices to notice that there is a single 8-dimensional irreducible
representation of @xmath , and thus both the isotropy and adjoint
representations are equivalent). The, we apply Corollary 11 and the
Proposition follows. ∎

As we have mentioned, such unique connection is called the
characteristic connection, and its torsion tensor – the characteristic
torsion. Indeed, one may consider the latter as characterising the
geometry in a manner more convenient than the intrinsic torsion (however
the two can be clearly obtained from each other).

Of course, these notions make sense only if the connection exists.
Bobienski and Nurowski [ 2 ] proposed nearly integrability as a
candidate for an existence condition, and checked that it is one indeed
for the geometry they considered – i.e. the one modelled after @xmath It
then turned out [ 1 ] that it also works for the next two geometries in
the first column, failing however in case of the last one, i.e. @xmath :

###### Proposition 21 (Nurowski [1]).

Let @xmath be a @xmath -geometry with @xmath Then @xmath admits a
skew-torsion compatible connection iff @xmath is nearly-integrable.

In the following, we extend the equivalence between nearly-integrability
and existence of a characteristic connection onto the second family.

###### Theorem 1.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -geometry. Then @xmath admits a characteristic
connection iff @xmath is nearly-integrable.

###### Proof.

That nearly-integrability is implied by existence of the characteristic
connection follows immediately from Proposition 19 . To prove the
converse, we will apply Lemma 38 to the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is clear that its kernel contains @xmath In order to check that these
are actually equal, we extend @xmath by complex linearity and consider a
decomposition of a generic element @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath The action of extended @xmath gives then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath iff each of these vanishes separately. Applying the
isomorphisms ( 1.15 ), we find @xmath and @xmath to be equivalent to

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Contracting the first equation with @xmath and the second one with
@xmath we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Equation ( 2.12 ) gives simply @xmath so that @xmath Writing @xmath in
the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

equation ( 2.13 ) simplifies to @xmath so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now, using @xmath and @xmath to eliminate @xmath we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the terms involving @xmath due to @xmath give an element of @xmath
We thus finally obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that @xmath and the theorem follows by Lemma 38 . ∎

It is instructive to note that the latter proof relies on the complex
structure of @xmath indeed, in spite of complete symmetrization in the
definition of @xmath using the projections ( 1.15 ) splits linear and
antilinear indices and allows for separate contraction. That did not
occur in the first family, and thus Nurowski had to resort to explicit
calculations using computer algebra. Unfortunately, this method fails
also for the third family, since none of the complex structures is
invariant. The question whether nearly-integrability guarantees
existence of a characteristic connection for @xmath -geometries remains
open.

### 2.6 Decompositions of two- and three-forms

In order to classify possible @xmath -geometries with skew torsion, we
need to decompose the space of three-forms into @xmath irreducibles.
This is easily done using the computer algebra package LiE by Marc van
Leeuwen et al. [ 38 ] .

One needs to note that we are ultimately interested in real
representations, while the package we use operates on complex ones. Thus
in the first and third family, where the representations are
respectively real and quaternionic, we consider complexifications of
@xmath and @xmath and, after decomposing, take the real section
(recalling that @xmath with @xmath being some complex irrep, does not
decompose). On the other hand, the representations in the second column
are already unitary, and can be dealt with directly.

We only provide here the dimensions of the irreducible subspaces. The
invariants can be used to construct suitable projection operators.

#### 2.6.1 First family

The following was already done by Nurowski [ 1 ] .

###### Proposition 22.

With @xmath denoting an @xmath dimensional real representation, we have
the following decompositions into:

1.  @xmath irreps:

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

2.  @xmath irreps:

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

3.  @xmath irreps:

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

4.  @xmath irreps:

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

The @xmath case is special, since the isotropy representation is
equivalent to the adjoint one, @xmath In particular, there exists an
invariant three-form (spanning the @xmath subspace) corresponding to the
structure constants of @xmath

#### 2.6.2 Second family

Recall first, that the spaces of two- and three-forms on the second
family spaces decompose under @xmath into

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are completely skew analogues of the
usual spaces introduced in the Gray-Hervella classification of
almost-Hermitian structures [ 39 ] . These are further decomposed when
the unitary group is reduced to one of our gropus @xmath

###### Proposition 23.

With @xmath denoting (a realification of) an @xmath dimensional complex
representation, we have the following decompositions into:

1.  @xmath irreps:

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

2.  @xmath irreps:

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    where in @xmath the first (resp. second) copy of @xmath being a
    @xmath irrep, is affected only by the first (resp. second) @xmath in
    @xmath

3.  @xmath irreps:

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

4.  @xmath irreps:

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

The space @xmath where @xmath is already isomorphic to @xmath and thus
irreducible as a @xmath -module.

#### 2.6.3 Third family

###### Proposition 24.

With @xmath denoting an @xmath dimensional real representation, we have
the following decompositions into:

1.  @xmath irreps:

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

2.  @xmath irreps:

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

3.  @xmath irreps:

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

4.  @xmath irreps:

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

Note that one always has @xmath with the intertwiner given by the
natural @xmath -invariant 4-form @xmath

#### 2.6.4 A classification

Let @xmath be a @xmath -geometry. Then the decomposition of @xmath into
@xmath -irreducibles

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(where @xmath for @xmath being, respectively, @xmath ) gives rise to a
decomposition of the bundle of three-forms

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

into subbundles such that in an adapted frame @xmath one has @xmath As
the spaces @xmath are @xmath -invariant, the latter decomposition does
not depend on the choice of a frame.

Assume now that @xmath admits a characteristic connection, with a
characteristic torsion @xmath It follows that @xmath falls into one of
@xmath classes, numbered by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This way we obtain:

-   4 classes of @xmath -geometries with characteristic torsion.

-   16 classes of @xmath -geometries with characteristic torsion.

-   8 classes of @xmath -geometries with characteristic torsion.

-   128 classes of @xmath -geometries with characteristic torsion, where
    @xmath

-   32 classes of @xmath -geometries with characteristic torsion.

-   64 classes of @xmath -geometries with characteristic torsion.

A connection with skew torsion is not unique for a @xmath -geometry, due
to the one-dimensional subspace @xmath which is also contained in @xmath
There is thus no genuine characteristic torsion – instead, one has a
one-parameter family of connections whose torsion differs by a section
of the one-dimensional @xmath invariant subbundle @xmath (Nurowski [ 1 ]
introduces the notion of restricted nearly-integrability to rule this
subbundle out). Anyway, we can still perform analogous classification,
projecting the skew torsion of any compatible connection onto the
complement of @xmath . We thus have in addition:

-   8 classes of @xmath -geometries admitting a skew-torsion compatible
    connection.

### 2.7 Locally reductive @xmath-geometries

While symmetric spaces provide integrable models for @xmath -geometries,
it is the reductive spaces that give homogeneous examples with
nontrivial characteristic torsion (cf. [ 40 , 41 ] ,). We will first
show how certain locally reductive spaces become equipped with a @xmath
-structure, and how such reductive spaces can be obtained from the
symmetric models. Then, we shall perform a construction of such spaces
at the Lie-algebraic level, having previously shown how to extend
results derived for a single pair @xmath onto all the ‘larger’ cases.

#### 2.7.1 The existence theorem

In what follows, we construct a manifold equipped with a @xmath
-structure from adequate Lie-algebraic data.

###### Lemma 40.

Let @xmath be a subgroup of @xmath with @xmath its Lie algebra. Let
@xmath be a Lie algebra admitting a reductive, non-symmetric
decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath possesses a @xmath -invariant scalar product. Let there
moreover exist a Lie algebra monomorphism @xmath and an orthogonal
isomorphism @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath

Then there exists an @xmath -dimensional manifold equipped with a @xmath
-structure admitting a compatible connection with nontrivial skew
torsion.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a Lie group with Lie alebra @xmath (for example the
simply-connected one). While one is tempted to produce a subgroup from
@xmath and form a reductive homogeneous space by taking a quotient, it
is not trivial to guarantee that the subgroup is closed. Instead, we
shall perform a local construction.

Let @xmath be the left-invariant distribution such that @xmath for each
@xmath Since @xmath is a subalgebra in @xmath it follows that @xmath is
integrable and there exists a neighbourhood @xmath of identity, such
that @xmath gives rise to a foliation of @xmath together with a
projection @xmath onto the space @xmath of leaves, a (smooth) manifold.

Possibly choosing smaller @xmath consider a global section @xmath i.e. a
map satisfying @xmath The Maurer-Cartan form @xmath pulls back to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the latter is further decomposed into

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover @xmath is an isomorphism and extends to a coframe on entire
@xmath . The structure equation @xmath pulls back to

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath Since @xmath is orthogonal, it
follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Considering @xmath as an adapted orthogonal coframe on @xmath , we equip
the latter with a compatible metric, and a @xmath -structure @xmath .
The fibre over @xmath of the latter consists of all frames @xmath such
that there exists @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath

The frame dual to @xmath is a section @xmath with @xmath , where @xmath
is the soldering form on @xmath . Considering

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as a connection form relative to the frame @xmath we obtain a @xmath
-compatible connection @xmath in the tangent bundle, whose torsion
tensor

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is completely skew due to ( 2.14 ). Moreover, it is nontrivial, since
@xmath ∎

The latter lemma reduces the problem of producing locally reductive
@xmath -geometries with characteristic torsion to an algebraic one. This
in turn can be first dealt with on a Lie-algebraic level. Recall first
the notation introduced when decomposing the Magic Square algebras into
symmetric pairs, Subsection 1.1.5 of the previous Chapter. The idea is,
being given an original symmetric decomposition @xmath to produce a
reductive pair by reducing @xmath to a subalgebra @xmath and twisting
the @xmath bracket.

The following proposition performs such a construction whenever the
decomposition of @xmath into @xmath -irreducibles includes @xmath
itself.

###### Lemma 41.

Let @xmath be a symmetric pair, with @xmath semisimple. Let @xmath be a
subalgebra of @xmath such that there exists an orthogonal (with respect
to the Killing form) map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

equivariant under the adjoint action of @xmath

Let us equip the space @xmath with the following bracket:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for @xmath and @xmath where the commutators on the r.h.s are those in
@xmath and @xmath is the adjoint of @xmath with respect to the Killing
form.

Then @xmath becomes a Lie algebra, and the decomposition @xmath is
reductive pair. Moreover, @xmath posesses an invariant nondegenerate
quadratic form which, restricted to @xmath coincides with the Killing
form of @xmath

The proof is by an explicit verification of the Jacobi identities, and
can be found in Section 2.8 . We finally arrive at the following result,
which we shall use in the next section.

###### Theorem 2.

Let @xmath be a simple subalgebra and @xmath a @xmath -submodule
equivalent to @xmath Let moreover the action of @xmath on the orthogonal
complement of @xmath be nontrivial.

Then there exists a @xmath -geometry admitting a compatible connection
with nonvanishing skew torsion.

###### Proof.

We first apply Lemma 41 to the symmetric decomposition @xmath and the
subalgebra @xmath with the map @xmath being the intertwiner between
@xmath and @xmath (due to semisimplicity both @xmath and @xmath are
irreducible, and thus @xmath is automatically orthogonal).

This way we obtained a reductive pair @xmath such that the action on
@xmath on @xmath in @xmath is the same as in @xmath Moreover, for @xmath
(the orthogonal complement of @xmath ), we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, since the action on @xmath on @xmath is nontrivial, there exist
such @xmath that @xmath It thus follows that the reductive pair we have
obtained is not symmetric.

We can finally apply Lemma 40 to obtain a Riemannian manifold @xmath
equipped with a @xmath -structure admitting a compatible connection with
nontrivial skew torsion. Then, choosing an adapted frame @xmath , we can
equip @xmath wich a corresponding tensor @xmath , where @xmath is one of
@xmath depending on @xmath . Clearly, @xmath does not depend on the
choice of a frame. ∎

#### 2.7.2 A generalizing proposition

We are now going to give several examples of subalgebras @xmath
satisfying the conditions of Theorem 2 . While we tried to keep previous
sections of the present chapter possibly independent of the
Jordan-algebraic constructions, here we will need the structures
introduced in Sections 1.1 and 1.2 of the previous chapter.

It useful to note that an example for a pair @xmath gives rise to
examples for all ‘further’ such pairs, with the ordering given by
inclusions:

###### Proposition 25.

Let @xmath and @xmath where @xmath are chosen from @xmath and @xmath
from @xmath Assume there is a subalgebra @xmath and a subspace @xmath
satisfying the conditions of Theorem 2 .

Then there exist natural inclusions @xmath and @xmath such that their
images satisfy the conditions of Theorem 2 for @xmath -geometries.

We need the following Lemma, deriving form the properties of the Magic
Square:

###### Lemma 42.

1.   Let @xmath and @xmath be as in Proposition 25 . Then there exist
    natural monomorphisms (of Lie algebras and of vector spaces):

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    such that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for @xmath and @xmath with the l.h.s bracket taken in @xmath and the
    r.h.s. one in @xmath

2.   Let @xmath and @xmath be as in Proposition 25 . Then there exist
    natural monomorphisms (of Lie algebras and of vector spaces):

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    such that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for @xmath and @xmath with the l.h.s bracket taken in @xmath and the
    r.h.s. one in @xmath

###### Proof.

1.  Recall that

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath            @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    while

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath            @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    One easily checks that the inclusion @xmath induces a Jordan algebra
    monomorphism

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Recalling that the derivations of @xmath are defined as an image of
    the @xmath equivariant map @xmath defined in Lemma 4 :

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    we see that @xmath induces a map

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.15)
      -- -------- -- --------

    such that

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.16)
      -- -------- -- --------

    for @xmath and @xmath Due to equivariance of @xmath the map ( 2.15 )
    gives a monomorphism of Lie algebras,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and ( 2.16 ) translates to @xmath for @xmath and @xmath

    It then follows that the maps

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath            @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    are such as claimed by the Lemma.

2.  Recalling Proposition 3 , we have the following identifications:

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    and the algebras @xmath seen as endomorphisms of the latter spaces
    are

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath            
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    where @xmath and @xmath are the maps defined in Lemma 12 and
    extended by complex linearity, and @xmath denotes the additional
    algebra related to a quaternion-hermitian structure, as described in
    Proposition 3 . In @xmath we have included the additional @xmath as
    spanned by @xmath

    Let us now consider monomorphisms

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

    given by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for @xmath @xmath and @xmath and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for @xmath and @xmath .

    It is then readily checked that @xmath for @xmath and @xmath
    Comparing with the formula for @xmath given in Lemma 12 , one also
    easily verifies @xmath for @xmath and @xmath

    Finally, the map @xmath is given by either @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
    or @xmath (depending on @xmath and @xmath ), while @xmath is
    respectively @xmath , @xmath , @xmath or @xmath It follows from the
    previous paragraph, that @xmath and @xmath are such as claimed by
    the Lemma.

∎

By composing @xmath and @xmath we have the obvious

###### Corollary 12.

Let @xmath be as in Proposition 25 . Then there exist natural
monomorphisms (of Lie algebras and of vector spaces):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath and @xmath with the l.h.s bracket taken in @xmath and the
r.h.s. one in @xmath

This finally leads us to a proof of the Proposition:

###### Proof of Proposition 25.

The inclusions are simply the restrictions @xmath and @xmath of the maps
described by Corollary 12 . That @xmath as a @xmath -module is
guaranteed by the intertwining property ( 2.17 ) of @xmath Finally,
@xmath acts nontrivially at least on @xmath ∎

#### 2.7.3 Examples

We will now give a couple of examples of subalgebras satisfying the
conditions of Theorem 2 . As the examples of @xmath -geometries have
been given by Nurowski in [ 1 ] , we concentrate on constructions
applicable to @xmath - and @xmath -geometries.

###### Example 2 (Subalgebra of type @xmath).

Set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Define @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath We have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath One easily checks that @xmath is a subalgebra of @xmath
isomorphic to @xmath Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One easily checks that @xmath preserves @xmath (and @xmath ) and that
the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

satisfies @xmath for @xmath The action of @xmath on @xmath is evidently
nontrivial.

Theorem 2 for @xmath and @xmath , extended by Proposition 25 yields an
example of a @xmath -geometry with characteristic torsion for all @xmath
and @xmath

###### Example 3 (Subalgebra of type @xmath).

Set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

being of course isomorphic to @xmath Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One easily checks, that @xmath preserves @xmath (and @xmath ) and the
map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is bijective and satisfies @xmath for @xmath The action of @xmath on
@xmath is evidently nontrivial.

Theorem 2 for @xmath and @xmath , extended by Proposition 25 yields an
example of a @xmath -geometry with characteristic torsion for all @xmath
and @xmath

###### Example 4 (Subalgebra of type @xmath).

Set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The compact algebra @xmath has @xmath among its maximal subalgebras, and
one can check (e.g. using LiE [ 38 ] ) that the complex 56-dimensional
module @xmath decomposes under the action of @xmath into

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the defining representation of @xmath

Regarding now the usual inclusion @xmath (given by some generic
nondegenerate quadratic form on @xmath we find that @xmath decomposes
under @xmath into two copies of the complexified adjoint representation:
⁵ ⁵ 5 Since @xmath as @xmath -modules.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The explicit form of the intertwiner is rather complicated [ 42 ] .
Nevertheless, taking

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the real part of one of the two copies of @xmath , we can apply Theorem
2 to obtain an example of a @xmath -geometry with characteristic
torsion.

### 2.8 Proofs of Lemmas 34, 35 & 41

###### Proof of Lemma 34.

To find correct combinatorial factors, note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath terms on the r.h.s., so that we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

so that @xmath Moreover,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the orthonormal projection onto @xmath The Lemma is then
proved recalling the formula for @xmath given at the beginning of the
present chapter. ∎

###### Proof of Lemma 35.

Note first that the map @xmath being by construction @xmath
-equivariant, is given by a multiple of identity when restricted to each
of the irreducible subspaces of @xmath namely:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Distinguishing as usually one of the complex structures of @xmath by
convention @xmath to consider @xmath as a complex vector space, one
notes that each of the former subspaces has a nonzero intersection with
@xmath It is therefore sufficient to check the eigenvalue of @xmath on
each of the following:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is generated by the distinguished complex structure and
@xmath is the complement of @xmath in @xmath

Recall now the formula for the orthorgonal projection of @xmath onto
@xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the operator @xmath is such that the image in @xmath of a tensor
@xmath is:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the index sets @xmath and @xmath are symmetrized separately . Note
that, introducing @xmath to avoid clutter,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with @xmath terms on the r.h.s., so that we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Moreover,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Using computer algebra to keep track of the combinatorial factors, we
expand the symmetrizers and find that:

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

where the contractions of @xmath are:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and by slight abuse of notation @xmath Collecting terms yields

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Thus applying @xmath to @xmath with @xmath we have @xmath where

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Again by abuse of notation we have introduced @xmath Recollecting terms
we finally have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is trivially extended to the unitary complement of @xmath
and @xmath so that it is @xmath on @xmath and @xmath on its unitary
complement. Recalling the eigenvalues of @xmath on @xmath and its
symplectic complement, the result is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We also have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Substituting @xmath and using equivariance of @xmath and irreducibility
of the subspaces the Lemma refers to, the proof is complete. ∎

###### Proof of Lemma 41.

We use the Killing form @xmath to identify @xmath with @xmath in what
follows. We will moreover, independently of the previous indexing
conventions , use @xmath to index @xmath @xmath to index @xmath and
@xmath to index @xmath in such a way that greek letters denote
subalgebras of the algebras indexed by corresponding latin ones:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let the symbols @xmath and @xmath express the bracket on @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for @xmath and @xmath The bracket on @xmath is then given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the restriction of @xmath to @xmath and

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We now investigate the Jacobi identities for @xmath

1.  @xmath : @xmath satisfied since @xmath is a subalgebra in @xmath

2.  @xmath : @xmath satisfied since @xmath is equivariant.

3.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

4.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

Equivariance of @xmath and @xmath automatically ensures satisfaction of
all the equations except for the last one, namely:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We shall compute the first term. In the following formulas the indices
@xmath are implicitly antisymmetrized (the parentheses have been
supressed for the sake of readability):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Calculating each term (using the antisymmetry in @xmath ) yields:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Summing the expressions on the r.h.s. we obtain @xmath

Thus the Jacobi equations are all satisfied and @xmath is a Lie algebra.
Then @xmath is a reductive pair by construction. Finally we note that
the following quadratic form @xmath is invariant:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath and @xmath It clearly coincides with @xmath on @xmath ∎