In the paper [Fendley et al., J. Phys. A: Math. Gen., 38 (2005), pp.
315-322], Fendley, Schoutens and van Eerten studied the hard square
model at negative activity. They found analytical and numerical evidence
that the eigenvalues of the transfer matrix with periodic boundary were
all roots of unity. They also conjectured that for an @xmath square
grid, with doubly periodic boundary, the partition function is equal to
1 when @xmath and @xmath are relatively prime. These conjectures were
proven in [Jonsson, Electronic J. Combin., 13(1) (2006), R67]. There, it
was also noted that the cylindrical case seemed to have interesting
properties when the circumference of the cylinder is odd. In particular,
when 3 is a divisor of both the circumference and the width of the
cylinder minus 1, the partition function is -2. Otherwise, it is equal
to 1. In this paper, we investigate the hard square and hard hexagon
models at activity -1, with single periodic boundary, i.e, cylindrical
identifications, using both topological and combinatorial techniques. We
compute the homology groups of the associated independence complex for
small sizes and suggest a matching which, we believe, with further
analysis could help solve the conjecture. We also briefly review a
technique recently described by Bousquet-MÃ©lou, Linusson and Nevo, for
determining some of the eigenvalues of the transfer matrix of the hard
square model with cylindrical identification using a related, but more
easily analysed model.
