Magnetic fields have been observed in galaxies, clusters of galaxies and
probably in superclusters. While mechanisms exist to generate these in
the late universe, it is possible that magnetic fields have existed
since very early times. A field existing before the formation of the
cosmic microwave background will leave imprints from its impact on
plasma physics that might soon be observable. This thesis is concerned
with investigating methods to predict the form of such imprints.

In chapter 2 we review in detail a standard, linearised cosmology based
on a Robertson-Walker metric and a universe filled with photons,
massless neutrinos, cold dark matter, a cosmological constant, and
baryons. We work in a synchronous gauge for ease of implementation in a
Boltzmann code, and keep our formalism general. We then consider the
statistics of the cosmic microwave background radiation, assuming that
only scalar (density) perturbations cause significant impact.

Chapter 3 introduces an electromagnetic field of arbitrary size and
presents the equations governing the magnetised cosmology, and the
structure of the electromagnetic fields, in greater detail than has
hitherto been shown. We then invoke a hierarchy of approximations,
treating the conductivity of the universe as infinite and thus removing
the electric field, and considering the energy density of the magnetic
field to be small. We present the resulting system in a computationally
useful form and end by reviewing previous studies into the damping
scales induced by photon viscosity.

Chapter 4 considers the intrinsic statistics of the magnetic stresses.
We approach this issue in two ways. Analytical methods are exact but
reliant on an underlying Gaussian distribution function for the magnetic
field, and simulating fields on a finite grid allows a great freedom in
the form of the field but imposes an undesirable granularity and an
unphysical infra-red cut-off. We construct the two-point moments in
Fourier space, extending and improving the analytical results, some of
which we present for the first time. There is excellent agreement
between the results from analysis and those from the simulated fields.
At the one- and three-point level we find significant intrinsic
non-Gaussianities.

In chapter 5 we turn to the observable impacts a primordial magnetic
field. We briefly review previous studies into constraints from the
epoch of nucleosynthesis before turning to consider the cosmic microwave
background. We briefly consider the potential impact of an evolving
damping scale, which may cause decoherence in the sources. Assuming
coherence, which is likely to be accurate for very infra-red fields, the
statistics of the source can be mapped onto the cosmic microwave
background in an extensible manner, modelling the source statistics and
the photon evolution entirely seperately. We demonstrate that our
approach is valid by reproducing the signals for Gaussian power law
fields on the microwave sky. After outlining how we will improve our
predictions by employing a Boltzmann code, we show that it is a purely
technical matter to extend the method to the three-point function. With
detector sensitivity increasing, the non-Gaussianity of the cosmic
microwave background will be well constrained in the near future and our
work allows us to employ a new probe into the nature of an
early-universe magnetic field.

\department

Institute of Cosmology and Gravitation \university University of
Portsmouth, UK \principaladvisor Dr R. Crittenden \submitdate March,
2006 \copyrightyear 2006 \figurespagefalse \tablespagefalse
\setlongtables {preliminary}

{preface}

The work of this thesis was carried out at the Institute of Cosmology
and Gravitation University of Portsmouth, United Kingdom.

The work in this thesis is based on work in collaboration with Robert
Crittenden (ICG, Portsmouth). Much of chapter 4 is based on the paper
“Non-Gaussianity from Cosmic Magnetic Fields”, I. Brown and R.
Crittenden, Phys. Rev. D 72 063002 (2005).

I hereby declare that this thesis has not been submitted, either in the
same or different form, to this or any other university for a degree,
and that it represents my own work.

Iain Brown
