Duality symmetries such as the electric-magnetic duality in
electromagnetism have been of interest in theoretical physics for a long
time. In the context of a potentially existing M-theory, U-duality [ 28
] is the most prominent example. The low energy effective action of
M-theory is @xmath supergravity. In a reduction à la Kaluza–Klein of
@xmath supergravity to @xmath , the U-duality group is proposed to be a
discrete version of @xmath .

The real Lie group @xmath is a global symmetry of this @xmath
supergravity in four dimensions. It is well known that the @xmath part
of this global symmetry group is related to the diffeomorphism symmetry
in @xmath [ 10 ] . This thesis investigates the question if @xmath
supergravity can be lifted to 60 dimensions by restricting the geometry
without introducing new fields. Thus, the entire Lie group @xmath can be
interpreted as a subgroup of the diffeomorphism group in the @xmath
-dimensional exceptional geometry.

I consider a sixty-dimensional Lorentzian manifold with preserved
degenerate symplectic form @xmath of codimension @xmath and a preserved
totally symmetric quartic tensor @xmath . The resulting restriction of
the diffeomorphisms provides the possibility to consistently reduce the
degrees of freedom of the @xmath -dimensional vielbein in such a way
that a @xmath -dimensional subvielbein @xmath is an @xmath matrix.
Therefore it is possible to completely parametrize the latter by degrees
of freedom of the @xmath vielbein and the three-form potential of @xmath
supergravity. Thus, I do not add additional fields to @xmath
supergravity. The result of this thesis is that the @xmath -covariant
supersymmetry variations ¹ ¹ 1 Following the definition of covariance
from the sections 1.1.3 and 1.4.1 , the @xmath symmetry transformation
of the coordinates induces an @xmath action on the fields.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

exactly reproduce the supersymmetry variations of @xmath supergravity,
if the latter are restricted to the degrees of freedom that are covered
by the @xmath -dimensional subvielbein @xmath and the corresponding
fermion @xmath . The @xmath -dimensional @xmath -covariant derivative
@xmath acts on the @xmath -dimensional spinor @xmath of the
supersymmetry variation, which is linked to the @xmath supercharges of
@xmath @xmath supergravity by the standard decomposition into @xmath
used e.g. in [ 11 , 68 ] . The gravitino @xmath is associated with the
field @xmath in a way similar to [ 68 ] . Since I restricted the
diffeomorphisms in @xmath to the ones that preserve the tensors @xmath
and @xmath , it is consistent to describe the fermions as @xmath
representations. The purpose of this dissertation is to explain the
notation used in these @xmath -covariant supersymmetry variations, which
I will state again at the end of chapter 4 .

It was West’s idea [ 64 ] to relate the construction of Borisov &
Ogievetsky [ 3 ] in the context of non-linear realizations to symmetries
of @xmath supergravity. In this dissertation, I follow this line of
thought and devote chapter 3 to the discussion of non-linear
realizations. I start by reviewing the procedure of Borisov & Ogievetsky
and close by discussing the role of torsion in this context, which
cannot be discarded for a supergravity theory [ 17 ] .

Therefore, the adequate framework for the discussion of supergravity
appears to be Einstein–Cartan theory. In chapter 2 , I introduce this
theory as the natural consequence of gauging the isometry group of flat
Minkowski space [ 60 ] . Before presenting the mathematical concepts
that are necessary for this dissertation in chapter 1 , I want to
address some points that will not be covered in this thesis.

Most prominently, the question if the equations of motion of @xmath
supergravity can be lifted to a @xmath -dimensional theory without
introducing new fields, is beyond the scope of this thesis. I will
restrict myself to commenting on possible Lagrangians in the conclusion.
Furthermore, I refrain from discussing the supersymmetry variations of
the fields of @xmath supergravity that are not encoded in the @xmath
-dimensional subvielbein @xmath in detail. From the point of view of
@xmath @xmath supergravity and global @xmath -covariance, it is very
probable that these follow the same scheme as the ones @xmath comprises.
The fate of the on-shell supersymmetry algebra of @xmath supergravity
will not be part of this dissertation either. Since Cartan’s theorem [ 6
] rules out general @xmath -dimensional diffeomorphisms, if both tensors
@xmath and @xmath are preserved, it is a very interesting question in
which way the supersymmetry algebra can close at all. It is not clear
either, if this construction for the case of the symmetry groups @xmath
and @xmath of @xmath and @xmath maximal supergravity, respectively,
leads to similar results. I will also refrain from a detailed discussion
of the candidates @xmath [ 13 ] and @xmath [ 65 ] for symmetries of
M-theory, because only a complete theory in @xmath will allow for a
relation.

From a string theory point of view, this construction is interesting for
the following reasons. As this theory in @xmath dimensions is U-duality
invariant by construction, it is expected to also contain @xmath
supergravity. This is possible, because the choice of the eleven
dimensions of @xmath supergravity in the @xmath theory is not canonical:
choosing a different set of @xmath coordinate directions from the @xmath
possible ones may allow an interpretation of the fields of this @xmath
theory as the ones of @xmath supergravity. I want to conclude this
introduction with the remark that requiring @xmath -covariance in @xmath
and diffeomorphism invariance in @xmath may lead to a strong selection
criterium for higher curvature corrections in M-theory.
