Cauchy problem @xmath with zero second fundamental form in @xmath . We
assume that @xmath has nonnegative energy density everywhere, so by the
constraint equations @xmath must have nonnegative scalar curvature.
Suppose also @xmath has an outermost apparent horizon of area @xmath ,
and event horizon of area @xmath , and total mass @xmath (see [ 14 ] , [
13 ] for the definitions of these horizons). As long as a singularity
does not form, then it is assumed that eventually the space-time should
converge on some stationary final state. From the theorems of Israel [
17 ] , Hawking [ 11 ] , and Robinson [ 24 ] , the only stationary vacuum
black holes are the Kerr solutions which satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the area of the horizon of the Kerr black hole, @xmath
is the mass at infinity, and @xmath is the angular momentum.

However, by the Hawing area theorem [ 10 ] , the area of the event
horizon of the black hole is nondecreasing. Thus, @xmath . Also,
presumably some energy radiates off to infinity, so we expect to have
@xmath .

The apparent horizon is defined to be the outer boundary of the region
in @xmath which contains trapped or marginally trapped surfaces [ 14 ] .
The apparent horizon itself must then be a marginally trapped surface,
and hence satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the mean curvature of the apparent horizon in @xmath ,
@xmath is the second fundamental form of @xmath in @xmath , and @xmath
is the outward unit normal to the apparent horizon in @xmath . Hence,
since we chose @xmath to have zero second fundamental form, @xmath , so
that the apparent horizon is a zero mean curvature surface in @xmath .
Furthermore, if we consider the surface of smallest area which encloses
the apparent horizon, it too must have zero mean curvature and hence is
a marginally trapped surface in @xmath . Thus, the apparent horizon is
an outermost minimal surface of @xmath , which by stability arguments,
must be a sphere [ 14 ] . Since the event horizon always contains the
apparent horizon, @xmath , so putting all the inequalities together we
conclude that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus, Penrose argued, assuming the cosmic censor hypothesis and a few
reasonable sounding assumptions as to the nature of gravitational
collapse, given a complete asymptotically flat @xmath -manifold @xmath
of total mass @xmath with nonnegative scalar curvature which has an
outermost minimal sphere of total area @xmath , then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Conversely, he argued, if one could find an @xmath which was a
counterexample to the above inequality, then it would be likely that the
counterexample, when used as initial conditions in the Cauchy problem
for Einsteinâ€™s equation, would produce a naked singularity. Since
Huisken and Ilmanen have proved the above inequality, they have ruled
out one possible way of constructing counterexamples to the cosmic
censor hypothesis.
