Acknowledgments

I am deeply grateful to my adviser, Professor Richard Schoen, for
suggesting the topic of this thesis and for the remarkable insight and
ideas which he routinely provides. Rick has had a tremendous positive
influence not only on this thesis but also on my education as a
mathematician, and I thank him.

I would also like to thank Professors Ben Andrews, Leon Simon, and Brian
White who have also always been enthusiastic and generous with their
time and who have made important contributions to this thesis. I also
thank the Rice University mathematics department for nurturing my
interest in mathematics as an undergraduate. In addition, I wish to
acknowledge the Department of Defense and the ARCS Foundation for their
financial support during my first four years of graduate school.

I am very appreciative of the help Kevin Iga has given me with many of
the technical aspects of this thesis. I also thank Kevin for many
interesting mathematical conversations.

Finally, I especially would like to thank my parents and my brother for
their love and support. My parents have always encouraged our interest
in mathematics, and without their appreciation for the beauty of
mathematics this thesis never would have happened.

\afterpreface

## Chapter 1 Introduction

Einstein’s theory of general relativity is a theory of gravity which
asserts that matter causes the four dimensional space-time in which we
live to be curved, and that our perception of gravity is a consequence
of this curvature. Let @xmath be the space-time manifold with metric
@xmath of signature @xmath . Then the central formula of general
relativity is Einstein’s equation,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the energy-momentum tensor, @xmath is the Einstein
curvature tensor, @xmath is the Ricci curvature tensor, and @xmath is
the scalar curvature of @xmath . The beauty of general relativity is
that this simple formula explains gravity more accurately than Newtonian
physics and is entirely consistent with large scale experiments.

However, the nature of the behavior of mass in general relativity is
still not well understood. It is not even well understood how to define
how much energy and momentum exists in a given region, except in special
cases. There does exist a well defined notion of local energy and
momentum density which is simply given by the energy-momentum tensor
which, by equation 1.1 , can be computed in terms of the curvature of
@xmath . Also, if we assume that the matter of the space-time manifold
@xmath is concentrated in some central region of the universe, then
@xmath becomes flatter as we get farther away from this central region.
If the curvature of @xmath decays quickly enough, then @xmath is said to
be asymptotically flat, so that with these assumptions it is then
possible to define the total mass of the space-time @xmath .
Interestingly enough, though, the definition of local energy-momentum
density, which involves curvature terms of @xmath , bears no obvious
resemblance to the definition of the total mass of @xmath , which is
defined in terms of how fast the metric becomes flat at infinity.

The Penrose inequality and the positive mass theorem can both be thought
of as basic attempts at understanding the relationship between the local
energy density of a space-time @xmath and the total mass of @xmath . In
physical terms, the positive mass theorem states that an isolated
gravitational system with nonnegative local energy density must have
nonnegative total energy. The idea is that nonnegative energy densities
must “add up” to something nonnegative. The Penrose inequality, on the
other hand, states that if an isolated gravitational system with
nonnegative local energy density contains a black hole of mass @xmath ,
then the total energy of the system must be at least @xmath .

Important cases of the positive mass theorem and the Penrose inequality
can be translated into statements about complete, asymptotically flat
@xmath -manifolds @xmath with nonnegative scalar curvature. If we
consider @xmath as a space-like hypersurface of @xmath with second
fundamental form @xmath in @xmath , then equation 1.1 implies that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the scalar curvature of the metric @xmath , @xmath is
the local energy density, and @xmath is the local current density. These
two equations are called the constraint equations for @xmath in @xmath ,
and the assumption of nonnegative energy density everywhere in @xmath
implies that we must have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

at all points on @xmath [ 28 ] . Thus we see that if we restrict our
attention to @xmath -manifolds which have zero mean curvature in @xmath
, the constraint equations and the assumption of nonnegative energy
density imply that @xmath has nonnegative scalar curvature everywhere.
We also assume that @xmath is asymptotically flat, which is defined in
section 2.4 , in which case we can define the total mass of @xmath ,
also given in section 2.4 .

An “end” of an @xmath -manifold is a region of the manifold
diffeomorphic to @xmath where @xmath is the ball of radius one in @xmath
. In general, @xmath may have any number of disjoint ends, but for
simplicity, let us assume that @xmath has only one disjoint end and that
it is asymptotically flat. In section 2.4 we will show that without loss
of generality (for stating the Penrose inequality and the positive mass
theorem) we may assume that @xmath is isometric to @xmath for some
compact set @xmath in @xmath and some ball @xmath in @xmath centered
around the origin, and for some constant @xmath , where @xmath and
@xmath is the radial coordinate in @xmath . This is a convenient
assumption about @xmath , because the total mass of the system is then
just @xmath . The metric @xmath has zero scalar curvature, is
spherically symmetric, and is called the Schwarzschild metric of mass
@xmath , and we say that in the above case, @xmath is Schwarzschild with
mass @xmath at infinity. Using this simplified setup, we can make a
statement which is equivalent to the positive mass theorem in this
setting.

The Positive Mass Theorem (Schoen, Yau, 1979) Suppose @xmath is
complete, has nonnegative scalar curvature, and is Schwarzschild with
mass @xmath at infinity. Then @xmath , and @xmath if and only if @xmath
is isometric to @xmath with the standard flat metric.

Apparent horizons of black holes in @xmath correspond to outermost
minimal spheres of @xmath if we assume @xmath has zero second
fundamental form in @xmath . An outermost minimal sphere is a sphere in
@xmath which locally minimizes area (and hence has zero mean curvature)
and which is not contained entirely inside another minimal sphere. We
will also use the term horizon to mean an outermost minimal sphere in
@xmath . It is easy to show that two outermost horizons never intersect.
Also, it follows from a stability argument that these minimal surfaces
are always spheres [ 14 ] . However, there may be more than one
outermost minimal sphere, with each minimal sphere corresponding to a
different black hole. As we will see in the next section, there is a
strong motivation to define the mass of a black hole as @xmath , where
@xmath is the surface area of the horizon. Hence, the physical statement
that a system with nonnegative energy density containing a black hole of
mass @xmath must have total mass at least @xmath can be translated into
the following geometric statement.

The Penrose Inequality (Huisken, Ilmanen, announced 1997) Suppose @xmath
is complete, has nonnegative scalar curvature, contains an outermost
minimal sphere with surface area @xmath , and is Schwarzschild with mass
@xmath at infinity. Then @xmath , with equality only in the case that
@xmath is isometric to the Schwarzschild metric of mass @xmath outside
the horizon.

When @xmath , the Schwarzschild metrics @xmath have minimal spheres at
@xmath with areas @xmath so that these metrics give equality in the
Penrose inequality, and in fact, according to the recent announcement of
Huisken and Ilmanen, these are the only metrics (outside the horizon)
which give equality.

The proof that Huisken and Ilmanen used to prove the Penrose inequality
is as interesting as the theorem itself. We discuss the main ideas of
their proof in section 1.4 . We also give another proof of the Penrose
inequality for two classes of manifolds in chapter 2 using isoperimetric
surface techniques. Both approaches are also interesting because they
give hints about the nature of quasi-local mass in general relativity.

Also, using isoperimetric surface techniques we are able to prove a
generalized Penrose inequality for a class of manifolds in the case that
@xmath has more than one horizon. The idea is that if @xmath has more
than one horizon, then it should be possible to bound the total mass
from below by some function of the areas of the horizons. In this way we
hope to understand how masses “add” in general relativity. We state the
conditions under which we can prove a generalized Penrose inequality in
the introduction to chapter 2 and then conjecture that this generalized
Penrose inequality is always true.

### 1.1 Motivation behind the Penrose Inequality

In 1973, Roger Penrose proposed the Penrose inequality as a test of the
cosmic censor hypothesis [ 23 ] . The cosmic censor hypothesis states
that naked singularities do not develop starting with physically
reasonable nonsingular generic initial conditions for the Cauchy problem
in general relativity. (However, it has been shown by Christodoulou [ 5
] that naked singularities can develop from nongeneric initial
conditions.) If naked singularities did typically develop from generic
initial conditions, then this would be a serious problem for general
relativity since it would not be possible to solve the Einstein
equations uniquely past these singularities. Singularities such as black
holes do develop but are shielded from observers at infinity by their
horizons so that the Einstein equations can still be solved from the
point of view of an observer at infinity.

A summary of Penrose’s argument can be found in [ 22 ] . The main idea
is to consider a space-time @xmath with given initial conditions for the
Cauchy problem @xmath with zero second fundamental form in @xmath . We
assume that @xmath has nonnegative energy density everywhere, so by the
constraint equations @xmath must have nonnegative scalar curvature.
Suppose also @xmath has an outermost apparent horizon of area @xmath ,
and event horizon of area @xmath , and total mass @xmath (see [ 14 ] , [
13 ] for the definitions of these horizons). As long as a singularity
does not form, then it is assumed that eventually the space-time should
converge on some stationary final state. From the theorems of Israel [
17 ] , Hawking [ 11 ] , and Robinson [ 24 ] , the only stationary vacuum
black holes are the Kerr solutions which satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the area of the horizon of the Kerr black hole, @xmath
is the mass at infinity, and @xmath is the angular momentum.

However, by the Hawing area theorem [ 10 ] , the area of the event
horizon of the black hole is nondecreasing. Thus, @xmath . Also,
presumably some energy radiates off to infinity, so we expect to have
@xmath .

The apparent horizon is defined to be the outer boundary of the region
in @xmath which contains trapped or marginally trapped surfaces [ 14 ] .
The apparent horizon itself must then be a marginally trapped surface,
and hence satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the mean curvature of the apparent horizon in @xmath ,
@xmath is the second fundamental form of @xmath in @xmath , and @xmath
is the outward unit normal to the apparent horizon in @xmath . Hence,
since we chose @xmath to have zero second fundamental form, @xmath , so
that the apparent horizon is a zero mean curvature surface in @xmath .
Furthermore, if we consider the surface of smallest area which encloses
the apparent horizon, it too must have zero mean curvature and hence is
a marginally trapped surface in @xmath . Thus, the apparent horizon is
an outermost minimal surface of @xmath , which by stability arguments,
must be a sphere [ 14 ] . Since the event horizon always contains the
apparent horizon, @xmath , so putting all the inequalities together we
conclude that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus, Penrose argued, assuming the cosmic censor hypothesis and a few
reasonable sounding assumptions as to the nature of gravitational
collapse, given a complete asymptotically flat @xmath -manifold @xmath
of total mass @xmath with nonnegative scalar curvature which has an
outermost minimal sphere of total area @xmath , then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Conversely, he argued, if one could find an @xmath which was a
counterexample to the above inequality, then it would be likely that the
counterexample, when used as initial conditions in the Cauchy problem
for Einstein’s equation, would produce a naked singularity. Since
Huisken and Ilmanen have proved the above inequality, they have ruled
out one possible way of constructing counterexamples to the cosmic
censor hypothesis.

### 1.2 The Schwarzschild Metric

The space-like Schwarzschild metric is a particularly important example
to consider when discussing the Penrose inequality. First of all,
Huisken and Ilmanen prove that it is the only @xmath -manifold which
gives equality in the Penrose inequality. Also, if a @xmath -manifold is
assumed to be complete, spherically symmetric, and have zero scalar
curvature, then it must be isometric to either a Schwarzschild metric of
mass @xmath or @xmath , which can be viewed as the Schwarzschild metric
when @xmath .

In addition, understanding the Schwarzschild metric is particularly
important for chapter 2 because we show in section 2.4 that without loss
of generality for proving the Penrose inequality for @xmath we may
assume that outside a compact set @xmath is spherically symmetric with
zero scalar curvature, which means that in this region it is isometric
to the Schwarzschild metric of some mass @xmath . We also show in that
same section that all asymptotically flat metrics of nonnegative scalar
curvature can be perturbed pointwise less than @xmath in such a way that
the total mass is changed less than @xmath too and so that the new
metric is isometric to the Schwarzschild metric outside a compact set.
Thus, the Schwarzschild metric is a useful picture to keep in mind.

The space-like Schwarzschild metric, @xmath , is a time symmetric
asymptotically flat three-dimensional maximal slice (chosen to have zero
momentum at infinity) of the four-dimensional Schwarzschild space-time
metric.The space-like Schwarzschild metric is conformal to @xmath with
@xmath . The Schwarzschild metric of mass @xmath , @xmath , can also be
isometrically embedded into four-dimensional Euclidean space as the
three-dimensional set of points in @xmath satisfying @xmath , seen in
figure 1.1 . Hence, @xmath is a minimal sphere of area @xmath , so we
have equality in the Penrose inequality.

### 1.3 The Spherically Symmetric Case

In this section we sketch a proof of the Penrose inequality in the case
that @xmath is spherically symmetric. The proof is very easy
conceptually, but what is more important is that some of the ideas
generalize. In particular, we will see why the minimal sphere in the
Penrose inequality must be outermost.

Let @xmath be a complete asymptotically flat spherically symmetric
@xmath -manifold with nonnegative scalar curvature. For convenience, we
also assume that @xmath is isometric to the Schwarzschild metric of some
mass @xmath outside a large compact set. Then the total mass of @xmath
is @xmath . Let @xmath be the spherically symmetric sphere containing a
volume @xmath in @xmath . Let @xmath be the area of this sphere. It
turns out that the function @xmath , @xmath , captures all the
information about @xmath since @xmath is spherically symmetric.

Let @xmath be the scalar curvature of @xmath on @xmath . From the
calculations we will do in section 2.1 , it follows that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

It turns out that @xmath whenever @xmath since we find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath .

Let @xmath be the outermost minimal sphere. It follows that @xmath for
all @xmath . Hence, @xmath is increasing in this range as well, so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore @xmath since @xmath . Also, we assumed that @xmath was
isometric to the Schwarzschild metric outside a large compact set, and
we claim that @xmath , the mass parameter of the Schwarzschild metric,
in this region, or equivalently, for @xmath for some @xmath . To see
this, consider the mass function @xmath defined on the Schwarzschild
metric, where now @xmath refers to the volume contained by the
spherically symmetric spheres of the Schwarzschild metric which is
outside the horizon. Then by equation 1.11 , @xmath is constant for all
@xmath on the Schwarzschild metric since the Schwarzschild metric has
zero scalar curvature. Furthermore, setting @xmath and considering
@xmath at the horizon yields @xmath , the mass parameter of the
Schwarzschild metric, since the Schwarzschild metric gives equality in
the Penrose inequality. Thus, @xmath for all @xmath in the Schwarzschild
metric, so going back to @xmath , we see that @xmath , the mass
parameter of the Schwarzschild metric, for @xmath . Thus, it follows
from inequality 1.12 that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

which proves the Penrose inequality for spherically symmetric manifolds.

Conversely, we see that equation 1.11 can be used to construct
spherically symmetric manifolds which do not satisfy the Penrose
inequality if we do not require the minimal sphere to be outermost. In
figure 1.2 , we are viewing @xmath as an isometrically embedded
submanifold of @xmath with the standard Euclidean metric. @xmath is
spherically symmetric and is constructed by rotating the curve shown
above around the @xmath -axis in @xmath . Hence, @xmath and @xmath are
both @xmath -spheres, and we can choose the curve shown above so that
the scalar curvature of @xmath , @xmath , is non-negative.

The Penrose inequality, @xmath , is true for @xmath , but is not true
for @xmath . However, @xmath is not an outermost minimal sphere since it
is contained by another minimal sphere, namely, @xmath . In fact, since
@xmath is not outermost, we can construct a spherically symmetric
manifold like the one shown above so that the area of @xmath is as large
as we like and the total mass of @xmath is still one.

### 1.4 The Hawking Mass and Inverse Mean Curvature Flows

One goal in general relativity is to understand how to define the amount
of mass inside a given region. In section 1.3 , we defined a function
@xmath which was increasing as a function of @xmath outside the
outermost minimal sphere. Furthermore, for large @xmath , @xmath equaled
the total mass of the manifold. Hence, it seems reasonable to say that
the spherically symmetric sphere @xmath defined in section 1.3 contains
a mass @xmath . The function @xmath is called a quasi-local mass
function.

Naturally we would like to define a quasi-local mass function which
would measure the amount of mass inside any surface @xmath which is the
boundary of a region in any @xmath -manifold @xmath . We refer the
reader to [ 6 ] , [ 3 ] , [ 7 ] , and [ 9 ] for a complete discussion of
this topic.

In this section we discuss a definition of quasi-local mass proposed by
Hawking called the Hawking mass. Going back to section 1.3 , we recall
that in the spherically symmetric case,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

As can be seen from the calculations in the appendix and as will be
shown later, it so happens that @xmath , where @xmath is the mean
curvature of the spherically symmetric sphere @xmath . Hence, one way to
generalize equation 1.14 is to define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the area of @xmath and @xmath is the mean curvature of
@xmath in @xmath . It turns out that this definition of quasi-local mass
has some very important properties.

In [ 7 ] , Geroch showed that if @xmath has nonnegative scalar
curvature, then the Hawking mass is nondecreasing when the surface
@xmath is flowed out at a rate equal to the inverse of its mean
curvature. This is straight forward to check using equations A.2 and A.3
from the appendix and the Gauss equation which is given in equation 2.1
of section 2.1 . In view of this, Jang and Wald proposed using the
Hawking mass function to prove the Penrose inequality [ 22 ] . They
suggested that we should let @xmath be an outermost horizon and then to
flow out using an inverse mean curvature flow to create a family of
surfaces @xmath flowing out to infinity. Since the Hawking mass function
@xmath is nondecreasing as a function of @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore @xmath , where @xmath is the area of the outermost horizon
@xmath , since horizons have zero mean curvature. Hence, Jang and Wald
proposed a proof of the Penrose inequality which is basically a
generalization of the proof which works in the spherically symmetric
case.

The main problem for this type of proof is the existence of an inverse
mean curvature flow. Naturally, if the mean curvature of the surface
ever went to zero or became negative, the flow could not exist, at least
in this form. However, Huisken and Ilmanen have recently announced that
they have been able to generalize the idea of an inverse mean curvature
flow to a “weak” inverse mean curvature flow which always exists and
hence can be used to prove the Penrose inequality [ 15 ] .

They introduce the notion of a “maximal minimal mean convex hull” of a
surface @xmath which equals the outermost surface of minimum area needed
to enclose @xmath . Then their weak inverse mean curvature flow can be
thought of as continuously replacing @xmath with the maximal minimal
mean convex hull of @xmath while flowing out using the inverse mean
curvature flow. The replacement process can then be shown to never
decrease the mass and also to keep the mean curvature of @xmath
nonnegative. The resulting weak flow is a family of surfaces which
occasionally has “jumps” and for which the Hawking mass is
nondecreasing. They use this to prove the Penrose inequality as stated
in the introduction to this chapter.

Partial results on the Penrose inequality have also been found by
Herzlich [ 14 ] using the Dirac operator which Witten [ 33 ] used to
prove the positive mass theorem, by Gibbons [ 8 ] in the special case of
collapsing shells, by Tod [ 32 ] , and by Bartnik [ 4 ] for
quasi-spherical metrics.

However, other versions of the Penrose inequality remain open. As in the
positive mass theorem [ 29 ] , the assumption of nonnegative scalar
curvature for @xmath should be able to be modified to include a more
general local nonnegative energy condition. It is also natural to ask
what kind of generalized Penrose inequality we should expect for
manifolds with multiple horizons. In chapter 2 we prove a generalized
Penrose inequality for a certain class of manifolds and in section 2.10
conjecture that this generalized inequality is always true.

### 1.5 Volume Comparison Theorems

The isoperimetric surface techniques which we will develop to study the
Penrose inequality in general relativity also can be used to prove
several volume comparison theorems, including a new proof of Bishop’s
volume comparison theorem for positive Ricci curvature.

Let @xmath be the standard metric (with any scaling) on @xmath with
constant Ricci curvature @xmath . Bishop’s theorem says that if @xmath
is a complete Riemannian manifold ( @xmath ) with @xmath , then @xmath .
It is then natural to ask whether a similar type of volume comparison
theorem could be true for scalar curvature. As it happens, a lower bound
on scalar curvature by itself is not sufficient to give an upper bound
on the total volume. We can scale a cylinder, @xmath , to have any
positive scalar curvature and still have infinite volume.

Since a lower bound on scalar curvature is not enough to realize an
upper bound on the volume of a manifold, in chapter 3 we consider @xmath
-manifolds @xmath which satisfy @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is the
standard metric on @xmath with constant scalar curvature @xmath and
constant Ricci curvature @xmath (so that naturally @xmath ). It turns
out that there do exist values of @xmath for which these curvature
conditions imply that @xmath , giving us a volume comparison theorem for
scalar curvature. We also find the best value for @xmath for which this
theorem is true.

## Chapter 2 The Penrose Inequality

We will use isoperimetric surfaces to prove the Penrose inequality for
two cases. In the first case, we will use surfaces which globally
minimize area among surfaces which contain the same volume, and in the
second case, we will need to look at collections of surfaces, each of
which locally minimizes area among surfaces enclosing the same volume.
In both cases these surfaces will have constant mean curvature.

###### Definition 1

Suppose @xmath is asymptotically flat, complete, and has only one
outermost minimal sphere @xmath . Let @xmath be the closure of the
component of @xmath that contains the asymptotically flat end. We define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the boundary of some 3-dimensional region in @xmath and
@xmath is a surface in @xmath in the same homology class of @xmath as
the horizon @xmath .

If @xmath contains a volume @xmath outside the horizon and @xmath , then
we say that @xmath minimizes area with the given volume constraint.
Naturally, @xmath could have multiple components, as long as one of the
components contains the horizon.

###### Condition 1

@xmath has only one horizon @xmath , and for each @xmath , if one or
more area minimizers exist for @xmath , then at least one of these area
minimizers for the volume @xmath has exactly one component.

Note that condition 1 does not assume that an area minimizer exists for
each @xmath , just that if one or more do exist for @xmath , at least
one of these minimizers for @xmath has only one component. However, once
condition 1 is assumed, the existence of an area minimizer @xmath for
each @xmath follows from the behavior of @xmath as will be shown in
section 2.7 . Also, assuming condition 1 , we can prove the Penrose
inequality.

###### Theorem 1

Suppose @xmath is complete, has nonnegative scalar curvature, contains
an outermost minimal sphere with surface area @xmath , is Schwarzschild
with mass @xmath at infinity, and satisfies condition 1 . Then @xmath .

Naturally, we want to find a way to get around condition 1 . This can be
partially accomplished if we consider a different minimization problem,
minimizing the sum of the areas to the three halves power given a volume
constraint. Posing this type of problem seems strange at first, but
turns out to be surprisingly natural for manifolds with nonnegative
scalar curvature.

###### Definition 2

Suppose @xmath is asymptotically flat, complete, and has any number of
horizons. Let @xmath be the closure of the component of @xmath that
contains the asymptotically flat end. Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the @xmath are the boundaries of the components of some
3-dimensional open region in @xmath and @xmath is in @xmath and is in
the homology class of @xmath which contains both a large sphere at
infinity and the union of the horizons.

If the collection @xmath contains a volume @xmath outside the horizons
and @xmath , then we say that @xmath minimizes @xmath for the volume
@xmath . The only problem that occurs with this optimization problem is
that two or more surfaces @xmath and @xmath can push up against each
other.

###### Condition 2

For each @xmath , if one or more sets of surfaces minimize @xmath for
the volume @xmath , then at least one of these sets of surfaces @xmath
which minimize @xmath for the volume @xmath is pairwise disjoint, that
is, @xmath for all @xmath .

Note that condition 2 does not assume that an @xmath minimizer exists
for each @xmath , just that if one or more do exist for @xmath , at
least one of these @xmath minimizers for @xmath does not have any of its
surfaces pushing up against or touching each other. However, once
condition 2 is assumed, the existence of an @xmath minimizer for each
@xmath follows in a nice way from the behavior of @xmath as we will see
in section 2.8 . Also, it is possible to verify experimentally using a
computer to construct axially symmetric, conformally flat metrics with
multiple horizons that there are examples of 3-manifolds which appear to
satisfy condition 2 but not condition 1 .

At first glance the issue of existence for this optimization problem
looks bleak for several reasons. First, two components @xmath and @xmath
can be joined into one component by a thread of area zero. This is
always disadvantageous for minimizing @xmath and so is not a problem.
Also, one component of @xmath might run off to infinity. In addition,
“bubbling” might occur, where the optimal configuration is an infinite
number of tiny balls with a finite total volume. Amazingly, if we assume
condition 2 , these last two problems do not occur and the Penrose
inequality follows.

###### Theorem 2

Suppose @xmath is complete, has nonnegative scalar curvature, contains
one or more outermost minimal spheres with surface areas @xmath , is
Schwarzschild with mass @xmath at infinity, and satisfies condition 2 .
Then @xmath .

Thus, condition 2 implies a stronger version of the Penrose inequality
since
@xmath for all @xmath . Based on this, it seems plausible to conjecture
that for multiple black holes, this stronger Penrose inequality is
always true. We provide additional motivation for this conjecture in
section 2.10 .

###### Conjecture 1

Suppose @xmath is complete, has nonnegative scalar curvature, contains
one of more outermost minimal spheres with surface areas @xmath , and is
Schwarzschild with mass @xmath at infinity. Then @xmath .

### 2.1 Isoperimetric Surface Techniques

We will prove theorems 1 and 2 using constant mean curvature surfaces
which minimize area given a volume constraint. First, let us assume the
hypotheses of theorem 1 including condition 1 and recall the definition
of @xmath given in the previous section. Under these circumstances, we
show in section 2.7 that for all @xmath , there exists a smooth,
constant mean curvature surface @xmath which minimizes area among
surfaces which enclose a volume @xmath outside the horizon. By condition
1 , we may choose the minimizer @xmath to have only one component, and
since @xmath is a minimizer, the area of @xmath is @xmath .

@xmath contains important geometric information, including the fact that
@xmath is the area of the horizon. The fact that the horizon is
outermost implies that @xmath is nondecreasing.

We must use this last fact somewhere, because the Penrose inequality is
definitely not true without the assumption that the minimal sphere in
the conjecture is outermost. In fact, it is easy to construct a
complete, spherically symmetric 3-manifold with nonnegative scalar
curvature and total mass @xmath and an arbitrarily large (non-outermost)
minimal sphere. It is worth noting that when considering other possible
approaches to the Penrose inequality, the hypothesis of the Penrose
inequality that the minimal sphere is outermost is often one of the more
delicate and difficult points to handle.

Also, as we will prove in section 2.6 , the total mass @xmath of @xmath
, is encoded in the asymptotic behavior of the function @xmath for large
@xmath . Hence, the key to proving theorem 1 is understanding how the
assumption of nonnegative scalar curvature on @xmath bounds the behavior
of @xmath .

###### Theorem 3

Suppose @xmath is complete, has nonnegative scalar curvature, is
Schwarzschild at infinity, and satisfies condition 1 . Then the function
@xmath defined in definition 1 satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in the sense of comparison functions, where this means that for all
@xmath there exists a smooth function @xmath with @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. First we comment that all the inequalities which we state “in the
sense of comparison function” are also true distributionally. We do not
need this, so we do not prove it, but the proof is very similar to the
proof of lemma 1 in section 2.2 .

To get an upper bound for @xmath at @xmath , we will do a unit normal
variation on @xmath . Let @xmath be the surface created by flowing
@xmath out at every point in the normal direction at unit speed for time
@xmath . Since @xmath is smooth, we can do this variation for @xmath for
some @xmath . Abusing notation slightly, we can also parameterize these
surfaces by their volumes as @xmath so that @xmath corresponds to @xmath
. Let @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath since @xmath is not necessarily
minimizing for its volume. Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To compute @xmath , we will need to compute the first and second
derivatives of the area of @xmath and the volume that it encloses. We
will use the formulas

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the dot represents differentiation with respect to @xmath , @xmath
is the surface area 2-form for @xmath , @xmath is the second fundamental
form for @xmath , @xmath is the mean curvature, and @xmath is the
outward pointing unit normal vector. Since @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

And since @xmath , we have that at @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By single variable calculus,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that at @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

By the Gauss equation,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the scalar curvature of @xmath and @xmath is the Gauss
curvature of @xmath . Substituting we get,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath has only one component, @xmath by the Gauss-Bonnet theorem.
Since @xmath and @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally, since @xmath and @xmath for every @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the sense of comparison functions. @xmath

It turns out that @xmath is more convenient to work with than @xmath .
Note that @xmath and @xmath have the same units. Making this
substitution, inequality 2.2 becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the sense of comparison functions. This last inequality will be the
key step in proving theorem 1 .

Now we turn to the other case in which we can prove the Penrose
conjecture where there may be multiple horizons. We assume the
hypotheses of theorem 2 including condition 2 and recall the definition
of @xmath given in the previous section. Under these circumstances, we
show in section 2.8 that for all @xmath , there exists a collection
@xmath of smooth surfaces which minimizes @xmath among collections of
surfaces which enclose a volume @xmath outside the horizons. The mean
curvature is constant (but generally different) on each component. By
condition 2 , we may take @xmath to be pairwise disjoint, and since
@xmath is a minimizer, @xmath .

@xmath also contains important geometric information, including the fact
that @xmath is the sum of the areas of the horizons to the three halves
power. The fact that the horizons are outermost implies that @xmath is
nondecreasing.

Again, as is proved in section 2.6 , the total mass @xmath of @xmath ,
is encoded in the asymptotic behavior of the function @xmath for large
@xmath , since we will show that for sufficiently large @xmath , the
minimizing collection of surfaces is a single large sphere. Hence, the
key to proving theorem 2 is understanding how the assumption of
nonnegative scalar curvature on @xmath bounds the behavior of @xmath .

###### Theorem 4

Suppose @xmath is complete, has nonnegative scalar curvature, is
Schwarzschild at infinity, and satisfies condition 2 . Then the function
@xmath defined in definition 2 satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in the sense of comparison functions, where this means that for all
@xmath there exists a smooth function @xmath with @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Sketch of proof. The method of the proof here is exactly as in theorem 3
. The reason condition 2 is needed is that if two components of @xmath
push up against each other, then we can not flow both of the surfaces
out at the same time. We want to find a flow on @xmath which is constant
(but different) on each component. Let @xmath be the sum of the areas to
the three halves power of these new surfaces, parameterized as before by
the total enclosed volume @xmath . First we consider a flow which is
constant on @xmath and zero on all the other components. As in
inequality 2.3 , we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The next observation to make is that the value we get for @xmath is
independent of which component we flow out. Otherwise, we could find a
volume preserving flow which flowed out on one component and flowed in
on the other component which decreased the value of @xmath . It follows
that @xmath is the same for any flow. From these observations, it is
possible to calculate @xmath for any flow which is constant on each
component. We then choose the flow which gives us the best estimate for
@xmath which is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally, since @xmath and @xmath for every @xmath , the theorem follows
as before. @xmath

### 2.2 The Mass Function

The function @xmath will be used to prove theorem 1 and the function
@xmath will be used to prove theorem 2 . We choose to abuse notation
slightly from this point on and call both functions @xmath since both
functions satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the sense of comparison functions. It always will be clear from the
context which function is intended. Given an inequality like the one
above, it is natural to want to integrate it.

###### Definition 3

For @xmath , let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the mass function, where @xmath .

@xmath is continuous, but @xmath does not necessarily exist for all
@xmath , although it does exist almost everywhere since @xmath is
monotone increasing. The left and right hand derivatives, @xmath and
@xmath , do always exist though. This follows from the fact that @xmath
has a comparison function @xmath (or @xmath ) which touches @xmath at
@xmath and is greater than @xmath in some neighborhood of @xmath for all
@xmath . Since the second derivatives of the comparison functions are
uniformly bounded from above in a bounded interval we can add a
quadratic to @xmath to get a concave function, from which it follows
that the left and right hand derivatives always exist and are equal
except at a countable number of points.

Furthermore, @xmath using the comparison function argument again since
@xmath . If @xmath does not exist, then it is natural to define @xmath
to be a multivalued function taking on every value in the interval
@xmath . This is consistent, since if @xmath does exist, then @xmath .
Hence, @xmath is multivalued for some @xmath , which can be interpreted
as the mass “jumping up” at these @xmath , and the set of @xmath for
which @xmath and @xmath are multivalued is a countable set.
Alternatively, one could replace @xmath with @xmath (or @xmath ) in the
formula for @xmath so that @xmath would always be single valued.

###### Lemma 1

The quantity @xmath is a nondecreasing function of @xmath .

Proof. The main idea is that if @xmath were smooth,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

being nonnegative would follow from inequality 2.4 and the fact that
@xmath is nondecreasing.

More generally, it is sufficient to prove that @xmath distributionally.
Hence, treating @xmath as a distribution we may equivalently define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since @xmath except at a countable number of points. It is convenient to
extend @xmath and @xmath to be defined for all real @xmath , so define
@xmath for @xmath . Then since @xmath we still have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in the sense of comparison functions for all @xmath , where we recall
that this means that for all @xmath there exists a smooth function
@xmath with @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

To prove that @xmath distributionally, we will prove that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all smooth positive test functions @xmath with compact support. We
will need the finite difference operator @xmath which we will define as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we have used the integration by parts formula for the finite
difference operator, @xmath , which follows from a change of variables.
Then since @xmath has left-hand derivatives everywhere, in the limit, we
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the comparison functions at each point, since @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath and @xmath are increasing, it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Changing the integration variable to @xmath , then, we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
              
  -- -------- --

and since @xmath except at a countable number of points,

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath            
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

since @xmath and the comparison functions satisfy inequality 2.5 .
Hence,
@xmath distributionally, so @xmath is a nondecreasing function of @xmath
. @xmath

### 2.3 Proof of the Penrose Inequality Assuming Condition 1 or 2

The key to the proofs of theorems 1 and 2 is the mass function @xmath .
First, we consider the context of theorem 1 so that we have only one
horizon and we are minimizing area with a volume constraint.

In section 2.6 we show that if @xmath is Schwarzschild with mass @xmath
at infinity, then for large @xmath there is a unique area minimizer, and
that this minimizer is one of the spherically symmetric spheres of the
Schwarzschild metric. Hence, for large @xmath , the functions @xmath and
hence @xmath are computable in terms of the parameter @xmath , and in
fact @xmath . Also, since the horizon has zero mean curvature, @xmath ,
so @xmath , the mass of the black hole.

Since @xmath equals the mass of the black hole and @xmath equals the
total mass of the system, we now see why it is reasonable to call the
function @xmath mass. (In fact, @xmath is equal to the Hawking mass of
@xmath , studied by Christodoulou and Yau in [ 6 ] and by Huisken and
Yau in [ 16 ] .) Since @xmath is increasing, @xmath , so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we see that theorem 1 , the Penrose inequality for manifolds which
satisfy condition 1 , is true.

The proof of theorem 2 is exactly the same, but we get a stronger
result. We are back in the context of multiple horizons, and we are
minimizing the quantity @xmath (from definition 2 ) given a volume
constraint and assuming condition 2 . Again, in section 2.6 we show that
if @xmath is Schwarzschild with mass @xmath at infinity, then for large
@xmath there is a unique @xmath minimizer, and that this minimizer is a
single spherically symmetric sphere of the Schwarzschild metric. Thus,
once again, @xmath for sufficiently large @xmath . However, while @xmath
again since the horizons still have zero mean curvature, @xmath , where
the @xmath are the areas of the horizons. Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so this time we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which proves that theorem 2 , the Penrose inequality for manifolds which
satisfy condition 2 , is true.

### 2.4 Spherical Symmetry at Infinity

###### Definition 4

@xmath is said to be asymptotically flat if there is a compact set
@xmath and a diffeomorphism @xmath such that, in the coordinate chart
defined by @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath and some @xmath , where we have used commas to denote
partial derivatives in the coordinate chart, and @xmath is the scalar
curvature of @xmath .

These assumptions on the asymptotic behavior of @xmath at infinity imply
the existence of the limit

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath is the sphere @xmath , @xmath is the unit normal
to @xmath in Euclidean space, and @xmath is the Euclidean area element
of @xmath . The quantity @xmath is called the total mass of @xmath (see
[ 1 ] , [ 2 ] , [ 25 ] , and [ 29 ] ).

###### Theorem 5

(Schoen-Yau [ 29 ] ) Let @xmath , @xmath , be a complete asymptotically
flat @xmath -manifold with @xmath . For any @xmath , there is a metric
@xmath such that @xmath is asymptotically flat, and outside a compact
set @xmath is conformally flat and has @xmath , and @xmath .

Furthermore, although Schoen and Yau did not originally mention it,
their proof of the above theorem also proves a stronger version of the
theorem which we will use, namely that the theorem is still true if we
require @xmath and @xmath and @xmath to be @xmath -quasi isometric. We
say that two metrics on @xmath are @xmath -quasi isometric if for all
@xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all tangent vectors @xmath .

Since @xmath is conformally flat and scalar flat outside a compact set,
we may choose @xmath as a coordinate chart for @xmath for some @xmath ,
so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Euclidean Laplacian and @xmath , we see that @xmath
for @xmath . Since @xmath is asymptotically flat, @xmath tends to 1 as
@xmath goes to infinity.

Thus, expanding @xmath in terms of spherical harmonics of @xmath , we
find that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we define a new metric @xmath , @xmath -quasi isometric to @xmath
which will be spherically symmetric with zero scalar curvature outside a
compact set. To do this, choose any @xmath and @xmath and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are chosen so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This function is continuous since @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for
@xmath . Furthermore since @xmath and @xmath are harmonic and the
minimum value of two harmonic functions is weakly superharmonic, @xmath
is weakly superharmonic.

Now define @xmath where @xmath is some smooth, spherically symmetric,
positive bump function of total integral 1 and compact support in @xmath
. Then @xmath is smooth and superharmonic and @xmath for @xmath and
@xmath for @xmath , since @xmath and @xmath are harmonic and hence have
the mean value property.

Let @xmath everywhere except in the region that @xmath is conformally
flat and scalar flat. In this region parameterized by @xmath , let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is superharmonic,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore, if we choose @xmath big enough and @xmath small enough we
can make @xmath @xmath -quasi isometric to @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath . The bound on the mass comes from the fact that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and choosing @xmath large and @xmath small gives @xmath close to 1 and
@xmath close to @xmath . Hence we have the following theorem:

###### Theorem 6

Let @xmath , @xmath , be a complete asymptotically flat @xmath -manifold
with
@xmath . For any @xmath there is a metric @xmath @xmath -quasi isometric
to @xmath such that @xmath has @xmath , is asymptotically flat, is
spherically symmetric with @xmath outside a compact set, and has @xmath
.

The statement of this theorem can be simplified by introducing the
following terminology: We define @xmath to be the Schwarzschild metric
of mass @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This metric is spherically symmetric, asymptotically flat, has zero
scalar curvature, and has total mass @xmath .

###### Definition 5

We say that @xmath is Schwarzschild with mass @xmath at infinity if
@xmath is isometric to @xmath for some compact set @xmath in @xmath and
some ball @xmath in @xmath centered around the origin.

With this definition, the statement of the previous theorem can be
stated as follows.

###### Theorem 7

Let @xmath be a complete asymptotically flat @xmath -manifold with
@xmath and with total mass @xmath . For any @xmath , there exists a
metric @xmath @xmath -quasi isometric to @xmath with @xmath , @xmath
Schwarzschild with mass @xmath at infinity, and @xmath .

Hence, since the positive mass and Penrose inequalities are closed
conditions, we see by theorem 7 that without loss of generality, we may
assume in the statements of the positive mass theorem and the Penrose
inequality that the manifolds are Schwarzschild at infinity.

### 2.5 The Isoperimetric Surfaces of the Schwarzschild Manifold

In the previous section we justified the claim that without loss of
generality for proving the Penrose inequality, we could assume that
@xmath is isometric to the Schwarzschild metric of mass @xmath outside a
compact set. By the positive mass theorem, @xmath , and since the
standard, flat @xmath metric is the only metric with @xmath , we
generally have @xmath . In the next two sections, we prove that the
isoperimetric surfaces of @xmath , the surfaces @xmath which minimize
area given a volume constraint @xmath , are the spherically-symmetric
spheres of the Schwarzschild metric when @xmath is large enough.

We recall that the Schwarzschild metric of mass @xmath is given by
@xmath where @xmath . The metric is spherically symmetric,
asymptotically flat, has zero scalar curvature, and has an outermost
minimal sphere at @xmath . In fact, the Schwarzschild metric is
symmetric under the mapping @xmath and so has two asymptotically flat
ends.

###### Theorem 8

In the Schwarzschild metric of mass @xmath , @xmath , described above,
the spherically symmetric spheres given by @xmath minimize area among
all other surfaces in their homology class containing the same volume.

Proof. Since there is an infinite amount of volume inside the horizon of
the
Schwarzschild metric, we first comment that “containing the same volume”
is a well defined notion among surfaces in the same homology class.
Equivalently, one could define the volume contained by a surface in the
horizon’s homology class to be the volume contained by the region
outside the horizon keeping track of signs if the region is not entirely
outside the horizon.

Let @xmath be a spherically symmetric sphere @xmath of the Schwarzschild
metric @xmath . We will prove that @xmath is an isoperimetric surface of
@xmath , and the case when @xmath will follow from the symmetry of the
Schwarzschild metric under @xmath . We omit the case @xmath , but in
this case it is easy to show that @xmath minimizes area among all
surfaces even without the volume constraint (see figure 1.1 ).

By direct calculation, it is easy to compute that the Hawking mass of
@xmath is always @xmath , that is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the area of @xmath and @xmath is the mean curvature of
@xmath which is constant on @xmath by symmetry. Since @xmath , @xmath
for @xmath , and since @xmath , it is easy to check that @xmath . Notice
that we have already used the positivity of the mass @xmath .

Now we construct a new metric @xmath which is isometric to @xmath
outside @xmath but is isometric to a spherically symmetric connected
neighborhood of the tip of a spherically symmetric cone inside @xmath ,
where the proportions of the cone are chosen to give @xmath the same
area @xmath and mean curvature @xmath from the inside as the outside.
The form of the metric @xmath can then be written

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in spherical coordinates @xmath in @xmath , where @xmath is the standard
metric on the sphere of radius 1 in @xmath . Notice that @xmath would
represent the standard flat metric of @xmath , and that @xmath gives a
cone. But the main point of this form for the metric is that the volume
element of @xmath is the standard volume element in @xmath no matter
what @xmath is.

It is helpful to view @xmath as a submanifold of @xmath (see figure 2.2
). We recall from figure 1.1 that the submanifold @xmath is the
Schwarzschild metric of mass @xmath . Let @xmath be the cone in @xmath
which is tangent to the Schwarzschild metric on @xmath . Then @xmath is
the spherically symmetric solid portions shown in figure 2.2 , equal to
the union of the Schwarzschild metric outside @xmath and the cone @xmath
inside @xmath .

Suppose @xmath is at @xmath in this new metric @xmath . Since @xmath is
a cone inside @xmath , @xmath for @xmath for some constant @xmath .
Since @xmath for @xmath , it turns out that @xmath .

In the Schwarzschild metric, if we parameterized the areas of the
spherically symmetric spheres by the enclosed volume (outside the
horizon) we get from the vanishing of the scalar curvature that @xmath
satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

We will now reparameterize @xmath where @xmath is the enclosed volume.
This is convenient since the coordinate chart is volume preserving.
Hence, since @xmath is Schwarzschild outside @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath satisfies the second order differential equation
( 2.6 ) with initial conditions @xmath and @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These last two initial conditions guarantee that @xmath (which is the
sphere at the boundary between the cone and the Schwarzschild metric)
has the same area and mean curvatures on the inside and the outside, and
that consequently the curvature of @xmath is bounded on @xmath .
Finally,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath since this factor guarantees that the sphere containing a
volume @xmath in @xmath will have area @xmath , and hence @xmath will be
Schwarzschild outside @xmath .

###### Lemma 2

The following inequality holds.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. First we show that @xmath . To do this we note that @xmath has
scalar curvature @xmath everywhere since @xmath . If we redefine @xmath
to be the area of the spherically symmetric sphere in @xmath containing
a volume @xmath , then by direct calculation we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath , with equality outside @xmath . Integrating this
inequality implies that @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence that @xmath since @xmath . Thus, @xmath , from which it
follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which implies @xmath .

The fact that @xmath follows from the fact that @xmath . We show that
@xmath is increasing for @xmath by proving that @xmath would imply
@xmath . Hence, since @xmath , it follows that the minimum value of
@xmath for @xmath is zero, so @xmath . We compute for @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so @xmath implies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath in the Schwarzschild metrics, it follows that for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , then @xmath , so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from before. Thus, for @xmath , @xmath , so @xmath . This completes the
proof that @xmath , so it follows that @xmath for all @xmath , too.
@xmath

Now we prove that @xmath at @xmath is an isoperimetric sphere of @xmath
. Let @xmath be any other surface in @xmath containing the same volume
@xmath as @xmath (or greater volume). Let @xmath and @xmath be the
@xmath areas of @xmath and @xmath respectively and let @xmath and @xmath
be the areas of @xmath and @xmath in the @xmath coordinate chart where
@xmath is represented by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since this coordinate chart is volume preserving, @xmath and @xmath both
contain the same volume @xmath in the @xmath coordinate chart. Hence, by
the isoperimetric inequality, @xmath . Thus, since @xmath and @xmath ,
and @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath minimizes area among all surfaces which contain a volume
@xmath in @xmath .

Since @xmath and @xmath , the Schwarzschild metric, are both spherically
symmetric, they are conformally equivalent. In fact we can represent
@xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath for @xmath . Furthermore, by the scalar curvature formula
for conformal metrics [ 25 ] , @xmath , so @xmath for @xmath since
Schwarzschild has zero scalar curvature and the cones with @xmath have
positive scalar curvature.

Now we prove @xmath at @xmath minimizes area among all surfaces in the
Schwarzschild metric in its homology class containing the same
(relative) volume. Let @xmath be any other such sphere. Since @xmath
contains the same volume in @xmath as @xmath , it must contain more
volume than @xmath in the @xmath metric under the conformal
identification since @xmath . Hence it has more area in the @xmath
metric since @xmath is an isoperimetric sphere of @xmath . Then again,
since @xmath but @xmath , @xmath must have more area than @xmath in the
Schwarzschild metric @xmath . Thus, we have proved theorem 8 . @xmath

Now we consider minimizing @xmath , “the sum of the areas to the three
halves power” from definition 2 , with a volume constraint in the
Schwarzschild metric. Using the same argument as in the proof of theorem
8 , we find that the collection of surfaces @xmath which minimizes
@xmath among collections of surfaces containing the horizon and a volume
@xmath outside the horizon is always a single spherically symmetric
sphere of the Schwarzschild metric.

The only real difference in the proof is understanding minimizers of
@xmath in @xmath . Whereas a sphere minimizes area given a volume
constraint in @xmath , any collection of spheres minimizes @xmath in
@xmath given a volume constraint. This follows from the isoperimetric
inequality, @xmath with equality for spheres. Hence, @xmath with
equality for collections of spheres. However, a single sphere containing
a volume @xmath still minimizes @xmath , and so the proof from theorem 8
still applies.

###### Theorem 9

In the Schwarzschild metric of mass @xmath , @xmath , the spherically
symmetric spheres minimize F among all other surfaces in their homology
class containing the same volume.

### 2.6 Mass and Isoperimetric Spheres at Infinity

Now we consider manifolds @xmath which are Schwarzschild of mass @xmath
at infinity (see definition 5 ), are complete, and have nonnegative
scalar curvature. By the positive mass theorem, @xmath . Since @xmath is
isometric to the Schwarzschild metric outside a compact set, we expect
that when we minimize area with a volume constraint @xmath , the
minimizers are still the spherically symmetric spheres of the
Schwarzschild metric when @xmath is large enough. In fact this is the
case not only for area minimization, but is also true when we minimize
@xmath with a volume constraint. To prove this, we begin with three
definitions and a lemma.

###### Definition 6

Suppose @xmath minimizes area among all surfaces bounding a compact
region of the same volume, @xmath . Then we call @xmath an isoperimetric
surface of @xmath .

###### Definition 7

Suppose @xmath minimizes area among all surfaces bounding a compact
region of volume greater than or equal to @xmath . Then we call @xmath
an outer isoperimetric surface of @xmath .

###### Definition 8

A mapping @xmath is area nonincreasing if and only if for all surfaces
with boundary @xmath , the area of @xmath is less than or equal to the
area of @xmath .

###### Lemma 3

Suppose @xmath is a smooth surface in @xmath , @xmath is compact, and
there exists a @xmath , onto, area nonincreasing mapping @xmath , which
is an isometry outside of the interior of @xmath , such that @xmath is
an outer isoperimetric surface of @xmath . Then @xmath is an outer
isoperimetric surface of @xmath .

Proof. First we claim that @xmath is volume nonincreasing inside @xmath
. Let @xmath be an orthonormal basis at some point @xmath , the region
contained by @xmath . Let @xmath , and @xmath . Then for @xmath , @xmath
is the square of the length of @xmath and @xmath is the factor by which
areas (more generally, @xmath -volumes) get increased in the direction
orthogonal to the unit vector @xmath . Since we are given that areas are
not increased, all the eigenvalues of @xmath (which is symmetric and so
has all real eigenvalues) are less than or equal to one. Thus @xmath ,
which implies @xmath from the formula for @xmath . But @xmath is the
factor by which volumes are changed at @xmath , so @xmath is volume
nonincreasing inside @xmath .

Now we prove @xmath is outer isoperimetric. Let @xmath be any competitor
for @xmath , that is, suppose @xmath contains at least as much volume in
@xmath as @xmath . Then upon reflection we see that @xmath must contain
at least as much volume as @xmath in @xmath since @xmath is volume
nonincreasing. Hence, since @xmath is outer isoperimetric, @xmath . But
@xmath is an isometry on @xmath and area nonincreasing everywhere, so
@xmath . @xmath

Using this lemma, we can prove theorem 10

###### Theorem 10

Suppose @xmath is complete, has nonnegative scalar curvature, and is
Schwarzschild at infinity. Then there exists a @xmath such that for all
@xmath , the spherically symmetric spheres of the Schwarzschild metric
minimize area among all other surfaces in their homology class
containing the same volume @xmath (outside the horizons, if any exist).

Proof. Since @xmath is isometric to the Schwarzschild manifold of mass
@xmath outside a compact set, then for some @xmath , @xmath exists for
@xmath and is the spherically symmetric sphere of area @xmath of the
Schwarzschild portion of @xmath . We claim that the spheres of area

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

must be outer isoperimetric spheres of @xmath . Let @xmath be one of
these spheres with area satisfying inequality 2.7 . As before in the
proof of theorem 8 , we construct a spherically symmetric manifold
@xmath which is isometric to the Schwarzschild manifold of mass @xmath
outside a spherically symmetric sphere @xmath and is isometric to a cone
inside @xmath , where the proportions of the cone are chosen so that
@xmath has the same area and mean curvature from the inside as the
outside. As we proved in theorem 8 , @xmath is outer isoperimetric in
@xmath . We perform this construction so that @xmath has the same mass
as @xmath and @xmath has the same area as @xmath . Hence @xmath outside
@xmath is isometric to @xmath outside @xmath .

We want to construct a map @xmath which satisfies the conditions of
lemma 3 . Define @xmath to be the identity isometry map outside @xmath
so that @xmath . Inside @xmath we will make @xmath spherically symmetric
where @xmath is spherically symmetric, so in the region where @xmath is
injective we can characterize @xmath with the function @xmath , where
@xmath is the area of the spherically symmetric pre-image in @xmath of
the spherically symmetric sphere in @xmath of area @xmath . Hence, if we
let @xmath be the area of @xmath and of @xmath , then @xmath . We define
@xmath for @xmath so that @xmath is as small as possible for each @xmath
such that @xmath is area nonincreasing.

In fact, since @xmath , lengths in the spherically symmetric directions
get decreased by a factor of @xmath by @xmath , so that if we define
@xmath to increase lengths by a factor of @xmath in the radial
direction, @xmath will be area nonincreasing. Hence, volumes will be
decreased by @xmath locally by a factor of @xmath .

It is convenient to consider the spherically symmetric functions @xmath
on @xmath and @xmath on @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are volumes
enclosed by the corresponding spherically symmetric spheres. We note
that @xmath is defined everywhere on @xmath but @xmath is defined only
where @xmath is Schwarzschild and hence spherically symmetric. Then it
is easy to compute that on the cone, @xmath , so that for some constant
@xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Furthermore, in the Schwarzschild portion of @xmath , since from the
Hawking mass we have @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Also, since we already noted that @xmath decreases volumes locally by a
factor of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath with initial condition @xmath . Hence, this differential
equation determines @xmath .

We claim that @xmath if @xmath as in inequality ( 2.7 ). This will prove
that an area nonincreasing map @xmath exists from @xmath to @xmath ,
where @xmath will be defined to map everything in @xmath inside the
spherically symmetric sphere of area @xmath to the tip of the cone
@xmath . Actually, this mapping is not @xmath as required in the lemma,
but the mapping can be perturbed to be @xmath and still stay area
nonincreasing.

We need the inequality

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we will verify later that @xmath for all @xmath . Since the
dimensions of the cone (including @xmath ) were chosen so that @xmath
had the same mean curvature in @xmath on the inside as on the outside,
@xmath since to first order @xmath for @xmath near @xmath . Thus, @xmath
must satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, if we let @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , it follows that @xmath for @xmath and that @xmath . Thus,
@xmath attains its maximum value at zero. Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that if we integrate both sides from @xmath to @xmath we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

so that since @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath from inequality ( 2.7 ) and @xmath since the minimal sphere
in the Schwarzschild manifold has area @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, @xmath , since the left side of the above inequality is an
increasing function of @xmath . Thus, plugging this into inequality (
2.12 ) we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that from inequality ( 2.7 ) we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But @xmath , so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which means that we have stayed in the spherically symmetric portion of
@xmath for @xmath . We notice that the spherically symmetric sphere in
@xmath of area @xmath gets mapped to the tip of the cone @xmath , so we
might as well define @xmath to send everything inside the sphere of area
@xmath in @xmath to the tip of the cone. Certainly this is an area
nonincreasing map. Thus, we have defined a mapping @xmath which is an
isometry outside of @xmath in @xmath and which is area decreasing inside
of @xmath in @xmath . The mapping is not @xmath on the sphere of area
@xmath in @xmath , but @xmath can be perturbed slightly around the
sphere of area @xmath so that it is @xmath and still area nonincreasing.
Since @xmath is outer isoperimetric in @xmath and @xmath , it follows
from lemma 3 that @xmath is outer isoperimetric in @xmath and hence
minimizes area among surfaces containing the same volume in @xmath .
Since @xmath was any of the spherically symmetric spheres of area @xmath
, this proves theorem 10 . @xmath

Since spheres are @xmath -minimizers given a volume constraint, we
mentioned in the previous section that @xmath minimizes @xmath as well
as area given a volume constraint in @xmath . Thus, lemma 3 implies
theorem 11 as well as theorem 10 .

###### Theorem 11

Suppose @xmath is complete, has nonnegative scalar curvature, and is
Schwarzschild at infinity. Then there exists a @xmath such that for all
@xmath , the spherically symmetric spheres of the Schwarzschild metric
minimize F among all other surfaces in their homology class containing
the same volume @xmath (outside the horizons, if any exist).

Theorems 8 , 9 , 10 , and 11 are also true in higher dimensions except
the exponent in the definition of @xmath is more generally @xmath
instead of @xmath . Also, note that theorems 10 and 11 are not true if
we merely require @xmath to be Schwarzschild at infinity and drop the
conditions that @xmath is complete and has nonnegative scalar curvature.
We need @xmath and completeness to use the positive mass theorem to
conclude that @xmath , which is essential for theorems 8 and 9 . In
fact, for @xmath , the spherically symmetric spheres of the
Schwarzschild metric are unstable and hence do not minimize area among
surfaces enclosing the same volume.

Theorems 10 and 11 are important because they allow us to evaluate
@xmath . In fact, since the minimizing surface (when minimizing area) or
collection of surfaces (when minimizing F) enclosing a volume V outside
the horizons is always a spherically symmetric sphere of the
Schwarzschild metric for @xmath , @xmath , the mass parameter of the
Schwarzschild metric, for @xmath .

###### Theorem 12

Suppose @xmath is complete, has nonnegative scalar curvature, and is
Schwarzschild with mass @xmath at infinity. Then for both definitions of
@xmath in section 3 (whether we are minimizing area or @xmath with a
volume constraint), we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This theorem is true in higher dimensions as well. We also conjecture
that theorem 12 is true for asymptotically flat manifolds with positive
total mass, where @xmath is replaced by the total mass @xmath . With
additional decay conditions on the asymptotic flatness of @xmath ,
Huisken and Yau show that the region at infinity is foliated by constant
mean curvature spheres which are stable and hence locally minimize area
with a volume constraint [ 16 ] . We conjecture that these same spheres
also globally minimize area among surfaces in the same homology class
containing the same volume.

### 2.7 Existence of Surfaces which Minimize Area Given a Volume
Constraint

In our proof of theorem 1 , we used the fact that the mass function
@xmath is nondecreasing which relies on equation 2.3 , which in turn
followed from doing a unit normal flow on @xmath , the surface which
minimizes area among surfaces containing a volume @xmath outside the
horizon. Thus, it is essential that the surface @xmath actually exists.

In this section, we assume the hypotheses of theorem 1 again, including
condition 1 , and recall the definition of @xmath given in the
introduction to this chapter. We will prove that for all @xmath , there
exists a surface @xmath which encloses a volume @xmath outside the
horizon and which minimizes area, so that @xmath .

Existence theory for compact manifolds is well understood using
geometric measure theory, since the space of rectifiable currents of
bounded mass on compact manifolds is compact. The main problem with this
type of existence question is that @xmath is not compact. However, we
will be able to use the mass function @xmath to combat this problem and
prove that the minimizers always exist and lie inside a bounded domain
for each @xmath .

First we will prove existence of @xmath for @xmath , but the approach
will work for all nonnegative @xmath . Now consider @xmath , where the
union is a disjoint union and @xmath is a constant curvature 3-sphere
with total volume @xmath . The approach will be to prove existence of an
area minimizer on this manifold, @xmath , for volumes less than or equal
to @xmath , and then to use the mass function @xmath to prove that the
minimizers actually contain zero volume in the @xmath if we choose
@xmath to be large enough.

For the moment, let us redefine @xmath to be exactly as before in
definition 1 , except that we replace @xmath with @xmath and @xmath with
@xmath . Since @xmath is the infimum of the areas of surfaces which
contain a volume @xmath outside the horizon, there exists a sequence of
surfaces @xmath in @xmath , each containing a volume @xmath , and whose
areas approach @xmath from above. Again, since @xmath is not compact, we
can not conclude that the sequence converges to a limit surface with
area @xmath . However, using the two propositions below, we will be able
to modify this sequence of surfaces so that the areas still converge to
@xmath and each surface stays inside a compact region. Then since the
space of rectifiable currents with bounded mass in a compact region is
compact, we will get a limit surface in @xmath with area @xmath .

The first proposition uses the fact that the Schwarzschild metric
becomes very flat as we move out to infinity. Recall that the
Schwarzschild metric of mass @xmath is @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath
is the radial coordinate in @xmath . In the next proposition, we allow
@xmath to be positive, zero, or negative. If @xmath is negative, then
the Schwarzschild metric has a singularity at @xmath . If @xmath is
positive, then the metric has a horizon at @xmath . In these cases, for
the purposes of the two propositions below, we will say that a surface
contains a volume @xmath when it contains a volume @xmath outside the
horizon or singularity.

###### Proposition 1

Consider the Schwarzschild metric @xmath of mass @xmath disjoint union a
constant curvature 3-sphere with volume @xmath . Then there exists an
@xmath such that if we choose any @xmath and let @xmath , then if @xmath
is any connected surface containing a volume @xmath intersecting both
the coordinate sphere of radius @xmath and the coordinate sphere of
radius @xmath (using @xmath coordinates here), then we can modify @xmath
outside of the coordinate ball of radius @xmath to be three surfaces
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath in the closed
3-dimensional region contained by @xmath and with @xmath in the constant
curvature sphere, such that @xmath intersects the coordinate sphere of
radius @xmath but not the coordinate sphere of radius @xmath , @xmath
intersects the coordinate sphere of radius @xmath but not the coordinate
sphere of radius @xmath , and @xmath has less area than @xmath but still
contains the same volume @xmath .

The main idea of this proposition is that if @xmath and @xmath are large
enough, then any connected surface with a finite volume @xmath
intersecting both spheres must have at least one very long tentacle.
Since @xmath has finite total volume, these tentacles must get very
thin. Then we can snip the tentacles somewhere in the region between the
two spheres so that we get two surfaces, @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath
entirely inside the coordinate ball of radius @xmath and @xmath entirely
outside the coordinate ball of radius @xmath . The simplest snipping
process would simply be to remove a section of the tentacle. By doing
this, we’ve decreased the volume by @xmath , so we define @xmath to be a
constant curvature 2-sphere of volume @xmath in the constant curvature
3-sphere. Thus the total enclosed volume stays the same, and if we snip
the tentacle correctly where we remove a sufficiently long and skinny
section, the total area will decrease. Proposition 1 follows as a
generalization of theorem 17 which is proved in section 2.9 . We leave
the details to the reader.

###### Proposition 2

Consider the Schwarzschild metric @xmath of mass @xmath disjoint union a
constant curvature 3-sphere with volume @xmath . Then there exists an
@xmath such that if @xmath is any surface bounding a region of volume
@xmath entirely outside the coordinate ball of radius @xmath , then the
area of @xmath is greater than the area of a constant curvature 2-sphere
containing a volume @xmath in the constant curvature 3-sphere.

This proposition follows from the fact that Schwarzschild is very nearly
flat outside a coordinate ball of large radius. Thus we get that
surfaces nearly satisfy the isoperimetric inequality for surfaces in
@xmath , that @xmath , whereas constant curvature 2-spheres in any
constant curvature 3-sphere always have @xmath . Making this idea
rigorous is delicate, particularly for small volumes. We prove
proposition 2 later in section 2.9 .

Now we are ready to prove existence of @xmath on @xmath . Again, since
@xmath is the infimum of the areas of surfaces which contain a volume
@xmath outside the horizon, there exists a sequence of surfaces @xmath
in @xmath , each containing a volume @xmath , and whose areas approach
@xmath from above. Note that if we modify the surfaces in the sequence
in a way which preserves their enclosed volumes but decreases their
areas, then the areas of the surfaces still approaches @xmath .

The first modification we will make to each surface in the sequence is
to take whatever volume is in @xmath and to change that part of the
surface to be a single constant curvature 2-sphere in the @xmath
enclosing that volume. This always decreases area since it is known that
2-spheres minimize area with a volume constraint in @xmath . We will
repeat this step whenever more volume is sent to @xmath from @xmath in
subsequent modifications of the surfaces.

Next we use propositions 1 and 2 to modify each surface in the sequence.
By assumption, @xmath is isometric to the Schwarzschild metric outside a
compact set. Again, we use the standard coordinate chart for the region
of @xmath which is Schwarzschild, just as we did in propositions 1 and 2
. Now we choose @xmath to be greater than the @xmath of proposition 1
and the @xmath of proposition 2 and large enough that @xmath is
Schwarzschild outside the coordinate sphere of radius @xmath . As in
proposition 1 , @xmath . By proposition 1 , we can modify each surface
in the sequence so that each component of each surface is either
entirely inside the coordinate ball of radius @xmath or entirely outside
the coordinate ball or radius @xmath . A portion of the volume gets sent
to @xmath , but the total volume of the surfaces stays the same and the
total area decreases.

Next, using proposition 2 , we take all of the components of the
surfaces outside the coordinate ball of radius @xmath and send them to
spheres of the same volume in @xmath , one at a time. By proposition 2 ,
this also decreases the areas and preserves the volumes of the surfaces
in the sequence. We send these components to @xmath one at a time in the
sense that if at any point there are two spheres (or any other surface
that is not a single constant curvature sphere) in @xmath , we
immediately turn this portion of the surface into one constant curvature
sphere in @xmath with the same volume. This always decreases the area,
preserves volume, and guarantees that there will be room for more
spheres to be sent to @xmath .

But now every surface in the sequence is contained in the coordinate
ball of radius @xmath union @xmath . Since the sequence of surfaces in
now contained in a compact set and the areas of the surfaces still
converge to @xmath from above, it follows from the compactness of the
space of rectifiable currents in a compact manifold that a limit surface
@xmath exists and that @xmath .

###### Theorem 13

Suppose @xmath is complete, has nonnegative scalar curvature, contains a
single outermost minimal sphere @xmath , is Schwarzschild at infinity,
and satisfies condition 1 . Let @xmath be the closure of the component
of @xmath that contains the asymptotically flat end, and let @xmath be a
constant curvature sphere of volume @xmath . Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the boundary of some 3-dimensional region in @xmath and
@xmath is a surface in @xmath in the same homology class of @xmath as
the horizon @xmath .

Then for all @xmath , there exists a surface @xmath containing a volume
@xmath outside @xmath in the same class of surfaces just described such
that @xmath .

Now we will prove existence of @xmath on @xmath for @xmath , for any
nonnegative @xmath . Again, consider @xmath , where the union is a
disjoint union and @xmath is a constant curvature 3-sphere with total
volume @xmath much bigger than @xmath . We will describe how much bigger
in a moment. Since we have already proven existence of a minimizer
@xmath on @xmath for volumes up to @xmath , we certainly have existence
on the same manifold up to the volume @xmath . Furthermore, by condition
1 , we can choose @xmath to have at most two components, with only one
component in @xmath and possibly one component in @xmath .

If we choose @xmath to be large enough, we can use the mass function
@xmath to prove that the minimizers actually contain zero volume in the
@xmath , and hence are entirely contained in @xmath . Let @xmath be the
supremum of all volumes @xmath with the property that @xmath has zero
volume in the @xmath for @xmath . Since we are assuming @xmath satisfies
condition 1 , @xmath has exactly one horizon, and @xmath is this
horizon, which of course is contained entirely in @xmath . Hence, @xmath
.

Furthermore, for @xmath , @xmath has zero volume in the @xmath and hence
is in @xmath and has only one component. Thus, by lemma 1 , @xmath is a
nondecreasing function of @xmath in this range, and since @xmath , where
A is the area of the horizon, @xmath is positive for @xmath .

For @xmath , @xmath is no longer necessarily nondecreasing. However, if
we reexamine the proof of lemma 1 and the derivation of inequality 2.3 ,
it turns out that there exists a uniform @xmath which is only a function
of @xmath and the area of the horizon such that @xmath for @xmath .

The reason for this is that in this range, @xmath can be bounded below
uniformly in terms of @xmath and the area of the horizon. Inequality 2.2
is changed where the @xmath is replaced by an @xmath because the
minimizers on which we do a unit normal variation in section 2.1 may now
have up to two components, so the Euler characteristic may be as large
as 4. The function @xmath is bounded on both sides since it is larger
than the area of the horizon and smaller than the area of the horizon
plus @xmath . The upper bound on @xmath comes from comparing @xmath with
a surface which is the horizon union a roughly spherical surface
containing a volume @xmath very far out on the asymptotically flat end
of @xmath . Finally, since the horizon is outermost, @xmath is bounded
below by zero and bounded above for @xmath small enough since we have an
upper bound on @xmath from inequality 2.2 . We leave the details of this
to the interested reader.

Since the mass function @xmath , it follows from definition 3 that
@xmath for some @xmath , which is equivalent to @xmath for some uniform
@xmath . On the other hand, consider @xmath where @xmath . The surface
@xmath has constant mean curvature @xmath on all the components, and by
looking at a unit normal variation of @xmath and comparing the areas of
the variation surfaces with @xmath , we get that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a function of @xmath and the area of the horizon only.

The mean curvature H of a constant curvature sphere of area A in @xmath
is @xmath . Furthermore, the mean curvature H of a constant curvature
sphere of area A in a constant curvature 3-sphere @xmath of volume
@xmath is as close to the @xmath value as we like if we choose @xmath to
be large enough. Now suppose @xmath , with @xmath , had a component in
@xmath . This component is a constant curvature sphere, and we can
define @xmath in terms of @xmath and the area of the horizon to be large
enough so that the mean curvature of the sphere cannot satisfy
inequality 2.13 . Hence, we have a contradiction, so @xmath is in @xmath
for @xmath .

But @xmath is the supremum of all volumes @xmath with the property that
@xmath is entirely contained in @xmath for @xmath . Hence, since @xmath
is a function of @xmath and the area of the horizon only, @xmath ,
proving that the minimizer @xmath exists in @xmath for all @xmath since
@xmath was arbitrary.

###### Theorem 14

Suppose @xmath is complete, has nonnegative scalar curvature, contains a
single outermost minimal sphere @xmath , is Schwarzschild at infinity,
and satisfies condition 1 . Let @xmath be the closure of the component
of @xmath that contains the asymptotically flat end. Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the boundary of some 3-dimensional region in @xmath and
@xmath is a surface in @xmath in the same homology class of @xmath as
the horizon @xmath .

Then for all @xmath there exists a surface @xmath containing a volume
@xmath outside @xmath in the same class of surfaces just described such
that @xmath .

### 2.8 Existence of Surfaces which Minimize @xmath Given a Volume
Constraint

We go back to the case that @xmath has any number of horizons and assume
the hypotheses of theorem 2 , including condition 2 . Let @xmath be the
closure of the component of @xmath that contains the asymptotically flat
end. Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the @xmath are the boundaries of the components of some
3-dimensional open region in @xmath and @xmath is in @xmath and is in
the homology class of @xmath which contains both a large sphere at
infinity and the union of the horizons. If the collection @xmath
contains a volume @xmath outside the horizons and @xmath , then we say
that @xmath minimizes @xmath for the volume @xmath .

In this section we will prove that if @xmath satisfies condition 2 ,
then an @xmath -minimizer always exists. Existence of an @xmath
-minimizer for all volumes @xmath is necessary to prove theorem 2 since
the theorem relied on the fact that we had an increasing mass function
@xmath . The proof that the mass function was increasing though relied
on doing a variation of the @xmath -minimizers for each @xmath . Thus,
it is essential that their exists a collection of surfaces @xmath which
minimize @xmath among collections of surfaces in the correct homology
class containing a volume @xmath outside the horizon.

We will abuse notation slightly again and define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is any collection of surfaces in @xmath which are the
boundaries of the components of some 3-dimensional open region in @xmath
.

First we will prove existence of @xmath for @xmath , but the approach
will work for all nonnegative @xmath . Now consider @xmath , where the
union is a disjoint union and @xmath is a constant curvature 3-sphere
with total volume @xmath . The approach will be to prove existence of an
@xmath -minimizer on this manifold, @xmath , for volumes less than or
equal to @xmath , and then to use the mass function @xmath to prove that
the minimizers actually contain zero volume in the @xmath if we choose
@xmath to be large enough.

For the moment, let us redefine @xmath to be exactly as above except
that we replace @xmath with @xmath and @xmath with @xmath . Since @xmath
is the infimum of the @xmath -values of collections of surfaces which
contain a volume @xmath outside the horizon, there exists a sequence of
collections of surfaces @xmath in @xmath , each containing a volume
@xmath , and whose @xmath -values approach @xmath from above.

In the previous section, we used propositions 1 and 2 to show that we
could modify any sequence of surfaces in @xmath to lie inside a compact
region of @xmath without increasing the areas of any of the surfaces.
The technique, though, did increase the number of the components of the
surfaces. However, since the total area went down and the number of
components went up, it follows from the fact that @xmath for @xmath and
@xmath positive that these same techniques can be used to modify a
sequence of collections of surfaces @xmath so that the sequence lies
inside a compact region of @xmath without increasing the @xmath -values
of any of the collections of surfaces. Also, since it can be checked by
direct calculation that the collection of surfaces which minimizes
@xmath inside @xmath is a single spherically symmetric sphere, each of
the new modified collections of surfaces will have at most one component
in the @xmath which will always be a spherically symmetric sphere as
before. Since the @xmath -values are not increased, the @xmath -values
of the new modified sequence @xmath still converge to @xmath from above.

In the introduction to this chapter we commented that there were two
problem to look out for in the existence of @xmath -minimizers. The
first is that a component of the @xmath -minimizer could run off to
infinity. This problem is taken care of since we are able to require our
minimizing sequence to stay inside a compact set. The other problem with
@xmath -minimization, though, is that “bubbling” might occur, where the
optimal configuration is an infinite number of tiny balls with a finite
total volume. To combat this, we modify the sequence @xmath one last
time. We know bubbling cannot happen in the @xmath , since, by direct
calculation, the @xmath -minimizers in @xmath are single spherically
symmetric spheres. Hence, we modify a given collection of surfaces
@xmath using the following rule which we will call the “sphere
replacement rule”. If any subcollection of the surfaces in @xmath would
have smaller @xmath -value by replacing them with a single sphere in
@xmath , then we make the replacement. This rule puts an upper bound on
how much volume can be used for tiny balls in @xmath since at some point
@xmath can be reduced by replacing a large number of tiny balls in
@xmath by a single sphere with the same volume in @xmath . The reason
for this is that since @xmath is smooth, it has bounded curvature and
hence on the small scale is approximately flat. Since @xmath scales like
volume, it follows that a bunch of tiny balls containing a volume @xmath
will have @xmath -value close to @xmath , which by direct calculation is
larger than the @xmath -value of a single sphere in @xmath containing
the same volume. And as before, if at any time there are two or more
spheres in @xmath , then we combine them into one sphere containing the
same volume and this also always decreases the @xmath -value.

Now we are ready to take a limit of a subsequence of @xmath . This is a
little tricky since each @xmath is not a surface, but a collection of
connected surfaces. For each @xmath , order the surfaces of each
collection @xmath by the volume outside the outermost horizons enclosed
by each surface, with largest volumes first. If two surfaces enclose the
same volume, then choose either ordering. By the Federer-Fleming
compactness theorem, there exists a subsequence @xmath of @xmath in
which the largest surfaces of each @xmath converge to a limit.
Similarly, there exists a subsequence @xmath of @xmath in which the
second largest surfaces of each @xmath converge to a limit. Repeating
this process we define the sequence @xmath for @xmath . Finally, we
define @xmath , which has the property that the largest surfaces
converge to a limit, the second largest surfaces converge to a limit,
and so on, and we define the collection of the limit surfaces to be
@xmath .

While we do get a collection of limit surfaces @xmath , we still need to
show that they enclose the correct volume @xmath that each collection of
surfaces in the original sequence enclosed. Suppose @xmath did not
enclose the volume @xmath but instead only enclosed a volume @xmath for
some @xmath . Then for any @xmath there must exist an @xmath such that
in the collection @xmath there is a large subcollection of tiny surfaces
each containing less than @xmath volume each but containing a total
volume of @xmath . In other words, bubbling has occurred. But by the
sphere replacement rule, this can not happen, since the @xmath -value of
@xmath would have been reduced by replacing the large subcollection of
tiny surfaces by a single sphere in @xmath containing a volume @xmath ,
for some value of @xmath . Hence, @xmath encloses a volume @xmath , and
@xmath .

###### Theorem 15

Suppose @xmath is complete, has nonnegative scalar curvature, contains
any number of outermost minimal spheres @xmath , is Schwarzschild at
infinity, and satisfies condition 2 . Let @xmath be the closure of the
component of @xmath that contains the asymptotically flat end, and let
@xmath be a constant curvature sphere of volume @xmath . Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the @xmath are the boundaries of the components of some
3-dimensional open region in @xmath and @xmath is in @xmath and is in
the homology class of @xmath which contains both a large sphere at
infinity and the union of the horizons.

Then for all @xmath , there exists a collection of surfaces @xmath
containing a volume @xmath outside the horizons in the same class of
surfaces just described such that @xmath .

Now we will prove existence of @xmath on @xmath for @xmath , for any
nonnegative @xmath . Again, consider @xmath , where the union is a
disjoint union and @xmath is a constant curvature 3-sphere with total
volume @xmath much bigger than @xmath . We will describe how much bigger
in a moment. Since we have already proven existence of a minimizer
@xmath on @xmath for volumes up to @xmath , we certainly have existence
on the same manifold up to the volume @xmath . Furthermore, by condition
2 , we can choose the collection of surfaces @xmath so that no two of
its surfaces touch. Hence, we can perform unit normal variations on each
surface of the collection, so the mass function @xmath is nondecreasing
as long as we require @xmath (since we need the mean curvature of the
minimizers to be positive to get @xmath nonnegative which is required
for nondecreasing mass).

Since the mass function is initially positive since @xmath , and since
@xmath is nondecreasing, @xmath is always positive for @xmath . Since
@xmath where @xmath , it follows that @xmath for @xmath for some @xmath
.

On the other hand, suppose the surfaces @xmath minimize @xmath while
enclosing a volume @xmath . It follows from the first variation of area
on each surface that each surface has constant (generally distinct) mean
curvature @xmath . Furthermore, from this same first variational
computation it follows that if we consider any smooth variation on these
surfaces, the rate of change of @xmath with respect to @xmath will be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . By comparing this variation with other minimizers, it
follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some fixed @xmath .

But if we choose @xmath to be large enough, then the local geometry of
the sphere @xmath can be made as close to that of @xmath as we like.
Hence, for a sphere containing a volume less than @xmath in @xmath ,
@xmath can be made as close to @xmath as we like if we choose @xmath
large enough, violating inequality 2.14 . Hence, if we choose @xmath
large enough, then the minimizer @xmath will not have any components in
the @xmath , which proves that @xmath minimizes @xmath in @xmath among
all other collections of surfaces in @xmath in the correct homology
class containing the same volume @xmath , for @xmath . But since @xmath
was arbitrary, we have a @xmath -minimizer for all @xmath .

###### Theorem 16

Suppose @xmath is complete, has nonnegative scalar curvature, contains
any number of outermost minimal spheres @xmath , is Schwarzschild at
infinity, and satisfies condition 2 . Let @xmath be the closure of the
component of @xmath that contains the asymptotically flat end. Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the @xmath are the boundaries of the components of some
3-dimensional open region in @xmath and @xmath is in @xmath and is in
the homology class of @xmath which contains both a large sphere at
infinity and the union of the horizons.

Then for all @xmath , there exists a collection of surfaces @xmath
containing a volume @xmath outside the horizons in the same class of
surfaces just described such that @xmath .

### 2.9 Another Isoperimetric Inequality for the Schwarzschild Metric

In section 2.6 , we proved that the spherically symmetric spheres of the
Schwarzschild metric minimize area among all surfaces in their homology
class containing the same volume outside the horizon. This gives a lower
bound for the area of any surface containing the horizon in terms of the
volume outside the horizon that the surface encloses, and so is an
isoperimetric inequality.

In this section, we lead up to proving proposition 2 of section 2.7
which is an isoperimetric inequality for the asymptotically flat portion
of the Schwarzschild metric since it gives lower bounds for the areas of
surfaces in terms of their enclosed volumes. We also prove theorem 17
below, which is necessary in the proof of proposition 2 , and which,
when generalized sufficiently, proves proposition 1 of section 2.7 as
well. We begin with two definitions.

###### Definition 9

Let @xmath be a region in @xmath and let @xmath which we assume is
smooth. Let

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

###### Definition 10

Define @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, @xmath is the change in the surface area of @xmath if we cut a
section of @xmath out from @xmath to @xmath and replace this section
with a ball of equal volume.

###### Theorem 17

There exist @xmath such that if for some @xmath

1.  @xmath

2.  @xmath ,

then there exists @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. Since the theorem is scale-invariant, we may as well assume
@xmath . Now we break the interval @xmath into six intervals, the two at
the ends having length @xmath and the four in the middle having length
@xmath , for some positive @xmath . Let

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

be these six intervals. Abusing notation slightly, let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that @xmath . Hence, @xmath is the fraction of the area of @xmath
which is in the region @xmath .

Note that, in general, if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

then we can iterate this proof by substituting the interval @xmath for
@xmath then rescaling @xmath (in all directions) so that @xmath becomes
@xmath . Hypothesis 1 of the theorem is still satisfied, and hypothesis
2 is still satisfied too since areas scale as the square of distances.
Hence, since the conclusion of the new rescaled theorem is stronger, the
original theorem follows from the rescaled theorem.

We choose to rescale if inequality 2.15 is satisfied for @xmath or
@xmath . We claim this iteration process can only happen a finite number
of times. First we note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we let @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Each time we rescale, it follows from inequality 2.15 that the area of
@xmath does not increase. However, @xmath goes up by at least a factor
of @xmath . Hence, since in the theorem we assumed @xmath , we must only
rescale a finite number of times or inequality 2.16 would be violated.

In the final rescaled interval, we must therefore have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath and @xmath Thus,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , it follows (but it is not equivalent to) that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.17)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

To get an upper bound on @xmath in the conclusion of the theorem, we
choose @xmath , @xmath and determine the region @xmath which maximizes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

while still satisfying 2.17 and 2.18 .

This optimal region @xmath must be axially symmetric around the @xmath
-axis. This follows from the following symmetrization argument. Given a
region @xmath , symmetrize it about the @xmath -axis by defining another
region @xmath to be axially symmetric around the @xmath -axis but having
the same cross sectional area as @xmath when intersected by planes given
by @xmath equal to a constant. @xmath and @xmath have the same volume,
and it is known that this symmetrization process decreases surface area.
In fact, @xmath will have less surface area than @xmath in each region
@xmath . We want to preserve inequalities 2.17 and 2.18 , so define
@xmath to be @xmath union any regions in @xmath so that @xmath has the
same area as @xmath in each @xmath . Then since @xmath has more volume
than @xmath , we see that @xmath can only maximize 2.19 if it is axially
symmetric.

Furthermore, from the first variation formula, @xmath must have constant
mean curvature in each of the six intervals. Hence, in each interval
@xmath is either a collection of spheres or a Delaunay surface. If
@xmath (from the statement of the theorem) is small enough, we can rule
out Delaunay surfaces since they are unstable. We can also rule out more
than one sphere completely contained in the interiors of each of the six
intervals using stability since decreasing the area of one of the
spheres while increasing the area of one of the other spheres at the
same rate always increases volume to second order.

For convenience, let’s rescale again so that @xmath . Then checking all
the possibilities we find that one of the optimal regions @xmath which
maximizes @xmath is the right portion (with outside surface area @xmath
) of a ball in @xmath union the left portion (with outside surface area
@xmath ) of a ball in @xmath union a ball with surface area @xmath
centered in @xmath union a ball with surface area @xmath centered in
@xmath . For this region @xmath , we can then estimate that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where again we recall that we have rescaled so that @xmath . Note that
when @xmath , the right hand side of the above equation equals

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, by choosing @xmath small enough, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath . Since this was for the maximal configuration for
@xmath , the theorem follows. @xmath

We call theorem 17 the “cutting theorem” since it tells us that if a
region is long and skinny enough, then we can cut out a portion of it
and replace that portion with a ball of equal volume and decrease the
total surface area in the process. @xmath is the amount the area changes
when we cut out the section @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the condition we need to know that @xmath is long and skinny enough.

Intuitively, this theorem is clear, but we see that the proof was
nontrivial. We claim, but neglect to prove here, two generalizations of
theorem 17 . First, we will need a cutting theorem like theorem 17 for
the Schwarzschild metric outside a coordinate ball of radius @xmath to
prove proposition 2 , for some large @xmath . Since the Schwarzschild
metric @xmath has conformal factor @xmath which approaches @xmath as
@xmath approaches infinity, we can view the Schwarzschild metric as a
perturbation of @xmath , with the perturbation being as small as we like
if we choose @xmath large enough. Hence, it is reasonable to use rotated
and translated versions of the standard @xmath coordinate chart for the
Schwarzschild metric of mass @xmath to define @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath , and then to state a generalized version of theorem 17 for
regions @xmath in the Schwarzschild metric entirely outside the
coordinate ball of radius @xmath , for some @xmath . Secondly, we claim
that proposition 1 follows as a further generalization of theorem 17 ,
where not only are we now in the Schwarzschild metric of mass @xmath ,
but the cuts are being made along planes parallel to the sides of a
large polyhedron contained inside the coordinate ball of radius @xmath
minus the coordinate ball of radius @xmath . In this way proposition 1
follows, after sufficient adaptation, from the proof of theorem 17 .

Now we prove proposition 2 from section 2.7 . Since the Schwarzschild
metric is conformal to @xmath , with conformal factor @xmath , then for
surfaces outside the coordinate ball of radius @xmath we can use the
isoperimetric inequality for @xmath to conclude that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the area of a constant curvature 2-sphere containing a
volume @xmath in the constant curvature 3-sphere of volume @xmath . Then
since @xmath for @xmath , with the inequality being by a uniform amount
for @xmath given an @xmath , we see that we can simply choose @xmath
large enough to prove proposition 2 for @xmath .

To prove proposition 2 for small @xmath , we observe that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . We will show that for small volumes @xmath , if we choose
@xmath large enough, then in @xmath outside the coordinate ball of
radius @xmath that all surfaces of area @xmath containing a volume
@xmath satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

which will prove proposition 2 for @xmath if we choose @xmath small
enough. Thus, all that remains is to establish inequality 2.21 for
@xmath , for some @xmath .

Suppose @xmath contains a volume @xmath and is entirely outside the
coordinate ball of radius @xmath in Schwarzschild. We assume @xmath is
smooth, but @xmath could have tentacles extending long distances, for
example, which is troublesome. We find it necessary to regularize @xmath
first before proving inequality 2.21 .

Let @xmath be any open subset of the bounded open set @xmath . Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since we have uniform bounds on @xmath and @xmath when @xmath is being
minimized since @xmath , and since @xmath is bounded, there exists a
region @xmath which minimizes @xmath . Note that since @xmath , @xmath .

Finally, we regularize @xmath by removing the region @xmath from @xmath
. This, of course, decreases the total volume, so to keep the total
volume constant we add a ball of volume @xmath to a copy of @xmath .
Thus, we’ve modified @xmath and replaced it with @xmath , where @xmath
is the ball of volume @xmath in @xmath . Note that @xmath and that the
area has decreased since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, it is sufficient to prove inequality 2.21 for the regularized
region @xmath in
Schwarzschild (disjoint) union @xmath .

It is also sufficient to prove inequality 2.21 for each component of
@xmath individually. The ball @xmath in @xmath satisfies inequality 2.21
since @xmath for balls. Now consider one of the components @xmath in
Schwarzschild outside the coordinate ball of radius @xmath . Note that
for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

because otherwise @xmath would have included the region @xmath .
Furthermore,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the constant from the cutting theorem and @xmath is the
diameter of @xmath . Otherwise, we would have @xmath which means we
could use the cutting theorem to remove a section of @xmath , form a
ball in @xmath with it, and decrease the boundary area while preserving
the total volume. This cannot happen, since @xmath would have included
this section of @xmath if removing it and forming a ball with it
decreased the total area. Hence, we must have inequality 2.23 . This
diameter bound is central to the rest of the proof and is the reason we
needed to regularize @xmath .

Pick any point @xmath in @xmath , where again @xmath . In coordinates,
Schwarzschild can be represented as @xmath , where @xmath is the metric
and @xmath is the radial coordinate in @xmath . Suppose @xmath has
radial coordinate @xmath . Since @xmath is outside the coordinate ball
of radius @xmath , @xmath .

We construct a spherically-symmetric mapping @xmath from a
spherically-symmetric connected neighborhood of Schwarzschild containing
@xmath to a spherically-symmetric connected annular neighborhood of a
large 3-sphere @xmath of radius @xmath (when embedded in @xmath ). We
want @xmath to be spherically-symmetric, locally volume preserving, and
“tangent” (to be defined in a moment) at @xmath .

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a radial tangent vector in Schwarzschild, @xmath is the
length in the Schwarzschild metric, and @xmath is the length in the
sphere of radius @xmath metric. Thus @xmath increases lengths in the
radial direction by a factor of @xmath . Since @xmath preserves volumes
locally, lengths in the two other mutually orthogonal directions must be
increased by a factor of @xmath , so that the areas of the spherically
symmetric spheres of the Schwarzschild metric get increased by a factor
of @xmath by @xmath . We choose the radius @xmath of @xmath and define
@xmath such that @xmath and @xmath , in which case we say @xmath is
tangent at @xmath , and in particular at @xmath .

Since volume is preserved by @xmath locally, it is most convenient to
parameterize the spherically symmetric functions by the enclosed volume
of the corresponding spherically symmetric spheres, or at least relative
enclosed volume. On Schwarzschild, define @xmath to be the volume
enclosed by the coordinate ball of radius @xmath outside the coordinate
ball of radius @xmath . When @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Let @xmath
be @xmath changed into @xmath -coordinates, and let @xmath be the area
of the spherically symmetric sphere in Schwarzschild containing a volume
@xmath outside the coordinate ball of radius @xmath . Use @xmath to
define @xmath on @xmath , and let @xmath be the area of the spherically
symmetric spheres in @xmath . Since @xmath is locally volume preserving,
@xmath is relative enclosed volume on @xmath as well as @xmath .

In the Schwarzschild metric of mass @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . This follows from the fact that the mean curvature of
the spheres is given by @xmath and the formula for the Hawking mass. In
a 3-sphere @xmath of radius @xmath (when embedded in @xmath ), we
compute directly that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

At the point of tangency ( @xmath ), @xmath and @xmath . Hence, dividing
the two previous formulas at @xmath gives us that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, the further out @xmath is in Schwarzschild, the larger @xmath is
and the larger @xmath is. Thus, we may guarantee @xmath to be as large
as we like if we choose @xmath large enough. (Also, we see that this
construction only works when @xmath , which, by the positive mass
theorem, is all we need. Proposition 2 is true for @xmath , but the
proof requires constructing tangent hyperbolic spaces instead of tangent
spheres.)

Furthermore, since @xmath , we can differentiate this twice, and use
@xmath and @xmath to get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Changing the @xmath back to @xmath coordinates, we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the derivatives on @xmath and @xmath are still with respect to
@xmath . Working out the behavior of @xmath and @xmath for large @xmath
, we find that @xmath goes down as @xmath , for some constant @xmath for
large @xmath . Thus, we can guarantee @xmath to be as small as we like
if we choose @xmath large enough.

Since @xmath , @xmath so we need only to extend @xmath this distance
both ways from @xmath . Hence, on @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath since @xmath and @xmath , and we can choose @xmath as
small as we want if we choose @xmath large enough since this will make
@xmath small. Thus, since direct calculation shows that @xmath , @xmath
increases areas pointwise by a factor less than or equal to @xmath , and

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We will use the isoperimetric inequality for @xmath , that the
spherically symmetric spheres minimize area among surfaces enclosing the
same volume, to prove inequality 2.21 for @xmath . If we choose @xmath
large enough, the radius @xmath (and total volume) of @xmath will be as
large as we want, so by inequality 2.20

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . Since @xmath increases areas less than @xmath , then in
Schwarzschild we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for @xmath if we choose @xmath large enough. Since @xmath could be
chosen as small as we like provided @xmath was chosen large enough,
inequality 2.21 follows, proving the theorem. @xmath

### 2.10 Conjectures

We have seen that isoperimetric surfaces can be used to prove the
Penrose inequality for two classes of manifolds. Naturally we want to
generalize these results. First we minimized area with a volume
constraint and found that this approach worked as long as the minimizing
surfaces always had only one component. Then we realized that if we
minimized the sum of the areas to the three halves power with a volume
constraint, then this approach worked even when the minimizer had
multiple components. However, this second approach has a new problem,
that two or more surfaces in the minimizing configuration can push up
against each other.

This suggests that we are still not optimizing the correct quantity.
Minimizing the sum of the areas to the three halves power is a
generalization of minimizing area (with a volume constraint) in the
sense that these two optimization problems give the same answer when the
minimizers have only one component. Hence, it is natural to consider how
we can generalize the quantity “sum of the areas to the three halves
power” in such a way that the new quantity equals the sum of the areas
to the three halves power in certain cases. We recall the definition of
area nonincreasing maps given in definition 8 of section 2.6 and propose
the following functional.

###### Definition 11

Suppose @xmath is complete, has nonnegative scalar curvature, contains
one or more outermost minimal spheres @xmath , and is asymptotically
flat at infinity. Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is any open region in @xmath containing everything inside
the horizons.

In general, there will not be a unique map @xmath which maximizes the
@xmath volume of @xmath among area nonincreasing maps. Instead, we
generally expect there to be a two dimensional “critical set” of @xmath
which determines how large the @xmath volume of @xmath can be. For
example, if the boundary of @xmath has area @xmath , then by the
isoperimetric inequality in @xmath , the volume of @xmath can be at most
the volume of a sphere in @xmath with surface area @xmath , which is
@xmath , and sometimes this upper bound is realized. In fact, if @xmath
has several components each with boundary area @xmath , then the volume
of @xmath can be at most the volume of disjoint balls with surface areas
@xmath , which is @xmath , and sometimes this upper bound is realized
too. Hence, we see that optimizing the functional @xmath is sometimes
equivalent to optimizing the sum of the areas to the three halves power.

###### Conjecture 2

Under the assumptions stated in the definition of @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 12

For @xmath , let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the new mass function, where @xmath .

From conjecture 2 , it follows that @xmath is nondecreasing for @xmath .
Also, the original manifold can always be modified so that @xmath where
@xmath are the areas of the horizons. Hence, it is likely that
conjecture 2 would imply the following generalized Penrose inequality.

###### Conjecture 3

Suppose @xmath is complete, has nonnegative scalar curvature, contains
one or more outermost minimal spheres @xmath with surface areas @xmath ,
and is Schwarzschild with mass @xmath at infinity. Then @xmath .

## Chapter 3 Volume Comparison Theorems

The isoperimetric surface techniques which we developed to study the
Penrose inequality in general relativity also can be used to prove
several volume comparison theorems, including a new proof of Bishop’s
volume comparison theorem for positive Ricci curvature. Let @xmath be
the standard metric (with any scaling) on @xmath with constant Ricci
curvature @xmath . Bishop’s theorem says that if @xmath is a complete
Riemannian manifold ( @xmath ) with @xmath , then @xmath . It is then
natural to ask whether a similar type of volume comparison theorem could
be true for scalar curvature. We prove the following theorems for @xmath
-manifolds.

###### Theorem 18

Let @xmath be the constant curvature metric on @xmath with scalar
curvature @xmath , Ricci curvature @xmath , and volume @xmath . Then
there exists a positive @xmath such that if @xmath is any complete
smooth Riemannian manifold of volume @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As it happens, a lower bound on scalar curvature by itself is not
sufficient to give an upper bound on the total volume. We can scale a
cylinder, @xmath , to have any positive scalar curvature and still have
infinite volume. However, if we consider a neighborhood of metrics
around the standard metric @xmath on @xmath which satisfy @xmath , then
from the above theorem we see that @xmath implies that @xmath for these
metrics. Hence, we see that a volume comparison theorem for scalar
curvature is true for metrics close to the standard metric on @xmath .
Moreover,

###### Theorem 19

Let @xmath be the constant curvature metric on @xmath with scalar
curvature @xmath , Ricci curvature @xmath , and volume @xmath . If
@xmath and @xmath is any complete smooth Riemannian 3-manifold of volume
@xmath satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore, this expression for @xmath is sharp.

Interestingly enough, @xmath for many values of @xmath . And since the
above expression for @xmath is sharp, this allows us to define the best
value for @xmath which works in theorem 18 , namely

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Naturally it is desirable to estimate the actual value of @xmath . It is
not too hard to show that @xmath . However, getting an accurate estimate
for @xmath definitely seems to be a job for a computer, and it seems
reasonable to conjecture that @xmath is transcendental. From preliminary
computer calculations, it looks like @xmath , although these bounds are
not currently rigorous.

### 3.1 Isoperimetric Surface Techniques

As before in chapter 2 , isoperimetric surfaces will be used to prove
these theorems. The main difference is that we will be minimizing area
with a volume constraint on compact manifolds in this chapter, so
existence of area minimizers is already known. Also, the manifolds we
will be considering all have positive Ricci curvature, from which it
will follow from a stability argument that the area minimizers always
have exactly one component. Hence, condition 1 from chapter 2 will
always apply, so it will not be necessary to consider minimizing @xmath
with a volume constraint.

###### Definition 13

Let @xmath be a complete Riemannian n-manifold. Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is any region in @xmath , @xmath is the @xmath dimensional
volume of @xmath , and @xmath is the @xmath dimensional volume of @xmath
. If there exists a region @xmath with @xmath such that @xmath , then we
say that @xmath minimizes area with the given volume constraint.

The manifolds we will be dealing with in this chapter all have @xmath .
Hence, these manifolds are compact, so there will always exist a
minimizer @xmath (not necessarily unique) for all @xmath . These minimal
surfaces have constant mean curvature and are smooth.

We will use the function @xmath to achieve the volume bounds on @xmath .
We will use the curvature bounds on @xmath to get an upper bound on
@xmath . Intuitively, this will force the two roots of @xmath to be
close together. Since the two roots of @xmath are @xmath and @xmath , we
will get an upper bound for @xmath .

To get an upper bound for @xmath at @xmath , we will do a unit normal
variation on @xmath . That is, let @xmath be the surface created by
flowing @xmath out at every point in the normal direction at unit speed
for time @xmath . Since @xmath is smooth, we can do this variation for
@xmath for some @xmath . Abusing notation slightly, we can also
parameterize these surfaces by their volumes as @xmath so that @xmath
will correspond to @xmath . Let @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath since
@xmath is not necessarily minimizing for its volume. Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us suppose that @xmath satisfies @xmath and @xmath as in theorem 19
and compute @xmath . To do this, we will need to compute the first and
second derivatives of the area of @xmath and the volume that it
encloses. We will use the formulas

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the dot represents differentiation with respect to @xmath , @xmath
is the surface area 2-form for @xmath , @xmath is the second fundamental
form for @xmath , @xmath is the mean curvature, and @xmath is the
outward pointing unit normal vector. Since @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

And since @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By single variable calculus,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that at @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Finally, since @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Hence,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Lemma 4

Suppose @xmath minimizes area for its volume, @xmath , and @xmath . Then
@xmath has exactly one component.

Proof. Suppose @xmath has more than one component. Consider a flow on
@xmath which is a unit normal flow (flowing out) on the first component
(parameterized by volume) and a unit normal flow (flowing in) on the
second component (also parameterized by volume). Then all of the
surfaces in this family contain the same volume. However, by equation
3.2 the second derivative of area is negative with respect to this
volume preserving flow (let @xmath ). Thus, @xmath does not minimize
area for its volume. Contradiction. @xmath

Lemma 4 will be crucial for getting upper bounds on @xmath from the
lower bound on scalar curvature, and is one of the reasons we need some
kind of lower bound on Ricci curvature.

Going back to equation 3.2 , since @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the sense of comparison functions defined in chapter 2 .

###### Lemma 5

Suppose @xmath satisfies @xmath . Then @xmath is strictly increasing on
the interval @xmath .

Proof. It is always true that @xmath , since the boundaries of a region
and its complement are the same. By equation 3.3 , @xmath is strictly
negative (again, let @xmath . The lemma follows. @xmath

Now we want an equation like equation 3.3 which follows from the lower
bound on scalar curvature. From before,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By the Gauss equation,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the scalar curvature of @xmath and @xmath is the Gauss
curvature of @xmath . Substituting we get,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Lemma 4 , @xmath has only one component, so by the Gauss-Bonnet
theorem, @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As before, since @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the sense of comparison functions defined in chapter 2 .

Notice that we had to use the Gauss-Bonnet theorem to get equation 3.4 .
If we tried to generalize equation 3.4 for higher dimensions, we would
need to get an upper bound for @xmath , where @xmath is the scalar
curvature of @xmath . Since we don’t have such a bound in general, the
argument, as presented here, only works when @xmath is a 3-manifold.

However, equation 3.3 does generalize for all dimensions. This allows us
to give a new proof of Bishop’s theorem, which we present in section 3.3
.

### 3.2 Ricci and Scalar Curvature Mass

We define

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and choose to deal with @xmath instead of @xmath . Since @xmath and
@xmath have the same units and @xmath is roughly a linear function of
@xmath for small @xmath , the equations for @xmath turn out to be
simpler than the equations for @xmath . Of course, @xmath and @xmath
will have the same roots, @xmath and @xmath , and we will want to use
upper bounds on @xmath to prove that the roots of @xmath are close
together, thereby getting an upper bound on @xmath .

Plugging equation 3.5 into equations 3.3 and 3.4 and simplifying, we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the sense of comparison functions defined in chapter 2 . We comment
that it follows that these inequalities are also true distributionally.
Given inequalities like equations 3.6 and 3.7 , it is natural to want to
integrate them.

###### Definition 14

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we call these two quantities “Ricci curvature mass” and “scalar
curvature mass” respectively.

@xmath is continuous, but @xmath does not necessarily exist for all
@xmath , although it does exist almost everywhere since @xmath is
monotone increasing on @xmath and monotone decreasing on @xmath . The
left and right hand derivatives, @xmath and @xmath , do always exist
though. This follows from the fact that @xmath has comparison functions
@xmath , for all @xmath with uniformly bounded second derivatives.
Hence, we can add a quadratic to @xmath to get a concave function, from
which it follows that the left and right hand derivatives exist and are
equal except at a countable number of points. We define @xmath and
@xmath , which is natural for smooth manifolds.

Furthermore, @xmath using the comparison function argument again since
@xmath . If @xmath does not exist, then it is natural to define @xmath
to be a multivalued function taking on every value in the interval
@xmath . This is consistent, since if @xmath does exist, then @xmath .
Hence, @xmath and @xmath are multivalued for some @xmath , which can be
interpreted as the mass “jumping up” at these @xmath , and the set of
@xmath for which @xmath and @xmath are multivalued is a countable set.
Alternatively, one could replace @xmath with @xmath (or @xmath ) in the
formulas for @xmath and @xmath so that they would always be single
valued.

###### Lemma 6

The quantities @xmath and @xmath are nonnegative, nondecreasing
functions of @xmath on the interval @xmath and @xmath .

Proof. Since @xmath is a smooth manifold, @xmath for small @xmath and
@xmath . Since @xmath , it follows that @xmath . In addition, we observe
that if @xmath were smooth, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then by lemma 5 , we would have @xmath , so that by equations 3.6 and
3.7 , @xmath and @xmath proving that @xmath and @xmath are
nondecreasing, and hence nonnegative, on the interval @xmath .

More generally, we need to prove that @xmath and @xmath as
distributions, which follows as before in the proof of lemma 1 . @xmath

The reason the we call the two quantities @xmath and @xmath “mass” is
motivated by the fact that if we set @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath is
the mass function from chapter 2 . However, beyond being nonnegative,
nondecreasing functions which are very similar to @xmath in form, the
author is not currently aware of any physical interpretations of @xmath
and @xmath in the context of general relativity, although that is an
interesting possibility.

### 3.3 A New Proof of Bishop’s Theorem

In this section, we will give a new proof of Bishop’s theorem using an
argument which is very similar to the one we will use to prove theorem
19 . Whereas the rest of this chapter deals specifically with @xmath
-manifolds, in the next section we will study @xmath -manifolds. Because
of this, we will need to generalize a few definitions and equations just
for this section.

###### Theorem 20

(Bishop) Let @xmath be the standard metric (with any scaling) on @xmath
with constant Ricci curvature @xmath . If @xmath is a complete
Riemannian manifold ( @xmath ) with @xmath , then @xmath .

Proof. Modifying equation 3.3 , since @xmath , ( @xmath )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now we let @xmath , from which it follows that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The correct definition for @xmath then becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the surface area of the sphere @xmath of radius @xmath
in @xmath . As before, on the interval @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is a
nonnegative, nondecreasing function of @xmath . The proof is the same as
before.

Now consider phase space which we will view as the @xmath - @xmath plane
where @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath be the path in phase space of F(V)
for @xmath between @xmath and @xmath . Then we note that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

We also observe that since @xmath and @xmath (by the symmetry of @xmath
), @xmath is a path from the @xmath axis to the @xmath axis. Since
@xmath is strictly increasing and @xmath is strictly decreasing (by
inequality 3.9 ), the @xmath position of @xmath is nondecreasing and the
@xmath position of @xmath is strictly decreasing. Since @xmath is
sometimes multivalued, taking on the values of an interval, @xmath is
sometimes vertical.

Now we want to find the @xmath which maximizes equation 3.11 , with the
constraint that @xmath stays nonnegative and nondecreasing, which is
equivalent to satisfying equation 3.9 . Consider all the possible paths
which terminate at a given point on the @xmath axis, @xmath , and think
of these paths as beginning at this point and then follow the paths
backwards. The path which maximizes equation 3.11 will be the one which
has the smallest @xmath values. Since @xmath , we can rewrite inequality
3.9 as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath terminating at @xmath with the smallest @xmath values will be
the path which has equality in inequality 3.12 .

Hence, this path is given by the @xmath which has equality in inequality
3.9 . But equality for inequality 3.9 is equivalent to @xmath , which
implies that @xmath , where @xmath is some positive constant. By
equation 3.10 , this path can be computed explicitly and is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Different values of @xmath correspond to curves terminating at different
points on the @xmath axis. Hence, the @xmath which maximizes equation
3.11 is a curve which is the graph of equation 3.13 for some @xmath . By
a simple change of variables, it is easy to compute that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Now we recall that @xmath is nonnegative, so @xmath must also be
nonnegative. Hence, the above expression is maximized when @xmath . But
the standard sphere @xmath with constant Ricci curvature @xmath has
@xmath . This can be verified by direct computation using the fact that
the isoperimetric spheres of @xmath are the spherically symmetric @xmath
-spheres, or from noticing that since we get equality in inequality 3.8
when @xmath , @xmath , so @xmath . Let @xmath be the path in phase space
corresponding to this standard sphere with zero mass. Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

proving the theorem. @xmath

### 3.4 Proof of the Volume Comparison Theorems involving Scalar
Curvature

Proof. The approach we take here is the same as we used to prove
Bishop’s theorem in section 3.3 . Going back to section 3.2 and
combining equations 3.6 and 3.7 , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can rewrite inequality 3.15 as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

As before, we consider phase space which we will view as the @xmath -
@xmath plane where @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath be the path in phase
space of @xmath for @xmath between @xmath and @xmath . Then we recall
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath and @xmath (by the symmetry of @xmath ), @xmath is a path
from the @xmath axis to the @xmath axis. Since @xmath is strictly
increasing and @xmath is strictly decreasing (by inequality 3.18 ), the
@xmath position of @xmath is nondecreasing and the @xmath position of
@xmath is strictly decreasing. Again, since @xmath is sometimes
multivalued, taking on the values of an interval, @xmath is sometimes
vertical.

We want to find the @xmath which maximizes equation 3.20 , while still
satisfying inequality 3.18 . Consider all the possible paths which
terminate at a given point on the @xmath axis, @xmath , and think of
these paths as beginning at this point and then follow the paths
backwards. The path which maximizes equation 3.20 will be the one which
has the smallest @xmath values. Since @xmath , we can rewrite inequality
3.18 as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we think of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath as functions of @xmath
and @xmath instead of @xmath and @xmath . The @xmath terminating at
@xmath with the smallest @xmath values will be the path which has
equality in inequality 3.21 , and thus has equality in inequality 3.15 .
Let’s call this path @xmath . Then we see that @xmath maximizes equation
3.20 among all paths which terminate at @xmath .

By the computations in the proof of lemma 6 , equality in inequality
3.15 is equivalent to either @xmath or @xmath for each @xmath . This,
combined with equation 3.19 and the fact that @xmath is a strictly
increasing function of @xmath , gives us that @xmath is strictly
increasing as a function of @xmath for the path @xmath . Furthermore,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Hence, we see that there are three cases.

Case 1: If @xmath is always less than @xmath , then @xmath is the curve
given by @xmath for some constant @xmath which depends on @xmath .

Case 2: If @xmath is initially smaller than @xmath but becomes larger
than @xmath for @xmath , then @xmath will be the union of two segments
of curves, one given by @xmath for @xmath and the other given by @xmath
for @xmath , for three constants @xmath and @xmath which depend on
@xmath .

Case 3: If @xmath is always greater than @xmath , then @xmath for some
constant @xmath . By equation 3.19 , though, we see that if this
constant were positive, then @xmath would approach @xmath for small
@xmath , thus violating our assumption that @xmath . Hence, @xmath , so
@xmath for all @xmath .

From these observations, we explicitly compute @xmath . We spare the
reader some of the routine details and summarize the results. For
convenience, we define two special values for @xmath . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The subscripts stand for “sphere” and “football,” since the standard
3-sphere produces the curve @xmath and the metric (which turns out to
have two singularities) which produces @xmath looks like an axially
symmetric football (with two pointy ends) when embedded in @xmath .

For @xmath , @xmath is the graph of the function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

These are the curves from case 1.

For @xmath , @xmath is the graph of the function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These are the curves from case 2, and the constants @xmath and @xmath
are the same constants that are mentioned in case 2. Case 3 is also
included here, and occurs when @xmath , which implies that @xmath .

There are no paths which terminate at @xmath for @xmath . This follows
from the definition of @xmath in equation 3.17 and the fact that @xmath
.

Now let’s define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then we have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is any arbitrary @xmath -manifold satisfying the curvature
conditions of theorem 19 . Using equations 3.22 and 3.23 , we can
compute @xmath explicitly.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we’ve simplified the top integral using a change of variables.
Unfortunately, it is not so easy to simplify the bottom integral.
However, we can simplify the bottom integral when @xmath equals @xmath
or @xmath (because the values of @xmath and @xmath work out nicely), and
we find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

(using @xmath ) and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

so it is easy to check that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore, by the definition of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can simplify things further if we recognize the fact that everything
scales as it should. Using the values from the 3-sphere of radius one
embedded in @xmath , we use @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath to get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that plugging in these values for @xmath and scaling appropriately we
get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where again

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can simplify the notation a bit by changing variables. Let @xmath and
@xmath . Then we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is continuous, the maximum value must occur for @xmath .
Hence, we have the following theorem.

###### Theorem 21

Let @xmath be the constant curvature metric on @xmath with scalar
curvature @xmath , Ricci curvature @xmath , and volume @xmath . If
@xmath and @xmath is any complete smooth Riemannian manifold of volume
@xmath satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore, this expression for @xmath is sharp.

We note that the reason that this expression for @xmath is sharp is that
it is possible to construct spherically symmetric manifolds which
satisfy the curvature conditions of theorem 21 and have volumes as close
to @xmath as desired, and equal to @xmath if we allow the manifolds to
have singularities. These manifolds look like long and skinny axially
symmetric footballs when embedded in @xmath with two pointy ends where
the manifold is not smooth. The smaller @xmath is, the longer and
skinnier these manifolds become, and as @xmath goes to zero, these “case
of equality” manifolds converge to the standard cylinder @xmath which
has constant scalar curvature @xmath (and zero Ricci curvature in the
directions along the length of the cylinder). These manifolds can be
constructed by looking at the function @xmath from equation 3.26 (for
each value of @xmath ) and defining @xmath to be the value of @xmath
which maximizes @xmath . Then the curve @xmath in phase space as
described before corresponds to an @xmath function, which yields an
@xmath function using @xmath . Given an @xmath function, we can then
construct a spherically symmetric manifold such that the spherically
symmetric spheres which contain a volume @xmath have surface area @xmath
, and it is easy to verify that these are in fact “case of equality”
manifolds.

Direct computation shows that @xmath is a @xmath function on @xmath and
that @xmath , so @xmath for all @xmath . Furthermore, since direct
calculation also shows that @xmath is a nonincreasing function of @xmath
when @xmath is held fixed, it follows that @xmath is nonincreasing.
Hence, if @xmath equals one at one value of @xmath , then @xmath equals
one for all larger values of @xmath in the interval @xmath . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then we have the following theorem.

###### Theorem 22

Let @xmath be the constant curvature metric on @xmath with scalar
curvature @xmath , Ricci curvature @xmath , and volume @xmath . If
@xmath is any complete smooth Riemannian manifold of volume @xmath
satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Naturally it would be desirable to estimate the actual value of @xmath .
It is straightforward (although messy) to show that @xmath . However,
getting an accurate estimate for @xmath definitely seems to be a job for
a computer, and it seems reasonable to conjecture that @xmath is
transcendental. From preliminary computer calculations, it looks like
@xmath , although these bounds are not rigorous.

### 3.5 Estimates for @xmath

The results of this section are due primarily to Kevin Iga of Stanford
University, who wrote several computer programs using the C programming
language on a Sun SPARC station 20 computer to estimate the value of
@xmath from theorem 22 . We found that @xmath . However, the only
rigorous bounds that we have are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

but we are reasonably confident that @xmath . We leave it those with
greater expertise with computational methods to find better rigorous
upper and lower bounds for @xmath .

We recall that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We recall that since @xmath is continuous, the maximum value must occur
for @xmath . In fact, since @xmath is @xmath , the maximum value can not
occur on the left end point of this interval, @xmath , although there is
a local maximum very close to this point when @xmath is less than about
@xmath . In fact, we find that the maximum value of @xmath either occurs
at @xmath or at a @xmath value only slightly greater than @xmath . This
phenomenon can be seen in figure 3.1 where we can recognize the location
of @xmath on the graph using the fact that @xmath is linear for @xmath .

As previously mentioned, it is easily shown that @xmath is a decreasing
function of @xmath when @xmath is held fixed. Thus, from figure 3.1 we
see that the maximum value of @xmath is greater than one when @xmath ,
so this must be the case for all @xmath as well. Hence, @xmath . Using
this idea again we conclude from figure 3.2 that @xmath , and continuing
this procedure is how we estimated that @xmath .

In figure 3.3 we see the graph of @xmath when @xmath , so that the
maximum value of @xmath is roughly one and occurs (to the accuracy of
the computer) at two @xmath values, @xmath and @xmath slightly greater
than @xmath . Figure 3.4 is an enlargement of figure 3.3 around this
second maximum.

Notice that from the form of the formula for @xmath that solving for the
explicit values of the critical points using @xmath seems very
difficult, and this is why it seems necessary to resort to numerical
computations.

The first integral in the formula for @xmath can be computed in closed
form. However, we used Simpson’s rule to estimate the integral in the
formula for @xmath . To use Simpson’s rule, we need the function we are
integrating to be bounded, so we subtract the function @xmath for some
@xmath from the second integrand to make it a bounded function. We then
use Simpson’s rule with @xmath , the number of intervals, equal to one
thousand. We have not attempted any rigorous error estimates, although
we have observed that the value of @xmath which we compute is the same
to six digits for @xmath , which is a good sign.

To get the rigorous bounds in inequality 3.31 , we note that @xmath when
@xmath . Since this endpoint is never the maximum value of @xmath since
@xmath is @xmath and has positive slope at @xmath , @xmath . Hence,
@xmath . Finally, to show that @xmath , it is sufficient to prove that
for some @xmath , @xmath which implies that the maximum value of @xmath
occurs at @xmath and equals @xmath . Choosing @xmath very close to
@xmath we find that this is true, although the computations are not
trivial. Thus, @xmath for some @xmath , so @xmath .

### 3.6 Conjectures

The most natural generalization of theorem 22 is to propose that it is
true in higher dimensions.

###### Conjecture 4

Let @xmath be the constant curvature metric on @xmath with scalar
curvature @xmath , Ricci curvature @xmath , and volume @xmath . Then for
each @xmath , there exists a positive @xmath such that if @xmath is any
complete smooth Riemannian manifold with volume @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Other problems which relate to scalar curvature include questions
connected to the Yamabe problem and Einstein metrics [ 25 ] . Given a
manifold @xmath , consider metrics of volume one and define the energy
to be the integral of scalar curvature. Einstein metrics are critical
points of this functional. One approach to finding critical points of
energy is to define @xmath to be the infimum of the energy of all
metrics conformal to @xmath , and then to define @xmath to be the
supremum of @xmath over all conformal classes of metrics. If @xmath ,
then it is known that @xmath is always realized by a unique metric, so
that @xmath is realized by a metric which is a critical point of the
energy functional and hence is Einstein. However, for @xmath , it is not
known under what circumstances this procedure yields a critical point of
the energy functional.

Also, if @xmath is a manifold which admits a constant curvature metric,
then it is conjectured by Schoen [ 25 ] that the above procedure
produces the constant curvature metric and that @xmath equals the energy
of this metric. Schoen’s conjecture splits naturally into two cases,
depending on whether the constant curvature metric is negatively curved
or positively curved. Considering these two cases separately motivates
the following two conjectures.

###### Conjecture 5

(Schoen) Suppose @xmath , @xmath , admits a hyperbolic metric @xmath
with constant negative scalar curvature @xmath . If @xmath is any other
metric on @xmath with @xmath , then @xmath .

###### Conjecture 6

Let @xmath , @xmath , be the standard constant curvature metric on
@xmath with first nonzero eigenvalue of the Laplacian operator @xmath .
Let @xmath be any finite isometric group action on @xmath without fixed
points, so that @xmath is a constant curvature metric on @xmath with
scalar curvature @xmath and volume @xmath . If @xmath is a metric on
@xmath with @xmath and first eigenvalue @xmath , then @xmath .

Conjectures 5 and 6 imply Schoen’s conjecture respectively in the
negatively and positively curved cases. (In the case that @xmath admits
a flat metric the conjecture is already known to be true.) Furthermore,
if either conjecture 5 or 6 turns out to be false, then there would be a
good chance that a counterexample to Schoen’s conjecture could be found.

Conjectures 4 and 6 have the similarity that both attempt to use a lower
bound on scalar curvature to achieve an upper bound on the total volume.
However, both conjectures are false without additional assumptions. For
conjecture 4 , we need a lower bound on the Ricci curvature, and for
conjecture 6 we need a lower bound on the first nonzero eigenvalue.
These last two inequalities are weak in the sense that they are not
equalities for the constant curvature metrics (unless @xmath is trivial
in conjecture 6 ). Hence, both conjectures say that for metrics close to
the constant curvature metric (on @xmath in conjecture 4 and on @xmath
in conjecture 6 , for nontrivial @xmath ) that @xmath implies @xmath .
Conjecture 5 , on the other hand, is a volume comparison conjecture for
scalar curvature for hyperbolic metrics, and is particularly compelling
because of its simplicity.

## Appendix A Some Geometric Calculations

Let @xmath be a smooth compact surface without boundary in @xmath . In
this appendix we compute the rate of change of the mean curvature and
the area form of @xmath given a smooth variation of @xmath . We define a
variation of @xmath as follows. For @xmath and @xmath , suppose @xmath
takes values in @xmath , is smooth, @xmath is a smooth family of
surfaces around @xmath , and the vector @xmath is perpendicular to
@xmath at @xmath . Let @xmath be the outward-pointing unit normal to
@xmath at @xmath , so that we must have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

for some real-valued function @xmath . Then we see that the surfaces
@xmath can be thought of as the surface created by starting at @xmath
and flowing in the outward unit normal (to @xmath ) direction at speed
@xmath for @xmath between @xmath and @xmath . We call @xmath the flow
rate. In fact, given any smooth flow rate @xmath , for @xmath and @xmath
, we can always find a smooth mapping @xmath as above satisfying
equation ( A.1 ) such that @xmath is a smooth family of surfaces around
@xmath , for @xmath , for some @xmath .

Let @xmath be the area form on @xmath , @xmath be the second fundamental
form of @xmath in @xmath at @xmath , and @xmath be the mean curvature of
@xmath at @xmath . Let @xmath be the area form on @xmath , @xmath be the
second fundamental form of @xmath in @xmath at @xmath , and @xmath be
the mean curvature of @xmath at the point @xmath , for @xmath . In this
section we will verify the formulas

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

which we will use for important calculations in chapters 2 and 3 .

Let @xmath for some @xmath be a local coordinate chart for @xmath . Then
we can define @xmath equivalently locally on @xmath with coordinates
@xmath . Let @xmath be the vector @xmath , and define the @xmath matrix

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the pull-back of the metric of @xmath using the mapping
@xmath . Then @xmath is the metric for some neighborhood of @xmath so
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . Computing, we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we have used the formula @xmath . Also,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

since @xmath by the torsion-free property of the connection in @xmath
and since @xmath and @xmath are coordinate vectors. Thus, since by
equation ( A.1 ) @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since @xmath . Furthermore, since the second fundamental form is given
by @xmath and is symmetric, we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus, putting it all together, we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Thus, equation ( A.2 ) is true.

Now we verify equation ( A.3 ). Since @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But since @xmath , by the product rule it follows that @xmath so that by
equation ( A.4 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Furthermore,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

by the definition of the Riemann curvature tensor. Then since @xmath and
@xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We leave it to the reader to check that @xmath . Furthermore, since
@xmath , and @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Ricci curvature tensor.

Hence, from before, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

proving equation ( A.3 ).

One immediate consequence to equation ( A.2 ) is that smooth surfaces
which minimize area with a volume constraint must have constant mean
curvature. Otherwise, we consider a flow on the surface @xmath with a
flow rate @xmath defined on @xmath . Then since the area of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore, since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we can find an @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath unless @xmath equals a
constant. Hence, any smooth surface which even locally minimizes area
among surfaces containing the same volume must have constant mean
curvature.
