## 4.4 General Number of Branes, @xmath, for the Conifold

In the previous section we saw the generating function for the case of
@xmath for the conifold. In this section we will develop the general
@xmath case. This is done using the Plethystic Exponential. Recall that
in the case of baryon number @xmath , namely for mesonic generating
functions, [ 23 ] the knowledge of the generating function for @xmath is
enough to compute the generating function for any @xmath . This is
essentially due to the fact that the operators for finite @xmath are
symmetric functions of the operators for @xmath and this is precisely
the role which is played by the plethystic exponential – to take a
generating function for a set of operators and count all possible
symmetric functions of it.

For the present case, in which the baryon number is non-zero, it turns
out that the procedure is not too different than the mesonic case. One
needs to have the knowledge of a single generating function, @xmath ,
for one D brane, @xmath and for a fixed baryon number @xmath , and this
information is enough to compute all generating functions for any number
of D branes and for a fixed baryonic number [ 24 ] (see section 3.6.4 ).
Indeed the field theory operators with fixed baryonic numbers, when the
rank of the gauge group factor is N, are obtained contracting N strings
of elementary fields of the @xmath case with two epsilons, and hence
they are symmetric in the @xmath operators.

We can summarize this information by writing an expression for the
generating function of any number of branes and any baryonic number,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the first equality indicates that this is a generating function
for fixed number of branes, the second equality indicates that we are
summing over all contributions of fixed baryonic numbers and that each
contribution is the plethystic exponential of the generating function
for one D brane and for fixed baryonic charge. The third equality
expresses the generating function in terms of a multi-contour integral
of the generating function for one D brane. For completeness, using
Equation ( 4.3.5 ) and Equation ( LABEL:resconF ) we write down the
generating function as explicit as possible,

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

If we further ignore the @xmath quantum numbers and set @xmath we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The exponential terms have an equivalent representation as infinite
products and take the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 4.4.1 @xmath for the Conifold

Taking the expansion of Equation ( 4.4 ) to second order in the chemical
potential @xmath for the number of D branes, we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and we divided the contribution into two terms, @xmath and @xmath . We
next use the identity

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and evaluate @xmath to be

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

@xmath is slightly more involved since it contains two contour integrals
but still is relatively easy to evaluate,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                                
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We can now collect all the terms and get an expression for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We can recall the chemical potentials for counting the @xmath and @xmath
fields and rewrite

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us evaluate the second term and write it explicitly using equation (
4.3.3 ).

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The residue integral now gets contributions from 4 different points at

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The computations are a bit lengthy but after some work we get an
expression for the generating function for BPS operators on N=2 D branes
probing the conifold. If we ignore the @xmath weights by setting @xmath
, we obtain:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Similar expressions can be obtained for @xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.4.28)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

and greater values of @xmath .

The properties of these generating functions for different values of
@xmath are discussed in Section 4.6 .

### 4.5 The PE, the Baryonic Chiral Ring and the Geometric Quantization

It should be clear from the previous sections that the knowledge of the
generating function @xmath for @xmath and fixed baryonic number @xmath
is enough to compute the generating function for any @xmath and @xmath .
Intuitively this is essentially due to the fact that the chiral BPS
operators for finite @xmath are symmetric functions of the operators for
@xmath . The plethystic exponential has the role of taking a generating
function for a set of operators and of counting all possible symmetric
functions of them, therefore it allows to pass from @xmath to @xmath .
In this section we want to explain in detail how this procedure works
for the simple case of the conifold for baryonic charge @xmath , and the
geometric realization of this procedure.

In section 3.3.1 we have seen that the generic baryonic operators with
baryonic charge N is obtained taking N strings of the elementary fields
@xmath , each one having baryonic charge one:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and contract them with two epsilon symbols:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Thanks to the @xmath symbols these operators are completely symmetric in
the exchange of the @xmath ’s. Now we want to understand the role of the
plethystic exponential in the problem of counting all the operators of
the form ( 4.5.30 ). It is clear that the generating function counting
all the possible BPS operators with baryonic charge N is the one that
counts all the possible symmetric products of N elements of the form (
4.5.29 ). The BPS operators ( 4.5.29 ) are in correspondence with points
inside an integral conical pyramid (see Section 4.3.1 ), that we denote
@xmath . Therefore counting the operators ( 4.5.29 ) is the same as
counting the integer points @xmath inside @xmath , and the counting
procedure for generic @xmath is simply achieved by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have introduced the chemical potential @xmath for the number of
branes, and @xmath are the chemical potentials for the @xmath toric
action. ¿From this expansion it is clear that the LHS of Equation (
4.5.31 ) is the generating function for all the possible symmetric
products of @xmath elements inside @xmath . The RHS of Equation ( 4.5.31
) is what we write as @xmath , and it is easy to show that:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The RHS of Equation ( 4.5.32 ) is the definition of the plethystic
exponential, hence we have the relation:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This is the physical justification of the use of the plethystic
exponential in the baryonic counting problem: the generic BPS operator
of the gauge theory in the presence of N D3 branes, Equation ( 4.5.30 ),
is a symmetric function of the chiral operators in the case of @xmath ,
Equation ( 4.5.29 ). Hence once we know @xmath we obtain @xmath by
counting all possible symmetric functions of the operators in @xmath ,
and this is exactly the role of the plethystic exponential.

It is also possible to relate the plethystic exponential to the result
of the geometric quantization procedure of a system of D3 branes wrapped
on three cycles inside @xmath . It is known that the gauge theory we
have discussed so far is dual to Type IIB string theory on the @xmath
supergravity background. In the geometric side the baryonic operators
correspond to D3 branes wrapped over non trivial three cycles in @xmath
. The supersymmetric D3 brane wrapping three-cycles in @xmath are in one
to one correspondence with the holomorphic surfaces @xmath in the real
cone @xmath over @xmath [ 92 , 93 ] . As explained in section 3.6.3 , we
can associate to every vertex of the toric diagram a global homogeneous
coordinate @xmath . In the conifold case the homogeneous coordinates
@xmath with charges @xmath can be put in one-to-one correspondence with
the elementary fields @xmath which have indeed the same charges. Hence
all the supersymmetric configurations of D3 branes wrapped in @xmath
with @xmath are zero loci of homogeneous polynomials of degree one:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.5.34)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

where @xmath ’s are complex numbers and parametrize the supersymmetric
D3 brane embeddings. This is a particular case of the general procedure
explained in the previous chapter, and we know that the phase space
@xmath of this classical system of D3 branes is @xmath and the @xmath ’s
are its homogeneous coordinate [ 93 ] ; and the BPS Hilbert space,
obtained using geometric quantization procedures [ 95 , 93 ] over @xmath
, is spanned by the degree @xmath polynomials in the homogeneous
coordinates @xmath , where @xmath is the value of the integral of the
five form @xmath over @xmath , and it correspond to the number of colors
in the dual gauge theory. These polynomials are clearly completely
symmetric in the exchange of the @xmath ’s and one can write them as the
symmetric states:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In this geometric language every @xmath correspond to a section of the
line bundle @xmath and the problem of counting all these sections is
explained in detail in section 3.6 . Let us denote the generating
function for this counting problem @xmath , meaning that we are counting
the sections of the line bundle @xmath over the conifold: we use the
notation explained in the previous chapter. The geometric quantization
procedure prescribes that ( 4.5.35 ) are a basis of the Hilbert space
for the BPS wrapped D3 branes, and hence of all the possible symmetric
products of @xmath of the sections of @xmath . As explained above, it is
by now clear that the role of the plethystic exponential is to pass from
the generating function of the global sections of @xmath to the
generating function of their @xmath -times symmetric products:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Hence in the geometric picture the appearance of the plethystic
exponential is the realization of the geometric quantization procedure
over the phase space of a system of wrapped D3 branes in the internal
geometry.

Clearly, there exists a precise relation between the two counting
problems [ 93 ] . From the identification of the elementary fields of
the conifold with the homogeneous coordinates @xmath , one has the
obvious association between the homogeneous coordinates @xmath over the
phase space and the chiral operators with @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and hence the correspondence between the BPS states in @xmath and the
baryonic operators in the dual field theory [ 93 ] :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore the interpretation of the plethystic exponential in these
counting problems is two-fold: in the gauge theory side it is the
realization that the generic BPS baryonic operator is a symmetric
product of some basic building blocks; in the geometric side it is the
direct outcome of the geometric quantization procedure of a system of D3
branes. The two approaches are related by the @xmath correspondence ¹ ¹
1 In the generic toric case there exist a relation between the two
counting problem, but it is more subtle, mainly due to the fact that the
correspondence between the homogeneous coordinates @xmath and the
elementary fields of the dual gauge theory is not one to one. :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now we understand a bit better the correspondence between the geometric
and the field theory counting. The correspondence for general toric
variety @xmath and general line bundle is much more complicated and we
will explain it in the following chapter. But, for notation simplicity,
we will leave from on the symbol @xmath for the generating function and
we will use just the symbol @xmath both for the field theory and the
geometric computations.

### 4.6 The Structure of the Chiral Ring for the Conifold

Now that we have under control the generating functions for the conifold
for generic baryonic number @xmath and number of branes @xmath , it is
interesting to understand the structure of the chiral ring for different
values of @xmath .

For simplicity we consider the generating functions for the conifold
@xmath with @xmath , @xmath . In this way it counts only the number of
fields @xmath ( @xmath ) and @xmath ( @xmath ) in the gauge invariant
operators without taking into account their weights under the global
@xmath symmetries. Our procedure will be to take the plethystic
logarithm (PE @xmath , or equivalently PL) of the generating function
@xmath . This operation is the inverse function of the plethystic
exponential and it was defined in section 1.5.2 :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the Möbius function We remind the reader that acting
with PE @xmath on a generating function gives back the generating series
for the generators and the relations in the chiral ring. We are going to
see that the result is generically an infinite series in which the first
terms with the plus sign give the basic generators while the first terms
with the minus sign give the relations between these basic generators.
Then there is an infinite series of terms with plus and minus signs due
to the fact that the moduli space of vacua is not a complete
intersection. In the introductory section 1.5.2 we have just seen
examples of PE @xmath that has a finite extension: namely free generated
rings and complete intersections. In this section we will see examples
of the generic infinite extension of the PE @xmath for non complete
intersections.

Let us start with the simplest case @xmath . In this case the generating
function for the conifold is simply:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Taking the plethystic logarithm we obtain:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This means that in the case @xmath the chiral ring is freely generated
by @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath without any relations. Indeed in
this case the gauge theory is Abelian and we have no matrix relations,
the superpotential is zero and we have no @xmath -term relations.

We can now pass to the more interesting case of @xmath . The generating
function is given in Equation ( 4.4.26 ):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The first terms of its plethystic logarithm are:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As explained above the interpretation of equation ( 4.6.44 ) is: the
first three monomials are the basic generators of the chiral ring and we
can recognize them in the following gauge invariant operators in the
quiver theory :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.6.45)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where the indices contraction between fields and epsilon symbols is
implicit. These operators transform under spin (1,0), (0,1), and @xmath
of @xmath , respectively.

The second three monomials give the quantum number of the relations
between the basic generators of the chiral ring. The presence of these
relations means that the chiral ring in the case @xmath is not freely
generated. It is possible to understand this fact looking at the higher
degree gauge invariant fields in the chiral ring. At order @xmath using
the ten basic generators we can write the operators:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.46)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using the tensor relation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.47)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and some tensor algebra we can rewrite the gauge invariants in equation
( 4.6.46 ) in terms of the operators:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.48)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Hence it is possible to write the @xmath operators in equation ( 4.6.46
) in terms of the @xmath operators in equation ( 4.6.48 ). This means
that there exist at least @xmath relations with quantum numbers @xmath
between the ten basic generators in Equation ( 4.6 ). One can check that
the relations are exactly three and these are precisely the ones
predicted by the term @xmath in Equation ( 4.6.44 ). To justify the term
@xmath in ( 4.6.44 ) one works in the same way as before exchanging the
@xmath fields with the @xmath fields. In a similar way we can justify
the term @xmath in ( 4.6.44 ). Using the ten basic generators we can
write the following @xmath operators at level @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.49)
  -- -------- -- ----------

these can be written in terms of the @xmath operators:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.50)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the identity operator.

Hence we see that in field theory there exist @xmath relations with the
quantum numbers @xmath , and these are the ones predicted by the
plethystic logarithm in equation ( 4.6.44 ).

The higher monomials in equation ( 4.6.44 ) mean that the moduli space
of the conifold at @xmath is not a complete intersection.

At @xmath one may expect the presence of the mesonic operators @xmath
among the basic generators of the chiral ring, but it is easy to show
that:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.51)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and hence we conclude that @xmath do not appear independently, but are
generated by the ten basic gauge invariant operators in ( 4.6 ) as
predicted by the plethystic logarithm in Equation ( 4.6.44 ).

To check the consistency of the discussion about the basic generators
and their relations one can expand the generating function @xmath at the
first few orders:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and try to construct the gauge invariant operators associated with each
monomial. It is convenient to form this expansion into a two dimensional
lattice in the @xmath coordinates,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.53)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The @xmath is the identity operator, the quadratic monomials are the
basic generators already discussed, at the quartic order we begin to
have composite operators made out of the 10 generators. Let us count
them taking into account their symmetry properties:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.6.54)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Thus, the counting as encoded in the generating function and the
explicit counting in the gauge theory nicely agree. It is interesting to
do the same analysis at dimension six, because at this level the
relations among the basic generators enter into the game (see equation (
4.6.44 )):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.6.55)
                                   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Also at this level the computation with the generating function and with
the conformal field theory techniques, taking into account the relations
between the basic generators previously explained, nicely agree.

It is now interesting to give a look at the case of @xmath . This is the
first level where non factorisable baryons appear [ 94 , 93 ] . These
types of baryons are the ones that cannot be written as a product of
mesonic operators (traces of fields) and the basic baryons (for example
@xmath at the level @xmath is a basic baryon). The generating function
for @xmath has the form:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.56)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a polynomial in @xmath , @xmath give in equation (
4.4.28 ). The first few terms in the @xmath lattice look like

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.57)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We now take the plethystic logarithm to understand the structure of
basic generators at level @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.58)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with the dots meaning the presence of relations among the basic
generators at higher orders in @xmath , @xmath . On the @xmath lattice
this expression looks like this

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.59)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now we would like to match the predictions of equation ( 4.6.58 ) with
the gauge invariant operators in quiver theory

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

As at the level @xmath the operators of the type @xmath do not appear
independently but are generated by the basic operators in ( 4.6 ). This
can be understood in the same way as the case @xmath using the tensor
relation ( 4.6.47 ).

The most interesting basic generators are the ones related to the
monomials @xmath , @xmath : these are the first cases of non
factorizable baryons. Let us analyze the monomial @xmath (the discussion
for the other monomial is the same if one exchanges the @xmath fields
with the @xmath fields and @xmath with @xmath ). At this level, if all
the baryonic operators were factorizable, the only gauge invariant
operators we could construct with the right quantum numbers would be of
the type @xmath and there are just @xmath of them. If instead we follow
the general proposal [ 93 , 24 ] to relate monomials in the homogeneous
coordinates to baryonic gauge invariant operators, at the level @xmath
we would write the operators

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.6.61)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the epsilon terms are contracted once with each index in the
brackets. If we count how many operators exist of this form we discover
that they are @xmath . This suggests that among the operators in (
4.6.61 ) there are @xmath that are not factorizable and must be included
as generators of the ring. An explicit computation shows that there are
indeed two non factorizable determinants. These two “special” baryons in
the spectra of the field theory are the ones that make the generating
function @xmath non trivial, and they are precisely the ones required by
the plethystic logarithm ( 4.6.58 ) as basic generators at the level
@xmath . The existence of non factorizable baryons is related to the
flavor indices of the @xmath [ 94 ] ; only those baryons where the
@xmath are suitably symmetrized can be factorized using the relation (
4.6.47 ).

Next, one can go up with the values of @xmath and try to extract the
general pattern of basic generators for the chiral ring of the gauge
theory dual to the conifold singularity.

We use a notation where @xmath denotes the weights of the gauge
invariant operators under @xmath , @xmath . The basic generators for the
first few values of @xmath are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.6.62)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

From ( 4.6 ) it seems that the pattern of the basic generators for
generic @xmath is the following (we assume reflection symmetry under the
exchange of @xmath and @xmath ):

-   The mesonic generators of the chiral ring are all the mesons (single
    traces) starting from weight (1,1) up to weight @xmath . There are
    @xmath generators with weight @xmath , transforming in the spin
    @xmath representation, leading to a total of @xmath generators;

-   The baryonic generators of the chiral ring have a jump of 2 in the
    level:

    -   @xmath generators of weight @xmath ;

    -   @xmath generators of weight @xmath starting at level @xmath ,
        which are exactly the non factorizable baryons we have already
        discussed;

    -   generators of weight @xmath starting at level @xmath , which are
        new non factorizable baryons;

    -   etc.

The non factorizable baryons appear for the first time at level @xmath ,
and going up with the number of branes the number and type of non
trivial baryons increase.

### 4.7 Some Toy Models

In this section we are going to look at some toy models to give more
explicit formulae and a more complete comparison with the field theory
BPS spectrum.

#### 4.7.1 Half the Conifold

A nice toy model consists of half the matter content of the conifold.
This model is particularly simple as it has no F term relations and all
baryons are factorized. The gauge theory data can be encoded in the
quiver in Figure 4.4 with @xmath .

The chiral multiplets are assigned charges according to Table 4.2 which
is a reduction of Table 4.1 .

With this toy model we are counting the subset of BPS operators of the
conifold with no occurrences of @xmath and @xmath .

As for the conifold case, the generating function for one D brane and
any baryon number is freely generated by the two chiral multiplets
@xmath and @xmath and takes the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.7.63)
  -- -------- -- ----------

¿From which it is easy to extract the generating function for fixed
baryonic charge @xmath and one D brane, @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which indeed reflects the symmetry of taking @xmath , @xmath
simultaneously. Setting @xmath to be the chemical potential for the
number of D branes, @xmath , and taking the @xmath -inserted plethystic
exponential of these expressions we can easily extract the the
generating function for fixed number of baryons

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We can compare this generating function to the generating function of
the complex line, taken from [ 23 ] ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.7.64)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which upon substitution @xmath and @xmath for positive baryonic charge
and similar expressions for negative baryonic charge, leads to the
generating function for fixed number of D branes @xmath and fixed
baryonic charge @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Note the relation @xmath (and a similar expression for @xmath ) which
implies that the partition function at baryonic number @xmath is
proportional to the mesonic partition function. This can be understood
by observing that, since there are no flavor indices, using equation (
4.6.47 ), we can factorize all baryons into a product of the basic
baryons @xmath and @xmath times mesons.

Summing over all baryonic charges we can get the generating function for
fixed number of D3-branes, @xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.7.65)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Which turns out to be freely generated. The corresponding chiral ring of
BPS operators is generated by the @xmath operators, @xmath , @xmath ,
and Tr @xmath .

##### Comparing with the Molien Invariant

The generating functions for cases in which the superpotential is zero
can be computed using a different method – that of the Molien Invariant
[ 76 , 85 ] . In the next chapter we will see a generalization of this
techniques to include the case in which the superpotential is non
trivial.

In the zero super potential case the method of the Molien Invariant uses
a multi-contour integral formula and goes as follows. Given a
supersymmetric @xmath gauge theory with a gauge group @xmath of rank
@xmath and Weyl group of order @xmath , and a set of chiral multiplets
transforming in representations, @xmath , we set a chemical potential
@xmath for each representation and compute the generating function for
BPS operators in the chiral ring

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.7.66)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are weights of the adjoint representation of @xmath , while
@xmath are weights of the representation @xmath .

This function is also used in the Commutative Algebra literature (see
for example [ 100 ] ) and is called there the Molien–Weyl invariant.

For the case of a gauge group @xmath and @xmath chiral multiplets in the
fundamental representation we introduce @xmath chemical potentials,
@xmath and this multi-contour integral can be extended to an @xmath
-dimensional contour integral of the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.7.67)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This expression counts all gauge invariant operators which contain
fields in the fundamental representation but not fields in the
anti-fundamental representation. If we would like to count BPS operators
which are constructed out of @xmath chiral multiplets in the fundamental
representation and @xmath chiral multiplets in the anti-fundamental
representation we introduce chemical potentials @xmath and @xmath and
write the integral

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.7.68)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ----------

We are now ready to present the formula for the case of discussion in
this section, half the conifold. We have two gauge groups, @xmath for
which we introduce 2 sets of @xmath variables each, @xmath , and @xmath
. There is one chiral multiplet @xmath with a chemical potential @xmath
and one chiral multiplet @xmath with

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.7.69)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ----------

The case @xmath was computed explicitly and the result coincides with
Equation ( 4.7.65 ), while other cases were not checked due the heavy
computations they involve but definitely can be checked for higher
values of @xmath .

#### 4.7.2 @xmath Conifold

Here we are considering another example of counting BPS operators which
are a subset of the states in the conifold theory. We are going to
restrict to all the operators that include the fields @xmath in Table
4.1 but not @xmath . Since these are 3 out of 4 of the fundamental
fields of the conifold theory we use the suggestive name “ @xmath
Conifold”. It is amusing to see that some of the expressions can be
derived exactly and for any number of branes @xmath and for any baryonic
number @xmath , even though the full answer can be represented
implicitly but no explicit expression is known. The first point to note
is that the field @xmath has no flavor index and therefore all baryons
with negative baryonic charge factorize. This allows us to sum exactly
all the generating functions with negative baryonic charge and fixed
@xmath . The F term relations are indeed relevant for this problem but
they turn out to affect the mesons only ( @xmath ). For simplicity of
computations we are going to set @xmath while the chemical potential
@xmath for the second @xmath is not needed.

The @xmath generating function is again freely generated and is given by
equation ( 4.3.3 ) with the factor corresponding to @xmath removed. It
takes the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.7.70)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using techniques which by now are standard (see equations ( 4.3.7 , 4.3
, 4.3.8 )) we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.7.71)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

and applying the plethystic exponential we find the generating function
for fixed @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We notice that, as in the half-conifold case,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.7.72)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This implies an equality satisfied by generating functions with fixed
number of branes and fixed negative baryonic charge by taking the power
expansion in @xmath on both sides,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.7.73)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Next we sum over all negative baryonic charges and get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.7.74)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so that just one free generator ( @xmath ) is added to the mesonic ones.
In agreement with the fact that baryons are factorized and relations
only apply to mesons.

Notice that the partition function for mesons, @xmath with @xmath is the
mesonic partition function for @xmath , namely

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This follows from the fact that the two matrices @xmath and @xmath are
adjoint valued and commute due to F-term relations. As a result their
moduli space is a copy of @xmath .

The other half of the spectrum with @xmath is more difficult to analyze:
there are non factorizable baryons and non trivial relations. To get
some expressions for the positive case we write

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The baryon number dependence is indeed isolated but does not seem to
simplify to be summed over.

##### @xmath for @xmath the Conifold

Getting a general expression for any @xmath seems to be too hard. We can
nevertheless use the techniques described in Section 4.4.1 in order to
get an explicit expression for @xmath . Using equations ( 4.4.22 ) and (
4.7.70 ), we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.7.75)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

implying that the moduli space of vacua for this theory is a complete
intersection and is generated by the 6 operators, the spin 1 baryons,
@xmath , the spin @xmath mesons @xmath , and the spin 0 baryon @xmath .
The moduli space is five dimensional, and is given by a degree (4,2) (4
@xmath ’s, 2 @xmath ’s) relation in these 6 generators.

### 4.8 Summary and Discussions

The results of this chapter were presented in an almost purely field
theory language. Looking at the previous chapter we can review the
success of the present one as the nice marriage of two basic principles
to construct the exact generating function which counts baryonic and
mesonic BPS operators in the chiral ring of quiver gauge theories. We
gave explicit formulas for the conifold theory and some subsets of the
fields in it (these are termed “half the conifold” and “ @xmath the
conifold”, respectively). The first principle relies on the plethystic
program [ 23 , 63 ] that consist of a set techniques to generate
partition functions for generic number of branes once the @xmath case is
known. The second principle [ 24 ] uses some index theorems to handle
baryonic generating functions with specific divisors in the geometry.
This is translated into generating functions for fixed baryonic numbers
and hence leads to the full generating function for any number of D
branes, N, and any baryonic charge, @xmath , as well as the other
charges in the system such as @xmath charges and flavor charges.

It is interesting to remark that the results in this chapter can be also
interpreted as based on the semiclassical quantization of wrapped
supersymmetric branes in an @xmath background dual to a strongly coupled
gauged theory at large @xmath [ 24 ] . We compared this strong coupling
computations with the spectrum of operators obtained directly in field
theory, for some specific values of @xmath and some set of operators.
The match seems one to one at least for the specific case described in
the chapter. This fact induce us to guess that such countings are valid
also for weak coupling constant and small values of @xmath , as
similarly observed in the case of @xmath [ 87 ] . We will see some other
examples of this kind of interpolation between strong coupling large N
and weak coupling small N in the following chapter.

An important outcome, that will be fundamental in the following chapter,
is the identification of the baryon number @xmath with the Kähler
modulus. This identification is very explicit in the conifold theory and
it is expected to be true for any CY manifold @xmath . In the next
chapter we will see in great detail how the Kähler modulus of the
geometry @xmath and the baryonic charges of the gauge theory are
related.

We can make some short speculation: the fact that computation of
generating functions reveals an important connection between gauge
theories and their CY moduli spaces, may suggest that the baryon number
in field theory may be interpreted as the discrete area of two cycles in
@xmath . Pushing on this correspondence we can guess that the discrete
values of the baryonic charges are the quantum volume of the two and
four cycles in a regime in which the string theory is strongly coupled
and the gauge theory description reveals an underlying discrete
structure. We expect this correspondence could produce a new line of
research for strongly coupled string theories, and we will present more
data in favor of this correspondence in the next chapter.

## Chapter 5 Partition Functions for General Quiver Gauge Theories

In the previous two chapters we accumulated enough informations to
attack the problem of counting BPS gauge invariant operators in the
chiral ring of quiver gauge theories living on D-branes probing generic
toric @xmath singularities @xmath . This is in principle an extremely
difficult task. In this chapter we will try to give a synthesis of what
we learnt both from the geometry and the field theory to develope
powerful techniques to solve the general problem.

In the previous chapter, in some short comments, we claimed some kind of
relations between baryonic charges and Kähler structure of @xmath . In
this chapter we will discover that the computation of generating
functions that include counting of baryonic operators is strongly
related to a possibly deep connection between the baryonic charges in
field theory and the Kähler moduli of @xmath .

A study of the interplay between gauge theory and geometry shows that
given geometrical sectors appear more than once in the field theory,
leading to a notion of “multiplicities”. We explain in detail how to
decompose the generating function for one D-brane into different sectors
and how to compute their relevant multiplicities by introducing
geometric and anomalous baryonic charges. The Plethystic Exponential
remains a major tool for passing from one D-brane to arbitrary number
@xmath of D-branes. We will illustrate a general procedure valid for all
the toric CY variety @xmath .

To make the discussion more easy to follow we will revisit the analysis
the conifold and we will study in detail the explicit examples of @xmath
and @xmath .

### 5.1 Generalities

This chapter is devoted to the study of the (baryonic and mesonic)
generating function for the chiral ring in quiver gauge theories.
Extending the results of the previous chapter, we compute the generating
functions including baryonic degrees of freedom for various theories. We
first study in detail the generating function for one D-brane and we
decompose it into sectors with definite baryonic charges. This
decomposition is closely related to the geometry and to the generating
functions for holomorphic curves obtained by localization in the CY
manifold @xmath . We conjecture that the generating function for a
number @xmath of D-branes is completely determined by the generating
function for a single D-brane and it is obtained by applying the
plethystic exponential to each sector [ 23 , 24 , 25 , 63 , 27 ] . This
conjecture, which can be proved in the case of mesonic operators, is
inspired by the geometrical quantization of the classical D3-brane
configurations in the gravitational dual. We explicitly compute the
generating functions for a selected set of singularities, including
@xmath , @xmath and we make various checks in the dual field theory. We
refer the reader to [ 28 ] for other examples.

In chapter 4 we studied the simple and elegant case of the conifold. A
new feature, which arises for more involved singularities, like for
example @xmath and @xmath , is the existence of multiplicities, namely
the fact that geometrical sectors appear more than once in field theory.
As we go over these examples in detail, we find that multiplicities have
a geometrical interpretation and can be resolved, with a construction
that ties together in a fascinating way the algebraic geometry of the CY
and the combinatorics of quiver data.

The chapter is organized as follows. In section 5.2 , we discuss the
basics of generating functions and plethystics. In section 5.3 , we
apply these tools and we explain in detail the nice interplay between
the geometric properties of the singularity @xmath and the graph
properties of the field theory, that conspire to give the general recipe
to obtain the complete generating function for every toric CY
singularities. We give a detailed discussion of the partition functions
from both the field theory and the geometry perspectives. The GKZ
decomposition is introduced and the auxiliary GKZ partition function is
defined. Section 5.4 contains detailed examples: we revise the conifold
and we study in detail the @xmath and the @xmath . For these examples we
explicitly compute generating functions both for @xmath and for small
@xmath . Section 5.5 deals with @xmath D-branes and gives a systematic
approach to the field theory computation by means of the Molien formula.
In this chapter we will mainly interested in regular horizon, the reader
interested in the singular horizon case, is referred to [ 54 ] , where
he can find some preliminary discussions and observations.

### 5.2 General Structure of Generating Functions for BPS Operators

In this section we will give general prescriptions on the computation of
generating functions for BPS operators in the chiral ring of a
supersymmetric gauge theory that lives on a D-brane which probes a
generic non-compact CY manifold @xmath . These will be of course
compatible with the simpler cases of the conifold that we have already
discussed in detail in the previous chapter.

Given an @xmath supersymmetric gauge theory with a collection of @xmath
global symmetries, @xmath , we have a set of @xmath chemical potentials
@xmath . The generating function for a gauge theory living on a D-brane
probing a generic non-compact CY manifold @xmath depends on the set of
parameters, @xmath . There is always at least one such @xmath global
symmetry and one such chemical potential @xmath , corresponding to the
@xmath symmetry.

The global charges are divided into classes: baryonic charges , and
flavor charges (by abuse of language, we will include the @xmath
-symmetry in this latter class). The number of non-anomalous flavor
symmetries, related to the isometries of @xmath , is less than three
while the number of non-anomalous baryonic symmetries, related to the
group of divisors in @xmath , can be quite large. In certain cases, we
can also have baryonic discrete symmetries. As is demonstrated below, in
addition to the non-anomalous baryonic charges we need to consider the
anomalous baryonic charges . We will only consider the case of toric CY
where the number of flavor symmetries is three. When it will be
necessary to make distinctions, we will denote with @xmath or @xmath the
flavor chemical potentials and with @xmath the non-anomalous baryonic
chemical potentials. Chemical potentials for anomalous charges are
denoted by @xmath .

For a given CY manifold @xmath , we denote the generating function for
@xmath D-branes by @xmath . The generating function for @xmath is simple
to compute by using field theory arguments. Indeed the quiver gauge
theory living on the world-volume of the D3-branes consists of a gauge
group @xmath , adjoint or bi-fundamental chiral fields @xmath , which
can be considered as @xmath matrices, and a superpotential @xmath .

For @xmath the matrices @xmath reduce to numbers and the F-term
conditions become polynomial equations in the commuting numbers @xmath .
We can consider the polynomial ring @xmath to be graded by the weights
@xmath . Since the gauge group is acting trivially for @xmath , the ring
of gauge invariants is just the quotient ring

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the set of F-term constraints @xmath . The generating
function for polynomials is the right now familiar Hilbert series which
we got used in chapter 2 to study the master space @xmath ; indeed
@xmath . It can be computed using the methods explained in chapter 2 and
it coincide with the Hilbert series of the master space @xmath . In
particular there is an algorithmic way to compute it using computer
algebra programs like Macaulay2 [ 74 ] . We can therefore assume that
the generating function @xmath for @xmath is known.

We proceed to the determination of @xmath with a general conjecture:

-    For the class of theories considered here (D-branes probing
    non-compact CY which are any of toric, orbifolds or complete
    intersections), the knowledge of the generating function for @xmath
    is enough to compute the generating function for any @xmath .

¿From the last two chapters this fact must be the right now familiar
statement that the mesonic and the baryonic operators for finite @xmath
are symmetric functions of the mesonic and baryonic operators for @xmath
.

The general construction is as follows. There exists a decomposition of
the @xmath ring of invariants @xmath , and consequently of its
generating function, into sectors @xmath of definite baryonic charges

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the generating function for the subsector @xmath . All
elements in @xmath have the same baryonic charges, and, except for a
multiplicative factor, @xmath only depends on the flavor charges @xmath
. In simple cases, like the conifold, @xmath is just a label running
over all the possible values of the non-anomalous baryonic charge. The
understanding of the precise decomposition of @xmath into subsectors in
the general case is a nontrivial task and is one of the subjects of this
chapter.

The generating function for @xmath branes is then obtained by taking
@xmath -fold symmetric products of elements in each given sector @xmath
. This is precisely the role which is played by the Plethystic
Exponential (PE) – to take a generating function for a set of operators
and count all possible symmetric functions of it. If we introduce a
chemical potential @xmath for the number of D-branes, the generating
function for any number of D-branes is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.2.2)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

This the generalization of the prescription we gave in section 4.2 to a
generic toric CY @xmath . The detailed description of the decomposition
into sectors @xmath is given in the rest of this chapter, but it is
important to notice from the very beginning that such a decomposition is
not unique. As already mentioned above, gauge invariants in the same
sector have the same baryonic charges. One can take these baryonic
charges to be non-anomalous. This however, turns out to be not enough
and we seem to need a finer decomposition of the ring of invariants
which is obtained by enlarging the set of non-anomalous baryonic charges
to a larger set. There are two basic extensions, one related to an
expansion in a full set of baryonic charges, anomalous and
non-anomalous, and the other extension is related to a full set of
discretized Kähler moduli on the CY resolutions. We thus have two
complementary points of view:

-    Quantum field theory perspective : the most general decomposition
    of the generating function @xmath is into the full set of baryonic
    charges. Let us extend the set of chemical potentials @xmath to all
    the baryonic charges, including the anomalous ones, denoted by
    @xmath . There are @xmath independent baryonic charges, where @xmath
    is the number of gauge groups. We can thus decompose @xmath into
    sectors with definite charges under @xmath . @xmath will decompose
    into a formal Laurent series in the baryonic chemical potentials
    @xmath and @xmath . The @xmath rings of invariants for number of
    colors @xmath will similarly decompose into sectors of definite
    baryonic charge. We can formally extend the gauge group @xmath to
    @xmath by gauging the baryonic symmetries. ¹ ¹ 1 The theory will of
    course be anomalous. The overall @xmath is discarded since it acts
    trivially. From this perspective, the decomposition of the ring of
    @xmath invariants into Abelian representations of the extended group
    @xmath is sometimes called an expansion in covariants and is
    extremely natural from the point of view of invariant theory. All
    sectors @xmath appear with multiplicity one in the decomposition of
    Equation ( 5.2.2 ).

-    The dual geometrical perspective : the full set of BPS states of
    the dual gauge theory can be obtained by quantizing the classical
    configuration space of supersymmetric D3-branes wrapped on the
    horizon. This problem can be equivalently rephrased in terms of
    holomorphic surfaces in the CY with @xmath as generating function [
    92 , 93 ] . Quite remarkably, @xmath has a decomposition

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.2.3)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    where the parameters @xmath can be identified with a complete set of
    discretized Kähler moduli and the integers @xmath are
    multiplicities. We will call it the GKZ decomposition , from the
    known description of the Kähler cone in terms of a secondary fan
    given by the GKZ construction. The functions @xmath can be
    explicitly determined with the computation of a character using the
    equivariant index theorem. This geometrical decomposition has
    multiplicities @xmath which will be interpreted in the following
    sections. The result for finite @xmath is generated by the following
    function

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.2.4)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    and can be interpreted as the result of quantizing the classical BPS
    D3-brane configuration in each sector @xmath .

The two decompositions of the @xmath generating function are different
and complementary. For a toric CY manifold that has a toric diagram with
@xmath external vertices and @xmath internal integral points, the number
of non-anomalous baryonic symmetries is @xmath , the number of anomalous
baryonic symmetries is @xmath and the dimension of the Kähler moduli
space is @xmath . The field theory expansion is thus based on a lattice
@xmath of dimension @xmath consisting of all baryonic charges, anomalous
or not, while the geometrical expansion is based on a lattice @xmath of
dimension @xmath . The two sets have a nontrivial intersection @xmath ,
consisting of non-anomalous baryonic charges.

At the end, we will be interested in the generating function for BPS
operators with chemical potential with respect to the non-anomalous
charges. To this purpose, we must project any of the two lattices on
their intersection, which is the @xmath lattice of non-anomalous
baryonic symmetries @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and multiplicities will generically appear.

On the other hand, we could even imagine to enlarge our lattices. Adding
the anomalous baryonic charges to the GKZ fan we obtain a lattice of
dimension @xmath . The points give hollow polygons over the GKZ fan. All
these issues will be discussed in detail in the rest of the chapter.

### 5.3 Expanding the @xmath Generating Function

As we have seen in the previous chapters our decomposition of the ring
of invariants of the gauge theory is a decomposition into different
types of determinants . Let us review its structure and fix the
notations. For simplicity, we will use the following notation: given a
pair of gauge groups @xmath , we call determinant of type @xmath a gauge
invariant of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes a string of elementary fields with all gauge
indices contracted except two indices, @xmath and @xmath , corresponding
to the gauge groups @xmath . The index @xmath runs over all possible
strings of elementary fields with these properties. The full set of
invariants is obtained by arbitrary products of these determinants.
Using the tensor relation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

some of these products of determinants are equivalent and some of these
are actually equivalent to mesonic operators made only with traces. In
particular, mesons are included in the above description as determinants
of type @xmath .

We can decompose the ring of invariants according to the baryonic
charges, which indeed distinguish between different types of
determinants, or baryons. This decomposition is natural in field theory
and it also has a simple interpretation in the dual gravity theory.

In fact, in theories obtained from D3-branes at CY singularities,
baryons can be identified with branes wrapped on nontrivial cycles on
the base @xmath of the CY as explained in detail in chapter 3 . The
non-anomalous symmetries can be clearly identified in the dual theory.
In particular, states with the same non-anomalous baryonic charges can
be continuously deformed into each other: indeed we can relate the set
of non-anomalous baryonic charges to the group of three-cycles in @xmath
. The homology @xmath determines @xmath continuous baryonic charges (
@xmath is the number of vertices of the toric diagram) and possibly a
set of discrete baryonic charges from the torsion part @xmath .

Let us remind what happens in the particular case of the conifold,
previously analyzed. In the conifold there is one non-anomalous baryonic
charge (since @xmath ) which is related to the single three-cycle in the
base @xmath . There are only two gauge groups and two types of
determinants: @xmath and @xmath . The invariants decompose according to
the baryonic charge:

1.  @xmath corresponds to the mesons (D3-branes wrapping trivial cycles,
    giant gravitons [ 91 ] ),

2.  @xmath corresponds to the sector containing the determinants @xmath
    and all possible mesonic excitations (D3-branes wrapping @xmath
    times the 3-cycle),

3.  finally, @xmath corresponds to the sector containing the
    determinants @xmath and all possible mesonic excitations (D3-branes
    wrapping @xmath times the 3-cycle with opposite orientation).

The conifold picture is nice and in many ways elegant. However, a simple
look at any other quiver gauge theory reveals that this simple picture
is too naive. Consider, for example, the case of the orbifold @xmath
(see chapter 2 and Figure 5.2 ), that already reveals all types of
oddities:

-   Since @xmath , there is no continuous non-anomalous baryonic
    symmetry. However, @xmath and there is a discrete baryonic symmetry.
    We can indeed construct determinants for example, using the fields
    @xmath and @xmath with @xmath charge @xmath . These do not carry any
    continuous conserved charge since the product @xmath can be
    rewritten as a meson in terms of traces; for example, using @xmath
    we can write,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    On the other hand, @xmath cannot be reduced to traces simply because
    there are no gauge invariant traces we can make with @xmath alone:
    we have actually an infinite number of products of determinants (
    @xmath for @xmath for example) that cannot be rewritten in terms of
    mesons. All these operators correspond in the ring of invariants to
    sectors that cannot be distinguished by the discrete baryonic
    charge.

-   The BPS D3-brane configurations wrap divisors in the CY: for @xmath
    we have just a single divisor @xmath satisfying @xmath and this
    agrees with the homology of the base @xmath . However, we also have
    a vanishing compact four-cycle which is represented in toric
    geometry by the integer internal point of the toric diagram. The
    size of this cycle becomes finite when we blow up the orbifold. It
    is conceivable that the inclusion of compact four-cycles such as
    this one will affect the description of the classical configuration
    space of D3-branes. This will add a new parameter, related to the
    group of divisors on the CY resolution, which has dimension one.

-   We could distinguish among elementary fields and types of
    determinants by using all the possible baryonic charges, including
    the anomalous ones. For @xmath this would lead to the inclusion of
    the two existing anomalous baryonic charges. As we will explain,
    this set of charges is different and complementary with respect to
    that related to the group of divisors on the resolution.

Having this example in mind, we now discuss the two possible expansions
of the ring of invariants. Explicit examples of the decompositions will
be presented in Section 5.4 . We encourage the reader to jump forth and
back with Section 5.4 for a better understanding of the material.

#### 5.3.1 Expanding in a Complete Set of Baryonic Charges

The most general decomposition of the @xmath generating function is
according to the full set of baryonic charges, including the anomalous
ones, denoted by @xmath . The sectors @xmath in this case correspond to
sectors with definite anomalous and non-anomalous baryonic charges.

There are @xmath independent baryonic charges, where @xmath is the
number of gauge groups. By gauging the baryonic symmetries, we would
obtain a quiver theory with the same fields and superpotential, and a
gauge group

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we factor out the overall decoupled @xmath . Some of the @xmath
factors will be anomalous, of course. The baryonic charges have a very
natural description: they correspond to the @xmath factors in @xmath .
In this way, different elementary fields have the same baryonic charges
if and only if they are charged under the same gauge groups. This allows
to efficiently distinguish between invariants belonging to different
sectors. Notice that non-anomalous baryonic symmetries alone would not
distinguish all inequivalent possibilities. For example, in @xmath , the
mesonic operator @xmath and the determinant @xmath have the same charge
under @xmath , but different charges under the two anomalous baryonic
symmetries.

Let us thus extend the set of chemical potentials @xmath to all the
baryonic charges, including the anomalous ones. We can therefore
decompose @xmath into sectors with definite charges under @xmath .

The @xmath generating function @xmath will decompose into a formal
Laurent series in the baryonic chemical potentials @xmath and @xmath .
The explicit decomposition of @xmath into a formal Laurent series can be
done by repeatedly applying the residue theorem, in a similar way to
what we explained in the previous chapter; the computation however
quickly becomes involved, since the order of integration becomes crucial
and divides the result into many different cases.

The ring of invariants @xmath , will similarly decompose into sectors of
definite baryonic charges. The generating function @xmath can then be
computed according to Equation ( 5.2.2 ).

We can understand this decomposition in terms of representation theory.
¿From this perspective, we have decomposed the ring of @xmath invariants
into Abelian representations of the extended group @xmath . This is
sometimes called an expansion in covariants and is extremely natural
from the point of view of invariant theory. From our point of view,
covariants are just the possible set of independent determinants . Each
sector @xmath in @xmath will be specified by a certain number of gauge
group pairs @xmath and is associated to the subsector of the ring of
gauge invariants made with products of the determinants of type @xmath .

To make connection with the toric quiver gauge theories we notice that
we have the relation [ 101 ] :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath in the number of vertices of the toric diagram and @xmath
the number of integer internal points. Only @xmath of these baryonic
symmetries are not anomalous.

We expect all sectors @xmath to appear with multiplicity one in the
decomposition of Equation ( 5.2.2 ). In the following we will show some
examples of this decomposition.

#### 5.3.2 Supersymmetric D3-Branes and the GKZ Decomposition

As explained in chapter 3 the full set of BPS states of the dual gauge
theory can be obtained by quantizing the classical configuration space
of supersymmetric D3-branes wrapped on the horizon H. D3-brane
configurations are in one-to-one correspondence with holomorphic
four-cycles in the CY variety @xmath . Indeed our problem can be
equivalently rephrased in terms of holomorphic surfaces in @xmath with
@xmath as a generating function.

¿From this perspective, we have an obvious decomposition into sectors
@xmath corresponding to Euclidean D3-branes that can be continuously
deformed into each other in @xmath . Such D3-branes have the same
non-anomalous baryonic numbers; indeed, geometrically, the non-anomalous
baryonic charges are identified with the group of divisors modulo linear
equivalence.

Recall from section 3.2 that our conical CY @xmath is specified by a
toric diagram in the plane with @xmath vertices having integer
coordinates @xmath . To each vertices @xmath we can associate an
homogeneous coordinate @xmath , spanning @xmath , in term of which
@xmath is defined by the symplectic quotient: @xmath , where S is some
set, that in our affine case will be always the null set, and the group
G is defined in equation ( 3.2.1 ), ( 3.2.2 ). @xmath is isomorphic, in
general, to @xmath times a discrete group. The residual @xmath complex
torus action acting on @xmath is dual to the flavor symmetry group in
the gauge theory, while the group @xmath is dual to the non-anomalous
baryonic symmetry group. Notice that the flavor and baryonic symmetries
nicely combine in the full group of @xmath non-anomalous charges which
act naturally on the @xmath homogeneous coordinates @xmath as @xmath
acts on @xmath .

In toric geometry each edge @xmath determines a (not necessarily
compact) four-cycle @xmath in @xmath , and a generic four-cycle @xmath
is given by a linear combination of basic divisors @xmath where @xmath
are integer coefficients. The divisors are subject to the three linear
equivalence conditions @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath is a basis for
@xmath . The group of four-cycles modulo linear equivalence is
isomorphic to the baryonic group @xmath . It follows that the
non-anomalous baryonic symmetry distinguishes deformation equivalence
classes of Euclidean D3-branes.

However this is not the end of the story. The decomposition into
non-anomalous baryonic charges is not fine enough. A D3-brane state with
baryonic charge @xmath can form a sort of bound state which
distinguishes it from a set of @xmath D3-brane states with baryonic
charge one. This typically happens in theories where there are
elementary fields with multiple non-anomalous baryonic charges. By going
over examples, it easy to convince oneself that the classical D3 brane
configurations obtained from divisors on the singular CY @xmath do not
exhaust all possible sectors of the dual gauge theory. However, as
already mentioned, we have a plethora of compact vanishing four-cycles
that are expected to enter in the description of the set of
supersymmetric D3-branes and solve these ambiguities. We have exactly
@xmath compact vanishing four-cycles, one for each integer internal
point in the toric diagram. These cycles become of finite size in the
smooth resolutions @xmath of @xmath . We will see that with the addition
of these divisors we can give a convenient description of all sectors in
the dual gauge theory. It would be interesting to understand the
necessity for the inclusions of these divisors directly from the point
of view of the geometric quantization of classical supersymmetric branes
living on the horizon.

We are led to enlarge the set of basic divisors of size @xmath to a
larger set of size @xmath by adding a divisor @xmath for each internal
point of the toric diagram. We now have a larger group of divisors which
strictly contains the baryonic symmetry group. The larger set of
divisors immediately leads us to the description of the Kähler moduli
space @xmath , of dimension @xmath . This moduli space is still a toric
variety described by the so-called secondary fan, or GKZ fan, and it is
indeed parameterized by the divisors @xmath in the larger set.

##### The GKZ Decomposition

It is well known that there are many different smooth resolutions of the
CY corresponding to the possible complete triangulations of the toric
diagram. Different resolutions are connected by flops. The number of
Kähler moduli of the CY is @xmath where @xmath is the number of internal
points; this is the same as the number of geometrical FI terms that
appear in the symplectic quotient description of the resolved manifold.
This number can be greater than the number of non-anomalous baryonic
symmetries in field theory, which is @xmath .

There is an efficient description of the Kähler moduli space in terms of
divisors [ 102 ] . Take a complete resolution of the variety and
consider the set of all effective divisors

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

modulo the three linear equivalence conditions given by @xmath where
@xmath is the standard basis for @xmath and @xmath are the vertices of
the toric diagram, including the internal integer points. The @xmath
give a parametrization of the @xmath dimensional Kähler moduli provided
we impose a further condition: to have all cycles of positive volumes we
must consider only convex divisors. The convexity conditions can be
expressed as follows. Assign a number @xmath to the @xmath -th point in
the toric diagram. To each triangle @xmath in the triangulation of the
toric diagram we assign a vector @xmath which is the integer solution of
the system of three linear equations ² ² 2 Actually, these equations can
be solved for all simplicial resolutions, corresponding to not
necessarily maximal triangulations of the toric diagram. If we allow
triangles with area greater than one, we have resolved varieties which
still have orbifold singularities. For completely smooth resolutions,
the vertices of all triangles @xmath are primitive vectors in @xmath and
Equation ( 5.3.7 ) has integer solutions. Observe that, to avoid
ambiguities, we have changed a bit the notation from the one we used in
chapter 3 . ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and impose the inequalities

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The set of inequalities ( 5.3.8 ), as @xmath runs over all the
triangles, determines the convexity condition for the divisor. For a
given resolution, the set of convex divisors forms a cone in the @xmath
vector space, that parameterizes the Kähler moduli of the resolution.
The boundary of this cone corresponds to the vanishing of some cycle. If
we can perform a flop, we enter a new region in the moduli space
corresponding to a different resolution. Indeed, the cones constructed
via the convexity condition for the various possible resolutions of the
toric diagram form regions in the @xmath vector space that are adjacent;
altogether these reconstruct a collection of adjacent cones (a fan in
toric language) in @xmath . The toric variety constructed from this fan
in @xmath is the Kähler moduli space of the CY. This is known as the GKZ
fan, or secondary fan [ 103 , 104 ] . We move from a cone in the GKZ fan
to another by performing flops (or in case we also consider orbifold
resolutions by flops or further subdivisions of the toric diagram). It
is sufficient for us to consider smooth varieties and we thus reserve
the name GKZ fan to the collections of cones corresponding to smooth
resolutions.

The GKZ fans for the conifold and @xmath are given in Figures 5.1 , 5.6
, respectively.

We form a lattice by considering the integer points in the GKZ fan. We
claim that the @xmath generating function, or in other words the Hilbert
series for the Master space that we computed in chapter 2 , has an
expansion in sectors corresponding to the integer points of the GKZ
lattice. Denote by @xmath an integer point in the GKZ lattice, then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the multiplicity of the point @xmath . Furthermore, we
conjecture that the finite @xmath generating function can be obtained as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

##### GKZ and Field Theory Content

At the heart of the previous formulae, there is a remarkable connection
between the GKZ decomposition and the quiver gauge theory. To fully
appreciate it we suggest to the reader to read this and the following
subsections in close parallel with section 5.4 where explicit examples
are given.

The integer points in the GKZ fan correspond to sectors in the quantum
field theory Hilbert space made out of determinants. Recall that mesons
in the quiver gauge theories correspond to closed paths in the quiver.
We want to associate similarly the other independent sectors made out of
determinants with equivalence classes of open paths in the dimers. The
open paths fall into equivalence classes @xmath specified by the choice
of ending points on the dimer. The open path in a given class can be
reinterpreted in the gauge theory as strings of elementary fields with
all gauge indices contracted except two corresponding to a choice of a
specific pair of gauge groups; let us call these composite fields .
Baryonic operators are written as “ @xmath ”, which is a schematic
expression for two epsilons contracted with @xmath composite fields
freely chosen among the representatives of the class @xmath . Generic
sectors are made with arbitrary products @xmath etc. Whenever open paths
@xmath and @xmath can be composed to give the open path @xmath , there
is at least one choice of representatives for @xmath and @xmath such
that we can write @xmath and we want to consider the two sectors @xmath
and @xmath equivalent. This can be enforced as follows. Denote with
letters @xmath the equivalence classes of arrows in the quiver
connecting different gauge groups. By decomposing open paths in strings
of letters, we can associate a sector with a string of letters. We
should however take into account the fact that if, for example, the
arrows @xmath make a closed loop, the operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a meson. We take into account this fact by imposing the constraint
@xmath . Moreover, composite fields connecting the same pairs of gauge
groups as an elementary fields do not determine the existence of new
independent determinants; to avoid overcountings, the corresponding
string of letters should be set to zero. Analogously, whenever two
different strings of letters correspond to open paths with the same
endpoints, these strings should be identified. We call @xmath the set of
constraints obtained in this way and construct the ring

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Quite remarkably, the monomials in the ring @xmath are in correspondence
with the integer points in the GKZ fan. More precisely, we can grade the
ring with @xmath charges in such a way that the generating function of
@xmath , which we call the auxiliary GKZ partition function , and is
denoted by @xmath , counts the integer points in the GKZ fan. Moreover,
any integer point @xmath comes with a multiplicity @xmath which is the
one in Equation ( 5.3.9 ).

We have explicitly verified the above statement in all the examples we
studied and we conjecture that it is a general result for all toric
diagrams: the auxiliary partition function counting open paths in the
quiver modulo equivalence coincides with the generating function for the
GKZ lattice dressed with field theory multiplicities. Just another
remarkable connection between apparently different objects:
combinatorics on the tiling, geometry of @xmath and gauge theory!

As another example of this fascinating correspondence, we will see that
it is possible to eliminate multiplicities by refining the GKZ lattice.
This is done by enlarging the set of charges. In particular, we have
found that, if we refine the GKZ lattice by adding the anomalous
baryonic charges, we obtain a “hollow cone” in @xmath with no
multiplicities.

As previously explained in a generic toric quiver gauge theory there are
@xmath anomalous baryonic symmetries, where @xmath is the number of
internal integer points. The variables in the auxiliary GKZ ring @xmath
corresponds to arrows in the quiver and therefore can be assigned a
definite charge under the baryonic symmetries that are just the ungauged
@xmath gauge group factors. We can therefore grade the auxiliary ring
@xmath with a set of @xmath weights: the original @xmath discretized
Kähler parameters @xmath of the GKZ lattice plus the @xmath anomalous
baryonic weights @xmath . The power series expansion of the auxiliary
partition function @xmath will draw a lattice in @xmath which has the
shape of an hollow cone over the GKZ fan: over each point of the GKZ fan
there is a hollow polygon @xmath whose shape is related to the pq-web of
the toric geometry. Quite remarkably, all points in the lattice come
with multiplicity one. Examples for @xmath and @xmath are presented in
Figure 5.3 and 5.7 .

##### Computing @xmath for one D Brane in a Sector @xmath Using
Localization

To compute the partition functions @xmath we need to apply the procedure
explained in section 3.6 to every integer point @xmath in the GKZ fan.
Indeed to every @xmath is associated a smooth resolution of @xmath and a
particular divisor @xmath on it. Extending our interpretation of the BPS
states in terms of supersymmetric D3-branes wrapping holomorphic cycles
in the singular CY to its resolution, we have a natural definition for
the function @xmath : it should count all the sections of the line
bundle @xmath corresponding to holomorphic surfaces in the given linear
equivalence class. Therefore @xmath is just the character @xmath under
the action of the element @xmath of the torus of flavor symmetries. All
elements in @xmath have the same baryonic charges. As we have explained
section 3.6 the higher cohomology groups of a convex line bundle vanish
and the character then coincides with the holomorphic Lefschetz number
that can be computed with the equivariant index theorem. Following
section 3.6 we can expresses the result as a sum over the fixed points
@xmath of the torus @xmath action on the particular smooth resolution of
@xmath corresponding to the point @xmath in the GKZ lattice:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the index @xmath denotes the set of isolated fixed points and the
four vectors @xmath , @xmath in @xmath are the weights of the linearized
action of @xmath on the resolved CY and the fiber of the line bundle
@xmath , respectively. The fixed points of the torus action are in
correspondence with the triangles in the subdivision of the toric
diagram. The vectors @xmath in the denominator of Equation ( 5.3.11 )
are computed as the three primitive inward normal vectors of the cone
@xmath in @xmath made with the three vertices @xmath of the I-th
triangle. The vector @xmath in the numerator is instead computed as in
Equation ( 5.3.7 ): @xmath . The prefactor @xmath in Equation ( 5.3.11 )
is just the charge of the divisor @xmath . The full dependence on
baryonic charges in encoded in this prefactor.

In explicit computations, some care should be paid to the choice of
charges. There is a natural geometric basis for the non-anomalous
charges of the gauge theory. In fact, the homogeneous coordinates @xmath
that are used to define @xmath as a symplectic quotient are extremely
useful to assign a full set of @xmath (flavor+baryonic) charges to the
elementary fields in the quiver; this is done using zig-zag paths and
standard dimers techniques [ 19 , 35 ] . All the elementary fields have
charge which is given by a product of the @xmath . We can also assign
charge @xmath to the divisor @xmath of the singular cone. In all the
examples we have considered there is a natural way to assign charges to
the enlarged set of divisors entering the GKZ decomposition. This allows
to compute the prefactor @xmath . The @xmath decompose into three flavor
charges and @xmath baryonic charges. The splitting of the charges @xmath
into flavor and baryonic charges is not unique in general; flavor
charges can be always redefined by adding a linear combination of the
baryonic charges. However, a toric diagram comes with a specific basis
for the flavor @xmath action which is determined by the equation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are the basis vectors of @xmath and @xmath the vertices of
the toric diagram. Notice that all dependence on baryonic charges drops
from the right hand side. This is the @xmath basis that should be used
in the localization formula ( 5.3.11 ).

##### Checks with all Charges: GKZ Approach vs. Field Theory

Having understood how to compute and resolve the multiplicities in the
GKZ cones and to compute the partition functions we can also refine our
decomposition of the @xmath generating function by adding the anomalous
baryonic charges.

Using the equivariant index theorem we compute all the generating
functions @xmath for all points @xmath in the GKZ lattice. We can use
@xmath coordinates for the GKZ cone @xmath . Denote also with @xmath the
non-anomalous baryonic charge corresponding to the point @xmath of the
GKZ lattice. As discussed in Section 5.3.2 , the generating functions
depend on the baryonic charges only by a multiplicative factor: @xmath
and all the other dependence is on the flavor charges @xmath . Thanks to
the auxiliary generating functions we were able to find expressions for
the multiplicities @xmath of the fields over each point of the GKZ
lattice. These functions sum up to the complete generating functions
with @xmath and with all the non-anomalous charges:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are the chemical potentials for the non-anomalous baryonic
charges. To resolve the multiplicities @xmath we construct the hollow
cone by adding the anomalous baryonic charges. Over each point in the
GKZ lattice there is a hollow polygon @xmath which can be parametrized
in terms of the set of @xmath anomalous charges @xmath with @xmath ,
such that:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using these resolutions we obtain the resolved generating functions for
@xmath with all the charges, anomalous and non-anomalous:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The non flavor charges do not appear in the basic generating functions
@xmath , but they are multiplicative factors over which one has to sum
up, in the same way one does for the usual non-anomalous baryonic
charges.

We would like to stress that Equation ( 5.3.15 ) points to a remarkable
connection between the geometry of @xmath , which is used to compute the
right hand side, and the field theory, that can be used to determine the
left hand side (the @xmath generating function). In other words, we have
two different ways of computing the @xmath generating @xmath function
which nicely match:

-   In the first case we use the GKZ geometric picture explained in the
    previous sections. We first compute the generating functions @xmath
    for each point in the GKZ lattice which depend on the flavor
    charges. We next sum over all the points of the hollow cone by
    dressing @xmath with the appropriate weight under the baryonic
    symmetries.

-   In the second case we use the field theory picture. We can take the
    fields of the gauge theory as basic variables and we assign to them
    all the possible charges anomalous and non-anomalous. This means
    that we construct the ring generated by the fundamental fields and
    we grade it with all the charges. Then we construct the quotient
    ring by modding out the ring of elementary fields by the ideal
    generated by @xmath -term equations. Using Macaulay2 we compute the
    Hilbert series of the quotient ring obtaining the completed resolved
    generating function with all the charges of the field theory: @xmath
    .

As we will explicitly demonstrate on the examples in Section 5.4 , the
two computations completely agree.

As a final remark, we notice that Equation ( 5.3.15 ) is the most
general decomposition of the @xmath generating function that we can
write. We can close our circular discussion and go back to the initial
point. Equation ( 5.3.15 ) has been obtained by enlarging the GKZ
lattice in order to eliminate multiplicities. The hollow cone is a
lattice in @xmath dimensions. The corresponding @xmath charges contain,
as a subset, all the anomalous and non-anomalous baryonic charges that
are in number @xmath . Notice that the terms in series in Equation (
5.3.15 ) depend on the extra @xmath GKZ parameters only through the
factor @xmath . By projecting the hollow cone on the @xmath dimensional
space of baryonic charges we obtain the explicit expansion of the @xmath
generating function @xmath in a complete set of baryonic charges which
was discussed in Section 5.3.1 . One can compare this expansion with the
one obtained by performing repeated contour integrations. As one can
check explicitly, the points in the baryonic charge lattice have still
multiplicity one.

### 5.4 Examples

In this section we explicitly compute the @xmath generating function for
certain toric CY manifolds @xmath and decompose it. Then we apply the PE
function to every sector and we obtain the generating functions for
@xmath . We start by revisiting the example of the conifold, and then we
present the example of @xmath and @xmath .

#### 5.4.1 The Conifold Revisited

To demonstrate our general discussion above and to prepare for more
involved cases we start by reviewing the generating function for the
conifold.

The generating function for the conifold can be written as 4.3.3 :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us start setting @xmath for simplicity.

@xmath decomposes into sectors with fixed baryonic charge @xmath , each
with multiplicity one:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.4.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

It is manifest that each term in @xmath has a monomial @xmath
corresponding to a baryonic charge @xmath . Observe that the
decomposition in equation ( 5.4.17 ) shows explicitly that every sector
with fixed baryonic charge @xmath decompose in symmetric representations
of dimension @xmath of the global symmetry group @xmath . As we
explained in the previous two chapters the decomposition into each
baryonic charge can be computed by expanding @xmath in a formal Laurent
series in @xmath or by determining the functions @xmath by resolving
@xmath , see Figure 5.1 , and using the equivariant index theorem.

It is right now clear that the decomposition has an interpretation in
terms of supersymmetric D3-branes states: @xmath counts the
supersymmetric D3-branes wrapping cycles of homology @xmath thus
corresponding to states with baryonic number @xmath . As already
observed in the previous chapter quite remarkably, the structure of the
integer lattices with generating function @xmath and the explicit
computation with the index theorem, strongly suggests a relation between
@xmath and a discretized Kähler modulus of the resolved CY [ 27 ] .

The result for generic @xmath is obtained as follows

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and a list of generating functions for small values of @xmath is given
in section 4.4.1 .

The conifold has only one baryonic charge, not anomalous, which can be
used to parametrize the Kähler moduli space. The two expansions, one in
baryonic charges, the other according to the GKZ lattice, coincide.

##### Baryonic Charge Expansion

We first expand the @xmath generating function, Equation ( 5.4.16 ) for
the conifold according to the baryonic charge

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

@xmath can be computed using the inversion formula

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with a careful evaluation of the contour integral for positive and
negative values of the baryonic charge @xmath (see the previous chapter
for a detailed explanation):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

By setting @xmath and @xmath we recover expansion ( 5.4.17 ).

##### GKZ Decomposition

We can similarly perform a GKZ decomposition of the @xmath generating
function. In Figure 3.6 the toric diagram and the two resolutions of the
conifold are reported. There are four divisors @xmath subject to three
relations that leave an independent divisor @xmath , @xmath . Consider
the cone of effective divisors @xmath modulo linear equivalence in
@xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we defined @xmath . For each resolution, we solve Equation ( 5.3.7
) for the two triangles in the resolution, or, equivalently, the two
vertices of the pq-web; the resulting vectors @xmath and @xmath are
reported in black and red respectively in Figure 3.6 . The convexity
condition, Equation ( 5.3.8 ), then tells us that the resolution on the
left corresponds to @xmath and the resolution on the right to @xmath .
Altogether we obtain two half lines (cones) in @xmath that form the GKZ
fan as in Figure 5.1 . The point of intersection @xmath of the two cones
corresponds to the singular conifold and the two cones in the fan are
related by a flop transition.

We now compute the generating functions @xmath using localization. As
mentioned in the previous section, we must pay attention to the
normalization of charges. The homogeneous coordinates for the conifold
are extremely simple: @xmath , which can be easily translated in the
notations of Section 5.4.1 . The natural flavor @xmath basis is then
given by Equation ( 5.3.12 )

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We are ready to apply the localization formula. Each point in the GKZ
fan is associated with a resolution and a divisor: for @xmath we use the
resolution on the left in Figure 3.6 and @xmath , while for @xmath the
resolution on the right and the divisor @xmath . The weights are
reported in Figure 3.6 . Equation ( 5.3.11 ) and Equation ( 5.4.22 )
give

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which coincides with the result previously obtained in Equation (
LABEL:rescon ).

##### Conifold: Multiplicities in the GKZ Decomposition

The multiplicities in the GKZ decomposition of the @xmath generating
function for the conifold are trivial since they are all equal to 1.
Nevertheless it is instructive to follow the procedure which is outlined
in Section 5.3.2 in order to compute the multiplicities using the
auxiliary GKZ partition function @xmath which counts independent sectors
in the ring of invariants. As explained in Section 5.3.2 , we assign a
letter @xmath to the two types of arrows in the quiver @xmath . There is
only one relation @xmath corresponding to the closed loop in the quiver.
The polynomial ring for the GKZ decomposition of the conifold is
therefore

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We thus compute the generating function for the polynomial ring (which
can be easily computed by observing it is a complete intersection), with
chemical potential @xmath to @xmath and @xmath to @xmath we find

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By expanding this auxiliary partition function we find multiplicity
@xmath for the integer points @xmath , multiplicity 1 for the integer
points @xmath , and multiplicity 1 for the point @xmath , reproducing
the lattice depicted in Figure 5.1 . We finally have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which appears to be a trivial observation as a Laurent series in the
baryonic chemical potential but in fact turns out to be nontrivial for
more involved singularities.

Now that we have rephrased the conifold example in the general setup of
the GKZ decomposition, we can apply this general method to more involved
singularities @xmath .

#### 5.4.2 Generating Functions for @xmath

We have already analyzed the master space of the @xmath in chapter 2 :
it is a five dimensional irreducible toric CY variety. For visual
simplicity we report here in Figure 5.2 its quiver and toric diagram.
The gauge theory has three sets of bifundamental fields @xmath with
@xmath and a superpotential @xmath .

###### Symmetries and Geometry

In chapter 2 we discovered that the master space @xmath has the
symmetries @xmath , where the last factor is an “hidden symmetry” not
manifest in the UV Lagrangian. In this section we will just consider the
UV symmetries and we will come back to the hidden ones in the following
chapter.

The UV global flavor symmetry is @xmath . All the fields have R-charge
@xmath and each set of three fields transform in the fundamental
representation of @xmath . One can also define two anomalous baryonic
@xmath charges which can be chosen to be

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

There are some non-anomalous discrete symmetries [ 105 ] acting on the
fields as follows,

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

We see that @xmath is a subgroup of @xmath and @xmath is subgroup of
@xmath . @xmath is related to the torsion homology group for three
cycles and, in a sense, is a discrete baryonic charge.

The symplectic quotient description of @xmath is as follow. Since @xmath
we introduce three homogeneous coordinates @xmath . The group @xmath of
baryonic charges is defined by the Equations ( 3.2.1 ), ( 3.2.2 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which implies @xmath with @xmath . The symplectic quotient description
of the CY just reduces to the orbifold description @xmath , as expected.

As already discussed, the homogeneous coordinates can be used to give a
full set of weights for non-anomalous symmetries to the elementary
fields. We can write @xmath in terms of the discrete baryonic charge
@xmath and the flavors @xmath . The assignment of charges to the fields
is done using standard dimer techniques and is reported in Table 5.1 .
One can notice that @xmath are the charges of the original @xmath SYM.
To keep track of the coordinates on the two dimensional projection in
Figure 5.2 we introduce three chemical potentials @xmath which count the
@xmath -charge, and the @xmath integral positions, respectively and read
from the figure @xmath .

The full set of continuous charges, anomalous or not, is summarized in
the Table 5.1 , as well as the chemical potentials and the assignment of
homogeneous coordinates to the fields.

##### The @xmath Generating Function

The @xmath generating function, or Hilbert series for the master space
@xmath , was computed in section 2.2 with respect to just the R charge
with the result:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

##### The GKZ Decomposition

In the singular CY there is only one independent divisor @xmath with
@xmath . This reflects the @xmath discrete charge. However, on the
smooth resolution of the orbifold there is a new divisor @xmath
corresponding to the internal point. @xmath is still true but now @xmath
is non-zero, but equal instead to @xmath . The cone of effective
divisors in @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the convexity condition, Equation ( 5.3.8 ), requires @xmath . The
GKZ fan is thus a half-line in @xmath . The integer parameter @xmath
turns out to be the discrete Kähler modulus of the resolution of @xmath
, measuring the discrete area of the two cycle.

The right basis for localization is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we compute (notice that the discrete baryonic charge @xmath
correctly drops out from this formula) @xmath . We thus obtain ³ ³ 3
These partition functions reduce for @xmath to the three independent
partition functions for nontrivial divisors on the singular cone.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

@xmath is identified with the Molien invariant for the discrete group
@xmath and indeed computes the mesonic generating function as explained
in detail in [ 23 ] . In the limit @xmath we find

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

##### Multiplicities

The multiplicities in the GKZ decomposition of the @xmath generating
function can be computed using @xmath , the auxiliary GKZ partition
function counting independent sectors in the ring of invariants. As
explained in Section 5.3.2 , we assign a letter @xmath to the three
types of arrows in the quiver @xmath . There is only one relation @xmath
corresponding to the closed loop in the quiver. We thus get the
polynomial ring

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and compute the generating function (which can be easily computed by
assuming it is a complete intersection), with charge @xmath to all
letters obtaining

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By expanding this auxiliary partition function we find multiplicity
@xmath for the point @xmath and multiplicity 1 for the point @xmath .
This is easily understood: the independent sectors contain determinants
of the form @xmath with @xmath or similar with @xmath permuted; there
are @xmath such sectors. This point will be further elaborated below.

We finally have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This can be summed easily using Equations ( 5.4.2 ) and ( 5.4.30 ) and
gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

For the special case @xmath we can take the limit or resum, using
Equation ( 5.4.28 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is exactly Equation ( 5.4.26 ).

##### Refining the GKZ Decomposition

Using Equation ( 5.4.30 ) we summarize the multiplicities

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For a dibaryon, the AdS/CFT dual object is a D3-brane that wraps a
@xmath cycle ⁴ ⁴ 4 Generically, @xmath is a Lens space. in @xmath . The
homology tells us that the wrapping number is characterized by an
integer, modulo 3. By resolving the singular Calabi-Yau, this gets
promoted to a (non-negative) integer which is just the coordinate @xmath
in the GKZ cone. The GKZ fan does not take into account the possible
topologically nontrivial flat connections on the wrapped D3-brane. To
avoid multiplicities, we include the U(1) extensions of all the discrete
charges. The R-charge is already a coordinate in the GKZ fan and its
corresponding GKZ auxiliary generating function is given in Equation (
5.4.30 ). The remaining charges are the anomalous charges @xmath and
@xmath , as given in Table 5.1 , which we now add to the lattice as
extra coordinates. The points in the resulting lattice form a “hollow
cone” and have no multiplicities.

The dressed auxiliary GKZ partition function which now also contains the
anomalous charges can be computed using the assumption that the
polynomial ring, Equation ( 5.4.29 ), is a complete intersection,

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

By drawing the lattice points in the @xmath lattice one can see that
there is a “hollow triangle” @xmath above each point @xmath in the 1d
GKZ cone (Figure 5.3 ), with edge length measured by the R-charge. This
gives the @xmath multiplicities. The same triangle appears in the pq-web
(Figure 5.4 ) of the geometry. This is a general feature as we will see
in other examples. The polygon in the fiber parameterized by the
anomalous charges nicely matches the shape of the blown-up cycle in the
pq-web.

We can now refine the decomposition ( 5.4.31 ) by introducing the
anomalous charges. We first write the expansion ( 5.4.2 ) in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the two-dimensional index @xmath runs over the points of the
hollow triangle @xmath .

We can then refine the decomposition ( 5.4.31 ) by replacing the
multiplicity @xmath with @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By explicit computation we can resum the previous series and compare
with the expected field theory result, finding perfect agreement. The
left hand side of formula ( 5.4.35 ) is indeed the @xmath generating
function depending on all the five chemical potentials, which can be
computed as the Hilbert series for the polynomial ring of the F-term
equations using the grading in Table 5.1 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a polynomial in the gauge theory chemical potentials

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.4.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We would like to stress that decomposition ( 5.4.35 ) is highly
nontrivial. The right hand side has been computed from the geometrical
localization formulae and the refined GKZ auxiliary generating function.
It is then remarkable that the sum on the right hand side coincides with
the field theory @xmath generating function.

Using Equations ( 5.4.2 ) and ( 5.4.2 ) we get the following simpler
expression

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Formula ( 5.4.2 ) has the general structure of equation ( 3.6.55 ) and
suggests the existence of a localization formula for the holomorphic
functions on the @xmath moduli space, which is a five-dimensional
variety with an action of five @xmath symmetries, three flavor plus two
baryonic. In the following section we will see that @xmath for the
@xmath gauge theory has the same localization structure. It is possible
to verify that the @xmath generating function has the general structure
of equation ( 3.6.55 ) for other examples [ 28 ] . This is a consistency
check that our counting procedure really reproduce the moduli space for
@xmath brane. Indeed we know from chapter 2 that the moduli space for
just one brane is a @xmath dimensional toric variety and it is in some
sense reasonable that the BPS spectrum over the moduli space can be
counted directly applying an index theorem as explained in section 3.6 .
We will add more comments about this phenomena in the following section
when we will understand better the correspondence between the field
theory and the geometric computation.

By projecting the refined GKZ expansion on the plane @xmath we would get
the expansion of the @xmath generating functions into sectors with
definite baryonic charge. The same result can be obtained by expanding
@xmath in a Laurent series by means of the residue theorem. It is easy
to check that the multiplicity of each sector is one.

##### Generating Functions for @xmath

The generating function @xmath is now obtained from the general formula
( 5.2.2 ) starting from any decomposition of the @xmath generating
function, the GKZ decomposition ( 5.4.31 ), the refined GKZ
decomposition ( 5.4.35 ) or the anomalous baryonic charge decomposition.
Since we are interested in writing generating functions depending on the
non-anomalous charges, at the end of the computation @xmath should be
set to one.

The more economical way of obtaining @xmath is to start from
decomposition ( 5.4.31 ). The generating function for @xmath D-branes is
now given by the plethystic exponentiation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The cases @xmath and @xmath (with only one charge @xmath ) are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Taking the Plethystic Logarithm for these expressions we find 9
generators for @xmath , 18 baryonic and 10 mesonic for @xmath , 30
baryonic and 10 mesonic for @xmath , 45 baryonic, 10 mesonic of @xmath
charge 2, 28 mesonic of @xmath charge 4 for @xmath , etc. By taking the
order of the pole at @xmath we find the dimension of the moduli space is
@xmath : 3N dimensions for the mesonic moduli space and 2 dimensions for
the baryonic fibers over it. All of this agrees with the field theory
expectations.

#### 5.4.3 Generating Functions for @xmath

@xmath is a @xmath freely acting orbifold of the conifold. We report
here for simplicity the toric diagram and the quiver of its first phase
Figure 5.5 . We will analyze here just the first toric phase of @xmath
and from now on @xmath . The quiver gauge theory has four types of
fields @xmath . and the superpotential is @xmath .

###### Symmetries and Geometry

In section 2.4.3 we have shown that the master space of @xmath is a
toric six dimensional variety that is reducible in the union of a six
dimensional CY cone: the product of two conifold @xmath and two four
dimensional complex planes: @xmath . The symmetry of @xmath is @xmath .
The last factor is an “hidden symmetry” that is not manifest in the UV
Lagrangian. In this section we will analyze just the UV symmetries and
we will come back to the hidden symmetries in the next chapter.

Including flavor charges, we find a rank six global UV symmetry denoted
by @xmath . The basic fields have transformation rules under the global
symmetry which are summarized in Table 5.2 .

We can explicitly examine the geometry of @xmath in the symplectic
quotient description. To this purpose, since @xmath , we introduce four
homogeneous coordinates @xmath in @xmath and we define the group of
rescaling @xmath which consists of a continuous charge acting as @xmath
on the @xmath and of a discrete one @xmath with @xmath . This implies
that the manifold, as we know, is a @xmath quotient of the conifold

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The homogeneous charges @xmath can be represented by chemical potentials
as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in terms of the discrete baryonic charge @xmath and the chemical
potentials @xmath and @xmath ; notations are inherited from original
conifold theory. For future reference, we notice that the right basis
for localization is given by @xmath and we compute @xmath .

##### The @xmath Generating Function

As we have already seen in section 2.4.3 the master space @xmath is
reducible. Here we decide to study only the irreducible component of the
moduli space which contains the generic point with all fields different
from zero: @xmath . Algebraically, this is obtained by taking the
closure of the open set @xmath and give the product of two conifold. We
will see that the geometry of the CY: the complex cone over @xmath :
@xmath , nicely captures this branch of the moduli space. The other
branches can be added by performing surgeries as in we have shown in
section 2.4.3 . The @xmath generating function for the generic branch is
given in equation ( 2.4.53 ). Introducing just the two field theory
chemical potentials @xmath , @xmath in Table 5.2 for the fields @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , @xmath respectively, we can distinguish between the
two conifold in @xmath , and we obtain:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

##### The GKZ Decomposition

On the singular cone, there is just one independent divisor @xmath as
for the conifold. On the resolution, there is a new divisor @xmath
corresponding to the internal point. @xmath and @xmath are still true
but now @xmath and @xmath are different. We can parametrize the GKZ fan
in @xmath with @xmath . The integer parameters @xmath and @xmath have
the interpretation as the discrete Kähler parameters of @xmath , namely
the discrete areas of the two @xmath ’s. In this case, the convexity
condition requires @xmath . The GKZ cone is depicted in Figure 5.6 and
the multiplicities are presented in Equation ( 5.4.50 ). Notice that the
QFT baryonic charge is given by @xmath , so the sector @xmath
corresponds to the positive baryonic charges and the sector @xmath
corresponds to the negative ones.

It is interesting to note that the line @xmath contains the sectors with
zero baryonic charge. It is not however true that operators with zero
baryonic charges are made with traces; this is only true for @xmath .
The other sectors on the line @xmath correspond to determinants of the
form @xmath .

Localization now gives (using the complete set of charges @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The dependence on the baryonic charge can be obtained by replacing
@xmath and @xmath and, as expected, is given by a multiplicative factor

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The generating function for @xmath can be nicely written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It is then obvious that, for example, the mesonic partition function
@xmath can be obtained from the mesonic partition function for the
conifold 5.4.17 by projecting on the @xmath invariant part ( @xmath ).

##### Multiplicities and Seiberg Duality

To extract multiplicities we use the auxiliary partition function for
the GKZ cone. We introduce letters @xmath for the four possible classes
of arrows. The only relation that they form is related to the closed
loop @xmath . The generating function is the Hilbert series of the
polynomial ring

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By assigning chemical potential @xmath to @xmath and @xmath to @xmath we
obtain the auxiliary GKZ partition function for multiplicities:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

¿From which we can extract the following multiplicities, @xmath for
@xmath , @xmath for @xmath , and @xmath for @xmath .

We thus have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.46)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and one computes, using Equation ( 5.4.43 ),

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.47)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is exactly Equation ( 5.4.41 ).

This is a rather important point. We have just seen that the geometrical
counting procedure reproduce just the coherent component @xmath of the
moduli space. This is a quite interesting result. Indeed in section
2.4.3 we accumulated some evidences, from the field theory point of
view, that the two coherent components @xmath of two Seiberg equivalent
CFT have the same Hilbert series written just in term of the non
anomalous symmetries. From the geometric computation we have just
presented, this fact means that the GKZ construction must be invariant
under Seiberg duality: namely the auxiliary GKZ partition function
restricted to the non anomalous charges is the same in the two phases of
@xmath . Indeed for the second phase of @xmath we have the quiver in
figure 2.6 . If we call @xmath the arrows along the diagonal and @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , the four arrows along the square, the
relations they satisfy are: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The generating
function for the second phase is the Hilbert series of the polynomial
ring ⁵ ⁵ 5 To do not make too heavy the notation in all this chapter we
will call @xmath the first toric phase of the @xmath gauge theory, and
@xmath the second toric phase.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.48)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By assigning chemical potential @xmath to @xmath , @xmath to @xmath and
@xmath to @xmath we obtain the auxiliary GKZ partition function for
multiplicities for the second phase of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.49)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This is exactly the auxiliary GKZ partition function of the phase I (
5.4.3 ), meaning that the GKZ construction is invariant under Seiberg
duality. We have previously observed that the geometric reconstruction
of the BPS spectrum is sensitive just to the coherent component of the
moduli space. Indeed the invariance under Seiberg duality of the GKZ
partition function is the geometric dual of the invariance of the
Hilbert series, refined by all the chemical potentials associated to the
non anomalous U(1) symmetries, of the coherent component of the master
space.

It seems that this fact, that we have shown just for the @xmath theory,
is going to repeat for other examples as well. For a detailed analysis
of the @xmath case, and more general examples, we refer the reader to [
80 ] . We conclude that both from the field theory and from the geometry
we can guess that the Hilbert series for non anomalous charges of the
coherent component of the master space is invariant under Seiberg
duality. This fact suggests the presence of some “quantum” corrections
to the classical moduli space of the field theory. We could in principle
obtain some informations regarding the “quantum” corrected moduli space
from the dual gravity setup (observe that we are here taking the non
trivial extrapolation from @xmath to @xmath !).

In this section we have seen that the Hilbert series for @xmath is
exactly reproduced by the counting of supesymmetric D3 branes in @xmath
. It would be interesting to understand if and how the linear components
of @xmath are reproduced by the geometry of @xmath , and if the Hilbert
series obtained from the geometric setup could give some hints to
understand the possible deformations to the classical field theory
moduli spaces and their behavior under Seiberg dualities.

##### Refining the GKZ Decomposition and Seiberg Duality

The auxiliary partition function in Equation ( 5.4.3 ) is derived by
computing the Hilbert series of the GKZ ring in Equation ( 5.4.44 ). By
expanding this partition function we get multiplicities in the @xmath
lattice given by the following infinite matrix,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.50)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In order to avoid getting multiplicities, let us introduce the chemical
potentials for the anomalous charges given in Table 5.2 . Using
Macaulay2, or the fact that we are dealing with a complete intersection,
we can write the auxiliary partition function dressed with these new
charges as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.51)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By expanding this function, we see that above each point in the GKZ fan,
parametrized by @xmath , there is a rectangle @xmath in the @xmath
lattice as in Figure 5.7 . The related rectangle in the pq-web is shown
in Figure 5.8 .

We can thus refine our decomposition of the @xmath partition function.
Equation ( 5.4.46 ) can be replaced by the following formula where all
multiplicities are lifted:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.52)
  -- -------- -- ----------

One can explicitly resum the right hand side, computed from geometrical
data and the auxiliary GKZ generating functions, and compare it with the
@xmath generating function as computed by field theory. By resumming the
series in Equation ( 5.4.52 ) we indeed recover the generating function
for @xmath with all anomalous and non-anomalous charges; this is given
by the Hilbert series for the polynomial ring of @xmath in section 2.4.3
and is easily computed using the fact that we deal with a complete
intersection,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.53)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ----------

For completeness we can rewrite this expression by summing using
Equations ( 5.4.3 ) and ( 5.4.51 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

As in the case of @xmath in section 5.4.2 this formula suggests that
some localization is at work in the field theory @xmath moduli space
@xmath , which is a six dimensional toric variety with the action of six
@xmath flavor and baryonic symmetries as described in chapter 2 . From
equation ( 5.4.47 ) we can refine our observation by guessing that the
counting of sections of line bundles with multiplicities over @xmath is
equivalent to the counting of holomorphic functions over @xmath .

Indeed we can count the complete chiral spectra of the gauge theory in
two different geometrical way: in the first one we start from the three
dimensional singularity @xmath and we count all the sections of all the
divisors according to the GKZ decomposition taking into account the
field theory multiplicities:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.55)
  -- -------- -- ----------

this is the way we are following in this chapter and it reveals very
useful for extending the computation to generic @xmath ; the second way
is more natural from the point of view of the study of the complete
moduli space @xmath of the field theory and it fit very well with the
discussion in chapter 2 . The trivial observation is that the set all
the @xmath BPS operators are exactly the set of all holomorphic
functions over the complete moduli space @xmath ( i.e. sections of the
trivial bundle @xmath over @xmath in the language of the section 3.6 ).
In chapter 2 we have shown that the moduli space @xmath for @xmath
brane, namely the master space @xmath , is a toric variety composed by a
CY toric cone of dimension @xmath called the coherent component @xmath ,
and a set of lower dimensional linear spaces @xmath . Hence if we want
to count the holomorphic functions over @xmath we just need to extend
the formalism for trivial bundle developed in section 3.6 from three to
@xmath dimensions:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.56)
  -- -------- -- ----------

this character can be computed applying index theorem on the trivial
line bundle @xmath over @xmath and it takes the form ( 5.4.3 ),
suggesting that:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.57)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us conclude with a couple of observations about the second phase of
@xmath , for more details we refer the reader to [ 80 ] . It is possible
to show that the two phases of @xmath have different completely refined
Hilbert series for the coherent component of the master space. If we
define the charges for the second phase as in Table 5.3 , with as usual
@xmath , @xmath

we obtain:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath a polynomial in the fugacities. One can check that the
Hilbert Series for the first phase in 5.4.3 , and the one for the second
phase in 5.4.3 are really different: @xmath and that they become exactly
equal for @xmath , in agreement with our conjecture in chapter 2 :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover the the refined GKZ auxiliary partition functions are also
different. In phase II the GKZ auxiliary partition function is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.58)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and it is explicitly different from ( 5.4.51 ). The two partition
functions become the same ( 5.4.3 , 5.4.49 ) only for @xmath . The nice
observation is that @xmath for both the two toric phases is decomposable
in terms of the elementary partition functions @xmath ( 5.4.3 ), and the
formula ( 5.4.52 ) holds for both the phases, meaning that @xmath
combined with @xmath of phase I and II reconstruct @xmath for the phase
I and II respectively. All this means that the computation of BPS
operators for @xmath give the same result in the two phases, when
expressed in terms of non anomalous symmetries @xmath , while the
dependence on the anomalous charges @xmath and @xmath is different.
However this agrees with Seiberg duality, because dual operators have
the same non anomalous charges but in general different charges under
anomalous symmetries. It agrees also with the strong coupling gravity
computations, because the anomalous symmetries are not really symmetries
of the theory and are invisible in the dual gravity background.

##### Generating Functions for @xmath

As before the higher @xmath generating function @xmath is given by the
plethystic exponentiation using formula ( 5.2.2 ). We can start from any
decomposition of the @xmath generating function, the GKZ decomposition (
5.4.46 ), the refined GKZ decomposition ( 5.4.52 ) or the expansion in
baryonic charges. Using the GKZ decomposition we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

¿From which we can compute the generating function for @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Taking the plethystic logarithm of the generating functions for @xmath ,
it is possible to find the generators of the moduli space. For @xmath
the plethystic logarithm of ( 5.4.41 ) is very simple:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and it correctly reproduces the 8 chiral field generators and the two
relations among them. For @xmath the moduli space is a complete
intersection, and this is reflected by the fact that the plethystic
logarithm has a finite number of terms. In the @xmath case there are 12
baryonic generators and 13 mesonic ones and the moduli space is no more
a complete intersection. By looking at the order of the pole for the
computed generating functions near @xmath , we checked that the
dimension of the moduli space is @xmath as expected.

#### 5.4.4 Counting in @xmath and in @xmath

We can also consider, as was done for the conifold in section 4.7 ,
fictitious theories counting subsets of the BPS chiral operators.

The half @xmath corresponds to considering only the BPS operators
containing @xmath and no occurrences of the other four elementary
fields. This is done by truncating Equation ( 5.4.43 ) for @xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.60)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We easily obtain the generating functions for @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.4.61)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Moreover, by generalizing arguments given in section 4.7 for the @xmath
conifold, it is easy to write a formula for generic @xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.62)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is interpreted as the fact that the ring of invariants is freely
generated by four determinants @xmath and @xmath mesons @xmath with
@xmath . This can be understood easily from the absence of nontrivial F
term conditions and the fact that all baryons factorize into an
elementary determinant times mesons.

The @xmath corresponds to considering only the BPS operators containing
@xmath and @xmath and no occurrences of the other two elementary fields.
This is done by taking

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.63)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using the same multiplicities as in Equation ( 5.4.46 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.4.64)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

### 5.5 The Molien Formula: Checks for @xmath

All along this thesis we have made some consistency checks of the
geometric computations we proposed against a direct field theory
construction. Till now we focused on some particular cases, namely the
abelian @xmath case, some lower dimensional operators in the chiral
ring, and some peculiar field theories with zero superpotential. In this
section we would like to give a general method, valid for every quiver
field theory, for computing generating function for generic @xmath in
the field theory side. The baryonic generating functions found in the
previous sections can indeed be checked against an explicit field theory
computation, at least for small values of @xmath . The method we present
here is the extension of the Molien Invariant formulae discussed in
section 4.7 to the case in which the superpotential is an arbitrary non
trivial functions of the elementary chiral superfields.

The problem of finding invariants under the action of a continuous group
is the hearth of invariant theory and goes back to the nineteenth
century, as most of the concepts necessary for its solution, like
syzygies and free resolutions, all amenable to Hilbert. Modern advances,
such as the discovery of Groebner basis, gave an algorithmic way of
solving such problems and the advent of computer algebra programs made
some computations really doable.

The generating functions for a fixed number of colors @xmath can be
reduced to a problem for polynomial rings as follows. Consider an @xmath
supersymmetric gauge theory with @xmath elementary fields @xmath and a
gauge group @xmath . Since we are discussing the chiral ring we can
replace @xmath with its complexification @xmath . For quiver theories,
the elementary fields consist of @xmath matrices. Consider a polynomial
ring in @xmath variables @xmath made with the entries of these matrices.
The F-terms give matrix relations whose entries are polynomial
equations. We can collect all the polynomial F-term equations in an
ideal @xmath and define the quotient ring

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.65)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The gauge group @xmath and the global symmetry group act naturally on
the ring and we can grade the elements of @xmath with gauge and global
charges. Denoting with @xmath the global Abelian charges and with @xmath
the charges under the Cartan subgroup of the gauge group @xmath , we can
write the generating function, or Hilbert series, of the graded ring
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.66)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which can be arranged to be a power series in the global charges @xmath
and a Laurent expansion in the gauge charges @xmath . The full gauge
group @xmath acts on the quotient ring @xmath and, since the gauge
symmetry commutes with the global symmetry, all the elements of @xmath
with given charge @xmath form a (not necessarily irreducible)
representation of @xmath . Therefore, the coefficient of @xmath in
Equation ( 5.5.66 ) is the character of a @xmath representation,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.67)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Here we have denoted with @xmath the irreducible representations of
@xmath and decomposed the representation on the elements of charge
@xmath into irreducible ones. The generating function for invariants is
given by the projection onto the trivial representation with character
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.68)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The projection can be easily done by averaging @xmath on the gauge group
with the Weyl measure. The latter has indeed the property to keep only
the contribution of the trivial representation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.69)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For a given group @xmath with rank @xmath we can explicitly write the
measure as a multi-contour integral

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.70)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are the weights of the adjoint representation and @xmath is
the order of the Weyl group. We finally get the Molien formula:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.71)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This is the generalization of the formula ( 4.7.66 ) to the case in
which the superpotential is non zero. Since the multi-contour integrals
can be evaluated with the residue theorem, the real problem in using
Equation ( 5.5.71 ) is the determination of the integrand, that is the
Hilbert series of the quotient ring @xmath . Fortunately, this is the
kind of problems that modern commutative algebra made algorithmic and
that can be easily solved with computer algebra programs. For example
Macaulay2 naturally deals with polynomial rings and it has a build-in
command hilbertSeries . For moderate values of @xmath , the computation
takes fractions of second, but it can become too hard with a standard
computer already at @xmath and a number of fields @xmath of order 10. In
these cases, one can still truncate the computation at a maximum degree
in t and get a sensible result.

It is worth mentioning that special care has to be taken when the moduli
space is not irreducible and at certain points in moduli space new
branches are opening up. This is the case for example for @xmath
theories that have additional Coulomb branches and was treated in [ 25 ]
. As we saw in chapter 2 the reducibility of the moduli space @xmath is
quite generic and understanding in detail how to compute Hilbert series
on this space is a fundamental task. The general case that we want to
address is the following. Suppose that we have an @xmath F-term equation
where one of the elementary fields can be factorized: @xmath where
@xmath is a polynomial not containing @xmath . Considering the @xmath
moduli space as a fibration over the line parametrized by @xmath , we
see that the dimension of the fiber increases by one unit over @xmath :
indeed, for @xmath we can impose the further constraint @xmath which
reduces by one the dimension of the fiber. This means that a new branch
opens up at @xmath and the full moduli space is reducible. This is for
example the case for @xmath as discussed in chapter 2.4.3 . We may want
to determine the generating function for a given irreducible component
of the moduli space, in particular the closure of the open set @xmath ,
or, for @xmath , of @xmath . This is done with a standard trick. Add a
new element @xmath to the ring and a new equation, @xmath to the ideal
@xmath . Clearly, the new equation prevents @xmath from being zero. The
irreducible component of the moduli space we are interested in is
obtained by projecting the variety defined by the new ideal @xmath on
the space parameterized by the @xmath and taking the closure. This can
be done by eliminating @xmath from the ideal @xmath . This defines the
elimination ideal @xmath that can be computed with the Macaulay2 command
eliminate . If we define

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.72)
  -- -------- -- ----------

we can now proceed as before, compute the Hilbert series of this ring
and project it onto gauge invariants with the Molien formula. This would
give us the generating function for the particular irreducible component
of the moduli space.

We now present some explicit examples based on the conifold and @xmath .
Other cases can be checked similarly, at least for small values of
number of fields, @xmath , and number of D-branes, @xmath . When @xmath
increases it is necessary to truncate the series to a maximum degree.

#### 5.5.1 @xmath for the Conifold

The generating function of the conifold for @xmath was explicitly
computed in section 4.4.1 and is given in Equation ( 4.4.26 ). For
@xmath we have four fields @xmath that are two-by-two matrices, whose
entries we denote by @xmath . The four matrix F-term equations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

give rises to sixteen polynomial equations for the @xmath which
generates an ideal @xmath in the polynomial ring @xmath . The element
@xmath of the complexified gauge group @xmath acts on the matrices as
@xmath and @xmath . All the entries @xmath and @xmath transform with a
definite charge under the Cartan subgroup

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.5.73)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

We further assign chemical potential @xmath to the eight fields @xmath
and chemical potential @xmath to the eight fields @xmath . The sixteen
F-term constraints generating the ideal @xmath transform homogeneously
under the gauge and global charges. We can thus grade the quotient ring

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.74)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with four charges, corresponding to chemical potentials, two gauge
@xmath and two global @xmath . The Hilbert series of @xmath can be
computed using Macaulay2

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
              
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.5.76)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

The molien formula now reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.77)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Some attention should be paid in performing the contour integrals.
Recall that @xmath gives the generating function for the ring @xmath
when expanded in power series in @xmath and in @xmath which are supposed
to be complex numbers of modulus less than one. This should be taken
into account when performing the contour integrals on the unit circles
@xmath . For example, the first contour integration in @xmath takes
contribution only from the residues in the points @xmath lying inside
the unit circle @xmath (we take @xmath ). Similar arguments apply to the
second integration. After performing the two integrals we obtain

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.78)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which perfectly coincides with Equation ( 4.4.26 ).

#### 5.5.2 @xmath and @xmath for @xmath: the Reducibility of the Moduli
Space

We now consider an example where the moduli space is not irreducible. We
consider the @xmath case in order to limit the number of equations
involved. The following discussion can be applied to the other cases of
reducible moduli space as well. For @xmath we consider the polynomial
ring

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.79)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with six variables. There are two F-term equations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Hilbert series for this polynomial ring is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.80)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As already discussed, the variety defined by @xmath is not irreducible:
we are interested in the closure of the open set @xmath . We then define
a new ideal by adding two new variables @xmath to @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.81)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and two new generators to the ideal @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The closure of the open set @xmath is obtained by eliminating @xmath and
@xmath . This can be done in a polynomial way by using the Groebner
basis and the algorithm is implemented in Macaulay2 in the command
eliminate . In our case the elimination ideal is just

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the Hilbert series of

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.5.82)
  -- -------- -- ----------

is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which indeed coincides with the @xmath generating function given in
Equation ( 5.4.64 ). The @xmath generating function should be computed
in a similar way. The fields @xmath are now two-by-two matrices, for a
total of @xmath independent entries. The ideal @xmath now contains
@xmath polynomial equations, given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the elimination ideal @xmath is obtained by eliminating @xmath and
@xmath . The Hilbert series of @xmath graded with the gauge charges is a
rational function @xmath whose expression is too long to be reported
here. Four integrations using the residue theorem finally give the
@xmath generating function given in ( 5.4.64 ).

### 5.6 Summary and Discussions

In this chapter we have performed a further step in the understanding
and the computation of the generating functions for the chiral ring of
the superconformal gauge theories living on branes at CY singularities.
We have reinforced the conjecture that the generating functions for
@xmath colors can be computed simply in terms of the @xmath generating
functions through the plethystic program. We tested this conjecture,
suggested by a computation with D3-branes in the dual background, in
field theory for small values of @xmath . It would be interesting to
perform checks for large @xmath as well as to investigate the
statistical properties of the resulting generating functions.

In particular we have made an explicit investigation of the properties
of the complete @xmath generating function and we have compared the
result with a geometrical computation. The emerging structure reveals
once more the deep interplay between the quiver gauge theory and the
algebraic geometry of the CY. We reinforce the relations between the
Kähler moduli space of the CY an the baryonic charges in the field
theory we observed in the previous chapter. Indeed in this chapter we
found an intriguing relation between the decomposition of the @xmath
generating function in sector of given baryonic charge and the
discretized Kähler moduli space of the CY.

The geometrical structure of the complete moduli space for @xmath
colors, which is obtained by the @xmath -fold symmetrized product of the
CY by adding the baryonic directions, is still poorly understood. In
chapter 2 we have seen that already for @xmath the moduli space is rich
and interesting.

In this chapter we have done the nice step forward to give a general
recipe, valid for every singularity @xmath , to compute the generating
function @xmath for arbitrary values of N. In the next chapter we will
apply the techniques we have developed for the finite N counting to the
study of the complete moduli space @xmath for generic values of @xmath .

## Chapter 6 Back to the Moduli Space

Enriched by the discussions of the last three chapters we can now go
back to the problem of studying the moduli space @xmath of SCFT at
singularity @xmath . Now we know how to compute partition functions for
generic @xmath number of branes and we can use the paradigm of algebraic
geometry: an algebraic variety is completely described by its coordinate
ring. Namely if we want to study the moduli space @xmath for a SCFT with
@xmath number of colors, it is enough to study the spectrum of
holomorphic function @xmath over it, or, in a field theory language, the
spectrum of 1/2 BPS operators. We will see that the Hilbert series of
@xmath for generic @xmath contain a lot of interesting informations
about the moduli space @xmath . In particular, using the PE function and
the GKZ decomposition, we would be able to extend the hidden symmetries
we have found in the Master space @xmath for @xmath brane, to the
complete moduli space @xmath for generic number of branes N.

### 6.1 Generalities

In chapter 2 we made an extensive study of the moduli space @xmath of
the gauge theory living on a single D3 brane probing the three-fold
singularity @xmath . We would be definitively interested to obtain as
many informations as possible regarding the moduli space @xmath for
generic number of brane @xmath . This seems in principle a very
difficult problem, if we want to attack it directly as we did in the
case of just one brane. However thanks to the techniques we developed to
study the BPS spectrum of these kind of gauge theories, we will be able
to extract non trivial informations regarding the moduli space @xmath in
a rather indirect way.

In the two following subsections we review what we know about the moduli
space @xmath and the PE function.

#### 6.1.1 The non Abelian Moduli Space

Let us start summarizing what we can say about @xmath looking directly
at the defining equations. The case for an arbitrary number @xmath of
D3-branes is much more subtle and less understood in the mathematical
literature than the @xmath case, even though it is clear from the gauge
theory perspective. We know that the world-volume theory for @xmath
D3-branes is a quiver theory with product @xmath gauge groups and in the
IR, the @xmath factors decouple since only the special unitary groups
exhibit asymptotic freedom and are strongly coupled in the IR. Thus the
moduli space of interest is the space of solutions to the F-flatness,
quotiented out by a non-Abelian gauge group

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the index @xmath recalls that we are dealing with @xmath branes.
The moduli space @xmath is of difficult characterization since the
quotient is fully non-Abelian and it can not be described by toric
methods, as in the @xmath case. This means that passing from @xmath to
@xmath we lose lot of the powerful tolls of toric geometry we have
extensively used in the @xmath case.

The more familiar mesonic moduli space is obtained by performing a
further quotient by the Abelian symmetries. Even for @xmath branes, the
Abelian group will be constituted of the decoupled @xmath factors, and
hence will be the same as in the toric, @xmath case. Once again, we
expect to have some symplectic quotient structure, in analogy with (
2.1.2 ), for this mesonic moduli space:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Hence, a toric symplectic quotient still persists for ( 6.1.2 ), even
though the moduli space in question is not necessarily toric.

Moreover, our plethystic techniques, which we will shortly review, will
illuminate us with much physical intuition. First, the mesonic moduli
space for @xmath branes is the @xmath -th symmetrized product of that of
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the symmetric group on @xmath elements. We see that the
mesonic moduli space, for @xmath a Calabi-Yau threefold, is of dimension
@xmath by ( 6.1.3 ). The dimension of the moduli space @xmath is thus
@xmath for general @xmath .

An important observation is that the symmetric product of a toric CY
variety is no more toric and generically non CY. This mesonic moduli
space is the base of the @xmath baryonic fibrations whose total space is
the complete moduli space @xmath . Combining our knowledge on the
complete moduli space for just one brane @xmath and our skill in
counting BPS operators for generic @xmath we will study the properties
of @xmath .

#### 6.1.2 The Plethystic Programme Reviewed

As we have already realized the PE function is a fundamental tool in the
study of general @xmath . Here we review/summarize some essential facts,
that we learnt to appreciate in the previous chapters and that will be
very useful in the present analysis.

The realization in [ 23 , 63 ] is that the mesonic generating function,
with all baryonic numbers fixed to be zero, @xmath , for the
single-trace mesonic operators for D3-branes probing a Calabi-Yau
threefold @xmath at @xmath , is the Hilbert series of @xmath . The
Plethystic Exponential of a multi-variable function @xmath that vanishes
at the origin, @xmath is defined as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then the multi-trace mesonic operators at @xmath are counted by the
plethystic exponential

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The inverse, @xmath , is counting objects in the defining equation
(syzygy) of the threefold @xmath . The mesonic multi-trace generating
function @xmath at finite @xmath is found by the series expansion of the
@xmath -inserted plethystic exponential as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In general (chapter 2 ) for the combined mesonic and baryonic branches
of the moduli space ¹ ¹ 1 To be Strict, we should say here the mesonic
branch together with given FI-parameters, since at @xmath , there are no
baryons. Nevertheless, we can still generate the counting for the
baryons for @xmath using PE of the @xmath case. , the @xmath operators
are counted by the Hilbert series of the master space @xmath . The
plethystic program can be efficiently applied to the study of the
coherent component of the moduli space ( chapter 5 ). With the
generating function for the coherent component of the master space,
which we denote @xmath , we can proceed with the plethystic program and
find the result for @xmath , counting the combined baryonic and mesonic
gauge invariant operators at finite @xmath .

As we explained in the previous chapter the implementation of the
plethystic program requires a decomposition of the @xmath generating
function in sectors of definite baryonic charges, to which the
plethystic exponential is applied. There exist an interesting connection
of this decomposition with Kähler moduli. The decomposition of @xmath
requires the knowledge of two sets of partition functions, the
geometrical ones, obtained by localization, and the auxiliary one,
obtained from dimer combinatorics. Specifically, we realized that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the summation is extended over the lattice points @xmath , of
multiplicity @xmath , of the so-called GKZ (or secondary) fan of the
Calabi-Yau threefold and @xmath is a much more manageable object
obtained from a localization computation, as given in Eq ( 5.3.11 ). The
GKZ fan, to remind the reader, is the fan of an auxiliary toric variety,
which is the space of Kähler parameters of the original toric threefold
@xmath . This space is of dimension @xmath , where @xmath is the number
of internal points and @xmath , the number of vertices, of the toric
diagram of @xmath .

The multiplicity @xmath of points in this GKZ lattice fan is counted by
an auxiliary partition function , so-named @xmath . This is simply the
(refined) Hilbert series of the following space: take the simpler quiver
than the original by neglecting any repeated arrows and then form the
space of open but not closed loops in this simplified quiver. The
expansion of @xmath can then be used to compute the generating function
for one D3-brane.

As a brief reminder to the reader, the procedure to determine the
refined generating function @xmath in ( 6.1.7 ) is to (1) obtain the
generating function @xmath in terms of a set of Kähler parameters @xmath
using the localisation formula ( 5.3.11 ); (2) obtain @xmath as above,
and (3) replace a term @xmath in @xmath by an expression for @xmath .
The important point for our ensuing discussions is that the plethystic
program can be applied to the @xmath partition functions at each point
of the GKZ fan in order to obtain the finite @xmath generating function

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The organization of the rest of the chapter is as follows. In section
6.2 we introduce and elaborate on the remarkable feature of “hidden
symmetries” of gauge theories from D3 branes at singularities. In
chapter 2 we have already seen that the coherent component @xmath of the
master space for one brane has generically some hidden symmetries not
manifest in the UV Lagrangian describing the field theory. In this
section we will see that the symmetries of @xmath can manifest
themselves as hidden global symmetries of the gauge theory, and indeed
they can sometime be promoted to symmetries of the complete moduli space
@xmath for generic value of N. We examine how such symmetries
beautifully exhibit themselves in the plethystics of the Hilbert series
of the master space by explicitly arranging themselves into
representations of the associated Lie algebra. In sections 6.3 and 6.4
we describe in details how to study the moduli space of gauge theories
for generic N in the @xmath and @xmath examples respectively.

### 6.2 Hidden Global Symmetries

In chapter 2 we realized that the master space @xmath of gauge theories
at singularities @xmath , in the case @xmath , has generically more
symmetries than the Lagrangian describing UV field theory. A natural
question is: is it an accident of the @xmath case or it propagates to
generic N ? May we learn something about the moduli space for generic
@xmath looking at the symmetries of the N=1 moduli space ? Or in the
language of the chapter 2 : Is it possible that the master space @xmath
contains important informations regarding the complete moduli space
@xmath ? In the rest of this chapter we will try to give an affirmative
answer to these questions.

All along the history, the physics made huge progress looking to the
symmetries of our world. Indeed the idea will move our following studies
will be: SYMMETRIES. The moduli space of a field theory may possess
symmetries beyond gauge symmetry or reparametrisation. Searching for
hidden symmetries of a given supersymmetric field theory often leads to
insight of the structure of the theory. For D-brane quiver theories, an
underlying symmetry is ever-present: the symmetry of the Calabi-Yau
space @xmath is visible in the UV as a global flavor symmetry in the
Lagrangian, while the symmetry of the full moduli space @xmath can
reveal a new hidden global symmetry which develops as the theory flows
to the IR.

In particular, in [ 49 ] , the basic fields of the quiver for @xmath
theories were reordered into multiplets of a proposed @xmath symmetry
and consequently the superpotential terms into singlets of this
symmetry. The exceptional Lie group @xmath acts geometrically on the
divisors of the del Pezzo surfaces and is realized in the quantum field
theory as a hidden symmetry enhancing the @xmath non-anomalous baryonic
@xmath ’s of the @xmath quiver.

Do the symmetries of the master space, whose geometrical significance we
have learned to appreciate in the foregoing discussions, manifest
themselves in the full moduli space @xmath of the gauge theory? Phrased
another way, do these symmetries survive the symplectic quotient of (
2.1.1 ) and manifest themselves also at finite @xmath ? This is
indubitably a natural question.

In this section, equipped with the new notion of the master space we can
revisit this problem and recast all operators into irreducible
representations of the symmetry of @xmath . We will show that these
symmetries are encoded in a subtle and beautiful way by the fundamental
invariant of the plethystic programme for @xmath : the Hilbert series.
Moreover, we will demonstrate in some examples how the hidden symmetries
of the moduli space come from enhancing anomalous and non-anomalous
Abelian symmetries of the Lagrangian describing the UV field theory.

Since we will always deal with the coherent component of the moduli
space in the following and there is no source for ambiguity, we will
adopt a simplified notation for the Hilbert series:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

#### 6.2.1 Character Expansion: a Warm-up with @xmath

The @xmath supersymmetric gauge theory does not have a baryonic branch
and therefore the master space @xmath coincides with the Calabi-Yau
manifold @xmath . We therefore do not expect any new symmetries but
instead can use this example as a warm-up example for expanding in terms
of characters of the global symmetry. For a single D3-brane, @xmath and
there is a @xmath symmetry. Now, there is an @xmath symmetry for which
@xmath is a maximal subgroup, however, we shall see below that the
slightly smaller @xmath suffices to keep the structure of the BPS
operators.

The generating function for @xmath is well known and was computed in
various places (cf. e.g. [ 23 , 63 ] ). It takes the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which coincides with the grand canonical partition function of the three
dimensional harmonic oscillator. This form is perhaps the simplest one
can write down for the exact answer and from this extract the generating
function for any fixed @xmath . In this subsection, we will rewrite it
in terms of characters of the @xmath global symmetry. The expansion
demonstrates how one can explicitly represent this function in terms of
characters. This will help in analyzing the next few examples in which
expansion in terms of characters are done but for more complicated
cases.

Equation ( 6.2.2 ) admits a plethystic exponential form,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We recall that @xmath , the generating function for a single D3-brane,
@xmath , is none other than the refined Hilbert series for @xmath ,
itself being the @xmath of the defining equations (syzygies) for @xmath
, here just the 3 variables. Furthermore, @xmath encodes all the
generators for the multi-trace operators (symmetric product) at general
number @xmath of D-branes.

We can now introduce @xmath weights @xmath which reflect the fact that
the chemical potentials @xmath are in the fundamental representation of
@xmath , and a chemical potential @xmath for the @xmath charge,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We can define the character of the fundamental representation with the
symbol

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The second equality follows from the basic property of the plethystic
exponential which produces all possible symmetric products of the
function on which it acts. The full generating function is now rewritten
as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

giving an explicit representation as characters of @xmath . This
equation is very important, and shows explicitly that the complete
spectrum of BPS operators for the @xmath theory, for generic @xmath ,
reorganize in representation of @xmath . H ence the complete moduli
space @xmath has at least an @xmath symmetry. This is clearly an
observation that is expected and can be obtained in many other ways, but
a similar fact will be rather non trivial for other singularity @xmath :
If the Hilbert series for generic N can be explicitly written in term of
character of certain group G, than the moduli space @xmath for generic N
will have the group G as symmetry group.

We can expand @xmath and find, for example,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Alternatively we can write down an explicit power expansion for @xmath
as

  -- -- -- ---------
           (6.2.9)
  -- -- -- ---------

Note that @xmath is not palindromic, indicating that the moduli space of
2 D-branes on @xmath , as expected, is not Calabi-Yau. Armed with this
character expansion let us now turn to more involved cases where there
is a baryonic branch.

#### 6.2.2 Conifold Revisited

Having warmed up with @xmath , let us begin with our most familiar
example, the conifold @xmath . In chapter 2 we learnt that the master
space for the conifold is simply @xmath . The symmetry of this space is
@xmath where the @xmath is the R-symmetry while the @xmath symmetry is
not visible at the level of the Lagrangian and therefore will be called
“hidden”. One should stress that at the IR the two @xmath gauge fields
become free and decouple and one is left with 4 non-interacting fields,
which obviously transform as fundamental representation of this @xmath
global symmetry. Now, there is a mesonic @xmath symmetry and a baryonic
@xmath symmetry, this @xmath Hidden Symmetry is an enhancement of both.
In section 4.3 we learnt how to assign the UV @xmath global symmetry
charges to the @xmath and @xmath fields that are the coordinates of the
master space @xmath . We obtained indeed the N=1 generating function:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In the above, we recall from section 6.1.2 that the Hilbert series is
itself the PE of the defining equations.

Now, the fields @xmath and @xmath are in the representations of the
explicit @xmath symmetry, while our hidden symmetry is @xmath . We will
therefore introduce @xmath weights, @xmath and map them to the three
weights of the @xmath global symmetry. This is done simply by first
taking the four weights of the fundamental representation of @xmath ,
whose character we will denote as @xmath , and which we recall can be
written in terms of the weights as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then we multiply by @xmath to obtain a @xmath representation, which
should be mapped them to the four weights of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In analogy with ( 6.2.3 ), we can now write ( 6.2.10 ) in terms of a
plethystic exponential:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the completely symmetric tensor of rank @xmath and
dimension @xmath . The first equality writes the 4 generators of @xmath
, viz., @xmath , in the weights of @xmath and the second equality
follows from the definition of @xmath in ( 6.1.4 ) and the fact that
expansion of the plethystic exponential in power series of @xmath will
compose the @xmath -th symmetrized product. Equation ( 6.2.13 ) is a
trivial and obvious demonstration that the @xmath generating function is
decomposed into irreducible representations of @xmath , precisely one
copy of the irreducible representation @xmath at R-charge @xmath . To be
precise we are taking here the R-charge to be @xmath times that of the
basic field @xmath .

##### Hidden Symmetries for Higher Plethystics

We have now seen that the basic invariant, i.e., @xmath , the Hilbert
series, of @xmath , can be written explicitly as the plethystic
exponential of the fundamental representation of @xmath . Now, the
hidden symmetry mixes baryon number with meson number and therefore we
do not expect this symmetry to hold for general number @xmath of
D3-branes. For the case of @xmath , however, baryons and mesons have the
same R-charge and therefore we may expect the global symmetry to be
enhanced.

Actually for @xmath , @xmath becomes a symmetry of the Lagrangian of the
conifold theory, which is an @xmath theory with four flavors in the
vector representation and an @xmath invariant superpotential. Writing
the 4 flavors in the vector representation of @xmath as a @xmath matrix
@xmath we find that the superpotential is @xmath . Using the formalism
which we developed to count gauge invariant operators for the conifold
we find that the @xmath generating function does indeed decompose into
characters of irreducible representations of @xmath .

The generating function for @xmath was computed in section 4.4 . This
generating function could be given as a function of all 4 chemical
potentials and is quite lengthy. Here, we will take this expression and
recast it into characters of the global symmetry @xmath . The first
point to note is that the generators form the @xmath representation of
@xmath . It is natural to expect this since this representation is the
second rank symmetric product of the generators for @xmath . The other
terms are less obvious and need explicit computation. A short
computation yields

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This can be seen if we write the explicit expressions for the characters
of the irreducible representations of @xmath which we can write in terms
of the weights as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As a check, ( 6.2.14 ) can be expanded to first few orders in @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and in series form it is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now, using the formula for the dimension of a generic irreducible
representation of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

we find that the unrefined generating function for @xmath sums to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

as expected and in agreement with the Equations in section 4.4 . Taking
the Plethystic Logarithm we find that the 7 dimensional manifold is
generated by 10 operators of order 2 transforming in the @xmath
representation of @xmath subject to 10 cubic relations transforming in
the @xmath representation of @xmath . Since @xmath is not palindromic we
expect the moduli space of 2 D-branes on the conifold to be not
Calabi-Yau.

This confirms the expansion in terms of characters of @xmath for the
case of @xmath . Unfortunately this symmetry does not extend to @xmath
and is not a symmetry for higher values of @xmath .

In the next example we are going to see how a hidden symmetry extends to
all values of @xmath , simply because the hidden symmetry does not mix
baryonic numbers with mesonic numbers as it does for the conifold. The
symmetry structure then persists to all orders in @xmath .

### 6.3 @xmath Revisited

The master space for @xmath is calculated above in section 2.3 and is
found to be irreducible. Its symplectic quotient description is @xmath .
We note that the sum of charges is zero, implying that this
5-dimensional variety is Calabi-Yau, in agreement with ( 2.2.9 ). This
space is a natural generalization of the conifold and has the
description of a cone over a 9 real dimensional Sasaki Einstein manifold
given by a circle bundle over @xmath . This structure reveals a symmetry
of the form @xmath .

Indeed, we note that this construction is toric and therefore we would
expect a symmetry which is at least @xmath since the master space has
dimension 5. However, due to the special symmetries of this space the
symmetry is larger. The @xmath is the R-symmetry and the first @xmath is
the natural one acting on the mesonic moduli space @xmath . The second
@xmath symmetry is a “hidden” symmetry, and is related to the two
anomalous baryonic @xmath symmetries that play a rôle as the Cartan
subgroup of this symmetry. We can use the full symmetry to compute the
refined Hilbert series for this space.

The Hilbert series for just one charge was computed with the Molien
formula in ( 2.3.30 )

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.3.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Taking the plethystic logarithm of this expression we find 9 generators
at order @xmath subject to 9 relations at order @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.3.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This agrees exactly with the content of ( 2.2.9 ) which says that @xmath
should be the incomplete (since the plethystic logarithm does not
terminate) intersection of 9 quadrics in 9 variables.

Now, we would like to refine the Hilbert series to include all the 5
global charges. This can be done using the Molien formula or any other
of the methods discussed in section 2.3 . Here we find a shorter way of
determining it. To do this we recognize the 9 quiver fields as
transforming in the @xmath representation of @xmath . For short we will
write an irreducible representation of this group as a collection of 4
non-negative integer numbers, here @xmath and with obvious extension to
other representations. These are all the generators of the variety (
2.3.29 ). The relations are derived from a superpotential of weight
@xmath so we expect 9 relations at order @xmath transforming in the
conjugate representation to the generators, @xmath . To get this into
effect we rewrite ( 6.3.19 ) into a form which allows generalization to
include characters (multiplying top and bottom by @xmath ):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.3.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The coefficient of the @xmath in the numerator can now be identified
with the 9 relations, whose transformation rules are already determined
to be @xmath . Being irreducible we expect the Hilbert series to be
palindromic. This gives as the @xmath term as @xmath . The same property
implies that the coefficient of the @xmath term is self conjugate and
hence uniquely becomes the adjoint representation for @xmath , @xmath .
Finally, the denominator can be simply expressed as a plethystic
exponential of the representation for the generators, @xmath . In other
words, @xmath . In summary, we end up with the refinement of the Hilbert
series for @xmath as:

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

For completeness, we list here the explicit expressions for the
characters of the representations, using weights @xmath for the first,
mesonic @xmath and @xmath for the second, hidden @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.3.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In terms of the above weights, being generated by the representation
@xmath , the Hilbert series, ( 6.3 ), for the case of @xmath D3-brane
admits a simple and natural series expansion of the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.3.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

##### Higher Number of Branes

Using the formalism of the chapter 5 and summarized in section 6.1.2 ,
we can compute the @xmath generating function in terms of characters of
the global symmetry. The computation is somewhat lengthy but the result
is relatively simple:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.3.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with coefficient 1 for each representation which appears in the
expansion. It is important to identify the generators of this expression
and a quick computation reveals the order @xmath and order @xmath
generators to be the representations, @xmath , and @xmath ,
respectively. We can therefore sum the series and obtain

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.3.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a complicated polynomial of order 58 in @xmath which has
the first 10 terms:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.3.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Similarly, we can obtain generic expressions for any @xmath . Recall
from section 5.4.2 that the generating function for a fixed integral
Kähler modulus @xmath is equal to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.3.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

this can be easily written in terms of representations of the global
symmetry as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.3.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The auxiliary partition function also admits an expression in terms of
representations of the global symmetry:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.3.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which has an expansion as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.3.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Following chapter 5 or the recipe we gave in section 6.1.2 , we can use
can use ( 6.3.29 ) and ( 6.3.31 ) to compute the generating function for
one D3-brane:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.3.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In the second equality we shifted the index @xmath by 3 and an opposite
shift of the index @xmath by 1 in the second term. This allows us, in
the third equality, to cancel all terms for @xmath except for the term
in @xmath . Thus we reproduce ( 6.3.24 ) in a remarkable cancellation
that leaves only positive coefficients.

Subsequently, we can obtain the expression @xmath , by computing the
@xmath -inserted plethystic exponential and series expansion:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.3.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Note that the first @xmath contains all the terms in the second @xmath
and hence all the coefficients in the expansion are positive. As a
check, we can expand ( 6.3.33 ) to second order in @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.3.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which indeed agrees with ( 6.3.25 ).

Equation ( 6.3.33 ) is extremely important: it shows that all the BPS
operators of the gauge theory for @xmath , for every value of N,
reorganize in representations of the @xmath group, where the second
@xmath factor is an hidden symmetry, namely it is not visible in the UV
Lagrangian describing the gauge theory. Because the BPS operators of the
gauge theory are the holomorphic functions of the moduli space @xmath ,
this result imply that the moduli space @xmath , for every values of N,
has the symmetry @xmath . This is a very interesting result that come
from the counting of chiral operators !

Because the symmetry @xmath persists for all the values of N, we can
interpolate this result till @xmath . In this way we could make the
prediction that the dual type IIB string on the @xmath background has a
sector in which there exist an hidden @xmath symmetry. This is just a
first guess and we clearly need much more studies.

### 6.4 @xmath Revisited

Let us move on to the @xmath theory and focus on the first toric phase,
whose master space we studied in section 2.4.3 , to see another clear
example of the extension of the symmetries of the coherent component of
the master space @xmath to the the complete moduli space @xmath and to
the complete chiral ring of the theory for every value of N.

We recall that the master space for a single D3-brane, @xmath , is a six
dimensional reducible variety composed by a set of coordinate planes and
an irreducible six dimensional Calabi-Yau piece. This top piece, being
toric, admits a symmetry group which is at least @xmath . Re-examining (
2.4.51 ) we see that it is actually the set product of two three
dimensional conifold singularities:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.4.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

hence the group of symmetries is @xmath , twice the isometry group of
the conifold. The first @xmath is the non-Abelian symmetry group of the
variety @xmath , and the second @xmath is a hidden symmetry related to
the two anomalous baryonic symmetries of the gauge theory. The chiral
spectrum of the theory is summarized by the Hilbert series:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.4.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the chemical potential @xmath counts the fields @xmath , @xmath
while @xmath counts the fields @xmath , @xmath .

Let us define the representation @xmath for the @xmath group. Equation (
6.4.35 ) and Table ( 5.2 ) then implies that @xmath are in the @xmath
representation and @xmath are in the @xmath representation. The
refinement for the Hilbert series ( 6.4.36 ) is then

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.4.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Amazingly, the group @xmath is the symmetry for the chiral ring for
generic @xmath , not just for @xmath , and hence the moduli space of the
non-Abelian theory on @xmath D3-branes has this group as a symmetry
group.

The generating function for finite @xmath can be computed using the
plethystic exponential in each sector of the GKZ decomposition of the
@xmath partition function. The procedure is explained in chapter 5 and
summarized in section 6.1.2 . In particular, the implementation of the
plethystic program goes through the formulae ( 6.1.7 ) and ( 6.1.8 ) and
requires the computation of the generating functions for fixed Kähler
moduli and the auxiliary partition function.

Recall from equation ( 5.4.43 ) that the generating function for fixed
integral Kähler moduli, which in this case can be parameterized by two
integers @xmath , @xmath , is equal to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.4.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This can be easily refined in terms of representations of the global
symmetry as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.4.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The auxiliary partition function in equation ( 5.4.51 ) also admits an
expression in terms of representations of the global symmetry,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.4.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which has an expansion as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.4.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Recalling from section 6.1.2 , once we have @xmath and @xmath we can do
the replacement @xmath in @xmath by @xmath (as done in line 2 below and
using the fact that by our definition @xmath ) to obtain the generating
function for a single brane:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.4.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

leaving only positive coefficients and meaning that @xmath is indeed a
symmetry of the @xmath moduli space. The second equality follows by
shifting @xmath by @xmath and the @xmath ’s by @xmath . The third
equality is the remaining @xmath term from both contributions. It is
important to note that Equation ( 6.4.42 ) factorizes into two conifold
generating functions,

  -- -- -- ----------
           (6.4.43)
  -- -- -- ----------

which can be easily checked to equal Equation ( 6.4.37 ).

Next, using ( 6.1.8 ), we can write a generic expression for any @xmath
.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.4.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Note that the first @xmath contains all the terms in the second @xmath
and hence all the coefficients in the expansion are positive. This is
the explicit demonstration that for generic @xmath the chiral spectrum
organizes into representations of @xmath and hence the moduli space of
the non-Abelian theory with generic rank @xmath has symmetry @xmath . As
in the previous section we could infer that type IIB string propagating
on the back ground @xmath times the circle bundle over @xmath has a
sector in which there exist an hidden symmetry @xmath .It would be nice
to study this phenomenon.

### 6.5 Summary and Discussions

In this chapter we tried to study the non abelian moduli space of brane
at singularity using the properties of the chiral spectra of the gauge
theory. The situation for general number @xmath of D3-branes is much
more subtle than the @xmath case. The moduli space is now the variety of
F-flatness quotiented by the special unitary factors of the gauge group,
so that when quotiented by the @xmath factors as a symplectic quotient
we once more arrive at the mesonic branch, which here is the @xmath -th
symmeterized product of the Calabi-Yau space @xmath . In the fully non
abelian case we lose the toricity properties and a direct attack to the
moduli space seems quite complicated. However, the plethystic programme
persists through and we can still readily extract the generating
functions for any @xmath . The crucial observation was that the gauge
theory possesses, at least in the @xmath case, hidden global symmetries
corresponding to the symmetry of @xmath which, though not manifest in
the Lagrangian, is surprisingly encoded in the algebraic geometry of
@xmath . In particular, we can re-write the terms of the single brane
generating funct! ion, i.e., the refined Hilbert series of @xmath , in
the weights of the representations of the Lie algebra of the hidden
symmetry in a selected set of examples. Using the plethystic programme
we were able to extend this analysis to an arbitrary number @xmath of
branes. Indeed we showed that, for a selected set of examples, we are
still able to reorganize the generating function for generic @xmath in
representation of the hidden symmetries. This fact allowed us to study
the symmetry of the moduli space @xmath . In some cases the symmetries
of @xmath become symmetries of the complete moduli space @xmath and of
the complete chiral ring for generic @xmath . This fact gives us the
possibility to make some predictions about the symmetry of the dual type
IIB string on the @xmath background.

We are at the portal to a vast subject. The algebraic geometry of the
master space at @xmath number of branes deserves a detailed study as we
have done for the single-brane example; we have given its form on
physical grounds and mathematically the structure is expected to be
complicated.

A very important observation is that our systematic analysis should
apply to not only D-brane theories but to supersymmetric gauge theories
in general; the master space and its associated physical insight need to
be thus investigated panoramically. The full symphony based on our motif
in @xmath awaits to be composed.

## Chapter 7 Counting the Fermionic Operators

In the previous chapters we discussed properties of the moduli space of
quiver gauge theories and of their BPS spectrum just looking to the
bosonic degrees of freedom. A generic gauge theory contains in its BPS
spectrum also spinorial degrees of freedom. These are the gauge
invariant operators containing the superfield @xmath . In this chapter
we discuss a general procedure to obtain @xmath @xmath partition
functions for generic @xmath quiver gauge theories counting the gauge
invariant operators (bosonic and fermionic), charged under all the
global symmetries (mesonic and baryonic), in the chiral ring of a given
quiver gauge theory. In particular we will explain the general recipe to
include the fermionic degrees of freedom @xmath in the previously
discussed bosonic partition functions.

### 7.1 Generalities

In the previous chapter we constructed a character associated to the
quiver @xmath at the singularity @xmath that counts the elements in the
chiral ring of the theory according to their charges under the various
@xmath factors of the global symmetry group.

The counting procedure consists in the definition of a set of chemical
potentials @xmath , @xmath associated to each @xmath factor in the group
@xmath (the abelian torus of the global symmetry group of the theory).
We can decompose the @xmath abelian symmetries in @xmath . A @xmath
comes from the isometries of @xmath ( flavour symmetries in CFT
including the R symmetry), @xmath in the toric case, while @xmath comes
from the topology of H ( the baryonic symmetries in the field theory),
in the toric case @xmath where d is the number of external points in the
toric diagram. Once we have defined these chemical potentials we
construct the character @xmath , such that once expanded for small
values of the @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

give us the positive integer coefficients @xmath that tell how many
independent gauge invariant operators there are in the chiral ring with
that specific set of quantum numbers. As we have explained in the
previous chapters this enumeration problem turns out to be a very
powerful toll for the study of the properties of the @xmath and the dual
@xmath geometry [ 28 , 27 , 23 , 24 , 22 , 63 , 85 , 86 , 87 , 88 , 89 ,
97 , 25 , 106 ] . The function @xmath contains the informations
regarding the algebraic equations of the moduli space of the field
theory, its dimension, the volume of the horizon manifold @xmath and
hence the value of the central charge @xmath of the @xmath , the volumes
of all the non trivial three cycles inside @xmath and hence of all the
@xmath charges of the chiral fields in the field theory and the behavior
of the @xmath spectrum under the non perturbative quantum corrections in
the strong coupling regime.

It turned out that all the geometric informations are encoded in the
scalar part of the chiral ring, and indeed till now we just focused on
this part of the spectrum.

The task of this chapter is to make a step further and to study the
generating functions for the complete chiral ring of generic quiver
gauge theories containing all the scalar degrees of freedom plus the
spinorial degrees of freedom originated by the @xmath Weyl spinor
superfields associated to the @xmath vector multiplets.

The complete generating function for the chiral ring of a given quiver
gauge theory gives informations about the complete @xmath @xmath
spectrum, and hence the possibility of a statistical studies of the
thermodynamical properties of a generic strongly coupled @xmath .

We will show how it is possible to obtain the generating functions for
the complete chiral ring starting from the generating functions for the
scalar part. This counting procedure is divided into two parts: the
@xmath counting, and the generic finite @xmath counting. As usual it
happens that the knowledge of the @xmath generating function is enough
to implement the finite @xmath counting. We will indeed introduce a
“superfield formalism” that allows to pass from the @xmath scalar
generating function to the @xmath complete one. In the chiral ring there
are both bosonic and fermionic degrees of freedom. Indeed the
bifoundamental fields are scalar superfields and hence bosons, while the
superfiels @xmath are Weyl spinors and hence fermions. This different
statistical behavior became important in the finite @xmath counting. For
this reason we will introduce the notion of Generalized Plethystic
Exponential @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 In this chapter we will use the symbol @xmath
for the generalized plethystic exponential, while we will use @xmath for
the bosonic part of the spectrum ( this is what we have till know simply
called the PE function), and @xmath for the fermionic part. . This is a
simple mathematical function that implement the mixed statistic of a
system of bosons and fermions. Once we have obtained the generating
function @xmath for @xmath , to have the generating function @xmath
counting the chiral ring operators for finite values of @xmath we just
need to plug @xmath in the Generalized Plethystic Exponential ² ² 2 This
is just a schematic expression. The more precise equations will be given
in following sections. :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the @xmath , @xmath are for bosonic and fermionic statistic
respectively; @xmath is the bosonic part of the @xmath generating
function, while @xmath is the fermionic part of the @xmath generating
function. The function @xmath is the usual @xmath -inserted plethystic
exponential we used all along this thesis, while the @xmath is its
fermionic version to be defined in the following.

In the previous chapters we developed powerful tools to compute the
@xmath scalar generating functions and the finite @xmath complete
generating functions is simply obtained using the algorithmic procedure
previously explained.

In this chapter we will just shortly comment on this possible extension
of the techniques developed in the rest of the thesis to reach the
complete counting of the chiral ring of quiver CFT. A more careful
analysis is left for the future and the reader can find some more
insights in [ 29 ] .

The chapter is organized in the following way. In section 7.2 we will
start with the simplest example of the @xmath gauge theory. We will
construct the various generating functions looking directly at the
chiral ring structure. This is a simple and explicit example to take in
mind in the next more abstract section. In section 7.3 we will give a
general discussion of the structure of the chiral ring of quiver gauge
theories. We will introduce the concept of generalized @xmath and we
will explain how to compute the generating functions for the complete
chiral ring in the case @xmath and in the generic finite @xmath case. In
section 7.4 , we will revisit, using the general tools introduced in
section 7.3 , the computation of the generating functions for the @xmath
gauge theory. In section 7.5 we will introduce our main example: the
conifold gauge theory. We will construct the @xmath and finite @xmath
generating functions for the mesonic sector of the chiral ring, for the
sector with baryonic charge @xmath , and finally for the complete chiral
ring with all the charges and all the chiral fields.

### 7.2 The @xmath Generating Functions

Let us start with the easy explanatory example of the @xmath , @xmath
gauge theory. In this theory the basic chiral operators are the three
scalars superfields:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the spinor superfiels:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

¿From the relation in the chiral ring we have:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Because the fields @xmath are bosons while the fields @xmath are
fermions, the first will be represented by commuting variables while the
latter by anti commuting variables. ¿From the super potential we have
the other relations:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We would like to write down a generating function counting all the
single trace operators in the chiral ring of the @xmath gauge theory.

This is easy to obtain if we remember that the generic @xmath @xmath
single trace operators are given by:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Let us introduce the chemical potential @xmath for the dimension of the
fields:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

the chemical potential @xmath for the fields @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the chemical potential @xmath for the spin of the chiral fields:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.2.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Hence the operators in ( 7.2.7 ) will be counted by the following
generating functions ³ ³ 3 we will put the subscript @xmath to the
generating functions because it can be shown that for the mesonic part
of undeformed quiver gauge theories the generating functions for the
multi traces, and hence of the complete spectrum of gauge invariant
operators, in the case @xmath are the same as the generating functions
for the single traces in the limit @xmath [ 23 ] . :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.2.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Hence the complete generating function counting all the single trace
operators ( 7.2.7 ) is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Till this moment we just counted in the limit @xmath and in the single
trace sector i.e. without taking into account the relations among gauge
invariants coming from the fact that for finite @xmath one can rewrite
some of the operators in terms other operators with lower dimensions.

To understand the finite @xmath counting we can look to equations (
7.2.5 ), ( 7.2.6 ). These ones tell that one can diagonalize at the same
time all the @xmath and all the @xmath . Hence we are left with a system
of @xmath bosonic eigenvalues and @xmath fermionic eigenvalues. Using
the Bose-Einstein and Fermi-Dirac statistic we can write down the
function @xmath that generate the partition functions @xmath with fixed
@xmath counting all the @xmath gauge invariant operators (single and
multi traces) [ 86 ] :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the next section we will discuss how to construct in general the
generating functions for the chiral ring of a given quiver gauge theory.
After this we will revisit the @xmath case.

### 7.3 The General Approach to the Complete Generating Functions

Let us try to motivate our approach to the complete partition function
for the chiral ring of a given gauge theory. We consider gauge theories
describing the low energy dynamics of D3 branes at the CY conical
singularity @xmath . These theories have a set of flavor symmetries (we
include in this class also the always present @xmath symmetry): @xmath ,
@xmath in the toric case; and a set of non anomalous baryonic symmetries
@xmath , @xmath in the toric case. We would like to write down a
generating function counting all the operators in the chiral ring
according to their charges under the global symmetries of the theory.
From the computation of the generating functions in the scalar chiral
ring, explained in the previous chapters, we know that the knowledge of
the generating function for a single D3 brane is enough to compute the
generating functions for an arbitrary number @xmath of @xmath branes ⁴ ⁴
4 this is due to the fact that the gauge invariant operators for fixed
@xmath are nothing else that the @xmath times symmetric product of the
ones for @xmath . The last ones are indeed obtained by the former using
some combinatorial tools. For this reason one has a well defined notion
of single particle Hilbert space ( @xmath ) and multi particle Hilbert
spaces ( @xmath ), that we will use in the following.

A generic quiver gauge theory has the following set of chiral fields:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

these ones are scalar bifundamental superfields transforming in the
fundamental of the @xmath gauge group and in the anti fundamental of the
@xmath gauge group. The @xmath label the number of fields between the
@xmath -th gauge group and the @xmath -th gauge group;

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

these ones are the Weyl spinor superfields associated to the vector
supermultiplet of the @xmath gauge group; @xmath label the spin state
and the label @xmath goes over all the @xmath gauge groups @xmath .

In the chiral ring they must satisfy the ‘‘symmetry’’ relations ⁵ ⁵ 5
see for example [ 107 ] :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.3.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the dynamical relations:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Where @xmath is the superpotential of the theory under consideration.

The gauge invariant operators constructed with scalar fields @xmath
define a complex ambient space. The dynamical equations ( 7.3.17 )
define an algebraic variety in this space and hence they give
constraints inside the chiral ring that are usually hard to deal with.
In the previous chapters we have explained how to deal with the problem
of counting the scalar part of the chiral ring and how to implement the
constraints ( 7.3.17 ) in the counting procedure. What we want to show
here is how, starting from the knowledge of the scalar partition
function, one can write down the complete @xmath @xmath partition
function for a generic quiver gauge theory.
The generic gauge invariant operator inside the chiral ring will be
constructed in the following way: given a pair of gauge groups @xmath ,
we call a gauge invariant of type @xmath a gauge invariant of the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath denotes a string of elementary chiral fields @xmath ,
@xmath with all gauge indices contracted except two indices, @xmath and
@xmath , corresponding to the gauge groups @xmath . The index @xmath
runs over all possible strings of elementary fields with these
properties. The full set of gauge invariant operators is obtained by
arbitrary products of the operators in ( 7.3.18 ). Using the tensor
relation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

some of these products of determinants are equivalent and some of these
are actually equivalent to mesonic operators made only with traces.

From the first equation in ( 7.3 ) it is easy to understand that the
fields @xmath are the fermionic degrees of freedom of the theory, and
they can appear in the chiral operator @xmath alone or at most in couple
in the antisymmetric combination: @xmath . The second equation in ( 7.3
) tells that the position of the @xmath spinor fields inside the chiral
string @xmath does not matter. From now on we will call the “single
particle Hilbert space” the space spanned by the operators @xmath . This
space is the total space of the gauge invariant operators in the case
@xmath .

Once we know the spectrum of the operators inside the scalar chiral ring
of the single particle Hilbert space (i.e. all the @xmath that does not
contain the @xmath field), the generic operators come in classes: there
are the ones of the scalar chiral ring, the same ones with the insertion
of one field @xmath , and the same ones of the scalar chiral ring with
the insertion of the antisymmetric combination @xmath . Thanks to the
“commutativity” properties of the fields @xmath and @xmath ( 7.3 ), we
do not have to specify the gauge groups @xmath the @xmath fields belong
to. It is enough to pick up a representative @xmath for all the gauge
groups. The result of this operation is that we would be able to easily
write down the complete partition function for the @xmath @xmath states
of a given @xmath quiver gauge theory with gauge group given by a
product of @xmath factors, times a diagonal overall @xmath factor. The
latter comes from the operators that factorize in products of the type
Tr @xmath . Even if it is possible to obtain the “pure @xmath ”
counting, it is more natural to continue keeping the overall @xmath
factor, and we will indeed continue in this way in the following.

To every operators @xmath we can associate a state in the single
particle Hilbert space. The single particle space of the complete chiral
ring would be spanned by the states:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are the charges under the @xmath abelian torus inside the
generically non abelian global flavor group of the gauge theory, @xmath
are the charges under the @xmath baryonic symmetry of the theory, and
@xmath label the statistic of the state.

Now that we have understood the structure of the chiral ring we can
divide the generic one particle state ( 7.3.19 ) in three classes
according to the number of @xmath fields.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (7.3.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the first and the third state are bosonic states ( @xmath ), while
the second one is fermionic ( @xmath ), the subscripts @xmath label the
presence of @xmath fields, and the second subscript label the number of
particle @xmath , in this case ( single particle ) @xmath .

Let us now pass to the generic @xmath case and hence to the multi
particle Hilbert space. Thanks to the division ( 7.3 ) the Fock space of
the chiral ring ( @xmath . @xmath .) will be divided into three parts:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the three factors on the right hand side are the Fock spaces
associated to the one particle Hilbert spaces definite in ( 7.3 ):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the @xmath means the Fock space of a symmetrized tensor product of
the single particle states, while the @xmath means the Fock space of an
anti symmetrized tensor product of the single particle states. The
chiral ring Fock space decomposes in the following way:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This means that we have to deal with a multi particle space that is
composed by bosons and fermions. If we want to count the operators at
finite @xmath we must introduce mathematical functions that implement
the bosonic and the fermionic statistic.

Let us define the one particle generating function:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

counting @xmath operators according for example to their dimension: the
integer numbers @xmath tells us how many operators we have with
dimension @xmath .

For the finite @xmath counting we have to implement the right statistic.
For the bosonic part of the spectrum we have the right now familiar
Plethystic function already introduced in the previous chapters that
from now on we will call it the bosonic Plethystic function ( @xmath ):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This function takes a certain generating function @xmath and generates
the new partition functions @xmath counting all the possible @xmath
times symmetric products of the constituents of @xmath , implementing in
this way the bosonic statistic, as it is possible to see from the left
hand side of ( 7.3.25 ). For the fermionic part it is useful to
introduce the fermionic Plethystic function ( @xmath ) [ 63 ] :

  -- -- -- ----------
           (7.3.26)
  -- -- -- ----------

This function generate the partition functions @xmath counting all the
possible @xmath -times anti symmetric products of the objects counted by
@xmath , and implements in this way the fermionic statistic, as it is
possible to see from the left hand side of ( 7.3.26 ).

Once we have defined the three basic generating functions (one for each
one of the states in ( 7.3 )), the counting problem for a generic quiver
gauge theories translates in counting the states in the Fock space
defined in ( 7.3.23 ).

Let us define the following chemical potentials:

-   @xmath labels the flavor charges;

-   @xmath labels the baryonic charges;

-   @xmath labels the spin

-   @xmath labels the number of @xmath fields.

For each of the sectors in ( 7.3 ) we can associate a generating
function, counting the single particle operators with a fixed set of
baryonic charges @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

With these definitions the finite @xmath counting is implemented by the
following total generating function of the chiral ring:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the expression @xmath means @xmath , and @xmath is what in the
previous chapters we called the multiplicities: the number of equal
generating functions with the same set of baryonic charges and
distinguished just by the field theory content. The meaning of ( 7.3 )
is: with the @xmath functions we implement the right statistic for the
various states and then we sum over all the possible sectors with fixed
baryonic charges taking into account the possible presence of
multiplicities.

To obtain the generating function for the chiral ring with fixed number
of branes @xmath one have just to take the @xmath times derivatives of (
7.3 ) with respect to the parameter @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

What we miss is to construct the generating functions for the two
sectors of the Hilbert space containing the fields @xmath once we know
@xmath . This one is an easy task and can be solved in an elegant way
introducing a superfield formalism. Let us introduce the usual set of
anti commuting variables @xmath such that:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

the dimension of the theta variables is @xmath and we will label it with
@xmath , in addition they carry a spin degrees of freedom that we will
label with @xmath for the @xmath spin case and @xmath for @xmath spin
case. As we have understood in the previous chapters the generic chiral
gauge invariant operators constructed with only the scalar superfields
of the theory is an @xmath -times symmetric product of @xmath chiral
fields “building blocks”: the @xmath fields without insertion of @xmath
. For simplicity from now on we will call @xmath the generic scalar
building block, where with @xmath we mean the specific set of @xmath
flavor charges and with @xmath the specific set of @xmath baryonic
charges of the operator. Given the relation inside the chiral ring and
the decomposition of the Hilbert space of the chiral ring we propose a
superfield formalism in which the super chiral fields are generically
given by:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Introducing the chemical potential @xmath counting the number of @xmath
fields, it is by now clear that the complete generating function for
@xmath is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Once we have defined ( 7.3.32 ) we can safely divide it in the fermionic
part and the bosonic one:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The statistical behavior of the field ( 7.3.31 ) will be a mixed bosonic
and fermionic statistic and this fact is implemented by the generalized
@xmath function:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us now take the first derivatives of this expression and look at the
form of the finite @xmath generating functions:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This expression clearly reproduce the @xmath counting we started with.

The two times derivatives is more interesting: here we can start
observing the mixed statistic.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us comment factor by factor the equation ( 7.3 ): the first two
factors take into account the bosonic statistic of the scalar part of
the chiral ring, and in the usual partition functions we have written in
the previous chapters that all. Here instead we have many more terms.
The second two factors are due to the bosonic statistic of the part of
the chiral ring with the insertions of the field @xmath . The third
factor describe the mixing between the two bosonic sectors of the chiral
ring. The fourth two factors is probably the most interesting one: it
has the same form of the first and the second, but it has one minus sign
more: this is due to the fermionic behavior of @xmath . This factor
implement the fermionic statistic of the operators in the chiral ring
with the insertions of the field @xmath . The last two factors are due
to the mixing between the bosonic and fermionic part of the chiral ring.

Before concluding this section we can make a comment regarding the
@xmath mesonic branch of the chiral ring for generic quiver gauge
theories. We learnt how to obtain the generating functions with @xmath
for the scalar mesonic chiral ring of a quiver gauge theory counting the
gauge invariant operators according to their dimensions:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Once we know the @xmath factors in ( 7.3.37 ), the general form for the
function @xmath generating the Hilbert series for the finite @xmath
mesonic counting is:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 7.4 The @xmath Case Revisited

In this section we will very briefly review the case @xmath using the
general technology developed in the previous section.

The basic idea is to pass from the @xmath invariant tensor, that does
not depend on the number of colors @xmath , to the @xmath invariant
tensor that has built in the dependence on @xmath . In this way the
basic generating function counting the gauge invariant operators in the
chiral ring for @xmath is the one counting the single trace in the limit
@xmath and all the counting for finite @xmath can be obtained starting
from the single trace @xmath generating function.

Following the prescription of the previous section we have just to
compute the generating function @xmath for @xmath . Using the
equivariant index theorem this is easy to compute in general, and in the
particular case of @xmath this function counts the holomorphic functions
on @xmath according to their degree and it is exactly the first one in (
7.2 ):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.4.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now we must implement the superfield prescription and write:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.4.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is exactly the one obtained in section 8.2.9 .

To implement the finite @xmath counting we have just to use the
generalized @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.4.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

One can easily checks that ( 7.4.40 ) reproduce the equation ( 7.2 ).

Now one can take the first few derivatives of ( 7.4.40 ) and looking for
the corresponding gauge invariant operators finding agreement between
our counting and the field theory spectrum. We refer the interested
reader to [ 29 ] .

### 7.5 The Conifold

To give an idea of the general procedure it is worthwhile to shortly
study the less trivial example of the conifold gauge theory. This
example contains almost all the properties of the generic case (except
the multiplicity problems already discussed in chapter 5 ). In this
section we just give a short review of the main steps for the
construction of the complete partition function and we refer the reader
to [ 29 ] for more a complete discussion and some checks.

The conifold gauge theory is already familiar. It has the gauge group
@xmath . The basic chiral fields are the four scalar superfields:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.5.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The @xmath fields transform in the fundamental of @xmath and the anti
fundamental of @xmath , while the @xmath fields transform in the
fundamental of @xmath and the anti fundamental of @xmath ; and the
chiral spinor superfields for the two factors of the gauge group @xmath
:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.5.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The cinematical relations in the chiral ring are:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.5.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

while the dynamical ones coming from the super potential are:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.5.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

#### 7.5.1 The Mesonic Chiral Ring

Let’s start from the easy case of the mesonic chiral ring.

The generating function for the scalar part of the chiral ring is ⁶ ⁶ 6
to be in line with the literature in the generating functions for the
conifold we will use the chemical potential @xmath to label the @xmath
charge of the chiral fields: @xmath , @xmath . ( 1.5.26 ):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.5.45)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using the prescription of section 7.3 the complete @xmath mesonic
generating function is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.5.46)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now we have just to apply the @xmath formalism and we obtain the mesonic
generating function for finite @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.5.47)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Observe that this expression has the general form of equation ( 7.3 ).
Using the relations ( 7.5.43 ) it is easy to understand why this
procedure works. The equations ( 7.5.43 ) shows that the single trace
operators of the mesonic chiral ring satisfy:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.5.48)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which means that we must consider only the diagonal part of the spinor
superfield, namely:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.5.49)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Hence the single trace operators of the mesonic chiral ring are:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.5.50)
  -- -------- -- ----------

From ( 7.5.50 ) it is easy to understand that whenever we know the
scalar mesonic generating function for @xmath , the complete one is just
the one dressed as in ( 7.5.46 ).

The interested reader can now expand the generating function for the
first few values of @xmath and check the result against the field theory
[ 29 ] .

Now that we have understood some basic properties about the mesonic
chiral ring let us pass to the more interesting case of the baryonic
one.

#### 7.5.2 The Baryonic Conifold’s Chiral Ring

We would like to write down the complete generating function for the
chiral ring of the conifold theory containing all the @xmath @xmath
degrees of freedom of the theory: namely the mesonic sector ( @xmath ),
all the operators charged under the @xmath baryonic symmetry and of
course all the possible fermionic degrees of freedom @xmath .

##### The @xmath Baryonic Sector

Let us start analyzing the problem in the easy case of fixed baryonic
charge @xmath , and for simplicity we will analyze the sector @xmath .

The prescription given in section 7.3 basically says that we just need
to know the @xmath generating function for the scalar chiral ring. We
computed it in section 3.6.2 and it is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.5.51)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now we have to dress it with usual “supermultiplet” charges:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.5.52)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The meaning of this procedure is easily explained in the case of the
conifold. Using the relations ( 7.5.43 ) we understand that the
operators in the chiral ring in the case @xmath are ⁷ ⁷ 7 Observe in the
case @xmath the operators are no more matrices but numbers. :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.5.53)
  -- -------- -- ----------

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.5.54)
  -- -------- -- ----------

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.5.55)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The generating function ( 7.5.51 ) counts all the operators of the form
( 7.5.53 ), while the dressed one ( 7.5.52 ) takes into account also the
operators in ( 7.5.54 ) and ( 7.5.55 ).

Let us now apply the rules explained in section 7.3 to implement the
finite @xmath counting.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the case @xmath we have the following generating function:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.5.57)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

One can now expands the various generating functions for different
values of @xmath and checks the result against the field theory spectrum
[ 29 ] .

Once again observe, as already explained in section 7.3 , that we are
counting BPS operators in the conifold with gauge group @xmath , where
the @xmath factor is the diagonal @xmath of the UV gauge group @xmath .
The chiral bifundamental fields @xmath , @xmath , are not charged under
this diagonal @xmath . Even if it is possible to obtain the “pure @xmath
” counting, it is more natural and economic to continue to keep the
overall @xmath factor, and we will indeed continue in this way in the
following.

##### The Complete Generating Function for the Conifold

Now we would like to write down the complete generating function for the
conifold containing all the baryonic charges and all the fermionic
degrees of freedom. The general procedure explained in section 7.3 tells
us that the complete generating function @xmath is obtained by summing
over all the possible baryonic charges @xmath the generalized @xmath of
the @xmath generating functions with fixed baryonic charge @xmath . In
the conifold case there is just one baryonic charge @xmath running from
@xmath to @xmath and there are no multiplicities. Hence equations ( 7.3
) and ( 7.3.34 ) become:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.5.59)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In chapter 4 we gave the @xmath generating functions for the scalar part
of the chiral ring:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hence

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.5.60)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us start as usual with the @xmath generating function.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath               (7.5.61)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

This result is easily explained. In the case @xmath the possible
generators in the chiral ring are:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.5.62)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The theory does not have superpotential and hence the scalar chiral ring
is freely generated and one has just to impose the relations coming from
the @xmath fields. As usual one can expand the generating function and
check against the field theory spectrum [ 29 ] .

Now we would like to compute the generating function @xmath for the
conifold with @xmath , counting all the operators in the chiral ring.
Using the relations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.5.63)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

One can easily obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The easiest way to do this computation is to pass from the chemical
potentials @xmath and @xmath , counting the @xmath charge and the
baryonic charge, to the chemical potentials @xmath , @xmath counting the
number of @xmath and @xmath fields, and sum over all the @xmath
symmetric representations:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.5.65)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

It is now easy to expand ( 7.5.65 ) in terms of @xmath , @xmath and find
an expression to compare with the field theory result. It is easy to see
that the generating function counts the gauge invariant operators in the
right way [ 29 ] .

### 7.6 Summary and Discussions

In this chapter we extended the analysis of the chiral ring for gauge
theory on D brane at singularities explaining how it is possible to add
the fermionic degrees of freedom to the bosonic chiral ring considered
in previous chapters. We presented a systematic way to construct the
complete generating functions for any quiver gauge theories of which we
are able to write down the scalar part of the generating functions:
namely the infinite class of gauge theories dual to toric singularities,
to quotient singularities, to complex cones over delPezzo surfaces, and
many more.

We solved the problem of adding the @xmath spinorial degrees of freedom
by introducing a kind of superfield formalism and implementing the mixed
state statistic through the introduction of the fermionic version of the
Plethystic exponential.

Right now we have a good and global understanding of the structure of
the chiral ring of a huge number of quiver gauge theories. Possible
future developments could be a systematic study of the statistical
properties of these gauge theories, the large quantum number behavior of
the various partition functions, the phase structure of these theories,
and maybe their application to related problems such as the holographic
duals of these thermodynamical properties. The generating functions
constructed in this chapter contain the information about the density
distribution of the @xmath degrees of freedom of the @xmath and hence
about the entropy and more generically the statistical and
thermodynamical properties of quiver gauge theories. For this reason
they could be a good starting point for a microscopic understanding of
the entropy of the recently constructed @xmath black holes [ 32 , 33 ,
108 , 109 ] .

A comment is mandatory: the partition functions of quiver gauge theories
we studied till now are mainly based on undeformed @xmath . Usually
@xmath admits a set of marginal deformations that leave the theory
conformally invariant. It would be interesting to study how the @xmath
spectra change when we turn on marginally operators in the field theory.
In the next chapter we will deal with this problem for a specific class
of deformations.

Another very interesting problem would be to study the BPS spectra in
the non conformal case. This topic is leave for future investigations.

## Chapter 8 @xmath-Deformed Gauge Theory

Super Conformal Field Theories usually come in families. Namely there
exist a manifold of coupling constants where the theory is
superconformal. Along this manifold the value of the central charge and
of all the R-charges of the theory are constant, but the global
symmetries can be partially broken and the moduli space can be modified:
namely some of the directions can be uplifted. In the case of D3 branes
at singularities the uplifted of some directions in the moduli space is
due to the presence of fluxes in the background that behave as potential
for the D3 branes.

There exist a marginal deformation common to all the gauge theories on
D3 branes at toric CY singularities that we have studied till now: the
@xmath -deformation. This deformation is a specific modification,
depending on the complex parameter @xmath , of the coefficients of the
superpotential. As a consequence the moduli space of the gauge theory is
partially uplifted and the dual geometry is no more neither CY neither
complex. Indeed in this chapter we consider the class of super-conformal
@xmath -deformed @xmath gauge theories dual to string theory on @xmath
with fluxes, where @xmath is a deformed Sasaki-Einstein manifold. The
supergravity backgrounds are explicit examples of Generalised Calabi-Yau
manifolds: the cone over @xmath admits an integrable generalised complex
structure in terms of which the BPS sector of the gauge theory can be
described. We will study the moduli spaces of the deformed toric @xmath
gauge theories on a number of examples. Using the dual supergravity
background and the techniques from Generalized Complex Geometry the
results in gauge theory can be explicitly checked studying the moduli
spaces of D3 and D5 static and dual giant probes. In this chapter we
will just study the mesonic moduli space and the mesonic chiral ring of
the SCFT from the field theory prospective, and we will leave the study
of the dual gravity side to the literature [ 30 ] .

### 8.1 Generalities

The super-conformal gauge theories living on D3-branes at singularities
generally admit marginal deformations. A particularly interesting case
of marginal deformation for theories with @xmath global symmetries is
the so called @xmath -deformation [ 110 ] . The most famous example is
the @xmath -deformation of @xmath SYM which has been extensively studied
both from the field theory point of view and the dual gravity
perspective. In particular, in [ 110 ] , Lunin and Maldacena found the
supergravity dual solution, which is a completely regular @xmath
background. Their construction can be generalized to the super-conformal
theories associated with the recently discovered Sasaki-Einstein
backgrounds @xmath [ 36 , 37 , 38 , 39 , 40 , 41 ] . More generally, all
toric quiver gauge theories admit @xmath -deformations [ 111 ] and, have
regular gravitational duals. The resulting @xmath -deformed theories are
interesting both from the point of view of field theory and of the
gravity dual.

On the field theory side, we deal with a gauge theory with a deformed
moduli space of vacua and a deformed spectrum of BPS operators. The case
of @xmath SYM has been studied in details in the literature [ 112 , 113
, 114 , 115 , 116 , 117 ] . In this chapter we would like to extend this
analysis to a generic toric quiver gauge theory to see how some of the
properties of the moduli space and of the BPS spectrum of the theory
studied till now are modified in the @xmath -deformed case. The moduli
space of the @xmath -deformed gauge theory presents the same features as
in @xmath case. In particular, its structure depends on the value of the
deformation parameter @xmath . For generic @xmath the deformed theory
admits a Coulomb branch which is given by a set of complex lines. For
@xmath rational there are additional directions corresponding to Higgs
branches of the theory.

On the gravity side, the dual backgrounds can be obtained from the
original Calabi-Yaus with a continuous T-duality transformation using
the general method proposed in [ 110 ] . It is possible to study the
@xmath -deformed background even in the cases where the explicit
original Calabi-Yau metric is not known. The toric structure of the
original background is enough. Besides the relevance for AdS/CFT, the
@xmath -deformed backgrounds are also interesting from the geometrical
point view. They are Generalised Calabi-Yau manifolds [ 118 , 119 ] :
after the deformation the background is no longer complex, but is still
admits an integrable generalised complex structure. Actually the @xmath
-deformed backgrounds represent one of the few explicit known examples
of generalised geometry solving the equation of motions of type II
supergravity. ¹ ¹ 1 For other non compact examples see [ 120 , 121 ] and
for compact ones [ 122 ] . . The extreme simplicity of such backgrounds
make it possible to explicitly apply the formalism of Generalised
Complex Geometry [ 123 , 124 ] which, provides an elegant way to study
T-duality and brane probes [ 125 , 126 , 127 ] .

The connection between gravity and field theory is provided by the study
of supersymmetric D-brane probes moving on the @xmath -deformed
background. This is basically an extension of the string states/gauge
operators map we have explained in the previous chapters. Indeed it is
possible to analyze the case of static D3 and D5 probes, as well as the
case of D3 and D5 dual giant gravitons [ 30 ] , and study in details
existence and moduli space of such probes. In the @xmath -deformed
background, both static D3 probes and D3 dual giants can only live on a
set of intersecting complex lines inside the deformed Calabi-Yau,
corresponding to the locus where the @xmath toric fibration degenerates
to @xmath . This is in agreement with the abelian moduli space of the
@xmath -deformed gauge theory which indeed consists of a set of lines.
Moreover, in the case of rational @xmath It is possible to demonstrate
the existence of both static D5 probes and D5 dual giant gravitons with
a moduli space isomorphic to the original Calabi-Yau divided by a @xmath
discrete symmetry. This statement is the gravity counterpart of the fact
that, for rational @xmath , new branches are opening up in the moduli
space of the gauge theory [ 112 , 113 , 114 , 115 , 116 ] .

To do not go too much far away from the main spirit of this Thesis, in
this chapter we will just look to the field theory side, and we refer
the reader to [ 30 ] for a complete discussion about the gravity dual.

The chapter is organized as follows. In section 8.2 we introduce the
structure of the @xmath -deformed gauge theory for a general toric CY
singularity @xmath . In section 8.3 we explain in complete generality
how to obtain the non abelian BPS conditions for the mesonic chiral ring
and @xmath -deformed mesonic moduli space directly from the geometry of
@xmath . In section 8.4 we study the mesonic abelian moduli space, and
in section 8.5 we discuss the particular case of rational @xmath . In
these last two sections we give some explicit examples of @xmath
-deformed mesonic moduli space and chiral spectrum, based on @xmath
-deformation of the gauge theories associated to @xmath , the conifold,
the SPP, and the @xmath singularities.

### 8.2 @xmath-Deformed Quiver Gauge Theories

The entire class of super-conformal gauge theories living on D3-branes
at toric conical Calabi-Yau singularities @xmath admits marginal
deformations. The most famous example is the @xmath -deformation of
@xmath SYM with @xmath gauge group where the original superpotential

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is replaced by the @xmath -deformed one

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

A familiar argument due to Leigh and Strassler [ 110 ] shows that the
@xmath -deformed theory is conformal for all values of the @xmath
parameter.

Similarly, a @xmath -deformation can be defined for the conifold theory.
The gauge theory has gauge group @xmath and bi-fundamental fields @xmath
and @xmath transforming in the representations @xmath and @xmath of the
global symmetry group @xmath , respectively, and superpotential

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The @xmath -deformation corresponds to the marginal deformation where
the superpotential is replaced by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Both theories discussed above possess a @xmath geometric symmetry
corresponding to the isometries of the internal space @xmath , one
@xmath is an R-symmetry while the other two act on the fields as flavour
global symmetries. The @xmath -deformation is strongly related to the
existence of such @xmath symmetry and has a nice and useful
interpretation in terms of non-commutativity in the internal space [ 110
] . The deformation is obtained by selecting in @xmath the two flavor
symmetries @xmath commuting with the supersymmetry charges and using
them to define a modified non-commutative product. This corresponds in
field theory to replacing the standard product between two matrix-valued
elementary fields @xmath and @xmath by the star-product

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are the charges of the matter fields under the
two @xmath flavor symmetries and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The @xmath -deformation preserves the @xmath geometric symmetry of the
original gauge theory, while other marginal deformations in general
further break it.

All the superconformal quiver theories obtained from toric Calabi-Yau
singularities @xmath have a @xmath symmetry corresponding to the
isometries of @xmath and therefore admit exactly marginal @xmath
-deformations. The theories have a gauge group @xmath , bi-fundamental
fields @xmath and a bipartite structure which is inherited from the
dimer construction [ 9 , 10 , 11 , 73 ] . The superpotential contains an
even number of terms @xmath naturally divided into @xmath terms weighted
by a @xmath sign and @xmath terms weighted by a @xmath sign

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The @xmath -deformed superpotential is obtained by replacing the
ordinary product among fields with the star-product ( 8.2.5 ) and can
always be written [ 111 , 30 ] , after rescaling fields as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is some rational number. It is obvious how @xmath SYM and
the conifold fit in this picture.

We will be interested in the effects of the @xmath -deformation on the
moduli space and on the BPS operators of the field theory. For
simplicity in this chapter we will concentrated in the mesonic moduli
space and in the mesonic chiral ring, where the effect of the marginal
deformation is already remarkable. Indeed the @xmath -deformation
drastically reduces the mesonic moduli space of the theory, which, as we
learnt int the previous chapters, is originally isomorphic to the @xmath
-fold symmetric product of the internal Calabi-Yau. To see quickly what
happens consider the case where the @xmath groups are replaced by @xmath
’s - by abuse of language we can refer to this as the @xmath case.
Physically, we are considering a mesonic direction in the moduli space
where a single D3-brane is moved away from the singularity. In the
undeformed theory the D3-brane probes the Calabi-Yau @xmath while in the
@xmath -deformed theory it can only probe a subvariety consisting of
complex lines intersecting at the origin. This can be easily seen in
@xmath and in the conifold case.

For @xmath SYM the F-term equations read

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where here and in the following @xmath . Since @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
are c-numbers in the @xmath case, these equations are trivially
satisfied for @xmath , implying that the moduli space is given by three
unconstrained complex numbers @xmath , @xmath , @xmath giving a copy of
@xmath . However, for @xmath these equations can be satisfied only on
the three lines given by the equations @xmath , or @xmath , or @xmath .
Only one field among @xmath , @xmath , @xmath is different from zero at
a time.

For the conifold the F-term equations read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.2.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

These equations are again trivial for @xmath and @xmath , the fields
becoming commuting c-numbers. The brane moduli space is parametrized by
the four gauge invariant mesons

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which are not independent but subject to the obvious relation @xmath .
This is the familiar description of the conifold as a quadric in @xmath
. For @xmath , the F-term constraints ( 8.2 ) are solved when exactly
one field @xmath and one field @xmath are different from zero. This
implies that only one meson can be different from zero at a time. The
moduli space thus reduces to the four lines

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using the dual gravity solutions it is possible to show, in complete
generality [ 30 ] , that for @xmath -deformed toric quivers the abelian
mesonic moduli space is reduced to @xmath complex lines, where @xmath is
the number of vertices in the toric diagram of the singularity. We will
give a generic construction of the mesonic moduli space of the gauge
theory using toric techniques in the following sections.

Something special happens for @xmath rational. New branches in the
moduli space open up. The @xmath case was originally discussed in [ 112
, 113 ] and the conifold in [ 129 ] . In all cases these branches can be
interpreted as one or more branes moving on the quotient of the original
Calabi-Yau @xmath by a discrete @xmath symmetry. Even in this case it is
possible to describe these branes explicitly in the gravitational duals
and we refer the reader to [ 30 ] for a detailed discussion. In the
following sections we will just look at the field theory analysis of
these vacua and we will show that it is possible to analyze the @xmath
rational case in complete generality.

### 8.3 Non Abelian BPS Conditions

In order to understand the full mesonic moduli space of the gauge theory
we need to study general non-abelian solutions of the F term equations.
Before attacking the general construction, we consider @xmath SYM and
the conifold.

In the @xmath SYM case, we form mesons out of the three adjoint fields
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The non-abelian BPS conditions for these
mesonic fields are given in equation ( 8.2.9 ) and can be considered as
equations for three @xmath matrices. In the @xmath case this equations
tell us that we can diagonalize the three mesons and the eigenvalues
describe an @xmath times symmetric product of @xmath .

In the conifold case, we can define four composite mesonic fields which
transform in the adjoint representation of one of the two gauge groups

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.3.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and consider the four mesons @xmath as @xmath matrices. We could use the
second gauge group without changing the results. With a simple
computation using the F-term conditions ( 8.2 ) we derive the following
matrix commutation equations

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.3.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the matrix equation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.3.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is just the conifold equation. For @xmath these conditions
simplify. All the mesons commute and the @xmath matrices @xmath can be
simultaneous diagonalized. The eigenvalues are required to satisfy the
conifold equation( 8.3.15 ) and therefore the moduli space is given by
the symmetrized product of @xmath copies of the conifold, as expected.

An interesting observation is that, for the @xmath SYM and ( 8.3 ) for
the conifold, the mesonic F-term conditions for @xmath can be obtained
by using the non commutative product defined in ( 8.2.5 ) directly on
the mesonic fields. The charges of mesons for @xmath and the conifold
are shown in Figure 8.1 .

The BPS conditions for the Calabi-Yau case, which require that every
pair of mesonic fields @xmath and @xmath commute, are replaced in the
@xmath -deformed theory by a non commutative version

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.3.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It is an easy exercise, using the assignment of charges shown in Figure
8.1 , to show that these modified commutation relations reproduce
equations ( 8.2.9 ) and ( 8.3 ).

This simple structure extends to a generic toric gauge theory. The
algebraic equations of the Calabi-Yau give a set of matrix equations for
mesons. In the undeformed theory, all mesons commute, while in the
@xmath -deformed theory the original commutation properties are replaced
by their non commutative version ( 8.3.16 ).

#### 8.3.1 The @xmath-Deformed Mesonic Chiral Ring

Let us see, in a bit more detail, how the @xmath -deformed mesonic
chiral ring is obtained for a generic CY toric singularity @xmath . As
we explained in chapter 1 a toric variety is reconstructed as a set of
algebraic constraints in some ambient space looking at the linearly
dependence constraints among the integer vectors generating the dual
cone @xmath . The generators @xmath , @xmath of the dual cone are the
basis @xmath of the mesonic chiral ring in the gauge theory and the sum
relations between points in the dual cone become multiplicative
relations among mesons in the field theory.

For every integer point @xmath in the dual cone there exist a unique
mesonic operator @xmath modulo F-term constraints. In particular, the
mesons are uniquely determined by their charge under @xmath . The first
two coordinates @xmath of the vector @xmath are the charges of the meson
under the two flavour @xmath symmetries.

Mesons correspond to closed loops in the quiver and for any meson there
is an F-term equivalent meson that passes for a given gauge group. We
can therefore assume that all meson loops have a base point at a
specific gauge group and consider them as @xmath matrices @xmath . In
the undeformed theory, the F-term equations imply that all mesons
commute and can be simultaneously diagonalized. The additional F-term
constraints require that the mesons, and therefore all their
eigenvalues, satisfy the algebraic equations defining the Calabi-Yau.
This gives a moduli space which is the @xmath -fold symmetrized product
of the Calabi-Yau.

In the @xmath -deformed theory

the commutation relations among mesons are replaced by @xmath -deformed
commutators

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.3.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The prescription ( 8.3.17 ) will be our short-cut for computing the
relevant quantities we will be interested in. This fact becomes
computationally relevant in the generic toric case. It is possible to
show [ 30 ] that this procedure is equivalent to using the @xmath
-deformed superpotential defined in ( 8.2.8 ) and deriving the
constraints for the mesonic fields from the F-term relations.

Finally the mesons still satisfy a certain number of algebraic equations

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.3.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which are isomorphic to the defining equations of the original
Calabi-Yau @xmath .

### 8.4 Abelian Moduli Space

In this section, we give evidence, from the gauge theory side, that the
abelian mesonic moduli space of the @xmath -deformed theories is a set
of lines. There are exactly @xmath such lines, where @xmath is the
number of vertices in the toric diagram. Indeed, the lines correspond to
the geometric generators @xmath @xmath of the dual cone over the real
number of the undeformed geometry, or, in other words, the edges of the
polyedron @xmath where the @xmath fibration degenerates to @xmath .
Internal generators of @xmath as a semi-group do not correspond to
additional lines in the moduli space. These statements are the field
theory counterpart of the fact that the D3 probes can move only along
the edges of the symplectic cone.

We explained in the previous section how to obtain a set of modified
commutation relations among mesonic fields. In the abelian case the
mesons reduce to commuting c-numbers. ¿From the relations ( 8.3.17 )
with non a trivial @xmath factor, we obtain the constraint

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.4.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Adding the algebraic constraints ( 8.3.18 ) defining @xmath , we obtain
the full set of constraints for the abelian mesonic moduli space. It is
possible to show in complete generality [ 30 ] that the mesonic moduli
space for a single D3 brane is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.4.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

namely the union of the @xmath complex lines associated to the
generators @xmath of the dual cone.

We now solve the constraints in a selected set of examples, which are
general enough to exemplify the result. We analyze @xmath , the
conifold, the Suspended Pinch Point ( @xmath ) singularity and a more
sophisticated example, @xmath , which covers the case where the
generators of @xmath as a semi-group are more than the geometric
generators.

#### 8.4.1 The Case of @xmath

The @xmath theory is simple and was already discussed in section 8.2 .
The abelian mesonic moduli space of the @xmath -deformed theory is done
by the three lines corresponding to the geometric generators of the dual
cone as in Figure 8.1 .

#### 8.4.2 The Conifold Case

The abelian mesonic moduli space of the @xmath -deformed conifold theory
was already discussed in section 8.2 using the elementary fields. From
the equations ( 8.3 ) we obtain the same result: the abelian mesonic
moduli space is the union of the four lines corresponding to the
external generators of the dual cone as shown in Figure 8.1 .

#### 8.4.3 The SPP Case

The gauge theory obtained as the near horizon limit of a stack of
D3-branes at the tip of the conical singularity

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.4.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

is called the @xmath gauge theory [ 5 ] . In section 2.4.2 we have
already studied the master space of this gauge theory. In Figure 8.2 we
give the toric diagram and the quiver of the theory.

Its superpotential is @xmath The generators of the mesonic chiral ring
are

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- ----------
        @xmath   @xmath            (8.4.22)
                 @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- ----------

These mesons correspond to the generators of the dual cone in Figure 8.2
. Their flavour charges can be read from the dual toric diagram

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.4.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

If we now @xmath deform the superpotential of the theory and we use the
deformed commutation rule for mesons ( 8.3.17 ) we obtain the following
relations

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.4.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In the abelian case they reduce to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.4.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the last equation is the additional F-term constraint giving the
original CY manifold. The presence of the symbol “ @xmath ” is due to
the fact that the original CY equation is deformed by an unimportant
power of the deformation parameter @xmath , which can always be
reabsorbed by rescaling the variables. The solutions to these equations
are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.4.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

corresponding to the four complex lines associated to the four
generators of the dual cone.

#### 8.4.4 The PdP@xmath Case

In this section we study a bit more complicated example: the PdP @xmath
theory. This is the first time we meet this example in this Thesis. We
look at this theory because this is probably the simplest example of
toric singularity with internal generators: the perpendicular vectors to
the toric diagram are enough to generate the dual cone on the real
numbers but other internal vectors are needed to generate the cone on
the integer numbers. The discussion in the dual gravity side [ 30 ]
suggests that the moduli space seen by the dual giant gravitons, and
hence the abelian mesonic moduli space of the gauge theory, are
exhausted by the external generators. We will see here evidence of this
fact.

The PdP @xmath gauge theory, [ 82 ] , is the theory obtained as the near
horizon limit of a stack of D3-branes at the tip of the non complete
intersection singularity defined by the set of equations

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.4.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

These equations describe the complex cone over the four dimensional
compact surface obtained blowing up four non generic points in @xmath .
The toric diagram and the quiver of the theory are given in Figure 8.3 .

The superpotential of the theory is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.4.28)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

The generators of the mesonic chiral ring are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.4.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

From the toric diagram we can easily read the charges of the mesonic
generators

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.4.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

To generate the dual cone @xmath on the integers we need to add the
internal generator @xmath with flavour charges @xmath . If we @xmath
-deform the superpotential ( 8.4.28 ) and we use the rules explained in
the previous section, we find that the generators ( 8.4.4 ) satisfy the
equations ( 8.4.4 ) for the PdP @xmath singularity modified just by some
irrelevant proportional factors given by powers of @xmath . We must then
add the relations obtained from the mesonic @xmath -deformed commutation
rule ( 8.3.17 )

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.4.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

that in the abelian case reduce to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.4.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The solutions to the set of equations ( 8.4.4 ) and ( 8.4.4 ) are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.4.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

corresponding to the five external generators of the dual cone. We
observe in particular that the complex line corresponding to the
internal generators @xmath is not a solution.

### 8.5 Non Abelian Moduli Space and Rational @xmath

We start to have a good understanding about the effect of the marginal
@xmath -deformation on the moduli space of the gauge theory: it usually
drastically reduced the moduli space. In this section we will see that
for some special values of @xmath it is possible that new branches open
up in the moduli space. Let us start with a very easy and explicative
example. Let us take the @xmath theory and let us analyze a couple of
BPS operators. The operator @xmath is not constrained by the F-term
equations in the case @xmath , but in the case in which @xmath it is
constrained to be zero on the moduli space of supersymmetric vacua.
Indeed @xmath using the F term equations and @xmath using the ciclicity
of the trace. This imply that @xmath unless @xmath which imply @xmath .
This is an easy heuristic argument to guess that the moduli space in the
deformed case is reduced, whichever is the value of @xmath . Let us now
consider another operator: @xmath . Using the F-term equations and the
ciclicity of the trace we obtain @xmath . This imply that @xmath unless
@xmath . And this is possible if @xmath hence @xmath , the undeformed
case, and @xmath hence @xmath . Looking at this example we understand
that for some special values of @xmath , namely rational values, new
branches of the moduli space, that are absent for generic values
(irrational) of @xmath , open up.

Let us now try to explain the general case. The F-term equations

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.5.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

give a non commutative ’t Hooft-Weyl algebra for the @xmath matrices
@xmath . By diagonalizing the matrix @xmath we can reduce the problem to
various copies of the algebra for a non commutative torus

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.5.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

whose representations are well known.

For generic @xmath , corresponding to irrational values of @xmath , the
’t Hooft-Weyl algebra has no non trivial finite dimensional
representations: we can only find solutions where all the matrices are
diagonal, and in particular equation ( 8.5.35 ) implies @xmath . The
problem is thus reduced to the abelian one and the moduli space is
obtained by symmetrizing @xmath copies of the abelian moduli space,
which consists of @xmath lines. This is the remaining of the original
Coulomb branch of the undeformed theory, and the mesonic moduli space is
just the N-times symmetric product of the @xmath complex lines
associated to the generators of the dual cone:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.5.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For rational @xmath , instead, new branches are opening up in the moduli
space [ 112 , 113 , 114 , 115 , 116 ] . Indeed, for rational @xmath , we
can have finite dimensional representations of the ’t Hooft-Weyl algebra
which are given by @xmath matrices @xmath . The explicit form of the
matrices @xmath can be found in [ 130 ] , but it is not of particular
relevance for us. For gauge groups @xmath with @xmath we can have vacua
where the mesons have the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.5.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The @xmath variables @xmath are further constrained by the algebraic
equations ( 8.3.18 ) and are due to identifications by the action of the
gauge group. A convenient way of parameterizing the moduli space is to
look at the algebraic constraints satisfied by the elements of the
center of the non-commutative algebra [ 112 , 113 ] .

We will give arguments showing that the center of the algebra of mesonic
operators is the algebraic variety @xmath , where @xmath is the original
undeformed CY variety, and the two @xmath factors are abelian discrete
sub-groups of the two flavours symmetries. This statement in the field
theory can be checked in the gravity side showing that the moduli space
of a D5 dual giant graviton is the original Calabi-Yau @xmath divided by
@xmath [ 30 ] .

The generic vacuum ( 8.5.37 ) corresponds to @xmath D5 dual giants
moving on the geometry. The resulting branch of the moduli space is the
@xmath -fold symmetrized product of the original Calabi-Yau divided by
@xmath . Each D5 dual giant should be considered as a fully non-abelian
solution of the dual gauge theory carrying @xmath color indices so that
the total number of colors is @xmath . Indeed the mesonic moduli space
for rational values of @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.5.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us pass to analyze some simple explicit examples, before giving the
general proof of ( 8.5.38 ).

#### 8.5.1 The Case of @xmath

The case of the @xmath -deformation of @xmath gauge theory is simple and
well known [ 112 , 113 ] .

The generators of the algebra of mesonic operators are the three
elementary fields @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Equation ( 8.2.9 ) implies
that it possible to write the generic element of the algebra in the
ordered form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.5.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The center of the algebra is given by the subset of operators in (
8.5.39 ) such that:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.5.40)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Since @xmath , the center of the algebra is given by the set of @xmath
such that @xmath .

The generators of the center of the algebra are: @xmath . We call them
@xmath respectively. They satisfy the equation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.5.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which defines the variety @xmath . To see this, take @xmath with
coordinate @xmath , and consider the action of the group @xmath on
@xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.5.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath . The basic invariant monomials under this action are @xmath
and they clearly satisfy the equation ( 8.5.41 ).

This fact can be represented in a diagrammatic way as in Figure 8.4 .
This representation of the rational value @xmath -deformation is valid
for every toric CY singularity.

#### 8.5.2 The Conifold Case

The case of the conifold is a bit more intricate and can be a useful
example for the generic CY toric cone @xmath . The generators of the
mesonic algebra @xmath satisfy the equations ( 8.3 ). It follows that we
can write the generic monomial element of the algebra in the ordered
form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.5.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The center of the algebra is given by the subset of the operators (
8.5.43 ) that satisfy the equations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.5.44)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Because @xmath , the elements of the center of the algebra are the
subset of the operators of the form ( 8.5.43 ) such that @xmath , @xmath
, mod @xmath .

The center is generated by @xmath ; we call them respectively @xmath .
The F-term relation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.5.45)
  -- -------- -- ----------

then implies that @xmath and @xmath are not independent: @xmath .
Moreover the generators of the center of the algebra satisfy the
equations

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.5.46)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As in the previous example, it is easy to see that these are the
equations of the @xmath orbifold of the conifold. Take indeed the
coordinates @xmath defining the conifold as a quadric embedded in @xmath
. The action of @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.5.47)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath . The basic invariants of this action are @xmath , and they
are subject to the constraint ( 8.5.45 ). Hence the equations ( 8.5.46 )
define the variety @xmath .

#### 8.5.3 The General Case

Enriched by these explicit computations we now want to analyze the
generic case and show that the center of the mesonic algebra for the
rational @xmath -deformed ( @xmath ) gauge theory is the @xmath quotient
of the undeformed CY singularity @xmath .

For a generic toric quiver gauge theory we take a set of basic mesons
@xmath (we will call them simply @xmath from now on) corresponding to
the generators @xmath of the cone @xmath . These are the generators of
the mesonic chiral ring of the given gauge theory. Because they satisfy
the relations ( 8.5.34 ) it is always possible to write the generic
monomial element of the mesonic algebra generated by @xmath in the
ordered form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.5.48)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We are interested in the operators that form the center of the algebra,
or, in other words, that commute with all the elements of the algebra.
To find them it is enough to find all the operators that commute with
all the generators of the algebra, namely @xmath . The generic operator
( 8.5.48 ) has charge @xmath under the two flavor @xmath symmetries, and
the generators @xmath have charges @xmath . They satisfy the following
relations

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.5.49)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This implies that the center of the algebra is formed by the set of
@xmath such that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.5.50)
  -- -------- -- ----------

At this point it is important to realize that the @xmath contain the two
dimensional vectors perpendicular to the edges of the two dimensional
toric diagram. The fact that the toric diagram is convex implies that
the @xmath span the @xmath flavor torus. In particular the operator
@xmath must commute (modulo @xmath ) with the operators with charges
@xmath and @xmath . The first condition gives all the operators in the
algebra that are invariant under the @xmath in the second @xmath , while
the second gives all the operators invariant under the @xmath contained
in the first @xmath . All together the set of operators in the center of
the algebra consists of all operators @xmath invariant under the @xmath
discrete subgroup of the @xmath .

The monomials made with the free @xmath coordinates of @xmath that are
invariant under @xmath , form, by definition, the quotient variety
@xmath . The toric variety @xmath is defined starting from a ring over
@xmath with relations given by a set of polynomials @xmath defined by
the toric diagram

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.5.51)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Indeed the elements of the center of the algebra are the monomials made
with the @xmath , subject to the relations @xmath , invariant under
@xmath . This fact allows us to conclude that the center of the algebra
@xmath in the case @xmath is the quotient of the original @xmath
singularity @xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.5.52)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The @xmath -deformed @xmath gauge theory and the @xmath -deformed
conifold gauge theory are special cases of this result and we refer the
reader to [ 30 ] for other explicit examples.

### 8.6 Summary and Discussions

In this chapter we extended the analysis of the moduli space and of the
chiral ring of superconformal field theories to the marginal deformed
case. In particular we studied the marginal @xmath -deformation, common
to all the toric quiver gauge theories, and its effect on the mesonic
chiral ring. We observed how the moduli space and the spectrum of the
chiral ring is drastically modified by the marginal deformation and that
it is possible to study in detail this effect using some kind of
non-commutative generalization of the usual toric techniques. To be in
line with the general philosophy of the thesis we concentrated our
studies in the field theory side of the AdS/CFT correspondence, but a
very careful analysis can be done even in the dual gravity side [ 30 ] .
In particular the gravitational duals geometry is simply characterized
in terms of generalised complex geometry. In this setup one can study
duals states to the mesonic operators in field theory such as D3 and D5
dual giants or D3 giants configurations. It is possible to verify that
the gravity computations match nicely! ! with the field theory.

In this chapter we focalized on the mesonic branch of the moduli space,
It would be interesting to extend this study to the baryonic spectrum
and to the complete moduli space of the @xmath -deformed theories.

Of course a toric quiver gauge theory has in general other marginal
deformations in addition to the @xmath -deformation. It would be very
interesting to extend this analysis to other marginal deformations. This
is a very interesting point, because the gravity dual of other marginal
deformation is in general not explicitly known. It would be nice if the
study of the moduli space and the chiral ring of the gauge theory could
help to find the dual gravity solutions.

## Conclusions

In this Thesis we have introduced some new concepts to study
supersymmetric gauge theories: the Hilbert Series, the Master Space and
the Plethystic Exponential. Using these powerful tools we have
illustrated various aspects of @xmath gauge theories. In particular we
focalized on the study of the moduli space @xmath and the chiral ring
for superconformal gauge theories with gravity duals. These theories can
be engineered putting a stack of N D3 branes at conical Calabi Yau
singularity. We were able to study in full generality the moduli space
of the abelian theory and to get some non trivial informations regarding
the symmetries of the moduli space for generic N. We explained how to
count BPS operators and the dual stringy states, and how to get from
these results a lot of informations regarding both the geometry and the
field theory. In the last part of the thesis we generalized this
approach to include the fermionic degrees of freedom of the BPS spectrum
and to study both the moduli space and the BPS spectrum for marginal
deformed gauge theories.

The Hilbert Series and the Master Space reveal very productive in the
study of supersymmetric gauge theories, and it would be very nice to use
them to study other interesting problems.

The moduli space and the chiral ring are basic concepts, common to all
the supersymmetric gauge theories, and it would be nice to apply the
tools we developed here to more phenomenological interesting theories,
such as SQCD [ 131 , 132 , 133 ] , string compactifications [ 134 , 69 ]
, or MSSM [ 67 ] . Along this line another possible step could be to
study non conformal theories with gravity dual: in particular the
spectrum of the cascading gauge theories along the renormalization group
flow [ 135 , 136 , 137 , 138 ] ² ² 2 see also [ 139 ] and reference
therein for the first steps towards a ”geometrization” of the recently
found non supersymmetric metastable vacua [ 140 ] .

It would be nice to start a statistical study of quiver gauge theories.
The first natural step is the analysis of the asymptotic behavior of the
partition functions for large charges. See [ 63 ] for some related
studies about the mesonic partition functions.

Another interesting application would be to extend at the quantum level
the classical analysis we have done so far. We have in principle all the
instruments: the study of the gravity duals must contain the quantum
moduli space and the quantum chiral ring of the gauge theory, and along
this thesis we learnt to study the supersymmetric stringy spectrum and
to map it to the gauge theory. Indeed in the thesis we observed that the
master space is not invariant under Seiberg duality. This fact may
suggest the presence of quantum corrections. It would be very nice to
systematically understand if there are really quantum modification to
the moduli space and to the chiral ring, how they are done, and how they
behave under Seiberg duality. See [ 80 ] for some results.

Another interesting extension would be to study the modifications to the
chiral ring and to the moduli space induced by general marginal
deformations other than the @xmath -deformation. It would be very nice
to see if these kind of studies could give important informations to the
dual gravity solutions. Indeed all the @xmath supergravity backgrounds
are described by the generalized complex geometry as twisted generalize
Calabi Yau. It would be wonderful if, the techniques here developed
could marry with and techniques from Generalized Complex Geometry to
obtain informations about the marginal deformed supergravity backgrounds
[ 30 ] .

Recently there were a lot of interests in instantonic corrections to the
superpotential induced by stringy instantons. In the setup of branes at
singularities the stringy instantons are euclidean D3 branes wrapped on
some four cycles. The operators they generate are determinant like. Both
the geometric embeddings and the operators they generate are very
similar to the D3 brane baryonic states and the dual BPS operators we
have considered along this thesis. It would be interesting to make more
precise this relation [ 31 ] .

The AdS/CFT proposes a non perturbative definition of some string
theories on some specific backgrounds that are asymptotically AdS.
Recently a set of black hole solutions asymptotically AdS were found and
their entropy were computed. In principle it could be possible to
“explain” the microscopic origin of their entropy counting states in the
dual field theory. It would be very interesting to see if the counting
procedure explained in this thesis could be extended to this very
interesting problem. The AdS black hole solutions are in general 1/4
BPS, and it would be very appealing to understand how to compute the
spectrum of 1/4 BPS operators, and to see if this counting match with
the black hole entropy.

An even more appealing achievement would be to compute gauge theory
partition functions for the complete spectrum, both supersymmetric and
non supersymmetric.

In the recent period there is a lot of interest in the study of three
dimensional SCFT that are supposed to describe the IR dynamics of M2
branes [ 141 , 142 , 143 , 144 ] . It seems that some of the tools we
developed in this thesis can be used also in this case [ 145 , 146 , 147
, 148 ] . It would be nice to further study this topic.

We started counting: 1,2,3,… but there are many numbers and many things
to count…the future may reserve very interesting applications based on
the studies presented in this thesis.

### Appendix: List of notations

  @xmath   the direct fan for the toric diagram
  -------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  @xmath   the dual cone
  @xmath   the six dimensional CY singularity transverse to the D branes
  H        the horizon manifold
  @xmath   Hilbert series of the variety @xmath
  @xmath   the master space
  @xmath   the coherent component of the master space
  @xmath   the linear components of the master space
  @xmath   the moduli space of the gauge theory
  @xmath   the mesonic moduli space of the gauge theory
  @xmath   number of D-branes
  @xmath   partition function for the sections of the line bundle associated to the divisor @xmath
  @xmath   partition function for D3 branes BPS states in the @xmath background
  @xmath   classical phase space of BPS D3 branes on three cycles in H
  @xmath   the generating function for fixed number of D branes @xmath and baryonic charge @xmath
  @xmath   the generating function for any number of D branes and fixed baryonic charge @xmath
  @xmath   the generating function for fixed number of D branes @xmath and any baryonic charge
  @xmath   number of @xmath gauge group factors in the theory
  @xmath   number of fields (chiral bi-fundamental multiplets) in the theory
  @xmath   chemical potentials for the geometric @xmath toric action
  @xmath   chemical potentials (weights) for flavor symmetries, R-symmetry and dimension
  @xmath   non-anomalous baryonic weights
  @xmath   anomalous baryonic weights
  @xmath   R-charge
  @xmath   baryonic charges from the gauge theory
  @xmath   baryonic charges from the geometry
  @xmath   anomalous baryonic charges
  @xmath   polynomial ring
  @xmath   ideals for a polynomial ring
  @xmath   generators of the auxiliary GKZ ring
  @xmath   multiplicities in the GKZ fan
  @xmath   number of internal (integral) points in toric diagram
  @xmath   number of external points in toric diagram
  @xmath   toric divisors assigned to the integral points in the toric diagram
  @xmath   homogeneous coordinates
  @xmath   plethystic exponential with weight @xmath for the number of D-branes
  @xmath   partition function from the geometry
  @xmath   hollow polygon in the fiber over the GKZ lattice