which form the boundaries of this three dimensional lattice now coincide
with the @xmath web of the conifold theory, at a point where the size of
the two cycle is non-zero, as in the right of Figure 4.3 .

As a last example let us turn to the case of baryonic charge @xmath . We
expand equation ( LABEL:resconF ) to order @xmath and write the matrix
for the two dimensional lattice in @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In this case there are two more @xmath fields than @xmath fields and
hence there are three lowest order lattice points with @xmath ,
corresponding to the operators @xmath . These three points transform in
the spin @xmath representation and form an integral rectangle of sizes
@xmath . At order @xmath we find 8 lattice points transforming in the
spin @xmath representation and forming an integral rectangle of sizes
@xmath , etc. At order @xmath we find @xmath lattice points transforming
in the spin @xmath and forming an integral rectangle of sizes @xmath .
In summary the lattice we get is the weight lattice of all @xmath
representations with a negative difference of spin @xmath . The 4
diagonal lines which form the boundaries of this three dimensional
lattice now coincide with the @xmath web of the conifold theory after a
flop transition, at a point where the size of the two cy! cle is
non-zero, as in the left of Figure 4.3 .

We summarize this discussion by the observation that the boundaries of
the conical pyramid are identified with the @xmath web of the conifold.
This @xmath web can be resolved in two phases, separated by a flop
transition. Each of these phases is characterized by the sign of the
baryonic charge @xmath and the flop transition appears at @xmath . In
this sense one can identify the baryonic charge with the Kähler modulus
for the conifold.

The relation to dimers then becomes natural. Let us fix a baryonic
charge @xmath . Take the tiling of the conifold, fix a reference tile
and consider all open paths that begin with this tile, consists of
@xmath arrows of type @xmath (horizontal) and @xmath arrows of type
@xmath (vertical) such that the numbers @xmath and @xmath satisfy the
condition @xmath . For a given endpoint there may be more than one path
which connects it to the reference tile. All such paths are equal by
imposing the F-term conditions. See [ 54 ] for a detailed explanation
and [ 55 , 24 ] for the applications to the mesonic and baryonic BPS
operators. The collection of endpoints then forms the two dimensional
projection of the three dimensional “conical pyramid” lattice discussed
above. What we have just seen in this section can be seen as the dimer
realization of the geometric localization techniques used in the
previous chapter.
