One of the biggest challenges of present day theoretical physics is to
find a consistent theory of quantum gravity. There are however obvious
problems in constructing a quantum theory of general relativity. It has
already been shown in the seventies by ’t Hooft and Veltman that
perturbative quantum gravity is non-renormalizable in four dimensions.
However, this does not mean that it is impossible to formulate quantum
gravity by use of field theoretic techniques, on the contrary, it
suggests that special, so-called non-perturbative methods have to be
applied. In this thesis we investigate the importance of causality in
such non-perturbative approaches to quantum gravity.

Firstly, causal sets are introduced as a simple kinematical model for
causal geometry. It is shown how causal sets could account for the
microscopic origin of the Bekenstein entropy bound. Holography and
finite entropy emerge naturally from the interplay between causality and
discreteness.

Going beyond causal set kinematics is problematic however. It is a hard
problem to find the right amplitude to attach to each causal set that
one needs to define the non-perturbative quantum dynamics of gravity.
One approach which is ideally suited to define the non-perturbative
gravitational path integral is dynamical triangulation. Without
causality this method leads to unappealing features of the quantum
geometry though. It is shown how causality is instrumental in regulating
this pathological behavior. In two dimensions this approach of causal
dynamical triangulations has been analytically solved by transfer matrix
methods.

In this thesis considerable progress has been made in the development of
more powerful techniques for this approach. The formulation through
matrix models and a string field theory allow us to study interesting
generalizations. Particularly, it has become possible to define the
topological expansion. A surprising twist of the new matrix model is
that it partially disentangles the large-N and continuum limit. This
makes our causal model much closer in spirit to the original idea by ’t
Hooft than the conventional matrix models of non-critical string theory.

The power of the here introduced techniques greatly extends the scope of
analytical calculations for causal quantum gravity. This ranges from
simple matter coupling to a new causal perspective on non-critical
string theory.
