This dissertation intends to present a unified view of my research in
the area of integrable systems, which has been carried out over the last
four years under the insightful supervision of Profs. F. Finkel,
A. González-López and M. A. Rodríguez. Particular emphasis has been laid
on the connection between (partially) solvable spin models of
Calogero–Sutherland (CS) type and Haldane–Shastry (HS) chains, which can
be rightly regarded as the leitmotif of this thesis.

The dissertation is divided into five chapters. In the first one we
summarize some aspects of the theory of CS and HS models that are needed
in later chapters and introduce some notation. Related original results
are introduced when appropriate. In Chapter 2 we rigorously analyze the
CS/HS connection, which enables us to compute the partition function of
the @xmath HS chain in closed form. In Chapter 3 we turn our attention
to quasi-exactly solvable (QES) generalizations of the standard CS
models presenting only near-neighbors interactions. A systematic
explanation of their quasi-exact solvability is given in terms of known
invariant flags. In Chapter 4 we make use of the results in the two
preceding chapters to analyze the algebraic spectrum of a novel spin
chain with nearest-neighbors interactions which is naturally related to
a QES Schrödinger operator of CS type. This work ends with a short
summary and a concluding note on future projects.

The most remarkable contributions presented in this thesis are the
following:

1.  We complete the first mathematically rigorous treatment of the CS/HS
    connection. Our approach hinges on several convergence results that
    make Polychronakos’s “freezing trick” precise.

2.  We provide the first systematic analysis of spin QES models of CS
    type presenting near-neighbors interactions, thereby obtaining
    several families of totally explicit eigenfunctions.

3.  We define an HS chain with nearest-neighbors interactions that
    presents some of the features of a QES system. The study of its
    algebraic states relies on a nontrivial refinement of the freezing
    trick and on the explicit results obtained in Chapter 3 .

4.  We introduce a natural Hamiltonian system admitting the maximum
    number of independent first integrals, just as the original Calogero
    and hyperbolic Sutherland models. This is the first example of a
    maximally superintegrable system in an @xmath -dimensional space of
    nonconstant curvature.

A significant part of the material presented in this memoir has been
adapted from Refs. [ 15 , 70 , 69 , 67 , 63 , 68 , 64 , 65 , 66 ] . The
presentation of the main results in Chapters 2 and 4 , however, greatly
differs from that of the original articles. In particular, most of the
rigorous proofs provided in these chapters appear in printed form here
for the first time.
