[0pt]2The present thesis work can be framed in a more general concept
designated as ”High resolution in solar physics”. The work consists of
two clearly defined parts. The first part concerning instrumental
development for solar observations and the second one devoted to the
scientific exploitation of solar data acquired with cutting edge solar
instrumentation.

The first part of this thesis is dedicated to the topic of
high-resolution observations and image restoration to obtain
high-quality images. It begins with a theoretical reviewing of the
problem that represents the atmospheric turbulence and the instrumental
aberrations on the image quality. This problem force us to implement
post-facto image restoration techniques that, added to the real-time
corrections performed by the Adaptive Optics, gives us images closer to
reality, i.e. to the true object , that in our case is the region of the
Sun we want to study.

The most evident solution, although not the easiest one, to get rid of
the negative effect of the atmospheric turbulence on the image quality,
is the use of space telescopes. Out from the Earth’s atmosphere, the
observations would not be affected by atmospheric aberrations.
Nevertheless, the instrumental errors would still be present degrading
the images although with less strength. The counter part of this
solution is the elevated costs of launching, maintenance and updating of
a space instrument.

To have good solar observations overcoming the negative influence of the
Earth’ s atmosphere, one effort is being made with the development of
the so-called SUNRISE mission, a collaboration between the German Space
Agency DLR, the north American NASA and the National Spanish Space
Program. This project consists in a balloon-borne mission that will
launch a 1-meter telescope to the stratosphere and will record data
uninterruptedly during 15 days, with unprecedented temporal, spatial and
spectral resolution. The main aim of SUNRISE is to study the formation
of magnetic structures in the solar atmosphere and their interaction
with the convective plasma flows. In order to do so, the on-board
instrument called Imaging Magnetograph eXperiment (IMaX) has been
designed and implemented entirely by Spanish institutions leaded by the
Instituto de Astrofísica de Canarias in which I have developed the
present work. This instrument will be able to produce magnetic field
maps of extensive solar regions by measuring the light polarization in
certain spectral lines. As a member of the IMaX team, I have been in
charge of performing numerical simulations to identify and evaluate
possible optical error sources. My main contribution to the project has
been the development of an in-flight calibration method to characterize
the aberrations affecting the images in IMaX. The description of this
calibration method as well as the test to prove its robustness make up
the core of the first part of this thesis.

The second part of the thesis is centered on the study of horizontal
flows in solar active regions. Data from ground-based and space
observations are used and the reconstruction techniques explained in the
first part are successfully employed to restore the images. We focus on
the proper motions of structures in and around solar active regions. The
way to quantify the horizontal flows in the field-of-view consist of
using local correlation tracking techniques that generate flow maps.

The first active region studied corresponds to a very complex sunspot
group with @xmath -configuration. The horizontal velocity field is
inferred from a high-quality time series and, from these flow maps, it
is found a correlation between the presence of strong velocity flows
(moats) surrounding sunspots and the existence of penumbra. A relation
between radial outflows along the penumbral filaments (Evershed flow)
and the photospheric outflows in the granulation surrounding the sunspot
is then suggested. To confirm this result, a larger sample of sunspots
with a variety of penumbral configurations is studied and once again the
same moat-penumbra dependence is found. In the areas where umbrae are
adjacent to the surrounding photospheric granulation there are not
evidence of these large-scale outflows.

Finally, the horizontal velocity field is studied around pores (sunspots
lacking penumbrae). Working with restored high-resolution images
conforming a stable and long-duration time series, the analysis of
proper motions is performed again within the field-of-view and the
properties of the motions around solar pores are studied and quantified
in detail. As a relevant result, there are no evidences of moat-like
flows around the pores.
