# Chapter 3 Averaging schemes : Zalaletdinov’s covariant Macroscopic
Gravity

In this chapter we turn to the averaging defined by Zalaletdinov [ 43 ]
, which is a @xmath -dimensional generally covariant procedure. This
averaging is used on the Einstein equations and, together with some
additional assumptions, leads to what Zalaletdinov has called
Macroscopic Gravity (henceforth MG). After introducing MG, we will
describe its spatial averaging limit as discussed in Paper 2.

### 3.1 A covariant averaging scheme

The starting point in any covariant averaging scheme has to be the
question : “How does one average tensors while retaining their
transformation properties under coordinate changes?” If the averaging
operation is to involve an integral over a spacetime region, then
clearly only scalar objects can be averaged, since they change only
trivially under coordinate transformations. To define a scheme for
general tensors then, it is essential to introduce some additional
structure in the formalism. The most convenient option is to introduce a
bivector @xmath which transforms as a vector at event @xmath and as a
co-vector at event @xmath . In Zalaletdinov’s scheme one postulates the
existence of such a bivector, requires it to have certain desirable
properties, and then explicitly constructs an object which has all these
properties. We will see how this is done in what follows. [Throughout
this chapter primed indices (e.g. @xmath ) will refer to “primed events”
( @xmath ) and unprimed indices to unprimed events.]

To begin with, we require that this bivector be idempotent (i.e. “square
to itself”)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and have the coincidence limit

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

This ensures that @xmath has the inverse operator @xmath (which is
easily seen by taking the @xmath limit in Eqn. ( 3.1 ) and using the
condition ( 3.2 )). The bivector is then used to define the “bilocal
extension” of a general tensorial object (denoted by an overtilde) : for
a vector @xmath this takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the obvious generalisation to higher rank objects. Notice that the
bilocal extension as defined above transforms like the original tensor
at the event @xmath , but as a scalar at the event @xmath . This allows
us to define the “average” of @xmath over a 4-dimensional spacetime
region @xmath with a supporting point @xmath , as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

the subscript @xmath standing for ‘spacetime’. While this averaged
tensor has the correct transformation properties at the event @xmath ,
in order to be a local function of its argument, one needs to ensure
that @xmath has appropriate differential properties. Since the @xmath
dependence of this object arises not only from the explicit appearance
of @xmath but also through the dependence of the domain @xmath on the
support point, in order to correctly calculate the derivative of @xmath
we need to specify how neighbouring domains are related to each other.

This is done as follows : The same bivector @xmath is used to specify a
Lie dragging of the averaging region @xmath , ensuring that the volumes
of the averaging regions constructed at nearby supporting points are
coordinated in a well defined manner (which motivates the terminology
“coordination bivector” for @xmath , which we will follow henceforth).
Suppose @xmath and @xmath are the coordinates of two support points,
where @xmath is a small change in the parameter along the integral curve
of a given vector field @xmath . Symbolically denote the two points as
@xmath and @xmath . Then the averaging region at @xmath is defined in
terms of the averaging region @xmath at @xmath , by transporting every
point @xmath around @xmath along the appropriate integral curve of a new
bilocal vector field @xmath defined as @xmath , thereby constructing the
averaging region @xmath with support point @xmath .

We can now evaluate the Lie derivative of @xmath along the vector field
@xmath , by first noting that the Lie derivative of the volume @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the semicolon denotes a covariant derivative. An easy way to see
this is to note that since

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

or symbolically @xmath , we will have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the result ( 3.5 ) follows from writing

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and using @xmath . For the derivative of @xmath , we need @xmath .
Explicitly we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

which after writing @xmath with @xmath and using ( 3.7 ), finally gives

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          
              @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have defined the “bilocal partial derivative”

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the vector field @xmath is arbitrary, Eqn. ( 3.10 ) gives us an
expression for the partial derivative @xmath (recalling that @xmath ).
Requiring that partial derivatives of @xmath commute, leads to the
following condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Straightforward algebra shows that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.13)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and hence the necessary and sufficient condition for ( 3.12 ) to hold,
is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where underlined indices are not antisymmetrized.

At this stage it is convenient to re-express results in the language of
differential forms, since it will make the algebra that follows concise
and readable. The original papers by Zalaletdinov introduce a
full-fledged bilocal exterior calculus, involving @xmath -forms which
are @xmath -forms at @xmath and @xmath -forms at @xmath . In what
follows however, we will almost exclusively only need to deal with
@xmath -forms that are differential forms at a single event @xmath ,
although they may be bilocal in their functional dependence on events
@xmath and @xmath . This is because we will only deal with bilocal
extensions of local @xmath -forms, which are defined to be @xmath
-forms. For example, the bilocal extension of a @xmath -form @xmath is
defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is a @xmath -form. We define the bilocal exterior derivative as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where d is the usual exterior derivative which “differentiates and
antisymmetrizes at @xmath ”, and the “shifted” exterior derivative
@xmath “differentiates at @xmath but antisymmetrizes at @xmath ” so
that, say for the @xmath -form @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

For a bilocal function @xmath we will have @xmath . In this language,
the preceding results for differential conditions on the coordination
bivector can be generalised to arbitrary tensor-valued @xmath -forms. In
particular for a vector-valued @xmath -form @xmath whose bilocal
extension is the @xmath -form @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have defined,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The condition ( 3.15 ) for the averaged object to be a local function of
its argument, reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eqn. ( 3.19 ) shows that it is desirable to choose a coordination
bivector which satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

since firstly, this allows us to commute the exterior derivative with
the averaging according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

and secondly, it implies that the volume of the averaging region is held
constant during the coordination (see Eqn. ( 3.5 )), and is therefore a
free parameter in the formalism.

Mars and Zalaletdinov [ 44 ] show in their Theorems 1, 3 and 4, that
firstly, the general solution of Eqn. ( 3.21 ) for an idempotent
coordination bivector is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is any vector basis satisfying the commutation relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

and secondly, that Eqn. ( 3.22 ) with the coordination bivector given by
Eqn. ( 3.24 ) is always integrable on a differentiable manifold with a
given volume @xmath -form. The proofs given in Ref. [ 44 ] are very
clear, although somewhat lengthy, and we will hence omit them here.
Further, these authors also show that for the special class of bivectors
for which @xmath , the vectors @xmath form a coordinate basis, with
‘proper’ coordinate functions @xmath say, so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

and satisfying Eqn. ( 3.22 ) makes this proper coordinate system volume
preserving, with @xmath constant. When expressed in terms of such a
volume preserving coordinate (VPC) system, the coordination bivector
takes its most simple form, namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Volume preserving coordinates in fact form a large class in themselves,
generalizing the Cartesian coordinate system of Minkowski spacetime. For
a discussion on the properties of VPCs and the associated bivectors
@xmath , see Sec. 8 of Ref. [ 44 ] . The problem of defining an
averaging operator has now been reduced to the far simpler problem of
choosing a specific VPC system which then fixes the coordination
bivector. We emphasize that the averaging is still fully covariant;
choosing a coordination bivector is distinct from choosing a coordinate
system to perform calculations in. This freedom in defining the
coordination bivector leads to a lack of uniqueness of the average in
the formalism as it stands. We will return to this issue when we study
the backreaction arising from perturbative inhomogeneities in chapter 4.

### 3.2 The averaged manifold

With the averaging operation in place, we can turn to the description of
an averaged geometry . Let us begin by recalling some standard results
from differential geometry. Given a differentiable manifold @xmath
endowed with a metric @xmath of Lorentzian signature @xmath , the
connection @xmath -forms @xmath are defined by the action of the
exterior derivative on the basis vectors @xmath [ 66 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the Christoffel symbols and the parentheses represent
the inner product with @xmath . We define the “exterior covariant
derivative” @xmath associated with the connection @xmath , as follows :
for a @xmath -form @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

with an obvious generalisation to higher rank objects. The compatibility
between the metric and the connection on @xmath is expressed by the
condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

with a similar condition for the inverse metric @xmath . The Cartan
structure equations are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.31a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.31b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where Eqn. ( 3.31a ) expresses the symmetry of the connection @xmath and
@xmath is the curvature @xmath -form on @xmath which defines the Riemann
curvature tensor via @xmath . Finally, the structure equations ( 3.31 )
and the metric compatibility condition ( 3.30 ) are supplemented by
their respective integrability conditions, given by equations ( 3.32a ),
( 3.32b ) and ( 3.32c )

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.32a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.32b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.32c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Note that Eqn. ( 3.32a ) corresponds to the cyclic identity @xmath and
Eqn. ( 3.32b ) to the Bianchi identity @xmath .

Consider now the bilocal version of the basis vector @xmath , given by
@xmath , which is a scalar at @xmath and a vector at @xmath , and whose
inverse is the @xmath -form @xmath . The construction of an averaged
manifold begins with the observation that the @xmath -form defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

transforms like a connection under coordinate transformations at @xmath
and, equally importantly, as a scalar at @xmath , and further has the
coincidence limit

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Explicitly, we have

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is symmetric in @xmath due to the condition ( 3.21 ) or (
3.15 ). This explicit form can be used to directly check the
transformation properties at @xmath and @xmath , and @xmath can
therefore be considered as the bilocal extension of the connection
@xmath .

The transformation properties of @xmath imply that its average @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

has the transformation properties of a local connection, and the
coincidence limit ( 3.34 ) implies the limit @xmath . This leads to the
key idea of MG, which is that @xmath , is defined as the connection
@xmath -form on a new, averaged manifold @xmath . As a set, @xmath is
identical to @xmath ; however for consistency in the definition of
averaged quantities, the guiding principle one adopts is that each
averaging domain @xmath is effectively treated as a single point on
@xmath . This ensures, for example, that the averaging operation is
idempotent [ 44 ] .

The goal now is to average out the bilocal extensions of the structure
equations ( 3.31 ) and the compatibility condition ( 3.30 ) and their
integrability conditions ( 3.32 ), and to express them in terms of
appropriate differential forms defined on @xmath . The bilocal
extensions of Eqns. ( 3.31 ) and ( 3.30 ), are respectively given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.37a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.37b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.37c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where, in the last equation, @xmath is the bilocal covariant exterior
derivative associated with the bilocal connection @xmath . The
integrability conditions of Eqns. ( 3.37 ) are given by the bilocal
extensions of Eqns. ( 3.32 ),

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.38a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.38b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.38c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

In the above equations, the @xmath -form @xmath is the bilocal extension
of the curvature @xmath -form constructed according to the rules set out
in Eqns. ( 3.16 ) and ( 3.3 ). Similarly the @xmath -form @xmath is the
bilocal extension of the metric. To proceed with the averaging, a
correlation @xmath -form is defined

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

The average of the curvature @xmath -form @xmath on @xmath is denoted
@xmath , and the curvature @xmath -form on the averaged manifold @xmath
is denoted @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equations ( 3.37a ) and ( 3.37b ) then average out to give

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.41a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.41b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The averages of Eqn. ( 3.38a ) and the identity @xmath give us

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the symmetry of @xmath and hence of @xmath give us

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

This ensures that the curvature @xmath -form @xmath satisfies the
correct algebraic identities

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

The formalism at this stage becomes somewhat complicated. The reason is
that there is no simple way of averaging out equations ( 3.37c ), (
3.38b ) and ( 3.38c ), which become

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.45a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.45b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.45c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . What we need are “splitting rules” for the various
products appearing inside the averager in these equations. Of these,
Eqn. ( 3.45b ) can be split by noting that the exterior covariant
derivative of the correlation @xmath -form becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the symbol @xmath permutes the free indices in, say @xmath
pairwise according to @xmath , and any summed indices are ignored, and
the correlation 3-form is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Tracing Eqn. ( 3.46 ) on the indices @xmath and @xmath kills the term
involving the correlation @xmath -form due to the presence of the
permutation symbol, leaving behind

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

which averages out Eqn. ( 3.45b ) to give the Bianchi identity for the
curvature @xmath -form @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

This was achieved at the cost of introducing a new object, the
correlation @xmath -form @xmath , which fixes the differential
properties of the correlation @xmath -form @xmath and hence of the
@xmath -form @xmath . The differential properties of this @xmath -form
are in turn fixed by introducing a correlation 4-form in an analogous
manner. Due to the @xmath -dimensionality of spacetime there are no
higher correlation @xmath -forms that need to be defined.

In practice, it is cumbersome to keep track of the correlation @xmath
-form and @xmath -form, and furthermore it is only the correlation
@xmath -form which will appear in the averaged Einstein equations. We
will ultimately be interested in explicit calculations of the
correlation objects in a perturbative setting at leading order, and will
hence ignore the @xmath -form and @xmath -form. Remarkably, it is also
possible to self-consistently ignore these forms in the nonperturbative
setting [ 43 ] as follows : We set the @xmath -form and @xmath -form to
zero and impose the conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the second equality required since Eqn. ( 3.49 ) holds. It can be
shown [ 43 ] that requiring the @xmath -form to vanish also imposes the
condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

The integrability condition for @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

which also contains the integrability condition for @xmath .

So far we have only managed to average out Eqn. ( 3.45b ). To make
progress with Eqns. ( 3.45a ) and ( 3.45c ) we need additional
assumptions. Zalaletdinov argues [ 43 ] that for a class of slowly
varying tensor fields (tensor-valued @xmath -forms) @xmath on @xmath
such as the metric and other covariantly constant tensors, and Killing
tensors, etc., the following assumptions may be reasonable

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.53a)
     @xmath      (3.53b)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then Eqn. ( 3.45a ) and its analogue for @xmath average out to give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

Further, for a general slowly varying object @xmath , the following
identity holds

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which follows from differentiating Eqn. ( 3.53a ), and which averages
out Eqn. ( 3.45c ) (and its analogue for @xmath ) to give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eqn. ( 3.54 ) allows one to choose @xmath , where @xmath is the metric
on the averaged manifold @xmath . In general however, we have @xmath ,
and one defines the tensor @xmath to keep track of this difference.
However, we shall see later that when the averaged manifold is highly
symmetric, as in the case of a manifold with homogeneous and isotropic
spatial sections which we will consider, one finds that @xmath .

### 3.3 Averaging Einstein’s equations

In the general case, it turns out that Eqn. ( 3.55 ) is all that is
needed to average out the Einstein equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath is the microscopic energy momentum tensor of the
matter distribution, and the Ricci tensor @xmath on @xmath is defined
according to the sign convention @xmath . The averaging leads to the
equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Ricci tensor on @xmath and we have defined

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

The averaged equations ( 3.58 ) differ from the usual Einstein equations
by the correlation tensor which we define as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, denoting the Einstein tensor on @xmath as @xmath , and defining
the tensor @xmath via

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

the averaged Einstein equations read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the left hand side of Eqn. ( 3.62 ) is covariantly conserved by
construction ( @xmath ), where the semicolon denotes covariant
differentiation with respect to the connection on @xmath , in general
one has

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

with no condition on @xmath and @xmath separately. If, however, we
assume that @xmath , it follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

which implies that the averaged energy-momentum tensor @xmath is also
covariantly conserved. In our explicit calculations in the perturbative
setting in chapter 4, we will see that this condition does not hold in
general.

It can also be shown that in 4 dimensions, the 720 a priori independent
components of @xmath are subject to 680 constraints arising from Eqns. (
3.52 ) and ( 3.51 ). This leaves 40 independent components which combine
to give the 10 independent components of the correlation tensor @xmath .
The conditions in Eqns. ( 3.52 ) and ( 3.51 ) do not constrain the
components of @xmath , which follows from considering the structure of
those equations.

### 3.4 A @xmath spacetime splitting and the spatial averaging limit

We are now in a position to apply the MG formalism to the problem of
cosmology. The main idea we wish to emphasize is that in the
cosmological context, it is essential to consider a spatial averaging
limit of the covariant averaging used in MG. The simplest way to see
this is to note that the homogeneous and isotropic FLRW spacetime ¹ ¹ 1
Appendix A describes the main features of the FLRW spacetime. must be
left invariant under the averaging operation, and this is only possible
if the averaging is tuned to the uniquely defined spatial slices of
constant curvature in the FLRW spacetime. We will elaborate on this
below. Our main motivation here is to spell out all the assumptions
usually made in the standard approach to cosmology, and ask what they
imply in the context of the averaging paradigm. It has been suggested
that the observationally relevant averaging must necessarily be
performed on the light cone [ 67 ] . This would not preserve the
symmetries of the FLRW spacetime. Our point of view is that one needs a
theoretically self-consistent mathematical framework in which to study
cosmological expansion, structure formation, etc. We will be
conservative in our approach and only make the minimum assumptions
necessary in order to make standard cosmology compatible with the
averaging paradigm.

We start with the assumption that Einstein’s equations are to be imposed
on length scales @xmath where stars are pointlike objects, and that
there exists a length scale @xmath such that averaging on this length
scale yields a geometry which has homogeneous and isotropic spatial
sections. We expect @xmath Mpc and we assume @xmath where @xmath is the
length scale of the observable universe. In other words, we will assume
that the averaged manifold @xmath admits a preferred,
hypersurface-orthogonal unit timelike vector field @xmath , which
defines @xmath -dimensional spacelike hypersurfaces of constant
curvature, and that @xmath is tangent to the trajectories of observers
who see an isotropic cosmic background radiation. For simplicity we will
work with the special case where these spatial sections on @xmath are
flat. One can then choose coordinates @xmath , @xmath , on @xmath such
that the spatial line element takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath for @xmath , and @xmath otherwise, and we have @xmath so
that the spatial coordinates are comoving with the preferred observers.
The vector field @xmath also defines a proper time (the cosmic time)
@xmath such that @xmath . We will further assume that the averaged
energy-momentum tensor @xmath can be written in the form of a perfect
fluid, as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the projection operator @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

and satisfies @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath are the
homogeneous energy density and pressure respectively, as measured by
observers moving on trajectories (in @xmath ) with the tangent vector
field @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

An important consequence of the above assumptions is that the
correlation tensor @xmath , when expressed in terms of the natural
coordinates adapted to the spatial sections defined by the vector field
@xmath , is homogeneous and depends only on the time coordinate. This is
clear when the modified Einstein equations ( 3.62 ) are written in these
natural coordinates.

Using the vector field @xmath , the (FLRW) Einstein tensor @xmath can be
written as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are scalar functions whose form depends upon the
coordinates used. The remaining components given by @xmath and the
traceless part of @xmath , vanish identically. Since the energy-momentum
tensor @xmath in Eqn. ( 3.66 ) also has an identical structure, this
structure is therefore also imposed on the correlation tensor @xmath .
Namely, only the components @xmath and the trace @xmath are relevant to
the dynamics of the averaged metric. The remaining components, namely
@xmath and the traceless part of @xmath , must vanish . This is a
condition on the underlying inhomogeneous geometry, irrespective of the
coordinates used to describe the geometry on either @xmath or @xmath ,
and is clearly a consequence of demanding that the averaged geometry
have the symmetries of the FLRW spacetime.

This leads us to the crucial question of the choice of gauge for the
underlying geometry : namely, what choice of spatial sections for the
inhomogeneous geometry, will lead to the spatial sections of the FLRW
metric in the comoving coordinates defined in Eqn. ( 3.65 )? Since the
matter distribution at scale @xmath need not be pressure-free (or,
indeed, even of the perfect fluid form), there is clearly no natural
choice of gauge available, although locally, a synchronous reference can
always be chosen. We note that there must be at least one choice of
gauge in which the averaged metric has spatial sections in the form (
3.65 ) – this is simply a refinement of the Cosmological Principle, and
of the Weyl postulate, according to which the universe is homogeneous
and isotropic on large scales, and individual galaxies are considered as
the “observers” travelling on trajectories with tangent @xmath . In the
averaging approach, it makes more sense to replace “individual galaxies”
with the averaging domains considered as physically infinitesimal cells
– the “points” of the averaged manifold @xmath . This is physically
reasonable since we know after all, that individual galaxies exhibit
peculiar motions, undergo mergers and so on. This idea is also more in
keeping with the notion that the universe is homogeneous and isotropic
only on the largest scales , which are much larger than the scale of
individual galaxies.

Consider any @xmath spacetime splitting in the form of a lapse function
@xmath , a shift vector @xmath , and a metric for the @xmath -geometry
@xmath , so that the line element on @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . At first sight, it might seem reasonable to leave the
choice of gauge arbitrary. One could then formally consider a
coordination bivector given by the Eqns. ( 3.24 ) and ( 3.26 ), with
@xmath denoting the coordinates in the chosen gauge and @xmath the VPCs;
and demand for example, that the metric ( 3.70 ) (with say @xmath )
average out to the FLRW form (with a nonsynchronous time coordinate in
general). This would imply

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the condition on the bilocal extension @xmath is in general
nontrivial even when the components @xmath are chosen to be zero. In the
Appendix ( C.1 ) we show that with the above assumptions, for a general
lapse function @xmath , the conditions @xmath (Eqn. ( 3.54 )) also allow
us to choose

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, it turns out that if we make the assumption that the spatial
sections on @xmath leading to the spatial metric ( 3.65 ) on @xmath ,
are spatial sections in a volume preserving gauge , then the correlation
terms simplify greatly. This is not surprising since the MG formalism is
nicely adapted to the choice of volume preserving coordinates. Moreover,
as we will see in chapter 4, at least in the perturbative context a
modified version of this “VP gauge assumption” in fact becomes a
necessity in order to consistently set up the formalism. We will
therefore introduce spatial averaging in MG by making the VP gauge
assumption, and will then calculate the correlation terms and display
the modified equations resulting from this choice of gauge. Following
that calculation we will also show how the correlation terms can be
generalized to the case where the gauge in the inhomogeneous metric is
(formally) left unspecified.

To begin our first calculation, we perform a coordinate transformation
and shift to the gauge wherein the new lapse function @xmath is given by
@xmath where @xmath is the determinant of the new @xmath -metric,
denoted @xmath . In general, one will now be left with a non-zero shift
vector @xmath ; however, the condition @xmath ensures that the
coordinates we are now using are volume preserving, since the metric
determinant is given by @xmath . We denote these volume preserving
coordinates (VPCs) by @xmath , and will assume that the spatial
coordinates are noncompact. For simplicity, we make the added assumption
that @xmath in the inhomogenous geometry ² ² 2 We are making the
assumption @xmath in the volume preserving gauge for algebraic
convenience only – in our case this assumption cannot be justified by
the absence of vorticity. A more detailed (and complicated) analysis
should retain an arbitrary @xmath in the inhomogeneous geometry, and
make assumptions about its average – such as @xmath for example. , so
that @xmath and @xmath . The line element for the inhomogenous manifold
@xmath becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that in this gauge, the average takes on a particularly simple form
: for a tensor @xmath , with a spacetime averaging domain given by the
“cuboid” @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are averaging time and length scales
respectively, the average is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

We define the “spatial averaging limit” as the limit @xmath (or @xmath )
which is interpreted as providing a definition of the average on a
spatial domain corresponding to a “thin” time slice, the averaging
operation now being given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

(Note the time dependence of the integrand.) Henceforth, averaging will
refer to spatial averaging, and will be denoted by @xmath , in contrast
to the spacetime averaging considered thus far (denoted by @xmath ) ³ ³
3 The choice of a cube with sides of length @xmath as the spatial
averaging domain was arbitrary, and is in fact not essential for any of
the calculations to follow. In particular, all calculations can be
performed with a spatial domain of arbitrary shape. We will only use the
cube for definiteness and simplicity in displaying equations. . The
significance of introducing a spatial averaging in this manner is that
the construction of spatial averaging is not isolated from spacetime
averaging, but is a special limiting case of the latter and is, in fact,
still a fully covariant operation.

For the volume preserving gauge, the averaging assumption ( 3.71 )
reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are some functions of the time coordinate alone.
A few remarks are in order on this particular choice of assumptions.
Apart from the fact that the spacetime averaging operation takes on its
simplest possible form ( 3.75 ) in this gauge and allows a transparent
definition of the spatial averaging limit, it can also be shown that the
assumptions in Eqn. ( 3.77 ) are sufficient to establish the following
relations :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here the second equality arises from the condition @xmath which can be
assumed whenever the averaged metric is of the FLRW form (see Appendix (
C.1 )). The last equality follows on considering the conditions @xmath
in obvious notation, (the basic assumption of the MG averaging scheme),
details of which can be found in the Appendix ( C.2 ). Eqn. ( 3.78 )
reduces the line element on @xmath to the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

The line element in Eqn. ( 3.79 ) clearly corresponds to the FLRW metric
in a volume preserving gauge which differs from the standard synchronous
and comoving gauge, only by a redefinition of the time coordinate. The
vector field @xmath introduced at the beginning of this section and
which defines the FLRW spatial sections, is now given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath is not in general the average of the vector field
@xmath which defines the @xmath splitting on @xmath , but (at least in
the volume preserving gauge) is related to it by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

(A simple relation such as ( 3.81 ) cannot in general be written for an
arbitrary gauge.)

As mentioned earlier, the spatial averaging limit of the covariant MG
averaging is important because we want the homogeneous and isotropic
FLRW geometry to average to itself. Since the FLRW geometry has a
preferred set of spatial sections, one therefore needs to average over
these sections. Further, since the FLRW metric adapted to its preferred
spatial sections depends on the time coordinate, it is also essential
that the spacetime average involve a time range that is short compared
to the scale over which say the scale factor changes significantly.
Clearly then, averaging the FLRW metric (denoted @xmath ) given in Eqn.
( 3.79 ) will strictly yield the same metric only in the limit @xmath .
Namely, for the cuboid @xmath defined in Eqn. ( 3.74 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

which should be clear from the definition of the metric. The result
@xmath in the spatial averaging limit can also be shown to hold for the
FLRW metric in synchronous gauge, where the coordination bivector @xmath
can be easily computed using the transformation from the VPCs @xmath to
the synchronous coordinates @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

The transformation ( 3.83 ) will also later allow us to write the
averaged equations in the synchronous gauge for the averaged geometry.

### 3.5 The correlation @xmath-form and the averaged field equations

#### 3.5.1 Results for the Volume Preserving Gauge

In any gauge with @xmath , the expansion tensor @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

The notation is the same as used in chapter 2, and the expansion scalar
@xmath , shear tensor @xmath and shear scalar @xmath are defined as
before. Note that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

The connection @xmath -forms @xmath in terms of the expansion tensor,
are listed below for an arbitrary lapse function @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.86)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Christoffel symbol built from the @xmath -metric
@xmath and its inverse. Specializing now to the volume preserving gauge
( @xmath ), the bilocal extensions @xmath of the connection @xmath
-forms are trivial and are simply given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath , the connection @xmath -forms @xmath for the averaged
manifold @xmath are constructed using the FLRW metric in volume
preserving gauge given in Eqn. ( 3.79 ), and are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.88)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have defined

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Eqns. ( 3.86 ) with @xmath , Eqn. ( 3.87 ) and Eqns. ( 3.88 ), we
can now easily construct the correlation @xmath -form @xmath defined in
Eqn. ( 3.39 ). For completeness, we will display all the nontrivial
components @xmath , although not all of them will be relevant for the
final equations. The condition @xmath has the effect that several of the
Christoffel symbols (which can be read off from Eqn. ( 3.86 )) become
related to each other. For example, we have @xmath , and so on. Denoting
the spatial average of some quantity @xmath as simply @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.90a)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.90b)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.90c)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.90d)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.90e)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.90f)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.90g)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.90h)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.90i)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where we have used the relation @xmath .

It is now straightforward to use the relations in Eqn. ( 3.59 ) (note
the unconventional normalization of the @xmath -form) to read off the
components @xmath and hence perform the required summations to construct
@xmath . This, together with the fact that @xmath (see Appendix ( C.1
)), allows us to construct the correlation tensor @xmath defined in Eqn.
( 3.60 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, the components of the Einstein tensor @xmath for the averaged
spacetime with metric ( 3.79 ) are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.92)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the peculiar splitting of terms in the last equation is for later
convenience. Recall that the overdot denotes a derivative with respect
to the VPC time @xmath , not synchronous time. In terms of the
coordinate independent objects introduced in Eqn. ( 3.69 ), we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the averaged Einstein equations in ( 3.62 ) we next construct the
scalar equations which in the standard case would correspond to the
Friedmann equation and the Raychaudhuri equation. These correspond to
the Einstein tensor components,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

and are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.95a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.95b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Here Eqn. ( 3.95a ) is the modified Friedmann equation and Eqn. ( 3.95b
) the modified Raychaudhuri equation (in the volume preserving gauge on
@xmath ). We have used Eqn. ( 3.68 ), with the overbar on @xmath and
@xmath reminding us that they are expressed in terms of the
nonsynchronous time @xmath , and we have defined the correlation terms

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.96a)
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.96b)
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.96c)
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.96d)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

We have used the second relation in Eqn. ( 3.85 ) in defining @xmath .
@xmath and @xmath are correlations of the extrinsic curvature, whereas
@xmath and @xmath are correlations restricted to the intrinsic @xmath
-geometry of the spatial slices of @xmath . Since the components of
@xmath are not explicitly constrained by Eqns. ( 3.51 ) and ( 3.52 ), we
can treat the combinations @xmath and @xmath as independent, subject
only to the differential constraints ( 3.64 ) which follow if we assume
@xmath . We will return to these below.

As discussed earlier, the remaining components of @xmath must be set to
zero, giving constraints on the underlying inhomogeneous geometry. In
coordinate independent language, these constraints read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eqns. ( 3.97 ) reduce to the following for our specific choice of volume
preserving coordinates,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

or, in full detail,

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.99a)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.99b)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.99c)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . Eqns. ( 3.86 ) with the choice @xmath show that all the
terms paired within square brackets in Eqns. ( 3.99 ) above, as also the
correlations @xmath and @xmath defined in Eqns. ( 3.96c ) and ( 3.96d ),
are of the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The assumption in Eqn. ( 3.53b ) shows that one can write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

An interesting point is that the VPC assumption @xmath also allows us to
assume @xmath consistently with the formalism (details in Appendix ( C.2
)). Using Eqn. ( 3.78 ) this gives us

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This leads to some remarkable cancellations in Eqns. ( 3.99 ), and also
shows that the correlation terms @xmath and @xmath in fact vanish,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Eqns. ( 3.99 ) simplify to give

  -- -------- -- ----------
                 
     @xmath      (3.104a)
     @xmath      (3.104b)
     @xmath      (3.104c)
  -- -------- -- ----------

These simplifications are solely a consequence of assuming that the
inhomogeneous metric in the volume preserving gauge averages out to give
the FLRW metric in standard form. In general, these simplifications will
not occur when the standard FLRW metric arises from an arbitrary choice
of gauge for the inhomogeneous metric.

In order to come as close as possible to the standard approach in
cosmology, we will now rewrite the scalar equations ( 3.95 ) (which are
the cosmologically relevant ones) after performing the transformation
given in Eqn. ( 3.83 ) in order to get the FLRW metric to the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since Eqns. ( 3.95 ) are scalar equations, this transformation only has
the effect of re-expressing all the terms as functions of the
synchronous time @xmath . Although the transformation will change the
explicit form of the coordination bivector @xmath , this change involves
only the time coordinate, and in the spatial averaging limit there is no
difference between averages computed in the VPCs and those computed
after the time redefinition. This again emphasizes the importance of the
spatial averaging limit of spacetime averaging, if we are to succeed
operationally in explicitly displaying the correlations as corrections
to the standard cosmological equations. The correlation terms in Eqns. (
3.96 ) are therefore still interpreted with respect to the volume
preserving gauge, but are treated as functions of @xmath . For the scale
factor on the other hand, we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Further writing

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

equations ( 3.95 ) become

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.108a)
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.108b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

We emphasize that the quantities @xmath and @xmath , defined in Eqns. (
3.96a ) and ( 3.96b ) as correlations in the volume preserving gauge,
are to be thought of as functions of the synchronous time @xmath , where
the synchronous time coordinate itself was defined after the spatial
averaging. Such an identification is justified since we are dealing with
scalar combinations of these quantities. Note that @xmath and @xmath can
be treated independently, apart from the constraints imposed by Eqn. (
3.64 ), which we turn to next. These conservation conditions can be
decomposed into a scalar part and a @xmath -vector part, given
respectively by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the synchronous gauge ( 3.105 ) for the FLRW metric, the scalar
equation reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We recall that this equation is a consequence of setting the correlation
3-form and the correlation 4-form to zero, and it relates the evolution
of @xmath and @xmath . The @xmath -vector equation (on imposing the
first set of conditions in Eqn. ( 3.97 )) simply gives @xmath , so that
@xmath constant, which also implies that @xmath constant and hence this
equation gives nothing new. (We have used the relations @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath where @xmath denotes the nonsynchronous time coordinate
@xmath .)

The cosmological equations ( 3.108 ), along with the constraint
equations ( 3.104 ) and ( 3.110 ) are the key results of this section.
Subject to the acceptance of the volume preserving gauge on the
underlying manifold @xmath they can in principle be used to study the
role of the correction terms resulting from spatial averaging.

#### 3.5.2 Results for an arbitrary gauge choice

In this subsection, we will display the results obtained on assuming
that the metric

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

averages out to the FLRW metric in standard form with a nonsynchronous
time coordinate @xmath in general, to give

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In other words, we are assuming that the relations in Eqn. ( 3.71 )
hold. Note that the averaging operation is no longer trivial, although
we are still assuming an averaging on domains corresponding to “thin”
time slices. We again split the averaged Einstein equations into scalar
equations, and @xmath -vector and traceless @xmath -tensor equations.
After transforming to the synchronous time coordinate @xmath , now
defined by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and again defining @xmath and @xmath with @xmath , the modified
Friedmann and Raychaudhuri equations read

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.114a)
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.114b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where the correlation terms are now defined using the relations,

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.115a)
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.115b)
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.115c)
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.115d)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

We emphasize that averaging here refers to spatial averaging. Also
@xmath , and the index @xmath refers to the nonsynchronous time @xmath .
It is easy to check using Eqn. ( 3.86 ), that @xmath and @xmath
correspond to correlations of (the bilocal extensions of) the extrinsic
curvature with itself and with the time derivative of the lapse
function. @xmath corresponds to correlations between the Christoffel
symbols of the @xmath -geometry, and @xmath to correlations of the
spatial derivative of the lapse function with itself and with the
Christoffel symbols of the @xmath -geometry. Due to the way we have
defined these correlations, one can also check that when the lapse
function satisfies @xmath (so that the averaging becomes trivial), we
have @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath were defined
in Eqns. ( 3.96 ). The @xmath -vector and traceless @xmath -tensor
equations become

  -- -------- -- ----------
                 
     @xmath      (3.116a)
     @xmath      (3.116b)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.116c)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the lower case index @xmath in the last equation runs over all
spacetime indices @xmath , with the index @xmath referring to the
nonsynchronous time @xmath . It is easy to check that Eqns. ( 3.116 )
reduce to Eqns. ( 3.104 ) with the choice @xmath . The condition @xmath
has the scalar part,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

while the @xmath -vector part, as before, gives nothing new and simply
states @xmath .

We can now state the main result of this section as follows : Having
assumed that the FLRW spatial sections arise as the average of some
gauge choice with lapse function @xmath , spatial @xmath -metric @xmath
and shift vector @xmath set to zero for convenience, we can construct
the scalar quantities @xmath and @xmath which, in coordinates natural to
the FLRW metric take the form,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with the various quantities being defined in Eqns. ( 3.115 ). These
scalars modify the usual cosmological equations as shown in Eqns. (
3.114 ), and are themselves subject to the differential conditions (
3.117 ). In addition, for consistency of our assumptions with the
formalism, the underlying inhomogeneous metric is also subject to the
conditions ( 3.116 ).

The combinations on the right hand sides of the relations ( 3.118 ) can
clearly be treated independently, apart from the conditions ( 3.117 ).
Further, since the correlation @xmath -form has 40 independent
components @xmath after imposing all algebraic constraints, and since
none of the four quantities @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
trivially related by these constraints, one can always treat these four
functions independently of each other, subject only to the constraint in
Eqn. ( 3.117 ). In general this constraint may also not be satisfied,
and the correlation tensor may not be independently covariantly
conserved. In chapter 4 we will see the explicit time dependence of
these correlation objects in the perturbative setting in cosmology.

### 3.6 Comparing the approaches of Buchert and Zalaletdinov

An important motivation in studying the spatial averaging limit of MG
was to be able to compare its results with those of Buchert’s spatial
averaging. Buchert’s averaging is the only approach apart from
Zalaletdinov’s MG, which is capable of treating inhomogeneities in a
nonperturbative manner, although it is limited to using only scalar
quantities within a chosen @xmath splitting of spacetime. Buchert takes
the trace of the Einstein equations in the inhomogeneous geometry, and
averages these inhomogeneous scalar equations. In the context of
Zalaletdinov’s MG however, we have used the existence of the vector
field @xmath in the FLRW spacetime to construct scalar equations after
averaging the full Einstein equations. As far as observations are
concerned, it has been noted by Buchert and Carfora [ 42 ] , that the
spatially averaged matter density @xmath defined by Buchert is not the
appropriate observationally relevant quantity – the “observed” matter
density (and pressure) is actually defined in a homogeneous space. Since
we have done precisely this in Eqn. ( 3.68 ), we are directly dealing
with the appropriate observationally relevant quantity in the MG
framework.

Another important difference between the two approaches is the averaging
operation itself. Buchert’s spatial average, given by ( 2.4 ), is
different from the averaging operation we have been using (given by Eqn.
( 3.76 ) using the volume preserving gauge), which is a limit of a
spacetime averaging defined using the coordination bivector @xmath .
Further, since Buchert only averages two of the Einstein equations, a
major difference between the two schemes is the presence of the
constraints ( 3.104 ) on the underlying geometry. These are in general
nontrivial and hence indicate that it is not sufficient to assume that
the metric of the inhomogeneous manifold averages out to the FLRW form.

Most importantly though, Buchert’s averaging scheme by itself does not
incorporate the concept of an averaged manifold @xmath (although the
work of Buchert and Carfora [ 42 ] does deal with @xmath -spaces of
constant curvature). The question then arises as to how one should
interpret Buchert’s @xmath . If one does not wish to identify @xmath
with the scale factor in FLRW cosmology, one is compelled to develop a
whole new set of ideas in order to try and compare theory with
observation. On the other hand, if one does (naively) identify @xmath
with the scale factor, comparison with standard cosmology becomes more
convenient, but this introduces a possible inconsistency since we know
from Zalaletdinov’s approach that additional constraints need to be
satisfied. It is not clear how one should account for these constraints
since the non-scalar Einstein equations are not averaged in Buchert’s
approach.

It is our understanding that the MG approach is a complete and
self-consistent scheme which allows us to meaningfully pose questions in
the averaging paradigm, which are directly interpretable in terms of
standard cosmological ideas. The Buchert approach on the other hand, is
harder to interpret. In the MG approach, there are no unaveraged shear
equations, because the trace of the Einstein equations has been taken
after performing the averaging on the underlying geometry. Since the
averaged geometry is FLRW, its shear is zero by definition. There is a
natural metric on the averaged manifold by construction, the FLRW
metric. The correlations satisfy additional constraints, given by Eqns.
( 3.104 ). Thus, once a gauge has been chosen and if one can overcome
the computational complexity of the averaging operation, the
cosmological equations derived by us in the MG approach are complete and
ready for application, without any further caveats.

In spite of these differences, our equations ( 3.108 ) and ( 3.110 ) for
the volume preserving gauge are strikingly similar to Buchert’s
effective FLRW equations and their integrability condition in the dust
case; and in the case of general @xmath , the role of Buchert’s
dynamical backreaction @xmath in Eqns. ( 2.15 ) and ( 2.19 ) is
identical to that of our combination of @xmath in Eqns. ( 3.114b ) and (
3.117 ). Concentrating on the volume preserving case, the structure of
the correlation @xmath is identical to Buchert’s kinematical
backreaction @xmath (or @xmath in the general case). The correlation
@xmath appears in place of the averaged @xmath -Ricci scalar @xmath in
Buchert’s dust equations. This is not unreasonable since Buchert’s
@xmath can be thought of as @xmath corrections, where @xmath represents
the @xmath -Ricci scalar on the averaged manifold which in our case is
zero, and hence @xmath represents the corrections due to averaging.
Further, these similarities are in spite of the fact that our
correlations were defined assuming that a volume preserving gauge
averages out to the FLRW @xmath -metric in standard form, whereas
Buchert’s averaging is most naturally adapted to beginning with a
synchronous gauge. This remarkable feature, at least to our
understanding, does not seem to have any deeper meaning – it simply
seems to arise from the structure of the Einstein equations themselves,
together with our assumption @xmath . In the absence of this latter
condition, one would have to consider the correlation @xmath - and
@xmath -forms mentioned earlier, and the structure of the correlation
terms and their ‘‘conservation’’ equations would be far more
complicated. In the rest of this thesis we will restrict our
calculations to Zalaletdinov’s approach ⁴ ⁴ 4 An entirely different
outlook towards his approach has been emphasized to us by Buchert [ 68 ]
. According to Buchert, the absence of an averaged manifold @xmath is
not to be thought of as a ‘caveat’, but as a feature deliberately
retained ‘on purpose’. The actual inhomogeneous universe is regarded by
Buchert as the only fundamental entity, and the introduction of an
averaged universe is in fact regarded as an unphysical and unnecessary
approximation. As we mentioned earlier, this is probably the most
important difference between MG and Buchert’s approach. In the latter,
contact with observations is to be made by constructing averaged
quantities, such as the scalars defined earlier in this section, and by
introducing the expansion factor @xmath . The assertion here is that the
averaging of geometry , as discussed in MG or in the Renormalization
Group approach of Buchert and Carfora [ 42 ] is not an indispensable
step in comparing the inhomogeneous universe with actual observations.
The need for averaging of geometry is to be physically separated from
simply looking at effective properties (such as the constructed scalars)
which can be defined for any inhomogeneous metric. Averaging of geometry
becomes relevant if (i) an observer insists on interpreting the data in
a FLRW template model, so that (s)he needs a mapping from the actual
inhomogeneous slice and its average properties to the corresponding
properties in this template, or (ii) one desires a mock metric, to sort
of have a thermodynamic effective metric to approximate the real one. .

Chapter summary and discussion: This chapter dealt with Zalaletdinov’s
fully covariant framework for averaging Einstein’s equations, named
Macroscopic Gravity (MG). Although the details of this approach are
rather involved, its strength lies in the fact that one can speak in
terms of a physically relevant “averaged metric” whose behaviour is
governed by a set of modified Einstein equations. We argued that in the
context of cosmology, the standard assumptions regarding the large scale
homogeneity and isotropy of the universe, translate to the requirement
of taking a spatial averaging limit of the four-dimensional averaging in
MG. The resulting modified cosmological equations were then compared
with the effective equations derived by Buchert, which we discussed in
the previous chapter.

We wish to emphasize an issue which is of importance in understanding
the approach we will take in subsequent chapters, which will deal with
Zalaletdinov’s averaging. There is a significant difference between the
original philosophy of the averaging formalism, common to both the
Buchert and Zalaletdinov schemes, and the manner in which we employ
Zalaletdinov’s averaging. The original idea as developed by these
authors was to construct a framework which would independently describe
a suitably defined averaged dynamics, with no reference to the
inhomogeneous spacetime whose average leads to this dynamics.
Zalaletdinov’s MG is therefore a new theory of gravity describing the
dynamics of an averaged manifold, with no recourse to the underlying
manifold which is described by the usual Einstein equations. The
backreaction @xmath in this approach is actually a new field in the
problem which satisfies its own equations and whose dynamics must be
solved for simultaneously with that of other fields such as the averaged
metric and the averaged energy-momentum tensor for matter.

Our approach to the backreaction issue is different : We consider it
central to be able to self-consistently describe both the inhomogeneous
geometry as well as its averaged counterpart. We find this necessary
since modern cosmology crucially relies on observations of
inhomogeneities around us, and ignoring the evolution of inhomogeneities
when solving for the averaged dynamics does not appear to be
satisfactory. Put another way, when faced with a solution of the
averaged dynamics, we find it essential to answer the question “which
(if any) inhomogeneous solution could lead to this averaged homogeneous
solution?” All our subsequent calculations will therefore focus on
solving for the averaged dynamics of specific inhomogeneities, which we
attempt to keep as realistic as possible. We will start with an
application of the spatial averaging limit of MG, to linear perturbation
theory in cosmology, in the next chapter. The reader is referred to
papers by Zalaletdinov and co-workers in Ref. [ 53 ] , for applications
of MG as a stand-alone theory for an averaged manifold.

## Chapter 4 Backreaction in linear perturbation theory

In this chapter we will adapt the MG formalism and its spatial averaging
limit to the specific case of linear cosmological perturbation theory
(PT). The motivation behind this excercise is to verify the
self-consistency of cosmological PT in the presence of a backreaction
due to averaging. In other words, we wish to ask whether cosmological PT
is stable against the inclusion of dynamical backreaction terms, or
whether a runaway process can render the PT invalid.

This chapter is organised as follows : In Sec. 4.1 we collect some
useful results from linear cosmological perturbation theory. Sec. 4.2
presents details of the MG averaging procedure adapted to cosmological
PT, including general expressions for the leading order backreaction
terms, with a discussion of gauge related issues and the definition of
the averaging operator. The main results are in Sec. 4.3 , where we
derive final expressions for the backreaction, both in real space and
Fourier space, which can be directly utilised in model calculations.
These expressions use a few simplifying restrictions which can be lifted
if necessary in a completely straightforward manner. Sec. 4.4 contains
example calculations in first order PT, which show that the magnitude of
the backreaction is, as expected, negligible compared to the homogeneous
energy density of matter in the radiation dominated era and for a
significant part of the matter dominated era. Throughout the chapter, a
prime refers to a derivative with respect to conformal time unless
stated otherwise, and we will assume that the metric of the universe is
a perturbation around the FLRW metric given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the scale factor and @xmath is the conformal time
coordinate related to cosmic time @xmath by the differential relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

In Eqn. ( 4.1 ) we have allowed the spatial metric to have the general
form @xmath where @xmath is the metric of a @xmath -space of constant
curvature. For the calculations in this chapter we will assume a flat
FLRW background in coordinates such that @xmath ; however for future
reference we shall present certain expressions in terms of the more
general spatial metric. Defining

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and setting @xmath in Eqns. ( 3.115 ), the correction terms in the
modified Friedmann and Raychaudhuri equations ( 3.114 ) now read

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.4a)
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.4b)
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.4c)
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.4d)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have dropped the tildes for convenience. The averaging in Eqns.
( 4.4 ) is assumed to be a spatial averaging in an unspecified spatial
slicing in the inhomogeneous manifold @xmath ; in Sec. 4.2 we will
specify the averaging procedure more exactly. In addition, the
“cross-correlation” constraints ( 3.116 ) with @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath must also be satisfied by the inhomogeneities. Note that we are
not imposing the conservation condition ( 3.64 ).

Before we move on to deriving formulae for the correlation terms ( 4.4 )
in terms of perturbation functions in the metric, there is one issue
which merits discussion. The cosmological perturbation setting, together
with the paradigm of averaging, presents us with a rather peculiar
situation. On the one hand, the time evolution of the scale factor is
needed in order to solve the equations satisfied by the perturbations.
Indeed, the standard practice is to fix the time evolution of the
background once and for all, and to use this in solving for the
evolution of the perturbations. On the other hand, the evolution of the
perturbations (i.e. – the inhomogeneities) is needed to compute the
correlation terms appearing in Eqns. ( 3.114 ). Until these terms are
known, the behaviour with time of the scale factor cannot be determined;
and until we know the scale factor as a function of time, we cannot
solve for the perturbations. Note that this is a generic feature
independent of all details of the averaging procedure.

It would appear therefore, that we have reached an impasse. To clear
this hurdle, one can try the following iterative approach : Symbolically
denote the background as @xmath , the inhomogeneities as @xmath , and
the correlation objects as @xmath . Note that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
all refer to functions of time. We start with a chosen background, say a
standard flat FLRW background with radiation, baryons and cold dark
matter (CDM), and solve for the perturbations in the usual way, without
accounting for the correlation terms @xmath . In other words, for this
“zeroth iteration”, we artificially set @xmath to zero and obtain @xmath
and @xmath using the standard approach (see e.g. Ref. [ 12 ] ). Clearly,
since the “true” background (say @xmath ) satisfies Eqns. ( 3.114 ) with
a nonzero @xmath , we have in general @xmath . Now, using the solution
@xmath , we can calculate the zeroth iteration correlation objects
@xmath by applying the prescription to be developed later in this
chapter. As a first correction to the solution @xmath , we now solve for
a new background @xmath , with the known functions @xmath acting as
sources in Eqns. ( 3.114 ). This first iteration will then yield a
solution @xmath for the inhomogeneities, and hence a new set of
correlation terms @xmath , and this procedure can be repeatedly applied.
Pictorially,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

As for convergence, if perturbation theory is in fact a good
approximation to the real universe, then one can expect that the
correlation terms will tend to be small compared to other background
objects, and will therefore not affect the background significantly at
each iteration, leading to rapid convergence. On the other hand, if the
correlation terms are large, this procedure may not converge and one
might expect a breakdown of the perturbative picture itself. We will see
that in the linear regime of cosmological perturbation theory, the
correlation terms do in fact remain negligibly small.

### 4.1 Metric perturbations in cosmology

For ready reference, in this subsection we present expressions for the
metric, its inverse, and the Christoffel connection in first order
cosmological PT, in an arbitrary, unfixed gauge. The notation we use is
similar to that used in Ref. [ 63 ] . We will also give expressions for
the first order gauge transformations of the perturbation functions (see
e.g. Ref. [ 64 ] ). The first order perturbed FLRW metric in an
arbitrary gauge and in terms of conformal time @xmath , can be written
as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The functions @xmath and @xmath are scalars under spatial coordinate
transformations. The functions @xmath and @xmath can be decomposed as
follows

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the parentheses indicate symmetrization; @xmath is the tracefree
second derivative defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath the covariant spatial derivative compatible with @xmath ;
and @xmath , @xmath and @xmath satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where spatial indices are raised and lowered using @xmath and its
inverse @xmath . From their definitions it is clear that @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath each correspond to one scalar degree of freedom, the
transverse @xmath -vectors @xmath and @xmath each correspond to two
functional degrees of freedom, and the transverse tracefree @xmath
-tensor @xmath corresponds also to two functional degrees of freedom.
This totals to @xmath degrees of freedom, of which @xmath are coordinate
degrees of freedom which can be arbitrarily fixed, which is what one
means by a gauge choice. For example, the conformal Newtonian or
longitudinal or Poisson gauge [ 13 , 64 ] is defined by the conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the metric ( 4.6 ) we have at first order,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The inverse of metric ( 4.6 ), correct to first order, has the
components

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
                 (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

With @xmath , the first order accurate Christoffel symbols are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the Christoffel connection associated with the
homogeneous @xmath -metric @xmath .

#### 4.1.1 Gauge transformations

While the concept of gauge transformations can be described in a rather
sophisticated language using pullback operators between manifolds [ 64 ]
, for our purposes it suffices to implement a gauge transformation using
the simpler notion of an infinitesimal coordinate transformation (also
known as the “passive” point of view). Hence, denoting the coordinates
and perturbation functions in the new gauge with a tilde (i.e. @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , and so on), we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the infinitesimal @xmath -vector @xmath can be decomposed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are scalars and @xmath is a transverse @xmath
-vector satisfying @xmath .

It is then easy to show that if this transformation is assumed to change
the metric ( 4.6 ) by changing only the perturbation functions but
leaving the background intact (a so-called “steady” coordinate
transformation), then the old perturbations and the new are related by [
64 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last equality shows that the transverse tracefree tensor
perturbations are gauge invariant. They correspond to gravitational
waves.

### 4.2 The Averaging Operation and Gauge Related Issues

In this section, we will describe the details of the MG (spatial)
averaging procedure adapted to the setting of cosmological PT.

#### 4.2.1 Volume Preserving (VP) Gauges and the Correlation Scalars

It will greatly simplify the discussion if we start with symbolic
calculations which allow us to see the broad structure of the objects we
are after. Since the correlation objects in Eqns. ( 3.114 ) depend only
on derivatives of the metric, we will primarily deal with metric
fluctuations; matter perturbations will only come into play when solving
for the actual dynamics of the system. Before dealing with the issue of
which gauge to choose in order to set the condition ( 3.36 ) with the
average connection taken to be the FLRW one, we will show that
irrespective of this choice, the leading order contribution to the
correlations requires knowledge of only first order perturbation
functions.

We will use the following symbolic notation :

-   Inhomogeneous connection: @xmath

-   FLRW connection: @xmath

-   Perturbation in the connection : @xmath

-   Coordination bivector : @xmath

-   Bilocal extension of the connection : @xmath

-   Inhomogeneous part of the bilocal extension of the connection :
    @xmath

-   Correlation object : @xmath

The integer superscripts denote the order of perturbation. The form of
the coordination bivector arises from the fact that in perturbation
theory, in the spatial averaging limit , a transformation from an
arbitrary gauge to a VP one can be achieved by an infinitesimal
coordinate transformation. By a VP gauge we mean a gauge in which the
metric determinant is independent of the spatial coordinates to the
relevant order in PT, but may be a function of time. It can be shown
that such a function of time (which will typically be some power of the
scale factor), is completely consistent with all definitions and
requirements of MG in the spatial averaging limit. An easy way of seeing
this is to note that in any averaged quantity, the metric determinant
appears in two integrals, one in the numerator and the other in the
denominator (which gives the normalising volume). In the “thin time
slicing” approximation we are using to define the averaging, any overall
time dependent factor in the metric determinant therefore cancels out.
Also, a fully volume preserving coordinate system can clearly be
obtained from any VP gauge as defined above, by a suitable rescaling of
the time coordinate. It is not hard to show that in the thin time
slicing approximation, this gives the same coordination bivector @xmath
as the VP gauge definition above.

To see that first order perturbations are sufficient to calculate @xmath
to leading order, we only have to note that the background connection
@xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

and that the structure of the correlation is @xmath , which then leads
to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is exact. Clearly, the correlation is quadratic in the
perturbation as expected, and hence to leading order, @xmath above can
be replaced by @xmath .

Eqns. ( 4.17 ) and ( 4.18 ) treat the averaging operation at a
conceptual level only. To make progress however, we also need to
prescribe how to practically impose the averaging assumption

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

in any given perturbative context. This requires some discussion since,
for example, the bilocal extension of the connection @xmath has the
structure

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a derivative at @xmath and @xmath a derivative at @xmath
(see Eqn. ( 3.35 )). The actual MG averaging operation in general is
therefore a rather involved procedure. Additionally, it is also
necessary to address certain gauge related issues.

To clarify the situation, let us start with a fictitious setting in
which the geometry has exactly the flat FLRW form, with no physical
perturbations. Clearly, if we work in the standard comoving coordinates
in which the metric @xmath of Eqn. ( 4.1 ) is simply @xmath , then since
these coordinates are volume preserving in the sense described above,
the coordination bivector becomes trivial. The averaging involves a
simple integration over @xmath -space, and we can easily see that Eqn. (
4.17 ) is explicitly recovered.

Now suppose that we perform an infinitesimal coordinate transformation,
after imposing Eqn. ( 4.17 ). Since the averaging operation is
covariant, then from the point of view of a general coordinate
transformation, both sides of Eqn. ( 4.17 ) will be affected in the same
way. However, suppose that we had performed the transformation before
imposing Eqn. ( 4.17 ). In the language of cosmological PT, we would
then be dealing with some “pure gauge” perturbations around the fixed,
spatially homogeneous background. If we did not know that these
perturbations were pure gauge, we might naively construct the nontrivial
coordination bivector for this metric, compute the bilocal extension of
the connection according to Eqn. ( 4.20 ) and try to impose Eqn. ( 4.19
). This would be incorrect since these perturbations were arbitrarily
generated and need not average to zero (for example they could be
positive definite functions). In order to maintain consistency, it is
then necessary to ensure in practice that the averaging condition ( 4.19
) is applied only to gauge invariant fluctuations (which is rather
obvious in hindsight).

There is another problem associated with the structure of the
coordination bivector, even when there are real, gauge invariant
inhomogeneities present. Note from Eqns. ( 3.24 ) and ( 3.26 ) that the
coordination bivector has the structure

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the coordinates we are working in and @xmath a set
of VPCs. In perturbation theory (in the spatial averaging limit) we will
have, at leading order,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath symbolically denotes an infinitesimal @xmath -vector
defining the transformation, and hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

and so on, which gives us

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now when we compute a quantity such as @xmath which appears in the
expression ( 4.20 ) for @xmath , we will be left with a fluctuating (
@xmath -dependent) term of the form @xmath , where @xmath denotes the
@xmath spatial coordinates. Hence if we try to impose Eqn. ( 4.19 ) we
will ultimately be left with equations of the type

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some functions derived from the inhomogeneities which we have
collectively denoted @xmath . In other words, consistency would seem to
demand that the inhomogeneities vanish in this coordinate system, which
is of course not desirable.

It therefore appears that we are forced to impose Eqn. ( 4.19 ) in a
volume preserving gauge , since by definition, only in such a gauge will
we have @xmath exactly. We emphasize that this is a purely practical
aspect related to defining the averaging operation, and is completely
decoupled from, e.g. the choice of gauge made when studying the time
evolution of perturbations. We are in no way breaking the usual notion
of gauge invariance by choosing an averaging operator. The conditions
Eqn. ( 4.25 ) now reduce to the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

which are far more natural than Eqn. ( 4.25 ). The averaging condition
is now unambiguous, but depends on a choice of the VP gauge which
defines the averaging operation , an issue we shall discuss in the next
subsection. For now, all we can assert is that this VP gauge must be
such that in the absence of gauge invariant fluctuations, it must reduce
to the standard comoving (volume preserving) coordinates of the
background geometry as in Eqn. ( 4.1 ). This of course is simply the
statement that the VP gauge must be well defined and must not contain
any residual degrees of freedom.

The averaging operation now takes on an almost trivial form as we have
seen in chapter 3 – to leading order, for any quantity @xmath (with or
without indices), the spatial average of @xmath in a VP gauge is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the integral is over a spatial domain @xmath with a constant
volume @xmath . The spatial coordinates are the comoving coordinates of
the background metric, and at leading order the boundaries of @xmath can
be specified in a straightforward manner as, e.g.,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a comoving scale over which the averaging is performed
(in which case @xmath ). The averaging definition can be written more
compactly in terms of a window function @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath vanishes everywhere except in the region @xmath , with the
integrals now being over all space. This expression will come in handy
when working in Fourier space, as we shall do in later sections.

A couple of comments are in order at this stage. Firstly, we have not
specified the magnitude of the averaging scale @xmath . The general
philosophy is that this scale must be large enough that a single
averaging domain encompasses several realisations of the random
inhomogeneous fluctuations, and small enough that the observable
universe contains a large number of averaging domains. However, as we
will show later in Sec. 4.3 , if one is ultimately interested in
quantities which are formally averaged over an ensemble of realisations
of the universe (as is usually done in interpreting observations), then
the actual value of the averaging scale becomes irrelevant.

This brings us to the second issue. The above discussion is valid only
in the situation where there are no fluctuations at arbitrarily large
length scales, since in the presence of such fluctuations the averaging
condition ( 4.19 ) loses meaning (in such a situation it would be
impossible to isolate the background from the perturbation by an
averaging operation on any finite length scale). Indeed, we shall see a
manifestation of this restriction in Sec. 4.3 , where the correlation
scalars will be seen to diverge in the presence of a nonzero amplitude
at arbitrarily large scales, of the power spectrum of metric
fluctuations.

We will end this subsection by explicitly writing out the averaging
condition in an “unfixed VP” gauge, to be defined below, and also
writing the correlation terms appearing in Eqn. ( 3.114 ), in this
gauge. As we can see from Eqn. ( 4.11 ), the basic condition to be
satisfied by a VP gauge is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hereafter, all VP gauge quantities will be denoted using a tilde. This
should not be confused with the similar notation that was used so far
for the bilocal extension, which will not be needed in the rest of the
chapter. @xmath and @xmath are the scalar potentials appearing in the
perturbed FLRW metric ( 4.6 ). The single condition ( 4.30 ) leaves
@xmath degrees of freedom to be fixed, in order to completely specify
the VP gauge one is working with. The MG formalism by itself does not
prescribe a method to choose a particular VPC system; in fact this
freedom of choice of VPCs is an inherent part of the formalism. We shall
return to this issue in the next subsection. For now we define the
“unfixed VP (uVP) gauge” by the single requirement ( 4.30 ), with @xmath
unfixed degrees of freedom, and present the expressions for the
averaging condition and the correlation scalars, with this choice.

It is straightforward to determine the consequences of requiring Eqn. (
3.36 ) to hold, with the right hand side corresponding to the FLRW
connection in conformal coordinates, and remembering that the
coordination bivector (in the spatial averaging limit) is now simply a
Kronecker delta. Together with some additional reasonable requirements,
namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

for any scalar @xmath , the averaging condition in the uVP gauge reduces
to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have used the expressions in Eqn. ( 4.13 ) with the uVP
condition ( 4.30 ). We will also make the additional reasonable
requirement that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

using which it is easy to see that the perturbed FLRW metric ( 4.6 ) and
its inverse ( 4.12 ), in the uVP gauge, both on averaging reduce to
their respective homogeneous counterparts, namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using these results, the expressions ( 4.4 ) simplify to give, in the
uVP gauge,

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.35a)
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.35b)
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.35c)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.35d)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where square brackets denote antisymmetrization.

#### 4.2.2 Choice of VP Gauge

In this subsection we will prescribe a choice for the VP gauge which
defines the averaging operation. In general, the class of volume
preserving coordinate systems for any spacetime, is very large (see Ref.
[ 44 ] for a detailed characterisation). We have so far managed to pare
it down by requiring that the VP gauge we choose should reduce to the
standard FLRW coordinates in the absence of fluctuations. It turns out
to be somewhat difficult to go beyond this step, since there does not
appear to be any unambiguously clear guiding principle governing this
choice. We will therefore motivate a choice for the VP gauge based on
certain details of cosmological PT which one knows from the standard
treatments of the subject.

In particular, we shall make use of certain nice properties of the
conformal Newtonian or longitudinal or Poisson gauge, which is defined
by the conditions ( 4.10 ) [ 64 ] (henceforth we shall refer to this
gauge as the cN gauge for short). Since this gauge is well defined and
has no residual degrees of freedom, all the nonzero perturbation
functions in the cN gauge, namely @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in
the notation of Appendix C, are equal to gauge invariant objects. This
is trivially true for @xmath , as seen in the last equation in ( 4.16 ).
For the rest, note that in any arbitrary unfixed gauge, the following
combinations are gauge invariant at first order

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be easily checked using Eqns. ( 4.16 ), and in the cN gauge,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath all vanish. Here @xmath and @xmath are the
Bardeen potentials [ 69 ] (upto a sign), and @xmath in particular has
the physical interpretation of giving the gauge invariant curvature
perturbation , which is the quantity on which initial conditions are
imposed post inflation [ 70 ] .

Additionally, it is also known that the cN gauge for the metric remains
stable even during structure formation, when matter inhomogeneities have
become completely nonlinear ¹ ¹ 1 See Ref. [ 27 ] for an intuitive
description of why this is so. We will also see an explicit
demonstration in a toy model of structure formation in chapter 5. . We
believe that this is a strong argument in favour of using the cN gauge
to define a VP gauge which will then define the averaging operation in
the perturbative context. This will ensure that this “truncated”
averaging operation, defined for first order PT, will remain valid at
leading order even during the nonlinear epochs of structure formation.

To implement this in practice, consider a transformation from the cN
gauge to the uVP gauge defined by Eqn. ( 4.30 ). The transformation
equations ( 4.16 ) reduce to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Recall that to completely specify a VP gauge, we need to fix @xmath
degrees of freedom in the uVP gauge. Our requirement regarding the “well
defined”-ness of the VP gauge, forces us to set @xmath , and to choose
@xmath and @xmath such that they vanish in the case where @xmath .

This has fixed @xmath degrees of freedom, in addition to the condition (
4.30 ) which is just the definition of the uVP gauge, and has hence not
yielded a uniquely specified VP gauge. To do this, we shall make the
following additional requirement. Since we are dealing with a spatial
averaging, it seems reasonable to require that the VP gauge being used
to define the averaging, should be “as close as possible” to the cN
gauge in terms of time slicing , and for this reason we shall set the
function @xmath to zero. To summarize, the VP gauge chosen is defined in
terms of the gauge transformation functions @xmath between the cN gauge
and the VP gauge, by the following relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (4.39a)
     @xmath      (4.39b)
     @xmath      (4.39c)
     @xmath      (4.39d)
     @xmath      (4.39e)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the function @xmath is restricted not to contain any nontrivial
solution of the homogeneous (Laplace) equation @xmath .

Having made this choice for the VP gauge, we are now assured that all
averaged quantities which we compute are gauge invariant : our choice
ensures that the averaging procedure does not introduce any pure gauge
modes, and the philosophy of “steady” coordinate transformations ensures
that all background objects are, by assumption, unaffected by gauge
transformations. In particular, the correlation objects in Eqns. ( 4.4 )
are all gauge invariant ² ² 2 Note that all these arguments are valid at
first order in PT, which is sufficient for our present purposes. A
consistent treatment at second order would require more work, although
as long as one is interested only in the leading order effect, these
arguments are expected to go through. . This is different from the gauge
invariance conditions derived in Ref. [ 29 ] , where the background was
also taken to change under gauge transformations at second order in the
perturbations. It is at present not clear how these results are related
to ours.

### 4.3 The Correlation Scalars

With the VP gauge choice defined by Eqns. ( 4.39 ), it is
straightforward to rewrite the correlation objects in Eqns. ( 4.35 )
(which are in the uVP gauge) in terms of the perturbation functions in
the cN gauge. We will restrict the subsequent calculations in this
chapter to the case where there are no transverse vector perturbations,
i.e.,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the cN gauge. This is a reasonable choice since such vector
perturbations, even if they are excited in the initial conditions, decay
rapidly and do not source the other perturbations at first order [ 12 ]
. In addition, for simplicity we will choose to ignore the gauge
invariant tensor perturbations as well,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

In terms of the scalar perturbations in the cN gauge, for a flat FLRW
background, the correlation objects ( 4.35 ) reduce to

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.42a)
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.42b)
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.42c)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.42d)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is defined in Eqn. ( 4.39b ).

Since we are working with a flat FLRW background, it becomes convenient
to transform our expressions in terms of Fourier space variables. This
will also highlight the problem with large scale fluctuations which was
mentioned in Sec. 4.2 . We will use the following Fourier transform
conventions : For any scalar function @xmath , its Fourier transform
@xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Consider an average of a generic quadratic product of two scalars @xmath
and @xmath where we have suppressed the time dependence since it simply
goes along for a ride. Using the definition ( 4.29 ), and keeping in
mind that the scalars are real, it is easy to show that we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Fourier transform of the window function @xmath on
the variable @xmath , and the asterisk denotes a complex conjugate.

In the present context, the functions @xmath and @xmath will typically
be derived in terms of the initial random fluctuations in the metric
@xmath which are assumed to be drawn from a statistically homogeneous
and isotropic Gaussian distribution with some given power spectrum. In
order to ultimately make contact with observations, it seems necessary
to perform a formal ensemble average over all possible realisations of
this initial distribution of fluctuations. The statistical homogeneity
and isotropy of the initial distribution implies that the functions
@xmath and @xmath will satisfy a relation of the type

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some function @xmath which is derivable in terms of the initial
power spectrum of metric fluctuations, and where @xmath denotes an
ensemble average and @xmath is the Dirac delta distribution.

Applying an ensemble average to Eqn. ( 4.44 ) introduces a Dirac delta
which forces @xmath . Further, the normalisation condition on the window
function in Eqn. ( 4.29 ) implies that we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

which means that all dependence on the averaging scale and domain drops
out, and we are left with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note however, that the right hand side of Eqn. ( 4.47 ) is precisely
what we would have obtained, had we treated the spatial average @xmath
to be the ensemble average @xmath to begin with. Therefore for all
practical purposes, we are justified in replacing all the spatial
averages in the expressions for the correlation scalars ( 4.42 ), by
ensemble averages.

It is convenient to define the transfer function @xmath via the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the calculations in this chapter, we shall assume that the cN gauge
scalars @xmath and @xmath are equal

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

a choice which is valid in first order PT when anisotropic stresses are
negligible (see Ref. [ 12 ] ). This simplifies many of the expressions
we are dealing with. The Fourier transform of @xmath can be written,
using Eqns. ( 4.39b ) and ( 4.49 ), as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, in terms of the transfer function @xmath and the initial power
spectrum of metric fluctuations defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

the correlation scalars ( 4.42 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.52a)
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.52b)
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.52c)
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.52d)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

These expressions highlight the problem of having a finite amplitude for
fluctuations at arbitrarily large length scales ( @xmath ), which was
mentioned in Sec. 4.2 . As a concrete example, consider the frequently
discussed Harrison-Zel’dovich scale invariant spectrum [ 71 ] which
satisfies the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eqns. ( 4.52 ) now show that if the transfer function @xmath has a
finite time derivative at large scales (as it does in the standard
scenarios – see the next section), then the correlation objects @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath all diverge due to contributions from the @xmath
regime. This demonstrates the importance of having an initial power
spectrum in which the amplitude dies down sufficiently rapidly on large
length scales (which is a known issue, see Ref. [ 70 ] ). Keeping this
in mind, we shall concentrate on initial power spectra which display a
long wavelength cutoff. Models of inflation leading to such power
spectra have been discussed in the literature [ 72 ] , and more
encouragingly, analyses of WMAP data seem to indicate that such a cutoff
in the initial power spectrum is in fact realised in the universe [ 73 ]
.

A final comment before proceeding to explicit calculations : In addition
to picking up nontrivial correlation corrections in the cosmological
equations, the averaging formalism also requires that the
“cross-correlation” constraints in Eqns. ( 3.116 ) be satisfied. It is
straightforward to show that the statistical homogeneity and isotropy of
the metric fluctuations implies that these constraints are identically
satisfied, for all types of perturbations (scalar, vector and tensor).
At the lowest order therefore, these constraints do not impose any
additional conditions on the perturbation theory, which is reassuring.

### 4.4 Worked out examples

We will now turn to some explicit calculations of the backreaction,
which will show that the magnitude of the effect remains negligibly
small for most of the evolution duration in which linear PT is valid. At
early times, linear PT is valid at practically all scales including the
smallest scales at which we wish to apply general relativity. As matter
fluctuations grow, the small length scales progressively approach
nonlinearity, and linear PT breaks down at these scales. As we will see,
however, by the time a particular length scale becomes nonlinear, its
contribution to the amplitude of the metric fluctuations correspondingly
becomes negligible. In practice therefore, one can extend the linear
calculation well into the matter dominated era, with the expectation
that the order of magnitude of the various integrals will not change
significantly due to nonlinear effects.

The model we will use is the standard Cold Dark Matter (sCDM) model
consisting of radiation and CDM [ 12 ] . We will neglect the
contribution of baryons, and at the end we shall discuss the effects
this may have on the final results. We shall also discuss, without
explicit calculation, the effects which the introduction of a
cosmological constant is likely to have. In the following, @xmath and
@xmath denote the density parameters of radiation and CDM respectively
at the present epoch @xmath , with @xmath denoting cosmic time. @xmath
is assumed to contain contributions from photons and @xmath species of
massless, out-of-equilibrium neutrinos. At the “zeroth iteration” we
have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the standard Hubble constant, the scale factor is
normalised so that @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath are related by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

The comoving wavenumber corresponding to the scale which enters at the
matter radiation equality epoch, is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have set (see Refs. [ 74 , 12 ] for details)

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          
              @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the dimensionless Hubble parameter defined by @xmath
km/s/Mpc. For all calculations we shall set @xmath [ 75 ] .

#### 4.4.1 EdS background and non-evolving potentials

Before dealing with the full model (which requires a numerical
evolution) let us consider the simpler situation, described by an
Einstein-deSitter (EdS) background, with negligible radiation and a
nonevolving potential @xmath (which is a consistent solution of the
Einstein equations in the sCDM model at least at subhorizon scales at
late times [ 12 ] ). Although not fully accurate, this example requires
some very simple integrals and will help to give us a feel for the
structure and magnitude of the backreaction.

With a constant potential, the only correlation object which survives is
@xmath , which evolves like @xmath , where the scale factor refers to
the “zeroth iteration”. The constant of proportionality can be written
in terms of the BBKS transfer function @xmath [ 76 , 12 ] , to give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have [ 76 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

The integral in Eqn. ( 4.58 ) is well-behaved even in the presence of
power at arbitrarily large scales, for a (nearly) scale invariant
spectrum. Since we are only looking for an estimate, we shall evaluate
the integral in the absence of a large scale cutoff, and leave a more
accurate calculation for the next subsection. For the initial spectrum
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the scalar spectral index @xmath is close to unity, the integral
in Eqn. ( 4.58 ) can be easily performed numerically and has the order
of magnitude

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

upto a numerical prefactor of order @xmath . Since the amplitude of the
power spectrum is @xmath [ 77 ] , the overall contribution of the
backreaction is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, as long as the correlation objects give a negligible backreaction
to the usual background quantities, when we proceed with the next
iteration, the effect of the backreaction on the evolution of the
perturbations will also remain negligible (at least at the leading
order). Hence in practice there will be essentially no difference
between the zeroth iteration and first iteration perturbation functions.
This amounts to saying that when the backreaction is negligible,
convergence to the “true” solution for the scale factor at the leading
order , is essentially achieved in a single calculation. We will discuss
the issue of convergence in somewhat more detail at the end of the
chapter.

#### 4.4.2 Radiation and CDM without baryons

Let us now turn to the full sCDM model (without baryons). An analytical
discussion of this model in various regions of @xmath -space, can be
found e.g. in Ref. [ 12 ] . Since we are interested in integrals over
@xmath across a range of epochs @xmath , it is most convenient to solve
this model numerically. It is further convenient to use @xmath in place
of @xmath , as the variable with which to advance the solution. Also, it
is useful to introduce transfer functions like @xmath for all the
relevant perturbation functions in exactly the same manner (see Eqn. (
4.48 )), namely by pulling out a factor of @xmath , since the initial
conditions are completely specified by the initial metric perturbation.
For a generic perturbation function @xmath (other than the metric
fluctuation @xmath ) the transfer function corresponding to @xmath will
be denoted by a caret, so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

The relevant Einstein equations can be brought to the following closed
set of first order ordinary differential equations (adapted from Eqns.
(7.11)-(7.15) of Ref. [ 12 ] ),

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (4.64a)
     @xmath      (4.64b)
     @xmath      (4.64c)
     @xmath      (4.64d)
     @xmath      (4.64e)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here we have introduced the dimensionless variables

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the various perturbation functions are defined as follows : @xmath
is the @xmath -space density contrast of CDM, @xmath and @xmath are the
monopole and dipole moments respectively of the @xmath -space
temperature fluctuation of radiation, and @xmath is the @xmath -space
peculiar velocity scalar potential of CDM (i.e., the real space peculiar
velocity is @xmath where @xmath is the Fourier transform of @xmath ).

Assuming adiabatic perturbations, the initial conditions satisfied by
the transfer functions at @xmath are (adapted from Ch. 6 of Ref. [ 12 ]
)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

We choose @xmath , which corresponds to an initial background radiation
temperature of @xmath GeV. While this is not as far back in the past as
the energy scale of inflation (which is closer to @xmath Gev), it is on
the edge of the energy scale where known physics begins [ 70 ] . This
makes Eqn. ( 4.57 ) unrealistic since we have ignored all of Big Bang
nucleosynthesis and also the fact that neutrinos were in equilibrium
with other species at temperatures higher than about @xmath Mev. However
the modifications due to these additional details are not expected to
drastically change the final results, and these assumptions lead to some
simplifications in the code used. The goal here is only to demonstrate
an application of the formalism; more realistic calculations accounting
for the effects of baryons can also be performed (see, e.g. Behrend et
al. [ 49 ] who incorporate these effects for the post-recombination era,
albeit in the Buchert formalism).

In order to partially account for the fact that inflationary initial
conditions are actually set much earlier than @xmath , we impose an
absolute small wavelength cutoff at the scale which enters the horizon
at the initial epoch which we have chosen. In the above notation this
corresponds to setting @xmath . This makes sense since scales satisfying
@xmath have already entered the horizon and decayed considerably by the
epoch @xmath . There is a source of error due to ignoring scales @xmath
which have not yet decayed significantly, but this error rapidly
decreases with time as progressively larger length scales enter the
horizon and decay. [In fact, in practice to compute the integrals at any
given epoch @xmath , one only needs to have followed the evolution of
modes with @xmath : more on this in the next subsection.] More important
is the cutoff at long wavelengths, which we set at @xmath (corresponding
to @xmath ), which is firstly a natural choice given that @xmath is the
only large scale in the system, and is secondly also guided by analyses
of CMB data which have detected such a cutoff [ 73 ] . We will see that
reducing @xmath even by a few orders of magnitude, does not affect the
final qualitative results significantly.

##### Numerical Results

Equations ( 4.64 ) with initial conditions ( 4.66 ) were solved with a
standard @xmath th order Runge-Kutta integrator with adaptive stepsize
control (based on the algorithm given in Ref. [ 78 ] ). For the
integrals in Eqns. ( 4.52 ), only the function @xmath needs to be
tracked accurately. Hence, although @xmath and @xmath are difficult to
follow accurately beyond the matter radiation equality @xmath due to
rapid oscillations, the integrals can still be reliably computed since
@xmath and @xmath do not significantly affect the evolution of @xmath in
the matter dominated era (as seen in Eqn. ( 4.64a )).

To see that known results are being reproduced by the code, consider
Figs. 4.1(a) and 4.1(b) as examples. Fig. 4.1(a) shows the evolution of
two scales corresponding to @xmath ( @xmath ) and @xmath . The first
enters the horizon at the present epoch, while the second remains
superhorizon for the entire evolution, satisfying @xmath . In this limit
an analytical solution exists in the sCDM model, due to Kodama and
Sasaki [ 79 , 12 ] , given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , and this function is also shown. Clearly all the curves
in Fig. 4.1(a) are practically identical. Fig. 4.1(b) shows the function
@xmath normalised by its (constant) value at large scales, at the epoch
@xmath , (which is well into the matter dominated era). The dotted line
is the BBKS fitting form given in Eqn. ( 4.59 ) with @xmath given by
Eqn. ( 4.56 ).

To numerically estimate the integrals in Eqns. ( 4.52 ), the values of
@xmath and its first and second derivatives with respect to @xmath are
needed across a range of @xmath values. For reference, note that the
following relations hold for a generic function of time @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

Based on the earlier discussion, the initial power spectrum @xmath is
taken to satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

and zero otherwise, and we set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

which, for the sCDM model follows from the convention (see Eqn.(6.100)
of Ref. [ 12 ] ) @xmath with @xmath (see, e.g. Ref. [ 77 ] ).

Consider Figs. 4.2(a) and 4.2(b) , which highlight two issues discussed
earlier. Fig. 4.2(a) shows the integrand of @xmath at three sample
epochs, and we see that the integrand dies down rapidly at increasingly
smaller @xmath values for progressively later epochs. (The other
integrands, not displayed here, also show this rapid decline for large
@xmath .) [We have not shown the integrand at the later two epochs for
all values of @xmath since this was computationally expensive, but the
declining trend of the curves can be extrapolated to large @xmath ,
which is well understood analytically [ 12 ] .] This justifies the
statement in the beginning of this section, that at any epoch @xmath it
is sufficient to have followed the evolution of scales satisfying @xmath
for computing the integrals. Secondly, Fig. 4.2(b) shows the behaviour
of @xmath at the same three epochs, and comparing with Fig. 4.2(a) we
see that at any epoch, the region of @xmath -space where linear PT has
broken down, does not contribute significantly to the integrals. This is
in line with the conjecture in Ref. [ 80 ] that the effects of the
backreaction should remain small since the mass contained in the
nonlinear scales is subdominant. We will return to this issue in chapter
5.

Due to the structure of the integrals and the chosen initial power
spectrum, it is convenient to compute the integrands in Eqns. ( 4.52 )
equally spaced in @xmath , and then perform the integrals using the
extended Simpson’s rule [ 78 ] . If @xmath points are used to evaluate a
given integral, resulting in a value @xmath say, then the error can be
estimated by computing the integral with @xmath points to get @xmath ,
and estimating the relative error as @xmath . With @xmath , the
estimated errors in all the integrals at all epochs were typically less
than @xmath . A bigger error is incurred in computing the integrand
itself at any given epoch, leading to estimated errors of order @xmath
in @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , with a larger error in @xmath as
explained below.

The second derivative @xmath proves to be difficult to track
numerically. At early times, when most scales are superhorizon, the
Kodama-Sasaki analytical solution ( 4.67 ) is a good approximation for
most values of @xmath . Using this one can see that at early times the
value of the derivative is numerically very small, and is difficult to
reliably estimate due to roundoff errors. For this reason the integral
@xmath could not be accurately estimated at early times. However, the
structure of the integrand of @xmath ( 4.52d ) shows that the largest
contribution comes from large (superhorizon) scales (the small scales
being subdominant due to the presence of @xmath and @xmath ). An
analysis using the Kodama-Sasaki solution then shows in a fairly
straightforward manner that the behaviour of the backreaction term is
@xmath for our choices of parameters, where @xmath . At intermediate
times around @xmath and later, although it becomes computationally
expensive to obtain convergent values for the second derivative at all
relevant scales ³ ³ 3 Convergence was tested by varying a global
parameter which dynamically controls the stepsize during evolution (by
stepsize doubling/halving, see Ref. [ 78 ] ). The integrals other than
@xmath show convergence at @xmath or more significant digits for all
epochs, whereas convergence can be obtained for @xmath only at epochs
sufficiently close to matter radiation equality, and there only for
@xmath - @xmath significant digits, by setting stringent conditions on
stepsize doubling. , moderately good accuracy ( @xmath - @xmath ) can be
achieved.

The results are shown in Fig. 4.3 , in which the magnitudes of the
correlation integrals of Eqn. ( 4.52 ), normalised by the Hubble
parameter squared @xmath are plotted as a function of the scale factor
in a log-log plot. The values for @xmath are shown only for epochs later
than @xmath . We see that at all epochs, the correlation terms remain
negligible compared to the chosen zeroth iteration background. Also, in
the radiation dominated epoch all the correlation scalars (except @xmath
whose evolution couldn’t be accurately obtained) track the @xmath
behaviour of the background radiation density (see also Ref. [ 28 ] ).
The discussion above shows however that the magnitude of @xmath is far
smaller than the other backreaction functions at early times, for a
cutoff at @xmath . On the other hand, in the matter dominated epoch
@xmath dominates the backreaction and settles into a curvature-like
@xmath behaviour (note that in the matter dominated epoch we have @xmath
). As for the signs of the correlations, @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
are negative throughout the evolution while @xmath is positive
throughout.

Finally, a few comments regarding the effects of ignoring baryons,
nonlinear corrections, etc. Including baryons in the problem (with a
background density parameter of @xmath ) will lead to a significant
suppression of small scale power (by introducing pressure terms which
will tend to wipe out inhomogeneities) and also a small suppression of
large scale power. This effect causes a (downward) change in the late
time transfer function of roughly @xmath - @xmath [ 12 ] , and therefore
cannot increase the contribution of the backreaction. Quasi-linear
corrections can lead to significant changes in the transfer function,