### 1.1 In a Nutshell…

When asked about the topic of my doctoral thesis, I sometimes joke and
answer that I am a stellar taxidermist or a space coroner. Then I
mention more seriously that I study pulsars. As most people have no idea
what they are, I explain that pulsars are (generally) formed when
massive stars die in supernova explosions and, if not massive enough to
leave behind a black hole, the remnant of the stellar core becomes a
very dense object known as a neutron star . What is a neutron star?
Imagine an object that has 1.5 times the mass of the Sun, but which is
compressed enough so that its size becomes comparable to that of
Montreal Island, about @xmath km in radius. Under such extreme physical
conditions, ‘normal’ matter is crushed and turns into a bulk of
neutrons. Such an object is essentially a neutron star.

Many neutron stars emit a (more or less) narrow beam of radio light
along their magnetic axis (see Figure LABEL:f:lighthouse ). Since the
spin axis about which the neutron star rotates is not necessarily
aligned with the magnetic axis, its radio beam sweeps around the sky
just like the beacon of a lighthouse. Distant observers will see the
star blinking if they are lucky enough to be located on the path
illuminated by the light beacon, hence the name of pulsars , which is a
contraction of ‘pulsating stars’.

In addition to being very compact and massive, pulsars also spin
extremely fast. In fact, many pulsars spin faster than kitchen blenders
— several hundreds rotations per second!

Through their exotic nature, pulsars and neutron stars readily display
their potential as promising tools for astrophysicists and physicists.
They permit the investigation of physics that would otherwise be out of
reach in laboratory experiments and hence can nicely complement our
knowledge in the fields of condensed matter, nuclear physics, relativity
and gravity, quantum mechanics, and electromagnetism. Not only can
pulsars be extraordinary tools for physics, they are also interesting
astrophysical objects. Studying their population and properties is
directly related to understanding galactic dynamics and stellar
evolution as they are forensic evidence of its past history (Hobbs
et al., 2005 ; Kaspi and Helfand, 2002 ) . Pulsars also have a
significant impact on their immediate environment: magnetars — a class
of ultra-high-magnetic field pulsars visible in X-rays — experience
extreme outbursts that can affect the Earth’s magnetosphere even if they
are located several thousand light-years away (Irion, 2005 ; Hurley
et al., 2005 ; Palmer et al., 2005 ; Gaensler et al., 2005 ; Cameron
et al., 2005 ) . Young pulsars also affect their immediate environment
and can power nebulae with their energetic relativistic wind (Slane,
2008 ) . These pulsar wind nebulae appear to play an important role of
‘cosmic accelerator’ for cosmic rays and some of them are among the
brightest Galactic sources in high-energy @xmath -rays (Funk et al.,
2006 ; Aharonian et al., 2006 ) .

The emission from radio pulsars can be compared to that of lasers since
it results from a coherent process and it is generally highly linearly
polarized. This, and the fact that they emit periodic, narrow pulses,
prove to be powerful tools. From pulsar observations, one can calculate
precisely their position and, sometimes, their parallax and proper
motion; estimate their age, magnetic field strength, and distance;
determine the average magnetic field along our line of sight and thus
map out the global magnetic field structure of our Galaxy; try to detect
very low-frequency gravitational waves; and more (Lorimer and Kramer,
2004 ) .

Many of these achievements come about from the precise timing of
pulsars. From such monitoring, one can also detect the presence of
bodies that are gravitationally bound to pulsars. Hence, according to
the ATNF pulsar catalogue (Manchester et al., 2005a ) , about 8% of
pulsars are found in binary systems. Sometimes, they even host planetary
companions (Wolszczan and Frail, 1992 ; Backer et al., 1993 ) .
PSR B1257+12 has four planetary companions, two of which are Earth-mass
bodies; these were the first extrasolar planets discovered (Wolszczan
and Frail, 1992 ) .

The study of binary radio pulsars also has a broad extent of
implications encompassing the scientific motivations enumerated above.
Binary pulsars can help perfect theories of stellar evolution in binary
systems because they provide the final link in the chain (Stairs, 2004 ;
van Kerkwijk et al., 2005 ) . Also, using binary pulsar timing and
observations of their companions, one can accurately measure pulsar
masses, which are central to understand their internal structure (Nice,
2006 ; Lattimer and Prakash, 2007 ; Thorsett and Chakrabarty, 1999 ) .
Finally, several binary pulsars, in particular those in relativistic
systems, provide high-precision tests for general relativity and
alternative theories of gravity (Kramer et al., 2006 ; Hulse and Taylor,
1975 ; Damour and Taylor, 1992 ) .

### 1.2 Historical Background

#### 1.2.1 The Great Discovery

It all began in 1967 in a field on the British countryside, a few miles
southeast from Cambridge ¹ ¹ 1 Unless specific citations are provided,
sources used to write this subsection are (Ghosh, 2007 ; Lyne and
Graham-Smith, 2006 ; Lorimer and Kramer, 2004 ; Bell Burnell, 1977 ) . .
It was just a simple scratch on a piece of paper made by a chart
recorder. It was a scratch among many others, but this one had something
different. When then-graduate student Jocelyn Bell saw it on the chart
that was recording radio signals from outer space as well as picking up
noise from the ground, unfortunately, she realized that this one was
special. The scratch was clearly contrasting with known astronomical
radio sources such as galaxies. On the other hand, it did not quite look
like those produced by Earth-based radio interference either. Back in
those days, a large fraction of the interference contaminating radio
observations was originating from cars, or more exactly from the sparks
of their engines.

What Jocelyn Bell noticed on that August 6 chart recording was the
signal emitted by a radio pulsar. Without knowing, this finding would
trigger what has now become four decades of pulsar astrophysics and from
which blossomed great discoveries related to, among other things, the
fate of massive stars and the validity of Einstein’s general relativity
in the extreme gravitational field regime.

To strangers wandering in the area of the Mullard Radio Astronomy
Observatory (MRAO) (see Figure LABEL:f:mrao ), there was clearly some
sort of experiment taking place. The whole field was covered with wood
poles sticking out of the ground. Metal rods — the dipole antennae —
were fixed to the poles and wires were connecting them. This strange
rectangular forest covered no less than 4 acres of land and contained
2048 of these bizarre trees. There was also a shed in which the
recording back ends, amplifiers and chart recorders were kept safe from
weather hazards. This apparatus was in fact a radio telescope designed
by Cambridge University Professor Anthony Hewish and built by himself
and his team of students over the year of 1967. Sheep were also
noticeable contributors, taking care of lawn mowing, since
mechanical-powered lawnmowers would have produced undesirable radio
interference.

This new instrument called the Interplanetary Scintillation Array aimed
to study very different objects than pulsars. It was instead targeting
galaxies, and more precisely quasars, which are the ultra-luminous cores
of distant galaxies likely powered by a massive central black hole. A
fraction of the quasar population is observable at radio wavelengths and
because of their small size and large distance, they appear as point
sources. Anthony Hewish was interested in investigating interplanetary
scintillation using quasars (Hewish et al., 1964 ) . This phenomenon is
caused by the travel of light through ionized material. Density and
ionization factor fluctuations introduce variations in the refraction
index and hence result in variability of the light source intensity
(Cordes and Rickett, 1998 ) . A similar phenomenon can be observed when
we look at an object located behind a BBQ grill; its shape is deformed
because rays of light coming to us change direction as a consequence of
refraction in the hot turbulent air. Scintillation of an astronomical
radio source is produced by ionized gas that can be located in Earth’s
atmosphere, the Solar System, interstellar space or even intergalactic
space if the source lies outside our Galaxy. It also requires a source
having a small angular size because scintillation is caused by
refraction which introduce a phase de-coherence of the light wave. The
type of scintillation found in quasars originates from the
interplanetary medium and Hewish realized he could use this phenomenon
to constrain their angular dimension (Hewish et al., 1964 ) .
Interplanetary scintillation is effective only at low frequencies,
@xmath 327 MHz, and acts on short time scales, @xmath 1 s. The
Interplanetary Scintillation Array was therefore built specifically to
detect short time scale intensity fluctuations and was sensitive to low
flux density. Because of its design, the instrument was operating in
transit mode; i.e. observing a fixed location in the sky and using the
Earth’s rotation to naturally cover a strip of the sky over the course
of a day. So in short, this radio telescope was perfectly suited to find
radio pulsars.

The August 6, 1967, detection of the first radio pulsar by Jocelyn Bell
occurred only a month after she started acquiring data for her doctoral
thesis on interplanetary scintillation of quasars. She identified the
source among hundreds of meters of recorded paper data — the chart
recorder would spit out 30 m of paper every day — and it subsequently
came back at about the same time in the following days (see Figure
LABEL:f:psr_discovery ). Even though Hewish initially dismissed the
finding of his graduate student, thinking that it was terrestrial noise,
he soon became convinced that the source was of astronomical origin. The
transit time was occurring four minutes earlier every day and was
therefore synchronized with the sidereal time, i.e. it was fixed with
respect to the distant stars. They then decided to make future
observations of this mysterious source at a higher time resolution —
Bell simply had to switch the chart recorder to a faster one just before
the source became visible. More details about the source properties
could therefore be investigated. Unfortunately, the source did not show
up for several days, probably because of interstellar scintillation.
When it finally showed up again at the end of November, the higher
resolution recording revealed, to everyone’s surprise, that it was
emitting regular pulsations every 1.33 seconds. The discovery was
shocking. How could a natural source be pulsating so periodically? The
object was dubbed LGM-1, Little Green Man 1, since it was envisioned (in
a rather speculative scenario) that pulsations could come from an
intelligent form of extraterrestrial life.

The mystery about the pulsating source took an interesting turn when,
just before the Christmas break, Bell found another pulsating source in
a different location of the sky. Further observations confirmed the
detection and two more sources were also identified. All of them
presented regular pulsations with periodicity of the order of one
second. LGM-1 was not unique. It was then renamed CP 1919 after its
right ascension (19h19m), while the other three were CP 1133, CP 0834
and CP 0950. After carefully gathering confirmation observations and
making sure that the sources were real astronomical phenomena they
announced their discovery to the scientific community. The discovery of
CP 1919, and a mention to the three other sources, appeared on February
24, 1968, in Nature (Hewish et al., 1968 ) . It was followed, on April
13, by a second paper reporting details about the three other pulsating
radio sources and providing further timing results from CP 1919
(Pilkington et al., 1968 ) .

The first pulsar paper is remarkably detailed (Hewish et al., 1968 ) .
It contains a section describing the large pulsed flux variation of the
signal, which is naturally expected from scintillation given the low
frequency (80.5 MHz) and the small bandwidth (1 MHz) of the radio
telescope. A very precise analysis of the arrival time of the pulses was
made — the timing of the periodicity of CP 1919 was better than one part
in @xmath during typical 6-h tracking observations while the relative
error for their complete data set reached @xmath . Hewish et al. ( 1968
) were even able to observe the Doppler shift imprinted in the pulsation
due to the orbital motion of the Earth around the Sun. They also ruled
out with reasonable confidence the possibility that CP 1919 was orbiting
another body because of the lack of an additional Doppler shift. Hence,
the source was clearly located outside the Solar System and no parallax
was detected to an upper limit of @xmath , thus constraining its
distance to be larger than @xmath AU. A shift in the arrival time of the
pulse was also observed in the different frequency channels of the
instrument. This was correctly interpreted as the delay caused by the
frequency-dependent light-travel time in the ionized interstellar
medium. The amount of delay is often referred to as the dispersion
measure and is proportional to the total column density of ionized
material along the line of sight. Assuming a constant electron density
in the interstellar medium, they found that the source was located about
65 parsecs away. According to the ATNF pulsar catalogue (Manchester
et al., 2005a ) , the current distance estimate from the dispersion
value is 2490 parsecs. Based on the duration of each pulse, they also
concluded that the source could not exceed 4800 km in size. On the
nature of the source, Hewish et al. ( 1968 ) speculated that pulsations
driven by the radial modes in a white dwarf or a neutron star was the
most plausible explanation for the radio periodicity. While neutron
stars had been theoretically predicted, no observational evidence had
been made thus far. Following the radial pulsation hypothesis, they
predicted that X-ray emission resulting from the hydrodynamic shock at
the surface of the pulsating compact star might be observable.

The second paper highlighted that one of the other pulsars, CP 0950, has
a ‘short’ 0.25 s periodicity (Pilkington et al., 1968 ) . This was
making the pulsating white dwarf scenario more unlikely as radial modes
would have fundamental periods of about 1 s in white dwarfs. At higher
densities, typical of that of neutron stars, shorter time scales were
still possible.

The exact nature of pulsars remained unclear, however, until the end of
1968 when neutron star theory and pulsar observations finally converged.
Pulsars are indeed neutron stars and some of them are even visible in
X-rays, but the mechanism responsible for their radio and X-ray
pulsations is not radial pulsation. The rotation of the neutron star
itself combined with non-isotropic radiation is what produces the
pulsation phenomenon. Among the contributing factors unveiling their
true nature was the discovery, in the months following the first pulsar
article, of two of the most famous pulsars: the pulsar associated with
the Vela Nebula, discovered by Large et al. ( 1968 ) , and the Crab
Nebula pulsar, by Richards ( 1968 ) . It became apparent from the large
range of pulse periods, in particular from the short periods of the Vela
and the Crab pulsars — 89 and 33 ms, respectively — that the radial
pulsation hypothesis presented major difficulties. In particular, it
could not account for the whole population with a single type of object,
either white dwarf or pulsar. Nevertheless, the original intuition of
Hewish et al. ( 1968 ) about the nature of pulsars was therefore
remarkably close to reality and their work pioneered subsequent research
in the field.

The name pulsar was first coined in an article of the Daily Telegraph, 5
March 1968, in an interview with Anthony Hewish about the initial
discovery (Hewish, 1968 ) .

#### 1.2.2 Theoretical Precursor Work

Baade and Zwicky originally introduced the concept of neutron stars in
1934, less than three years after the discovery of the neutron by Sir
James Chadwick. At the time, the duo was interested in observations of
novae and they soon recognized that this type of event could be divided
in two subclasses that they called novae and super-novae (now spelled
supernovae) (Baade and Zwicky, 1934 ) . They correctly identified novae
as the result of the sudden thermonuclear hydrogen burning at the
surface of an accreting white dwarf in a binary system, while they
proposed that supernovae followed from the transition from an ordinary
star into a body of considerably smaller mass (Baade and Zwicky, 1934 )
. Supernovae are much more energetic and brighter than novae — the
average peak absolute magnitudes are @xmath for (type Ia) supernovae
(Branch, 1998 ) and @xmath for novae (Darnley et al., 2006 ) . In a
following publication, Baade and Zwicky ( 1934 ) went further and
mentioned that the small bodies formed via supernovae would be neutron
stars. It is now established that supernovae are themselves separable in
two main sub-types that result from the core collapse of massive stars
or from the collapse of heavy accreting white dwarfs reaching the
Chandrasekhar mass limit (Carroll and Ostlie, 1996 ) . The remnants of
these supernovae are either neutron stars or black holes depending on
the supernova type and the mass of the progenitor star.

Interestingly, this theoretical work did not seem to catch the attention
of observers for more than 30 years until the first radio pulsar was
discovered by a fortunate chance. Physicists, mainly those interested in
nuclear physics and relativity took over the work of Baade and Zwicky.
During this ‘transition’ period, there have been a few milestone papers
marking the development of neutron star theory. Oppenheimer and Volkoff
( 1939 ) proposed an equation of state for neutron stars based on the
work of Tolman ( 1939 ) . Their work on the internal structure of
neutron stars led to what is now called the Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff
equation of state . It would allow the prediction of masses, densities
and radii of neutron stars well before they were even observed. Later,
Hoyle, Narlikar and Wheeler suggested that large magnetic fields, of the
order of @xmath G, could exist in neutron stars such as the one that was
thought to exist at the center of the Crab Nebula (Hoyle et al., 1964 )
. This field would naturally emerge from the conservation of magnetic
flux of a core-collapsing star having Sun-like magnetic dipolar field
strength. They also addressed the issue related to the dissipation of
the dynamical energy generated during the collapse by suggesting that it
would be radiated away via electromagnetic waves. A simple estimate for
the Crab Nebula indicated that it could be the source of energy driving
the expansion of the nebula.

Ironically, the theoretical work that really bridged neutron stars and
pulsars has been conducted and published at the same time that pulsars
were discovered, and without even knowing about it. Pacini ( 1967 )
pointed out that highly magnetized neutron stars would generate electric
currents and emit electromagnetic waves as they spin. He showed that the
energy output could power the Crab Nebula. Shortly after, Gold ( 1968 )
published his independent research restating the same general ideas as
Pacini ( 1967 ) . He very clearly identified that rapidly rotating,
highly magnetized neutron stars would emit a radio light beacon that
would sweep across space because of the star’s rotation about its axis.
The canonical pulsar lighthouse model was born. He also predicted that
pulsars should steadily slow down as a consequence of magnetic dipole
radiation. Not long after, Richards and Comella ( 1969 ) were confirming
this idea with the announcement that the period of the Crab Pulsar was
gradually increasing.

#### 1.2.3 Parallel Discoveries

In parallel to the pulsar discovery by the Cambridge University group,
there are many stories of ‘pre-discovery’ detections of pulsars. These
observations either went unnoticed then or were misinterpreted until
after the ‘original’ discovery paper came out. For example, an amateur
astronomer might have seen pulsations from the Crab Pulsar while looking
at the Crab Nebula with the optical telescope of the University of
Chicago (Brumfiel, 2007 ) . The strange behavior that the woman noticed
was dismissed immediately by Elliot Moore, the observatory astronomer,
who thought it was normal atmospheric scintillation. It seems that some
radio astronomers probably also observed giant pulses from the Crab
Pulsar while studying the nebula. None of them, however, realized that
it could have anything to do with neutron stars, which were predicted to
exist at the center of such a supernova remnant.

US Air Force sergeant Charles Schisler made another early pulsar
detection during the summer of 1967 (Brumfiel, 2007 ; Schisler, 2008 ) ;
this was at the same time as Jocelyn Bell conducted her first
‘accidental’ pulsar observations. Schisler was then a radar operator at
the Clear Air Force Station in Alaska. This base was part of the
Ballistic Missile Early Warning System that was aimed to detect missiles
that would be launched from Siberia during the Cold War. The radar was
specifically conceived to be sensitive to man-made pulses bouncing off
these hypothetical missiles. As he was monitoring the radar screen one
day, Schisler noticed a faint signal that was not related to anything he
had seen before. He repeatedly saw the same source afterwards and found
that it would appear 4 minutes earlier every day. His rudimentary
astronomy knowledge helped him in concluding that the source was located
in outer space since it was synchronized with the sidereal time. After
carefully determining the source’s celestial position to satisfy his own
personal curiosity, Schisler queried the help of a University of Alaska
astronomy professor. They came to the conclusion that the source was
coincident with the location of the Crab Nebula. While continuing his
work at the Alaskan radar base, Schisler observed about a dozen of these
astronomical sources. Unfortunately, because of the nature of his
military work, he waited until 2007 when the radar base was
decommissioned and demolished to publicly talk about his observations.

### 1.3 Thesis Outline

In this thesis, we present the results of research about binary radio
pulsars. Our studies involves a mixture of observational and theoretical
work that aims to investigate peculiar properties of binary radio
pulsars in order to obtain a better understanding of their nature and
evolution but also to use them as tools to test general relativity. Most
of the data used in this thesis were obtained at radio wavelengths with
the Green Bank and the Parkes telescopes. Some of the radio observations
have been conducted by the author of this thesis while a considerable
part of the data set was shared by co-investigators in these projects.
We also performed complementary follow up observations in other parts of
the electromagnetic spectrum, namely at near-infrared and optical
wavelengths, with various instruments such as the Gemini,
Canada-France-Hawaii and SOAR observatories. In this thesis, we shall
cover the following elements:

##### Chapter 2

In this chapter the basic elements of neutron star and pulsar theory are
presented. First, we describe the nature of neutron stars and then
introduce pulsars as a particular subset of this more general class of
stellar object. We present the fundamental pulsar properties in the
context of their supporting observational evidence and summarize the
main tools and techniques used to observe and time radio pulsars. These
are of great importance in order to structure a coherent theory of
binary pulsar evolution and relate it to the observed population. We
shall make use of this background information throughout this thesis and
particularly in Chapter 3 , which focuses on binary evolution. We
outline how the peculiar properties of binary pulsars can be used to
test general relativity and other theories of gravity. Finally, we
review the main characteristics of the double pulsar PSR J0737 @xmath
3039A/B, which is the binary pulsar we study in Chapters 4 and 5 .

##### Chapter 3

In this chapter, we present the results of the study of the binary
pulsar PSR J1744 @xmath 3922. The goal of this work was two-fold. First,
we examine the peculiar flickering behavior of the radio emission from
this pulsar and investigate the possible reasons that could cause it to
fluctuate. Second, we analyze the properties of this pulsar in
relationship with the existing population of binary pulsar and the
evolution mechanisms forming them. It appears that PSR J1744 @xmath 3922
challenges some of the standard binary scenarios and we describe how
this pulsar can fit in this picture.

##### Chapter 4

The double pulsar PSR J0737 @xmath 3039A/B is a unique binary system in
which two radio pulsars orbit each other. Once per orbit, one of the
pulsars eclipses its companion for about 30 s. This chapter presents an
extensive study of these eclipses. We perform a thorough analysis of the
phenomenological properties of the eclipses and report on the results of
a quantitative modeling. This work yields the precise measurement of
relativistic spin precession of the pulsar creating the eclipses. We
also look at some of the interesting consequences emerging from the
determination of the pulsar and the system geometry that arise from the
eclipse modeling.

##### Chapter 5

Special and general relativity not only affect the dynamical motion of
pulsars, they may also manifest as changes in the structure of their
pulse profiles. Latitudinal aberration, for instance, causes the angle
between our line of sight vector and the magnetic moment of a pulsar in
a binary system to be different from what it would be if the pulsar was
at rest. This kind of effect is generally too small to be visible.
Fortunately, the double pulsar PSR J0737 @xmath 3039A/B displays
characteristics such as a short orbital period and an almost perfectly
edge-on orbit that, once they are combined to the properties of the ‘A’
pulsar, could potentially be detected. This chapter reports on
geometrical constraints obtained on pulsar A from the limit on the
non-detectability of the latitudinal aberration effect.

##### Chapter 6

In this chapter, we summarize the essential contributions made by the
research presented in this thesis and draw some general conclusions. We
also briefly discuss the future work that shall follow this thesis work.

## Chapter 2 Neutron Stars and Pulsars

“There are those burned out stars who implode into silence after
parading in

the sky after such choreography what would they wish to speak of
anyway.” White Dwarfs, Michael Ondaatje

### 2.1 Neutron Stars: An Overview

Neutron stars are among the most exotic and extreme objects populating
our Universe. In the standard picture, neutron stars are the remnants of
massive stars ending their life as supernovae. ¹ ¹ 1 Other formation
mechanisms exist and will be described in § 2.6.1 They are small, about
10 km in radius, and their density is comparable to that of atomic
nuclei — typically @xmath g cm @xmath (Lyne and Graham-Smith, 2006 ) .
They generally also have large surface magnetic fields, ranging from
@xmath to @xmath G (Ghosh, 2007 ) . Although these properties appear
unreal, they naturally emerge from simple physics conservation laws. In
this section, we will review the basics of neutron star theory.

Normal stars are macroscopically stable because two main forces oppose
each other. On one hand gravity pulls matter together while on the other
hand thermal pressure (radiation and heat) produced by the nuclear
reaction in the core of the star counteracts it. It is the fine
equilibrium between both forces that holds stars together and prevents
them from collapsing or flying apart. When the energy budget of a star
changes, say because the rate or type of nuclear reaction varies, it
will readjust its internal structure and size in order to reach the
force balance again (Hansen et al., 2004 ) .

Thermal energy is neither the only nor the most efficient type of
negative pressure that can counteract gravity. In a totally different
class of stars, composed of degenerate matter, it is the quantum forces
themselves that stand against gravity via Pauli’s exclusion principle
(Chandrasekhar, 1967 ) .

A first kind of degenerate stellar remnant is called a white dwarf . The
degeneracy pressure of electrons supports these stellar remnants
(Chandrasekhar, 1967 ) . They are formed by the collapse of the core of
a low mass, Sun-like star after the helium burning stage. These stars
are not massive enough to ignite carbon burning that leads to the
formation of an iron core. With no source of energy to support the
gravitational force the core of the star shrinks until the electron
degeneracy force becomes comparable. Electrons are fermions and hence
are differentiable particles. No two fermions can be in the same quantum
state. Therefore, the wavefunctions of electrons start overlapping in
high-density conditions and any extra electron added to the system has
to occupy a higher energy state in order to be differentiable
(Griffiths, 1995 ) .

The condition that electrons fulfill is analogous to a negative pressure
as electrons are forced to occupy higher energy states and hence acquire
larger momentum. This way, one can calculate the equilibrium force
between the electron degeneracy pressure and gravity. To do so, one has
to solve the classical hydrostatic equations (de Loore and Doom, 1992 )
:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

for a given equation of state, which describes the pressure (P) versus
density ( @xmath ) behavior in the star.

In the 1930’s, Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar had conducted pioneer work
related to white dwarfs that had important implications for neutron star
theory (Chandrasekhar, 1931a , b , c , 1935 ) . He solved the
hydrostatic equations of a Fermi degenerate gas having a polytropic
equation of state, that is @xmath , for both the non-relativistic (
@xmath ) and ultra-relativistic ( @xmath ) cases.

In the non-relativistic case, @xmath , and the equation of state is
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Planck constant, @xmath is the electron mass, @xmath
is the mass of the proton, and @xmath is the molecular weight.

In the ultra-relativistic case, @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Chandrasekhar found that @xmath and @xmath constant for the
non-relativistic and ultra-relativistic cases, respectively. These
solutions are quite remarkable given their counter-intuitive behavior.
The more matter that is added to the degenerate star, the smaller it
becomes. When entering the ultra-relativistic regime, the star
“saturates” and its size does not depend on its mass anymore.

If the gravitational force increases further, hydrostatic equilibrium
can no longer exist. At the point where the Fermi energy — the energy of
the highest occupied eigenstate — reaches some critical value, inverse
@xmath -decay naturally occurs even in stable nuclei: @xmath (Ghosh,
2007 ) . Thus “normal” matter transmutes into neutron degenerate matter.
A new degeneracy pressure balance, similar to that of white dwarfs, can
then occur but this time neutrons, which are also fermions, are
responsible.

Neutron-degenerate matter has a larger fermi energy than
electron-degenerate matter. Hence, neutron stars can reach much higher
densities than white dwarfs and this explains their smaller size: about
10 km vs. 10 @xmath km, respectively (Ghosh, 2007 ) . Because of their
very high densities, neutron stars are relativistic objects. We can
easily demonstrate that about @xmath % of the mass of a neutron star
lies in its gravitational binding energy (Will, 2001 ) simply by
comparing the gravitational potential of a sphere having a uniform
density,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

with its rest mass energy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

In fact, if the gravitational pressure becomes larger than the neutron
degeneracy pressure, nothing would prevent the object from collapsing
until it becomes a black hole. The size of a black hole is given by the
Schwarzschild radius: @xmath (Schwarzschild, 1916a , b ) . In
comparison, the radius of a 1-2 @xmath neutron star is only a few times
the size of a black hole.

#### 2.1.1 Internal Structure and Equation of State

Although one may think a priori that neutron stars are made of neutrons
only, their structure is in fact more complex. In this subsection, we
present the essential elements of neutron star structure. We shall not
attempt, however, to extensively review this particular field of neutron
star astrophysics since it is beyond the scope of this thesis. We refer
readers interested in this topic to Heiselberg ( 2002 ); Lattimer and
Prakash ( 2001 , 2004 , 2007 ) , for example.

The quest for understanding the internal structure of neutron stars
started shortly after their existence was speculated by Baade and Zwicky
( 1934 , 1934 ) , well before any observational evidence was found.
Besides the work of Chandrasekhar ( 1931a ) , considerable work was
originally done by Oppenheimer and Volkoff ( 1939 ) . They investigated
the equilibrium conditions of a spherically symmetric distribution of
matter in the general relativistic framework using the method developed
by Tolman ( 1939 ) and considered the case of a cold gas of degenerate
neutrons.

Significant progress has been made on the internal structure since the
early days of neutron star astrophysics. Quantitative models exist to
describe their equation of state, that is, the relationship between the
distribution of mass as a function of radius, @xmath , or, equivalently,
the pressure as a function of density, @xmath . Such modern equations of
state were perfected using advances made in nuclear physics — QCD in
particular — which allow quantitative treatment of nucleon-nucleon
interactions, calculations of binding energies, and more (Heiselberg,
2002 ) . The heritage of this research yields a broad family of models
describing the relationship between cooling and luminosity of neutron
stars, as well as other properties linked to their structure. Despite
all these efforts, the exact nature of neutron stars still remains an
open question. Answering it will require further observational
breakthroughs such as simultaneous measurements of masses and radii for
example. This would allow one to narrow down the phase space predicted
by different equations of state and eventually identify the correct
theory.

In the canonical model, a neutron star is a body consisting of four main
internal regions (Yakovlev and Pethick, 2004 ; Lattimer and Prakash,
2004 ) that are possibly covered by a thin atmosphere having a few
centimeters thickness, whose composition may be hydrogen or a mixture of
heavier nuclei such as oxygen or even iron (Zavlin et al., 1996 ) . The
internal structure is organized as follows (Yakovlev and Pethick, 2004 ;
Lattimer and Prakash, 2004 ; Weber et al., 2007 ) (see Figure
LABEL:f:ns_structure ): 1. The outermost region, called the outer crust
, is made of ions and electrons. Ions tend to form a solid lattice under
the strong Coulomb coupling and their neutron content increases inward
as the larger pressure favors inverse @xmath -decay. 2. The transition
to the next zone, called the inner crust , is marked by the neutron
drip, which happens when the density reaches @xmath g cm @xmath . At
this point, neutrons start “leaking” out of nuclei. The inner crust
possesses a large fraction of free neutrons, whose occurrence increases
with density. They mix with free electrons and neutron-rich nuclei. 3.
The outer core starts where nuclei disappear. In this region, free
neutrons are the main constituents of matter. A non-negligible fraction
of electrons and protons are present, as well as traces of muons.
Interactions in the outer core are dominated by nuclear forces. 4.
Finally, the inner core marks the innermost region of a neutron star.
The extent of this region is not clearly defined, nor is the state of
matter.

The main differences between competing ‘‘classical’’ ² ² 2 Other
“non-classical” models have been proposed such as bare quark stars, also
known as “strange” stars (Alcock et al., 1986 ; Haensel et al., 1986 ) .
equation of state models arise from the description of the inner core
nature. These models vary from no significant changes with respect to
the outer core structure, to a variety of more or less exotic states of
matter: quark matter, hyperonic matter, pion condensate and kaon
condensate, for example (Yakovlev and Pethick, 2004 ) . These models
yield distinct mass-radius relationships as well as other observable
effects such as different cooling behaviors (Lattimer and Prakash, 2004
) . Whether or not these high-density phase transitions really take
place in nature can be probed by studying neutron stars. Ideally, one
would work from joint measurements of mass, radius, age and luminosity
made for several neutron stars. In a practical way, determining these
properties is very challenging. The simultaneous measurement of several
of these quantities, combining both high precision and reliability, in a
single neutron star has not been done yet.

Many other fascinating phenomena related to the neutron star structure
exist. For example, neutron star crusts and outer cores are known to
contain superfluid vortices (Lattimer and Prakash, 2007 ; Yakovlev and
Pethick, 2004 ) . It seems that the unpinning of these vortices could
trigger “starquakes” and cause temporary changes in their rotational
behavior (Lattimer and Prakash, 2004 ) . This scenario has been proposed
to explain the sudden increases in the rotational frequency observed in
some young pulsars. The mechanism through which these “glitches” happen
is relatively poorly understood and still lacks self-consistent
quantitative modeling.

#### 2.1.2 Magnetic Field

Among the other important questions related to the interior physics of
neutron stars is the origin of their large magnetic fields. Typical
surface magnetic field strength in neutron stars, such as in radio
pulsars, is @xmath G. Magnetic field values are inferred from the spin
of pulsars, assuming they are slowing down because they emit dipolar
electromagnetic radiation (see § 2.2 ). If, a priori , this seems
extremely large, bear in mind the small size of neutron stars; the
implied magnetic field moment is @xmath W m, which is comparable to that
of ordinary stars and planets — the Sun has a magnetic moment @xmath W m
and the Earth @xmath W m (Carroll and Ostlie, 1996 ) . Therefore, a
simple magnetic flux conservation argument is sufficient to explain the
apparent large magnetic field strength values of neutron stars.

Even though we just argued that neutron stars’ magnetic fields are not
unreasonable, the intricate details of their origin are not perfectly
understood. In particular, the large span of observed values, ranging
from @xmath to @xmath G, is puzzling since it suggests that some
intervening factors dramatically influence this property. What does
exactly happen when the transition from a “normal” star to a neutron
star occurs? Does the spread in observed magnetic fields simply reflect
differences already existing in their progenitors?

At the lower end of the distribution of magnetic fields, in millisecond
pulsars (MSPs), there is evidence for external factors intervening after
the neutron star birth. Although the physical mechanism responsible for
the lower observed magnetic field, @xmath vs. @xmath G, is unknown, the
connection with binary systems and, more precisely, a mass accretion
episode, appears to be well established (see Bhattacharya and van den
Heuvel, 1991 , and § 2.6.3 ) . This phenomenon will be investigated in
more detail in Chapter 3 .

Conversely, the origin of the high magnetic fields in neutron stars,
those of magnetars more specifically (see § 2.2.2 ), is yet to be
demonstrated. The solution to this question would help shedding light on
the link relating “normal” radio pulsars and “magnetars”.

Most theories about the origin of neutron star magnetic fields fall in
two categories: either the large magnetic field results from the
conservation of magnetic flux from a progenitor star that already has a
large magnetic field (Ferrario and Wickramasinghe, 2005 ) , or there is
some magnetic dynamo mechanism arising from instabilities inside the
progenitor during its collapse that permits the generation of a large
magnetic field (Thompson and Duncan, 1993 ) .

The magnetic fields of neutron stars are at the centre stage of neutron
star astrophysics. It is a key element closely related to several of
their observable properties such as the radio and X-ray pulsar emission,
the spin-down of rotation-powered pulsars and magnetar bursts. In these
processes, not only is the strength of the magnetic field important, but
also its structural properties. In radio pulsars, for instance, the
large-scale dipolar magnetic field is directly connected to the
lighthouse emission model.

### 2.2 Pulsars: An Overview

Pulsars represent a particular class of rapidly spinning neutron stars
that we observe as periodic emitters of electromagnetic radiation. Radio
pulsars, i.e. those visible at radio wavelengths, are the canonical type
and by far the most common pulsars. Pulsars also have now been observed
over the entire spectrum, from radio to high-energy gamma rays,
including X-rays, optical and infrared. Although the physical process
responsible for the pulsed emission varies across the spectrum, they all
share the common behavior of pulsating, which originates from the
rotation of the neutron star about its spin axis. Timing the pulsations
of a pulsar therefore allows the determination of its spin frequency.

Even though pulsars come in different varieties, visible in various
parts of the electromagnetic spectrum and possessing a rich set of
attributes, we can distinguish two main groups: rotation-powered and
non-rotation-powered pulsars. In this section, we shall present a brief
overview of the different kinds of pulsars with a particular emphasis on
radio pulsars, which are the type of neutron stars studied in this
thesis.

#### 2.2.1 Rotation-Powered Pulsars

As their name suggests, rotation-powered pulsars owe their energy output
to their rotation. That is (Ghosh, 2007 ) ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the moment of inertia in units of @xmath g cm @xmath and
@xmath is the spin period in seconds ³ ³ 3 To avoid confusion, we shall
refer to @xmath as the spin period in a generic way whereas @xmath
refers to the spin period in seconds when equations are expressing
calculated quantities. .

The classical rotation-powered pulsar model assumes that the magnetic
field structure outside the pulsar is dipolar, at least at large scales
(several hundred neutron star radii) ⁴ ⁴ 4 See Hewish ( 1972 ) for an
early review of the ‘classical’ pulsar model and properties. (Gunn and
Ostriker, 1969 ) . Under this assumption, such a rotating bar-magnet
should experience a regular spin-down due to electromagnetic radiation
at a frequency corresponding to its rotational frequency (Jackson, 1975
) . The loss in spin-down energy can be written (Ghosh, 2007 ; Lorimer
and Kramer, 2004 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.8)
              @xmath   @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with @xmath being the dipolar magnetic field strength at the neutron
star surface in units of @xmath G, @xmath the neutron star radius in
units of @xmath cm, @xmath the angle between the dipole moment and the
spin axis, and @xmath the period derivative in units of @xmath s/s.

In this framework, one can also relate the period derivative to the
period as (Ghosh, 2007 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that this relationship holds true for a spinning dipole in vacuum
only.

More generally, one can write (Ghosh, 2007 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

is called the braking index of the pulsar. The braking index can be
measured for young pulsars, as they spin-down faster than old pulsars,
if a sufficiently long timing baseline allows the determination of the
second period derivative. So far, all measurements led to values less
than 3, the value predicted for a perfect dipole in vacuum (Livingstone
et al., 2007 ) . A magnetic field structure different from dipolar, time
evolution of the magnetic field or a significantly ionized medium around
the pulsar instead of vacuum may explain these lower values (Livingstone
et al., 2007 ) .

By integrating the above equation one can determine the spin-down time
(Ghosh, 2007 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the above equation, @xmath and @xmath are the current and initial
spin frequencies, respectively. Under the assumption that @xmath , the
spin-down time of a perfect dipole ( @xmath ) becomes (Lorimer and
Kramer, 2004 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last equation is called the characteristic age of the pulsar and is
easily inferred from the most fundamental timing parameters: @xmath and
@xmath .

Finally, one can derive a relationship between the dipolar magnetic
field strength at the surface of the pulsar and its period and period
derivative (Lorimer and Kramer, 2004 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Another important concept related to rotation-powered pulsars, as well
as to all kinds of pulsars in general, is what is referred to as the
light cylinder . If one assumes that the magnetic field lines of a
pulsar co-rotate rigidly with its surface, there is a distance beyond
which the co-rotation velocity exceeds the speed of light. From this
condition, one can define an imaginary cylinder of radius (Lorimer and
Kramer, 2004 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

centered about the spin axis of the pulsar. Any field line that does not
close within this region remains open.

It is also practical to represent the pulsar population on a diagram
showing their spin period derivatives as a function of their spin
periods since they are the two key observable parameters (see Figure
LABEL:f:p_pdot ). Such a diagram is commonly referred to as the @xmath
diagram and readily shows the fundamental pulsar properties such as
their ages, magnetic field and spin-down luminosity. The @xmath diagram
is to pulsars what the Hertzsprung-Russell is to stars. In the @xmath
diagram of Figure LABEL:f:p_pdot , ‘normal’ radio pulsars are displayed
as yellow dots (see § 2.2.1 ). Young pulsars such as the Crab and Vela
form in the upper left side of the diagram. They eventually spin down
and move toward the ‘pulsar island’. We observe that several of these
young pulsars are associated with supernova remnants (SNR), which are
marked with green stars in Figure LABEL:f:p_pdot . Several of them are
also energetic enough to be visible in X-rays (see § 2.2.1 ). In the
upper right part of the diagram are the soft @xmath -ray repeaters
(SGRs) and the anomalous X-ray pulsars (AXPs), which are marked by open
red triangles (see § 2.2.2 ). These young pulsars are powered by their
extreme magnetic fields. Finally, binary pulsars are indicated by red
dotted circles (see § 2.6 ). Most of them lie at the lower left part of
the diagram, which implies that they are old, rapidly spinning and have
low magnetic fields. In the standard picture, these pulsars have been
‘recycled’ by mass transfer from their companion (Bhattacharya and van
den Heuvel, 1991 ) . The ‘death line’ represents the line below which
the electric potential drop across the magnetic poles would not be large
enough to enable the pair production responsible for the radio emission
(Ruderman and Sutherland, 1975 ) . The one pulsar below the ‘death line’
in Figure LABEL:f:p_pdot is PSR J2144 @xmath 3933. This 8.51-s pulsar
was initially thought to have a spin period of 2.84 s, namely because
pulsation was detected only every third pulse period (Young et al., 1999
) . It has the longest spin period and the lowest spin-down luminosity
of all known radio pulsars. PSR J2144 @xmath 3933 challenges pulsar
models since typical neutron stars are not expected to possess a large
enough electric potential drop to generate pair creation necessary to
power radio emission (Young et al., 1999 ) .

##### Radio Pulsars

Radio pulsars are the most common type of pulsars. They are found with
spin periods ranging from 1.399 ms for the fastest currently known ⁵ ⁵ 5
Incidentally, the fastest pulsar was found at McGill University by then
fellow Pulsar Group Ph.D. candidate Jason Hessels. (Hessels et al., 2006
) to 8.51 s for the slowest (Young et al., 1999 ) . Their inferred
magnetic fields vary between @xmath and @xmath G and their inferred ages
between a few hundred years and a few billion years ⁶ ⁶ 6 The oldest
pulsars are also the fastest millisecond pulsars. Because they are
thought to experience a spin-up phase from “recycling” in a binary
system, their estimated age from the timing might differ from their true
age. . Their population is very diverse and comprises young energetic
pulsars such as the Crab and Vela pulsars as well as very old, rapidly
rotating pulsars in binary systems.

The pulsed radio emission that one observes does not result from the
time-varying magnetic field (the spinning bar magnet). If it was the
case, the observed radio light would be monochromatic and have a
frequency corresponding to the spin frequency of the pulsar. Instead,
radio emission is created by relativistic electrons accelerated along
the open magnetic field lines of the pulsar. They emit synchrotron
radiation as they gyrate around the open magnetic field lines under the
Lorentz force (Gold, 1968 ; Pacini, 1968 ) and this produces an emission
cone along the magnetic pole. A pulsation is visible each time the
emission cone sweeps across our line of sight just as the fan-beam of a
light house illuminates the seashore. Important pieces of the puzzle are
still missing, however, in order to complete the radio emission model
(Lyubarsky, 2008 ) .

##### X-Ray Pulsars

X-ray (rotation-powered) pulsars are typically young, energetic pulsars
that emit pulsations in X-rays but, sometimes, also in other high energy
bands such as @xmath -rays. They owe the production of high-energy
photons to their high spin-down rates, which deposit a large amount of
energy in the surrounding magnetosphere. The combination of rapid spin
period and large magnetic field is ideal to accelerate charged particles
efficiently. The accelerating electric potential drop across their open
field lines is estimated to be (Ruderman and Sutherland, 1975 ) :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Particles accelerated at large Lorentz factors can produce energetic
@xmath -ray photons. In turn, these photons can efficiently generate
electron-positron pair cascades, that is, the interaction of two @xmath
-ray photons produces an electron-positron pair ( @xmath ), which can
then be accelerated in the pulsar’s magnetic field and also pair-produce
(Harding and Lai, 2006 ) . Depending on models, two such photons can
generate several hundreds of these pairs — this quantity is referred to
as the particle multiplicity.

Various physical processes (inverse Compton scattering, synchrotron and
cyclotron emission, curvature radiation, etc.) may be responsible for
the high-energy emission of these pulsars and produce characteristic
spectral components observable in the X-ray but at lower and higher
energies as well (Harding, 2007 ) . The exact physical location and the
intricate details of particle creation and acceleration are still not
perfectly understood (see Figure LABEL:f:emission_regions ). One family
of models considers that acceleration occurs close to the surface near
the polar caps , a region where the open field lines emerge from the
surface (Harding, 2007 ) . In the main competing class of models,
acceleration occurs further away in the magnetosphere in the outer gap
or the slot gap (Harding, 2007 ) . The former region lies along the
transition region between the open and closed field lines where the
induced electric field and the local magnetic field cancel out ( @xmath
). The latter region is located on the border of the last open field
lines.

Whereas X-ray pulsars tend to be young, rapidly spinning neutron stars
with “typical” magnetic fields, some of them were recently found with
high magnetic fields ( @xmath – @xmath G) and long spin periods ( @xmath
s) (Safi-Harb, 2008 ; Gonzalez et al., 2007 ; Kaspi and McLaughlin, 2005
) . It is not perfectly clear how these pulsars are related to other
X-ray and radio pulsars yet, but it is reasonable to believe that they
slowed down rapidly because of their high magnetic fields. Even though
their large energy output can be accounted for by their loss in
rotational energy, they lie in the same neighborhood of the @xmath
diagram as magnetars (see Figure LABEL:f:p_pdot and, below, § 2.2.2 ).
Are these high-magnetic field pulsars some transitional state between
normal radio pulsars and magnetars? Are they the natural extension of a
diverse population having a wide range of initial properties? The recent
observation of a magnetar-like burst from one of these X-ray pulsars by
Gavriil et al. ( 2008b ) definitely brought solid evidence bridging the
gap between the two families. Additional discoveries will be needed,
however, to fully understand their interrelationship.

Several X-ray pulsars also display pulsed emission at other wavelengths
such as radio, infrared and optical. This is the case for the Crab
Pulsar (Wilson and Fishman, 1983 ) . In these pulsars, the X-ray and
radio pulse profiles sometimes look similar, with aligned phases, but
this is not always the case (Wilson and Fishman, 1983 ; Oosterbroek
et al., 2008 ) . Many X-ray pulsars have very sinusoidal pulse profiles.
Their spectra generally contain a thermal component as well as a
non-thermal component, and are often fitted by a black body plus a
power-law component. Although the high-energy photons certainly interact
in the magnetosphere, it appears that the pulsation might be associated
with a hot spot or some thermal inhomogeneity at the surface of the
neutron star (Geppert et al., 2006 ) .

##### Rotating Radio Transients (RRATs)

Rotating radio transients (RRATs) were identified for the first time by
McLaughlin et al. ( 2006 ) in the reprocessing of the Parkes Multibeam
Pulsar Survey using a new search technique called a single pulse search
. The technique consists of searching raw, dedispersed time series by
convolving them with a kernel function — typically a top-hat function,
but other choices are possible — in order to identify data sequences
having values significantly above the noise level. In the original
discovery paper, 11 radio transients were found using this technique.
For all of them but one, it was possible to assess that they had a
regular spin period. In one case, a significant period derivative was
even found, thus allowing one to infer its magnetic field strength:
@xmath G.

This discovery considerably changed the approach to searching pulsars as
it suggests the existence of a large population of neutron stars
emitting radio pulses in an intermittent way (McLaughlin et al., 2006 )
. In this case, conventional Fourier techniques would generally fail to
detect these RRATs because many of them typically have very low burst
duty cycles.

The nature of these RRATs is unclear and several ongoing research
studies try to address this problem. They may simply represent the more
extreme part of the distribution of pulsars showing nulls and/or
drifting and/or mode switching behaviors. This hypothesis may certainly
account for some of the RRATs since more sensitive observations revealed
persistent radio pulsations in a handful of them (McLaughlin, 2006 ) .
It was also shown that some pulsars displaying important subpulse
variations or mode switching would appear as RRATs if they were located
further away (Weltevrede et al., 2006 ) . More research in this field
will be needed to shed light on the RRAT phenomenon and its connection
to conventional radio pulsars.

#### 2.2.2 Non-Rotation-Powered Pulsars

Among pulsars that are not powered by their rotational energy are the
accretion-powered pulsars and the magnetars. Below is a succinct
overview of these two sub-classes of pulsars.

##### Accretion-Powered Pulsars

Accretion-powered pulsars are found in binary systems. They also often
appear as low-mass X-ray binaries (LMXBs) and high-mass X-ray binaries
(HMXBs). As their names indicate, these pulsars accrete mass from a
binary companion, typically via Roche-lobe overflow or wind accretion
(Ghosh, 2007 ) . Accretion-powered pulsars can show spin-down or spin-up
behaviors depending or whether the accretion mechanism transfers angular
momentum to or away from the pulsar. They present spin periods ranging
from a few milliseconds to several hundred seconds (Laycock et al., 2005
) . Accretion millisecond pulsars in LMXBs are close siblings to MSPs
which are believed to be their descendants (see more details in § 2.6 )
(Alpar et al., 1982 ; Radhakrishnan and Srinivasan, 1982 ) . The
pulsations coming from these pulsars, observable in X-rays, are produced
by the reprocessed thermal emission from their surface, which is heated
when the accreted mass, streamed by the magnetic field, lands at the
polar caps (Shklovsky, 1967 ) .

##### Magnetars

Magnetar is the generic name for the family of pulsars comprising
Anomalous X-ray Pulsars (AXPs) and Soft Gamma-Ray Repeaters (SGRs).
These pulsars experience episodic burst and outburst events during which
their flux can increase by as much as three orders of magnitude above
their pre-burst level (Woods and Thompson, 2006 ) . After these
high-level activities, magnetars relax back to a quiescent level.
Because of the large dynamic range in flux, a large fraction of the
magnetar population might be very difficult to detect in their quiescent
state. For this reason, blind searches for new magnetars are generally
ineffective and instead they are found by serendipitous observations or
in all-sky monitors while they burst (Ibrahim et al., 2004 ) . The
relatively low, though somewhat unknown, duty cycle of magnetars lets us
suppose that they may represent an important fraction of the Galactic
neutron star population — maybe as large as the radio pulsar population,
according to optimistic estimates (Woods and Thompson, 2006 ) .

Magnetars are characterized by large period derivatives and long spin
periods (between 2 and 12 s according to the online magnetar catalogue ⁷
⁷ 7 http://www.physics.mcgill.ca/~pulsar/magnetar/main.html ). This
implies young characteristic ages and enormous dipolar magnetic fields (
@xmath to @xmath G). Their observed luminosity in outburst, and even in
quiescence for some of them, is much larger than would be obtained from
100% efficiency conversion of their spin-down energy to X-ray emission
and hence they cannot be powered by their rotation (Kaspi, 2007 ) . Two
main models originally attempted to explain their nature (Woods and
Thompson, 2006 ) . First, it was proposed that magnetars could be
powered by accretion from a mass-transferring companion or by a fallback
disc left over after the supernova explosion. Very stringent upper
limits have been set using timing on the mass of possible companions and
show that all known magnetars are isolated. Also, no trace of disc that
would be massive enough to trigger outbursts has been found. In
contrast, the magnetar scenario (Duncan and Thompson, 1992 ) , in which
the enormous magnetic field of these neutron stars powers their
emission, gained observational evidence over time and is now well
established.

AXPs and SGRs were historically identified as different kinds of objects
since they displayed slightly different properties. However, with the
increasing number of sources — as of October 2008 there are now 6 known
SGRs and 9 known AXPs — and their long-term monitoring, it seems that
AXPs and SGRs overlap very much. The discovery of SGR-like bursts from
the AXP 1E1048.1 @xmath 5937 by Gavriil et al. ( 2002 ) really closed
the gap between the two classes and showed that they both are
manifestations of magnetars, perhaps linked by an evolutionary path.

A tremendous amount of observational and theoretical progress has been
made over recent years, yet no fully self-consistent physical model has
been able to explain their properties as a whole, such as their spectrum
and timing. Magnetars display a wide variety of properties and more
observations will be needed to sort out the exact picture.
Qualitatively, however, it is generally believed that magnetic stress
accumulated in the crust causes a slow twisting of the magnetic field
outside the neutron star (Thompson et al., 2002 ; Thompson and Duncan,
1995 ) . When the twisting reaches a critical level, an event similar to
a starquake happens and is accompanied by a magnetic reconnection (see
Figure LABEL:f:magnetar_sketch ). This deposits an extremely large
amount of energy in the magnetar’s magnetosphere, maybe as a fireball.
Such an event would be followed by a reorganization of the external
magnetic field structure.

### 2.3 Measurements of Pulsar Properties

#### 2.3.1 Mass

Determining pulsar masses is essential to address a number of questions
related to pulsars, but also to other fields of physics and
astrophysics. One of the most sought answers related to neutron stars
concerns their internal structure and, more specifically, their equation
of state (see § 2.1.1 ). Tackling the equation of state of neutron stars
would in principle require simultaneously measuring radii and masses for
several neutron stars, and quantifying their age and luminosity would
also be desirable (Lattimer and Prakash, 2001 , 2004 , 2007 ) . In fact,
being able to do so for just one neutron star would itself be a great
help! Although this might become possible some day, significant progress
can already be made from mass measurements only. Equations of state
generally predict minimum and/or maximum masses and therefore bracketing
the range of possible masses can help to exclude several models
(Lattimer and Prakash, 2007 ) .

Pulsar mass measurements are also useful to investigate their formation
and evolution. Accurately measuring masses for isolated pulsars is very
challenging. It would certainly be interesting to relate their mass to
their progenitor and determine whether or not pulsars are all born with
a “universal” mass. Masses of pulsars in binary systems are more easily
obtained and can provide information about differences arising from
evolutionary channels (van Kerkwijk et al., 2005 ; van den Heuvel, 2007
) . As we shall see in § 2.6 , pulsars that have shorter periods and
lower magnetic fields are believed to have been recycled more, or more
efficiently, than those having intermediate spin periods and magnetic
fields (Breton et al., 2007 ) . A very important question that arises is
whether the amount of mass accreted plays a crucial role in the spin up
process and how much is needed in order to recycle a pulsar to fast spin
periods (Wijers, 1997 ) . Answering this question would not only help
understanding binary evolution better, it would also partly answer
questions related to accretion efficiency as well as the process through
which the binary pulsars’ magnetic fields dramatically decrease when
they get recycled (Bisnovatyi-Kogan, 2006 ) .

The sample of currently available pulsar masses is rather small and
besides a handful of binary pulsars it has a limited precision.
Nevertheless, this sparse data set has already proven to be extremely
helpful. One of the most striking features of the early mass
measurements is that the mass distribution was comprised within a
relatively narrow range of masses centered around @xmath @xmath
(Thorsett and Chakrabarty, 1999 ) . More recent measurements, however,
appears to yield a larger range (see Figure LABEL:f:psr_mass ). Also,
the fact that some pulsars could be as massive as @xmath @xmath (Freire
et al., 2008 ) appears to favor the ‘stiff’ equations of state at high
densities and would probably rule out exotic models such as quark stars.

Pulsar masses are determined in several ways. Pulsar timing offers the
most precise and reliable way of measuring masses for pulsars in binary
systems (Nice et al., 2008 ) . As we shall explain in § 2.5.3 , under
the assumption that general relativity is valid, the measurement of two
‘post-Keplerian’ parameters allows one to solve for both masses in the
system. Despite the great quality of these measurements, the number of
binary systems that present measurable post-Keplerian parameters is
small because they require a relativistic orbit and/or a favorable
mass/geometry configuration. So far, post-Keplerian parameters have been
observed in 21 binary systems of which 7 yielded measurements of
pulsars’ masses ⁸ ⁸ 8 Note that two or more post-Keplerian parameters
must be measured in order to determine the mass of a pulsar in a binary
system. (as of 2006, c.f. Nice, 2006 ) . The most precise estimate
obtained so far is for the double pulsar PSR J0737 @xmath 3039A/B, which
contains two radio pulsars. The mass of both of them has been measured
with an unparalleled precision: 1.3381(7) and 1.2489(7) @xmath ,
respectively (Kramer et al., 2006 ) .

Another great tool for measuring the mass of a pulsar relies on the
observation of its companion at optical and/or near-infrared wavelengths
(van Kerkwijk et al., 2005 ) . The Doppler shift of the spectral lines
induced by the radial component of the orbital motion allows one to
solve for the total mass of the system. One can then combine it with a
post-Keplerian parameter, when available, or with the mass of the
companion inferred from our knowledge of stellar structures and
atmospheres in order to obtain the mass of the pulsar (see Figure
LABEL:f:wd_fit and Bassa et al. ( 2006 ) ). In fact, the majority of
binary pulsars are in orbit with white dwarf companions (see § 2.6.2 ).
These degenerate stars are ideal since their internal structure and
atmosphere are “simple” compared to that of neutron stars and “normal”
stars and hence existing models are very accurate. Fitting their
spectrum, particularly their prominent Balmer absorption lines, allows
one to infer their surface gravity and temperature (Bergeron, 2001 ;
Bergeron et al., 2001 , 1995 ) . Once a cooling model is applied, this
yields a precise mass determination of the white dwarf. Similar
measurements can be obtained from other kinds of stellar-type companions
such as OB(e) stars, though the mass determination from their spectra is
much less accurate. When the system’s parameters are over-constrained,
one can alternatively use this information to validate white dwarf and
stellar models.

Other mass estimates can be obtained from observations of accreting
X-ray binaries displaying quasi-periodic oscillations (QPOs) (Zhang
et al., 2007 ; Miller et al., 1998 ; van der Klis, 2006 ) or derived
from redshift measurements of spectral line features in type I X-ray
bursts (Webb and Barret, 2007 ) . In either case, these alternative ways
of measuring masses are model-dependent and do not rival the precision
attained by dynamical techniques.

#### 2.3.2 Radius

So far, radius measurements for neutron stars have been very difficult.
In contrast with mass measurement, timing cannot be used as a proxy to
directly infer the radius of a neutron star. The lack of radius
measurements for pulsars having well determined masses has been a
limiting factor in the quest for determining their equation of state.

Other types of neutron stars, however, offer interesting means of
determining their size. In low-mass X-ray binaries for example, a
neutron star accretes mass from a companion. This process is not
continuous and the neutron star will undergo active accretion phases
interrupted by periods of quiescence. When such a neutron star is
quiescent, there is either radiation of the energy accumulated in its
crust or generated by the residual low-rate, radial accretion at its
surface (Webb and Barret, 2007 ) . In either case, the X-ray thermal
emission originates from the neutron star’s atmosphere. The spectrum
will therefore depend on the atmosphere composition as well as the
structure and strength of the neutron star’s magnetic field (Lattimer,
2007 ) . Typical modeling assumes a hydrogen-rich atmosphere and
neglects the effect of the magnetic field (Webb and Barret, 2007 ) . The
latter assumption is justified since these measurements are carried out
on old neutron stars that present low magnetic fields ( @xmath G), which
are negligible in this context. In general, one can determine the
redshifted radiation temperature, @xmath , from the spectral analysis
(see Figure LABEL:f:quiescent ). If the distance is reliably known —
nearby neutron stars with parallactic distance or globular cluster
neutron stars are used most of the time — one can deduce the redshifted
radius of the neutron star, @xmath , using @xmath (Webb and Barret, 2007
) . Under an assumption or independent measurement of the surface
gravity or neutron star mass, one obtains the proper radius of the
neutron star @xmath (Webb and Barret, 2007 ) .

As we can see, observations of quiescent, old neutron stars provide
excellent tools for studying their equation of state. The caveat here,
as for the non-dynamical mass determination techniques discussed
previously, is that they rely on several assumptions such as atmosphere
models and distance estimates.

#### 2.3.3 Magnetic Field

The magnetic field of pulsars is a fundamental ingredient responsible
for their pulsed emission in the various energy bands that are observed.
It controls the way that the rotation-powered pulsars spin down (Gold,
1968 ) , and it appears to play a pivotal role in binary evolution
(Bisnovatyi-Kogan, 2006 ) . In magnetars, the magnetic field even
provides the main source of energy (Thompson and Duncan, 1995 ) .
Measuring the magnetic field strength of pulsars is therefore
interesting but understanding its structure is also relevant for
explaining how they are generated, how they are coupled to the internal
structure of the neutron star, how emission mechanisms work and how
accretion and recycling proceeds.

In rotation-powered pulsars, magnetic field strength values are inferred
from the pulsar spin-down (see Equation 2.16 ). These measurements are
based on the assumption that pulsars are spinning magnetic dipoles and
that they spin in a vacuum (Gunn and Ostriker, 1969 ) . Although this
model is thought to provide reliable order-of-magnitude results, it is
desirable to obtain independent measurements. The timing-based magnetic
field method is also extended to magnetars despite the fact that they
are clearly not powered by dipolar radiation.

At the present time, there is no direct means of determining the
magnetic field strength of radio pulsars. In X-ray pulsars and X-ray
binaries, however, absorption lines are sometimes detectable and proper
identification of these lines can yield an independent estimate of the
magnetic field. For instance, the electron-positron cyclotron resonance
frequency is proportional to the magnetic field strength and is equal to
the electron rest-mass energy (511 keV) when the field reaches @xmath G
(Ghosh, 2007 ) . Depending on the exact magnetic field strength, one
could in principle see absorption features at the fundamental energy or
at higher-order harmonics.

Spectral features that appear to be electron cyclotron lines have been
detected in about a dozen accreting X-ray binaries (Staubert, 2003 ;
Harding and Lai, 2006 ) . They yield an estimated @xmath G magnetic
fields, which is consistent with spin-down measurements in radio
pulsars. In magnetars, detections of spectral features (Gavriil et al.,
2008a ; Rea et al., 2003 ; Ibrahim et al., 2003 ; Gavriil et al., 2002 )
indicate that this class of neutron stars would have @xmath G magnetic
fields if the features are interpreted as proton cyclotron resonance.
Further indirect evidence of pulsar magnetic field values have been
obtained in other ways such as spectral modeling of magnetar X-ray
emission (Güver et al., 2008 ) .

Investigating the magnetic field structure of pulsars is probably even
more difficult than inferring their strength. The relative success of
the pulsar spin-down model at predicting the right magnetic fields and
braking indices are certainly excellent accomplishments of the dipole
model, as is the pulsar lighthouse model at explaining general radio
pulsar shapes and polarization properties (Radhakrishnan and Cooke, 1969
; Han and Manchester, 2001 ) . Nevertheless, they do not constitute
unique proof of perfect dipolar structures and hence obtaining more
“direct” evidence is desirable.

Some of the most significant progress has been made not by studying
pulsars themselves but, instead, by making use of the nebulae that
surround the young, energetic ones such as the Crab Pulsar. These pulsar
wind nebulae (PWNs) are created by the large amount of radiative energy
and energetic particles deposited by pulsars in the surrounding
interstellar medium (see Figure LABEL:f:pwn ). Several of these PWNs,
which are particularly bright in X-rays, display toroidal and jet-like
structures (Bucciantini, 2008 ) . Detailed magnetohydrodynamics
simulations suggest that their morphology closely follows the structure
of the pulsar’s magnetic field (Komissarov and Lyubarsky, 2004 ) .

More recently, observations and modeling of magnetospheric eclipses in
the double pulsar PSR J0737 @xmath 3039A/B opened up a new, direct way
of probing the magnetic field structure of pulsars (Lyutikov and
Thompson, 2005 ; Breton et al., 2008 ) . This constitutes, in fact, part
of the material that we shall present in Chapter 4 .

### 2.4 Radio Telescopes

This thesis essentially concentrates on radio pulsars in binary systems.
Most of the data used in the original research presented here were
therefore collected with radio telescopes. More specifically, two radio
telescopes have been used: the 100-meter Robert C. Byrd radio telescope
(also known at the GBT) in Green Bank, West Virginia, United States (see
Figure LABEL:f:gbt ); and the 64-meter Parkes radio telescope in New
South Wales, Australia (see Figure LABEL:f:parkes ). In this section, we
shall briefly describe the general principle behind radio observation of
pulsars ⁹ ⁹ 9 This section is based on the information found in Lyne and
Graham-Smith ( 2006 ); Condon and Ransom ( 2008 ); Whitaker ( 1996 ) .

Pulsar observations are generally conducted on single “dish” radio
telescopes. Just like more conventional optical telescopes, the aim of
the primary reflector is to collect radio waves over a large effective
area and redirect them toward a device converting the radio signal into
an electrical signal. The larger the effective collecting area, the more
sensitive the radio telescope is at detecting weak sources. Since
pulsars are relatively weak point sources, no imaging capability is
required to observe them. Therefore, single dish antennae are perfect
instruments since they offer great sensitivity. All the photons are
generally collected by one receiver; in other words, these single dish
antennae are one-pixel cameras.

The radio signal is generally sampled by a wave-guide feed sensitive to
the two orthogonal polarizations of light. Each polarization then
follows a separate channel. A block diagram showing a typical
(simplified) back-end system of a radio telescope is showed in Figure
LABEL:f:heterodyne . The detected radio frequency (RF) is first
amplified and then sent into the receiver. Most modern radio telescopes
use superheterodyne receivers that allow the whole system, except the
front-end, to work in a fixed, narrow range of frequencies. The RF
amplified signal is first mixed with the signal generated by a local
oscillator (LO). The results of this process are four signals coming out
of the mixer and having frequencies corresponding to the original RF
signal ( @xmath ), the original LO signal ( @xmath ), and two signals
consisting of the sum and the difference of the RF and LO signals:
@xmath and @xmath . This technique can be used to convert the high
frequency RF signal into an intermediate frequency (IF). Lower frequency
signals are more efficiently transported and easier to analyze by
electrical devices than higher frequency ones. By filtering the output
one can therefore isolate the IF, which is usually chosen to be the
difference signal: @xmath . By tuning the frequency of the local
oscillator, one can always manage to obtain the same @xmath regardless
of the RF signal and thus the receiver can be optimized to work around
this frequency. After the step of filtering, the IF is amplified.
Additional steps of mixing with another local oscillator, filtering and
amplifying are sometimes done in order to improve the quality of the
received signal. Finally, the signal can be demodulated in order to
recover the baseband signal. Sampling devices can then record the
signal. Alternatively, it can also go to filter banks or correlators
directly without being demodulated.

### 2.5 Pulsar Timing

One of the characteristics that make pulsars unique astrophysical
objects is the periodic emission of electromagnetic waves. The pulsar
science framework is based on this property and timing pulsars with an
astonishing precision permits inference of several physical quantities.
Pulsar timing is itself a complex task and we shall describe in this
section the general principles of this fine art ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 Unless
otherwise stated, references used to write this section are Lorimer and
Kramer ( 2004 ); Lyne and Graham-Smith ( 2006 ) .

When doing pulsar timing, one essentially attempts to associate the
observed pulses from a pulsar, or more strictly speaking their times of
arrival (TOAs), with a model describing their past behavior, from which
future TOAs can be predicted. In order to obtain a TOA, one has to fold
the pulsar time series using a preliminary timing solution. This process
allows one to stack individual subpulses and construct a profile having
a signal significantly above the noise level. Bear in mind that the
pulsar signal is periodic whereas the noise should in principle be
random and uncorrelated over an extended amount of time. This explains
how data folding permits the detection of pulsars with individual
subpulses much lower than the noise level. Depending on the
characteristics of the pulsar being timed (isolated or in binary system,
flux density, etc.), the folded profile accumulates between a few pulses
to several minutes of observation. Then, a template representing the
pulse profile — often a high signal-to-noise profile — is
cross-correlated with the folded profile in order to find the precise
time corresponding to the location of a fiducial reference feature. Once
TOAs are generated, one fits them to the timing model. Timing is
generally an iterative process in which new TOAs are added to the old
ones and the timing solution is improved from the existing one. TOAs can
then be regenerated if the new timing solution significantly changes the
folded profile used to generate them. Several ingredients are involved
in pulsar timing models but we can generally separate them into two
fundamental categories: extrinsic and intrinsic components.

Two of the most widely used pulsar analysis packages are PRESTO ,
developed by Scott Ransom (Ransom et al., 2002 ) , and SIGPROC ,
developed by Duncan Lorimer ( Lorimer, ) . We made use of both pulsar
packages, and more particularly PRESTO , for the processing of the data
presented in this thesis. Pulsar timing is almost exclusively done using
the TEMPO software, which was written by Taylor, Manchester, Nice,
Weisberg, Irwin, Wex and others ¹¹ ¹¹ 11
http://www.atnf.csiro.au/research/pulsar/tempo/ . More recently, a
revamped version of this software called TEMPO 2 has mainly been written
by Hobbs et al. ( 2006b ) ¹² ¹² 12
http://www.atnf.csiro.au/research/pulsar/tempo2/ in order to allow for
extended timing capabilities such as the pulsar timing array , which is
used in order to detect extremely low-frequency gravity waves (Jenet
et al., 2006 ) .

#### 2.5.1 Extrinsic Timing Components

To first order, pulsar timing is relatively simple: pulsars spin and
emit beams of light that intersect our line of sight once per rotation.
Although it is in fact more complicated than that, let us assume for now
that some pulsars intrinsically emits perfectly periodic signals. As
seen from a ground-based observatory, the time interval between pulses
would vary over the course of a year because of the motion of the Earth
around the Sun. The Earth is therefore not a suitable choice for pulsar
timing and choosing the Solar System barycenter (SSB) is certainly more
appropriate.

One can relate the TOA of a pulse received by an observatory on Earth,
@xmath (topocentric time), to one measured at the SSB, @xmath
(barycentric time), as follows (Lorimer and Kramer, 2004 ) :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first correction, @xmath , is a time correction that synchronizes
the observatory clock to the Terrestrial Time international time
standard, TT(BIPM), which is maintained by the Bureau International de
Poids et Mesures (BIPM) based on the average time of a large number of
atomic clocks.

The second correction, @xmath , is the dispersion measure correction
(see Figure LABEL:f:dm ). As we discussed previously, light travels at a
different speed in an ionized medium because of the change in refraction
index. This traveling speed is frequency-dependent and varies as the
square of the observed frequency, @xmath . When barycentering a pulsar’s
TOA, one corrects the observed time of a signal arriving at an
infinitely high frequency or, in other words, as if space were empty. In
this correction, @xmath , where @xmath MHz @xmath pc @xmath cm @xmath s
is a constant and DM is a measurable quantity called the dispersion
measure . The dispersion measure corresponds to the integrated column
density of free electrons along the line of sight, @xmath pc cm @xmath ,
and can be determined experimentally using the frequency-dependent
behavior of @xmath . If the observed bandwidth is sufficiently large
compared with the dispersive delay, the signal will suffer a smearing
across the band. This can be corrected “incoherently” by breaking the
bandwidth into small frequency channels and applying a delay to each of
them. Alternatively, one can use a “coherent” dedispersion system
combined to the recording back-end that will apply the delay
continuously across the bandwidth and avoid the frequency channel
discretization approximation.

The third correction, @xmath , is called the Römer delay. It is a
classical correction to account for the finite speed-of-light travel
time between the observatory and the SSB. This correction considers the
precise motion of the Earth and includes perturbations from all major
bodies in the Solar System. Another component of the Römer delay arises
from the fact that observatories are not at the center of the Earth,
hence their geographical location with respect to the center of mass of
the Earth must also be included.

The fourth correction, @xmath , is called the Shapiro delay. It is known
from Einstein’s theory of general relativity that matter curves
space-time. Since light travels on straight lines (geodesics), the
curvature generated by the Sun and other bodies of the Solar System
increases the effective distance traveled by photons to us. The
signature of this delay depends on the geometry; it varies according to
the location of the body responsible for space-time curvature with
respect to our line of sight to the source. As one may expect, the
Shapiro delay becomes larger when the projected distance is smaller. The
Shapiro delay can be decomposed into two independent parameters: the
‘shape’ parameter describes the angular extent of the delay; and the
‘range’ parameter scales its amplitude. In the Solar System, the Sun
induces a delay that can reach @xmath @xmath s whereas for Jupiter it
goes up to @xmath ns. As for the Römer delay, contributions from all
significant sources have to be summed up.

Finally, the last correction, @xmath , is the Einstein delay. This delay
results from the combined effect of time dilation, mainly due to the
motion of the Earth in its orbit, and the gravitational redshift due to
the gravitational potential of the Sun, Earth and other main bodies of
the Solar System. A particular contribution to the Einstein delay arises
from the ellipticity of the Earth’s orbit. Since our distance to the Sun
varies, the gravitational force at the Earth changes and induces a
variation in the flow of time with respect to distant observers.

Since the arrival times of pulses undergo different kinds of delays that
are position-dependent, it is possible to exploit this particular
property in order to derive the pulsar position from timing even though
the radio telescopes that are being used to observe them do not have
imaging capabilities. For nearby pulsars, parallaxes can be obtained
using the very long baseline of the Earth’s orbit. In certain cases,
pulsar timing parallactic distances have been measured up to several
kiloparsecs (Hobbs et al., 2005 ) . Additionally, proper motion is
sometimes observed for pulsars having apparent large transverse
velocities. Timing parallaxes and proper motion measurements are more
accurately determined for pulsars located away from the ecliptic plane
as the Römer delay, which is the leading correction, scales as @xmath ,
where @xmath is the ecliptic latitude.

#### 2.5.2 Intrinsic Timing Components

As we can see, even for a simple periodic signal, pulsar timing requires
one to deal with several high-precision details. Intrinsically, pulsars’
timing behavior should be relatively simple; they spin at a very stable
rate and gradually slow down due to the conversion of their rotational
energy into electromagnetic radiation. As we have described in § 2.2.1 ,
dipole radiation, as well as other forms of rotational slow down, have
well defined behaviors relating the period, the first-order, and the
higher-order period derivatives. In a practical way, however,
barycentered TOAs are empirically fitted to a period signal that can
have multiple order derivatives. The goal of the process is to “phase
connect” the TOAs; i.e. to fit the observed TAOs such that each rotation
of the pulsar is accounted for without losing phase coherence even if
there are observational gaps.

In young pulsars, for which the spin-down rate is large, the second
period derivative has physical significance and allows one to determine
the braking index (see Equation 2.13 ). For most pulsars, however, the
timing behavior beyond the first period derivative is dominated by
noise. This noise is generally very ‘red’, i.e. it has a power density
proportional to @xmath with @xmath . In old MSPs, part of the noise may
be attributed to external causes such as gravitational waves, dispersion
measure variations, clock errors and inaccuracies in the solar system
ephemeris. Most of these external sources should present well-defined
correlations with the timing noise of other old MSPs (Hobbs et al.,
2006a ) . Hobbs et al. ( 2006a ) put stringent limits on the importance
of these contributions and showed that some the noise in old MSPs is
intrinsic to them (Hobbs et al., 2006a ) . In young pulsars, which have
spin-down rates @xmath times larger than that of MSPs, external sources
are negligible and hence their timing noise is dominated by intrinsic
factors.

Pulsars, and more specifically young ones, sometimes experience
‘extreme’ forms of timing anomalies known as glitches (Radhakrishnan and
Manchester, 1969 ) . These events are characterized by a sudden,
quasi-instantaneous ¹³ ¹³ 13 A ‘live’ observation of a glitch in the
Vela Pulsar revealed that the transition time from the original to the
new period was less than 40 s (Dodson et al., 2002 ) increase of the
pulsar spin frequency occasionally accompanied by a change in the
spin-down rate, which sometimes relaxes back to its pre-glitch rate
(Lyne et al., 2000 ) (see Figure LABEL:f:glitch ). The physical reason
for glitches is not known precisely but it is generally agreed that
since no significant pulse profile changes are observed, something must
be occurring inside the neutron star such as the unpinning of superfluid
vortices that would transfer angular momentum outward to the crust and
cause the spin-up (Lyne et al., 2000 ) .

#### 2.5.3 Binary Pulsar Timing

When pulsars are in binary systems, additional delays affect their TOAs,
notably because of their motion around the center of mass. In addition
to the SSB corrections presented above, one has to convert the observed
binary pulsar TOAs to its center-of-mass frame of reference using
another set of corrections similar to those introduced above.

##### Non-relativistic Systems

When the orbital velocity is much smaller than the speed of light,
Newtonian dynamics accurately account for the behavior of binary
pulsars. In this situation, the Römer delay essentially reduces to the
Doppler shift induced by the orbital motion around the center of mass
and is described by Kepler’s laws. Five parameters called the Keplerian
parameters are used to characterize these orbits (see Figure
LABEL:f:keplerian_orbit ): 1) the orbital period, @xmath ; 2) the
eccentricity, @xmath ; 3) the projected semi-major axis, @xmath ; 4) the
longitude of periastron (also known as periapsis), @xmath ; 5) the epoch
of passage at periastron, @xmath . Note that the orbital inclination,
@xmath , can generally not be determined from the timing of a
non-relativistic binary pulsar as the orbital Doppler shift only affects
the line-of-sight velocity component. Consequently, the measurable
Keplerian parameters can be combined using Kepler’s third law in order
to obtain a quantity called the mass function of the system:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the mass of the pulsar and its companion,
respectively, in solar mass, @xmath is in days, @xmath is in
light-second, and @xmath @xmath s. The mass function can be useful at
determining the minimum mass of a companion (for @xmath ) when a pulsar
mass is assumed.

In principle a sixth Keplerian parameter called the position angle (also
known as argument) of the ascending node, @xmath ( @xmath in Figure
LABEL:f:keplerian_orbit ) describes the orientation of the orbit in the
sky plane. As it requires supplemental knowledge about the geometry of
the system, which is rarely measurable, and it does not provide relevant
additional dynamical information, it is generally neglected.

##### Relativistic Systems

In systems with larger orbital velocities, Newton’s equations of motion
fail to perfectly explain the orbital dynamics and treating these
relativistic systems requires the incorporation of higher-order
corrections to the classical motion. The most common way to proceed
consists of using the post-Keplerian (PK) parameters , which are purely
phenomenological corrections to the orbit see (see Damour and Taylor,
1992 , for a complete description of relativistic binary pulsar timing)
¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 The post-Keplerian (PK) formalism must not be confused with the
parametrized post-Newtonian (PPN) formalism. The former is based on a
phenomenological description of the orbital motion. It aims to extend
the concept of Keplerian orbits to relativistic systems by accounting
for secular variations of the Keplerian parameters and various other
effects such as gravitational redshift, time dilation and aberration
(Damour and Taylor, 1992 ) . On the other hand, the PPN formalism is
based on the metric representation of gravity (Will, 2001 ) . It
accounts for the non-linearity of relativistic theories of gravity by
expanding the metric in the regime of weak gravitational fields and slow
velocities (typically @xmath , @xmath ) around a flat space. Note that
one can find an equivalence between the PK parameters and the PPN
parameters (see Damour and Taylor, 1992 ) . . Since this formalism does
not rely on any particular theory of gravity, it gives one the freedom
to establish the correspondence of these PK parameters to a given theory
and test it. Within the framework of a theory of gravity, the PK
parameters can be written as specific functions of the 5 Keplerian
parameters as well as the two masses in the system. Of course, general
relativity is a natural choice and we shall present a brief overview of
the tests of gravity involving binary pulsars in § 2.7 .

In theory, there are several first-order and higher-order PK parameters
that can be measured. So far, a total of five have been determined
(Nice, 2006 ; Lyne et al., 2004 ) . They are: 1) the periastron advance,
@xmath ; 2) the gravitational redshift and time dilation, @xmath ; 3)
the orbital period decay, @xmath ; 4-5) and the Shapiro delay ‘shape’,
@xmath , and ‘range’, @xmath , parameters (see Figure LABEL:f:shapiro ).
These PK parameters take the following form in general relativity
(Lorimer, 2005 ) :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , the total mass of the system.

The periastron advance is caused by the fact that relativistic orbits
are not closed. The gravitational redshift arises from the ‘downhill”
and/or “uphill” travel of the photons in the potential well of the
system in order to reach us, whereas the time dilation is due to the
varying rate of time of accelerated frames of reference; both effects
couple and are undistinguishable. The orbital period decay is a
consequence of gravitational wave radiation that takes energy away from
the system. Finally, the Shapiro delay is the same phenomenon as the SSB
correction introduced above.

From the above PK parameters, @xmath and @xmath require eccentric orbits
to be measurable, the Shapiro delay is visible for highly inclined (i.e.
edge-on) orbits only, whereas @xmath demands very short orbital periods.
Varying the mass of the companion also affects the visibility of the PK
parameters, and hence the favorable geometrical configuration of some
systems made PK parameter measurements possible even in systems that do
not appear to be very “relativistic”.

### 2.6 Binary Pulsars

Binary pulsars constitute one of the predominant subsets of known
pulsars and they are particularly relevant to radio pulsars and, of
course, to accretion-powered pulsars. This thesis specifically focuses
on binary radio pulsars and hence we shall provide a short review of
binary pulsar evolution and classes of binary radio pulsars in this
section.

Evolution with a binary companion, as opposed to being isolated,
dramatically changes the observed properties of a pulsar. A quick look
at the @xmath diagram (see Figure LABEL:f:p_pdot ) is sufficient to
realize that binary radio pulsars preferentially occupy the lower left
corner of the diagram. That is, they generally have short spin periods,
slow spin-downs and, correspondingly, low magnetic fields and large
characteristic ages. A close look at the distribution of spin periods of
binary and non-binary pulsars (see Figure LABEL:f:distribution_Binary )
does not leave any doubt: out of the 30 fastest spinning pulsars, 22 are
found in binary systems ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 Based on the ATNF pulsar catalogue
(Manchester et al., 2005a ) , as of September 2008. . As we shall
explain below, finding a high correlation between rapidly spinning
pulsars and binarity is not a selection effect but a natural consequence
of binary evolution.

The presence of a companion opens up a plethora of windows for studying
pulsar physics and, even using them as astrophysical tools to test
gravity and general relativity (Stairs, 2003 , 2004 ) . This latter
aspect will be covered in detail in § 2.7 . In this section, we will
direct our focus on the basics of binary pulsar evolution and discuss
some research aspects involving these systems.

#### 2.6.1 Binary Evolution

As we mentioned in § 2.1 , in the classical picture, neutron stars are
born from massive stars ending their life in supernovae. This scenario
is appropriate when the progenitor star is isolated but stellar
evolution becomes much more complex when two or more stars are
gravitationally bound. In this situation, the evolution of each star is
no longer independent but is, instead, coupled to that of its
companion(s). Current surveys are inconclusive regarding the precise
stellar multiplicity rate in the Milky Way and despite the fact that it
appears to vary anywhere from @xmath 15 to 80% and may depend on the
spectral type (Lada, 2006 ) , it nevertheless constitutes a
non-negligible fraction of the Galactic population. It is therefore
natural to expect that the pulsar population displays some observable
properties inherited from binary evolution.

The interaction of stars in binary systems can manifest itself in
different ways but the most crucial certainly is mass transfer. Mass
transfer occurs in compact binaries in which the orbital separation is
such that matter at the surface of one of the two stars becomes loosely
bound and equally attracted by the companion (see Figure LABEL:f:roche
). We refer to this equipotential surface that delimitates the zone of
influence of each body in a binary system as the Roche lobe, after the
French astronomer who first studied this concept. If a star reaches the
size of the Roche-lobe, matter will start being transfered to its
companion via the inner Lagrangian point @xmath .

The onset of mass transfer marks an important turning point in the
binary system evolution since mass transfer plays a significant role on
the evolution of the stars themselves and it is also accompanied by
angular momentum transfer and non-conservative effects such as mass loss
that change the orbital and rotational properties of the stars.
According to Ghosh ( 2007 ) and Bhattacharya and van den Heuvel ( 1991 )
, the behavior of the interaction between the two stars mainly depends
on: 1) the evolutionary state of the core of the donor star at the onset
of the mass transfer, 2) the donor star’s envelope structure, and 3) the
mass ratio . Kippenhahn and Weigert ( 1967 ) introduced a classification
scheme to identify the main evolutionary outcomes of a close binary
system based on the above factors (see Figure LABEL:f:radius_evolution
): case A systems start mass transfer before the donor star ends
hydrogen-core burning; case B systems start mass transfer between the
end of hydrogen-core burning and before the ignition of helium-core
burning; case C systems start mass transfer after the ignition of
helium-core burning and before the ignition of carbon-core burning
(Kippenhahn and Weigert, 1967 ; Paczyński, 1971 ; Ghosh, 2007 ) .

The evolution of binary systems leading to the formation of binary
pulsars usually involves a phase of mass transfer from the pulsar
progenitor to its companion. Unless the pulsar’s companion is also a
neutron star or a black hole, the pulsar’s progenitor is generally the
star that was initially more massive since it evolves first. As we shall
see in § 2.6.2 , most binary pulsars comprise evolved companions and
rare are the systems with non-evolved stars. In fact, all binary pulsars
having short spin periods and low magnetic fields — that is, the
majority of the binary pulsar population — present a common aspect: they
all have evolved companions. This cocktail of properties leads to the
conclusion that these pulsars have been “recycled” by their companions.
In this process, a “normal” or “old” pulsar gets rejuvenated to a short
spin period following the transfer of angular momentum while it is
accreting from its companion. As we mentioned in § 2.6 , it appears that
the magnetic field of the pulsar also decays as a result of this
process.

Despite that the intricate details of binary evolution depend on the
evolutionary class to which the system belongs, the general behavior of
the mass transfer is regulated by whether it is conservative or
non-conservative (see Figure LABEL:f:evolution_cases ). Conservative
mass transfer is associated with stars that have not developed a deep
convective envelope. In such a case, the star restores its hydrostatic
equilibrium on a thermal timescale, i.e. almost instantaneously
(Bhattacharya and van den Heuvel, 1991 ) . The star then has a smaller
size than before and should therefore stop filling its Roche lobe. Since
the star becomes out of thermal equilibrium, it will slowly expand to
reach a new equilibrium on a thermal timescale and this should allow it
to fill its Roche lobe again (Ghosh, 2007 ) . In a practical way, this
process acts in a feedback loop and this allows the star to transfer
mass to its companion in a stable way.

The equation of state of stars having a deep convective envelope is
different than those having a radiative structure. The volume of these
stars is nearly inversely proportional to their mass and hence as they
transfer mass to their companion they tend to become larger on a
dynamical timescale (Bhattacharya and van den Heuvel, 1991 ) . In
general, the change in orbital distance induced by the mass transfer is
not fast enough in order to let the Roche-lobe radius accommodate the
size of the star. Consequently, the star will enter a cataclysmic,
highly non-conservative mass transfer phase called common envelope in
which it becomes so large that the companion lies inside its envelope
(Bhattacharya and van den Heuvel, 1991 ) .

#### 2.6.2 Binary Radio Pulsar Population

As we have argued before, different evolutionary paths lead to pulsars
with different properties and companions (Bhattacharya and van den
Heuvel, 1991 ; Stairs, 2004 ; van Kerkwijk et al., 2005 ) . One may
choose to base the binary pulsar phylogeny on either aspect — the pulsar
properties or the companion type — but it appears that both are
complementary and constitute more or less two ways of viewing the same
thing (see Figure LABEL:f:population ). In this subsection, we shall
present an overview of the main classes of observed binary radio pulsars
following that presented in van Kerkwijk et al. ( 2005 ) , with some
additions from the review by Stairs ( 2004 ) .

##### Pulsar + Main Sequence Star

In binary systems consisting of pulsars with main sequence companions,
the more massive star evolved faster and became the observed pulsar
after exploding in a supernova. This type of binary is rare and they are
usually found with massive, early spectral-type companions such as B
stars. There is a strong observational bias against finding these
systems as main sequence companions have limited lifetimes and will
eventually start transferring mass to the pulsar. In several systems,
the companion is also likely going to hide the pulsar or quench its
radio emission if it has wind.

-    Pulse period: Typical of that of isolated pulsars.

-    Magnetic field: Typical of that of isolated pulsars.

##### Recycled Pulsar + He WD

Following the nomenclature adopted by Stairs ( 2004 ) , we shall also
refer to this class as case @xmath ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 In order to avoid confusion
with the standard binary evolution nomenclature, we differentiate case A
introduced by Kippenhahn and Weigert ( 1967 ); Paczyński ( 1971 ) from
case @xmath used here. . Pulsars with helium white dwarf (He WD)
companions typically evolve from low-mass X-ray binaries (LMXBs) in
which a neutron star accretes from a low-mass main-sequence star filling
its Roche lobe. Initially, the system probably had a large mass ratio
and the more massive star became a pulsar after the supernova. The less
massive secondary then kept evolving until it filled its Roche lobe,
which marks the onset of mass transfer of the LMXB phase. This generally
occurs when the secondary ascends the giant branch and then becomes
large. External factors may also contribute, though in a much lesser
extent, to accelerating the evolution process. For example, heating
caused by the newly born neutron star’s radiation may bloat the
secondary’s envelope (van Kerkwijk et al., 2000 ) and magnetic braking
may reduce the orbital separation (Ergma and Sarna, 2000 ; Benvenuto and
De Vito, 2005 ) .

He WD progenitors are low-mass stars ( @xmath @xmath ), which, after the
hydrogen-shell ignition, have helium cores that become degenerate and
slowly climb the giant branch until they experience the helium flash
(Bhattacharya and van den Heuvel, 1991 ) . Theoretically, the
evolutionary timescale of such stars forming @xmath @xmath He WDs is
comparable to or longer than the Hubble time. Binary evolution, however,
significantly accelerates the process; as the secondary loses mass to
the benefit of the neutron star, its internal structure and the rate of
nuclear reactions re-adjust to compensate for the mass transfer, which
induces a variation of the orbital separation and, consequently, of the
Roche-lobe radius (Tauris and Savonije, 1999 ; Taam, 2004 ) . It is
therefore possible to form @xmath @xmath He WDs in binary systems.

-    Pulse period: Steady and stable accretion occurring over a long
    timescale allows very fast, fully recycled millisecond pulsars (
    @xmath ms).

-    Magnetic field: Very low magnetic field ( @xmath G).

-    Orbital period: A correlation is predicted between the mass of the
    He WD and the orbital period of the system (Rappaport et al., 1995 )
    . The core mass of the progenitor is related to the size of its
    envelope and since mass transfer happens via stable Roche-lobe
    overflow, which is directly related to the orbital separation, the
    companion’s radius is required to match that of the Roche lobe.

-    Orbital eccentricity: A correlation is predicted between the
    eccentricity and the orbital period as a result of the damping of
    convective eddies in the white dwarf progenitor’s envelope. This
    damping excites the epicyclic motion in the orbit and stochastically
    maintains the eccentricity to a larger value than one would expect
    from the tidal circularization (Phinney, 1992 ) .

##### Recycled Pulsar + CO/ONeMg WD

Following the nomenclature adopted by Stairs ( 2004 ) , we shall also
refer to this class as case @xmath ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 In order to avoid confusion
with the standard binary evolution nomenclature, we differentiate case B
introduced by Kippenhahn and Weigert ( 1967 ); Paczyński ( 1971 ) from
case @xmath used here. . Pulsars with carbon-oxygen white dwarf (CO WD)
or oxygen-neon-magnesium white dwarf (ONeMg WD) companions experience
more cataclysmic evolutions than their relatives from case @xmath .
Because the secondary star of these systems is initially more massive,
helium-burning ignition will occur shortly after the start of
hydrogen-shell burning and hence the structure of the star is
considerably changed. Stable mass transfer via the inner Lagrangian
point will generally not occur for an extended period because the star
cannot dynamically readjust fast enough to match the Roche lobe.
Instead, the secondary expands beyond the Roche lobe and the system
enters an unstable common envelope . The neutron star and the core of
its companion will then in-spiral because of the viscous forces created
by the surrounding envelope. The orbital binding energy is transferred
into the envelope until enough is deposited to expel it, leaving the
neutron star and a bare CO or ONeMg-rich core, which ultimately becomes
a CO/ONeMg WD surrounded by a helium or hydrogen layer, depending on the
evolutionary stage of the secondary at the onset of the common envelope.
These systems are typically descendants of HMXBs or intermediate-mass
X-ray binaries (IMXBs) (Camilo et al., 2001 ) .

-    Pulse period: Unstable mass transfer is believed to be less
    efficient and to span a shorter amount of time than stable
    Roche-lobe overflow. Consequently, pulsars are mildly recycled to
    intermediate spin periods ( @xmath ms).

-    Magnetic field: Intermediate between isolated pulsars and MSPs (
    @xmath G).

-    Orbital period: No particular correlation is expected but the
    orbital separation should be relatively small because of the
    in-spiral experienced during the common envelope phase.

-    Orbital eccentricity: No particular correlation is expected but the
    orbital eccentricity should be “larger” than for the recycled
    pulsar + He WD class because the circularization should be less
    efficient for common envelope than stable mass transfer.

##### Recycled Pulsar + Neutron Star

The natural extension of the previous type of binary pulsars from the
case @xmath class is one with a companion massive enough to ignite
triple alpha nuclear reactions and build up iron in its core. In such a
case, the secondary would eventually explode as a supernova and become a
neutron star just like the primary. During the mass transfer phase that
leads to the formation of the second neutron star, these systems are
generally observed as high-mass X-ray binaries (HMXBs) . Like the above
class, which eventually forms CO/ONeMg WDs, this type of binary
experiences unstable mass transfer and common envelope evolution. This
binary class is fundamentally different from those having lighter
companions because a second supernova occurs in the system. Even though
the orbit may have circularized during the last mass transfer stage, the
kick imparted by the second supernova explosion will generally result in
a large orbital eccentricity.

-    Pulse period: Similar as for the case @xmath class — mildly
    recycled ( @xmath ms).

-    Magnetic field: Similar as for the case @xmath class — intermediate
    magnetic field ( @xmath G).

-    Orbital eccentricity: The second supernova explosion produces a
    kick that, for most configurations, is likely going to impart a
    large orbital eccentricity. Some systems, however, appear to have a
    relatively “small” eccentricity (van den Heuvel, 2007 ) .

In these systems, the observed pulsar is the first-born neutron star and
because it accreted mass from its companion, it experienced partial
recycling. Note that the second-born neutron star may also emit radio
pulsations. Its visibility depends on the viewing geometry of the system
since its radio beam would also have to sweep across our line of sight.
If it were the case, this second-born neutron star would appear with
characteristics similar to those of an isolated pulsar because it did
not experience recycling.

The double pulsar PSR J0737 @xmath 3039A/B is the only known case of a
binary system in which both neutron stars are observable radio pulsars
(Lyne et al., 2004 ) . Recent studies by Dewi and van den Heuvel ( 2004
) and Stairs et al. ( 2006 ) suggest that the double pulsar might have
experienced a slightly modified version of the above formation
mechanism. Rather than the conventional supernova explosion of a massive
star having an iron core, the second-born pulsar would result from an
electron-capture induced collapse (Stairs et al., 2006 ; van den Heuvel,
2007 ) . This hypothesis is supported by the low orbital eccentricity
and the probable small kick imparted to the system after the formation
of the second pulsar. The evolution prior to the formation of the second
pulsar, however, remains sensibly unchanged.

##### Pulsar + Neutron Star

This class of binary pulsar is very similar to the recycled pulsar +
neutron stars class. Here the observed pulsar is the second-born neutron
star and it has not experienced recycling.

-    Pulse period: Similar to that of isolated pulsars.

-    Magnetic field: Similar to that of isolated pulsars.

-    Orbital eccentricity: The second supernova explosion produces a
    kick that, for most configurations, is likely going to impart a
    large orbital eccentricity.

Note that a double neutron star system may appear as a recycled pulsar +
neutron star , a pulsar + neutron star or a recycled pulsar + pulsar
system, depending on whether they intrinsically emit radio pulsations
and also on the viewing geometry.

##### Pulsar + CO/ONeMg WD

As we explained before, in the early evolution of a binary the more
massive star evolves faster than its companion. If the primary star is
massive enough, it will explode as a supernova and leave behind a
neutron star remnant. It is important to bear in mind, however, that
during the giant phase of the primary, mass transfer from the primary to
the secondary will likely occur if the orbital separation permits. Such
an event can dramatically change the course of the evolution of the
system. For instance, if both stars have intermediate masses below the
threshold for forming neutron stars, mass transfer during this stage can
significantly increase the mass of the secondary. In this case, the
primary would eventually exhaust its envelope and become a massive
CO/ONeMg WD. Then, the newly massive secondary would experience a
supernova explosion and become a neutron star. In this scenario, the
pulsar is born from the secondary star, not the primary (Stairs, 2004 )
.

-    Pulse period: Since the pulsar is formed after the white dwarf and
    does not accrete mass, it should resemble “normal” isolated pulsars.

-    Magnetic field: Since the pulsar is formed after the white dwarf
    and does not accrete mass, it should resemble “normal” isolated
    pulsars.

-    Orbital eccentricity: The eccentricity is likely to be large given
    that no mass transfer helped circularize the orbit after the
    supernova.

#### 2.6.3 Other Pulsar Binaries

There are pulsar binaries that fail to fit into one of the above
categories. Obviously, binary evolution is a complicated process and
even if the above classification succeeds in grouping the majority of
binary radio pulsars, there is a continuum of properties rather than
discrete characteristics. External factors and peculiar properties of
the binary members can play an important role. As we shall discuss in
Chapter 3 , there may also exist alternative evolution channels that are
more rare but yet common to several binary pulsars.

##### Black Widow Pulsars

PSR B1957+20 is the classical example of peculiar binary systems
(Fruchter et al., 1988b ) . The radio pulsar in this system is an
energetic MSP that has been fully recycled by its companion. It has a
1.6 ms period and a low @xmath G magnetic field, typical of recycled
pulsar + He WD systems. Its companion, however, has an extremely low
mass, @xmath @xmath , and optical observations (Kulkarni et al., 1988 ;
Fruchter et al., 1988a ; van Paradijs et al., 1988 ) reveal that the
nearly Roche-lobe filling companion has been ablated by the strong wind
of the pulsar, which lies in a close 9.2-hr orbit (Phinney et al., 1988
) . In @xmath , a bow shock is clearly visible and confirms the above
scenario (Kulkarni and Hester, 1988 ) . After the discovery of
PSR B1957+20, which has been coined the black widow pulsar , people
thought they had solved the problem of isolated MSPs: recycled pulsars
that are isolated simply blasted away their companion (van den Heuvel
and van Paradijs, 1988 ) . Although this is a fair proposal, only a
handful of such black widow pulsars have been found (Stappers et al.,
1996 ; King et al., 2005 ) and so the question is still open as to
whether this mechanism can account for all the isolated MSPs. If not, it
is not clear how these pulsars ended up single.

##### Globular Cluster Pulsars

The situation of pulsars in globular clusters clearly contrasts with
that of pulsars in the Galactic field. As we show in Figure
LABEL:f:distribution_all , the two populations significantly diverge:
globular clusters, as opposed to the Galactic field, preferentially form
rapidly spinning pulsars. The dichotomy also appears in the rate of
binary systems, which is higher in globular clusters as well — @xmath
52% are in binaries, as opposed to only @xmath 7% for the entire pulsar
population ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 According to the ATNF catalogue (Manchester et al.,
2005a ) at the time when this thesis was written. (see Figures
LABEL:f:distribution_GC_Binary and LABEL:f:distribution_Binary_GCBinary
). Interactions between stars over the course of the evolution of these
globular cluster pulsars can explain the difference. Not only do
numerical simulations indicate that globular clusters are rich in
primordial binary stars (Ivanova et al., 2005 ) , that is, stars that
are born in binary systems, they also have large dynamical interaction
rates (Ivanova et al., 2008 ) . In fact, it appears that a large
fraction of the globular cluster neutron star binaries are not with
their original companion (Ivanova et al., 2008 ) ; stars and pulsars
that are isolated may end up in a binary system after a capture, while
binary systems may be disrupted, altered or ejected from the cluster.
The dynamics particular to globular clusters manifests itself in the
large number of MSPs per unit mass compared to the Galactic field but
also in the large fraction of highly eccentric binary MSPs — 10% of the
130 known globular cluster pulsars are in binary systems with
eccentricities @xmath — that is 1000 times more efficient per unit mass
than the Galactic disk (Champion et al., 2008 ) .

One particular consequence of the virial theorem applied to binary
interactions states that the most energetically favorable configuration
tends to make hard binaries harder and soft binaries softer
(Benacquista, 2006 ) . This is also known as Heggie’s Law (Heggie, 1975
) . In short, if the binding energy of a system is larger than that of
an incoming field star (hard binary case), then the energy after the
encounter would increase whereas it would decrease if the energy of the
system is lower (soft binary case). The latter scenario can be
visualized as follows: imagine a loosely bound system being hit by a
high velocity projectile; chances are that the system will be less
bounded, and maybe even disrupted, after the collision. The general rule
of thumb is that when a binary system encounters a field star, the
lighter component of the binary is often ejected while the more massive
incoming star or stellar remnant binds to the heavier component of the
system (Benacquista, 2006 ) . In a binary-binary interaction, the more
massive components will likely end up together while the lighter
components often get ejected.

As we can see, the dynamics of globular cluster evolution are quite
complex and companion exchange might happen at different stages of the
pulsar’s life or prior to its formation. Because pulsars are compact and
relatively massive objects, they preferentially bind with other stars
and therefore have better chances of getting recycled.

##### Peculiar Binaries

More recently, the discovery of PSR J1903+0327 also showed an example of
non-conventional evolution (Champion et al., 2008 ) . This MSP shows
evidence of full recycling since it has a short 2.15 ms spin period and
a low @xmath G magnetic field. However, it has a relatively massive
companion ( @xmath @xmath ) if one assumes that the observed periastron
advance is entirely due to general relativity, and its orbital
eccentricity is large ( @xmath ). If this binary pulsar had been in a
globular cluster, its properties would just appear as a normal
consequence of dynamical interaction. It turns out, however, that
PSR J1903+0327 is in the Galactic field. Its evolution must therefore
have been quite peculiar. Three possible scenarios are discussed by
Champion et al. ( 2008 ) : 1) the pulsar did not get recycled but was
actually born with a fast spin period and a low magnetic field; 2) the
pulsar was ejected from a globular cluster; 3) the pulsar is in a triple
system and the timing only reveals the signature of the inner companion,
which would likely be a white dwarf, whereas the optical counterpart is
associated with the third companion in a much wider, highly inclined
orbit. Such an inclined orbit is required in order to explain the large
eccentricity of the inner binary via the Kozai mechanism.

### 2.7 Binary Pulsars as Benchmarks for Gravity Theories

Binary radio pulsars are extraordinary tools for studying general
relativity and alternative theories of gravity. They owe their success
to a combination of physical and observational properties that make them
nearly ideal laboratories for this type of study. First, pulsars are
neutron stars and because they are extremely compact, they can be
treated as point-mass particles. When two neutron stars orbit each
other, the system is fully described by dynamical equations of motion
and other effects like tides are negligible. Second, radio pulsars can
be timed with very high precision that sometimes rivals with the
stability of atomic clocks. Hence, their orbital motion is easily
monitored via the Doppler shift imprinted in the TOAs of their pulses.

Despite the fact that the tests of gravitational theories involving
binary radio pulsars are currently less accurate than solar-system
experiments, they yield qualitatively different and complementary
information since they are conducted in the environment of strong-field
gravity (Will, 1993 ) (see also § A ). General relativity predicts that
the behavior of gravity is independent of the nature of the bodies
involved. However, this is not generally true when gravity is treated in
a generic way that encompasses more general classes of theories (Damour
and Esposito-Farèse, 1992a , b , 1996a , 1996b ) . In this context,
pulsars are privileged laboratories since their large binding energy,
which represents between 10 and 20% of their rest-mass energy, allows
putting limits on theories themselves but also on how they can
differentiate from possible common behavior in the low-field gravity
regime.

#### 2.7.1 “Classical” Tests of Gravity

Most binary pulsars have WD companions in very circular,
non-relativistic orbits (see Stairs, 2004 ; van Kerkwijk et al., 2005 ,
and § 2.6.2 , for reviews about the different types of binary pulsars) .
Ironically, the first discovered binary pulsar, PSR B1913+16, found by
Hulse and Taylor ( 1975 ) , is one of the rare pulsar binaries
containing two neutron stars in an eccentric, relativistic orbit ¹⁹ ¹⁹
19 They constitute about @xmath % of the observed binary population
(Manchester et al., 2005a ; Stairs, 2004 ) . .

As we pointed out in § 2.5.3 , an accurate description of the orbital
motion of relativistic binaries require the addition of PK parameters
(Damour and Taylor, 1992 ) to the standard five Keplerian parameters
used for classical orbits (Taylor et al., 1979 ) . Within the framework
of a given theory of gravity these PK parameters are specific functions
of the five measurable Keplerian parameters and the two unknown masses
in the system (Damour and Taylor, 1992 ) . Measuring two PK parameters
allows one to solve for the two masses and any extra PK parameter yields
a test for theories of gravity (Stairs, 2003 ) .

For relativistic binary pulsars, tests of gravity are usually
illustrated using mass-mass diagrams , which display the mass of the two
bodies against each other (see Figure LABEL:f:mass_mass ). When a
particular theory of gravity is considered, PK parameters are
represented by lines on a mass-mass diagram and they must intersect,
within uncertainties, at a common point if the theory is valid.

In the Hulse-Taylor pulsar, three PK parameters have been successfully
measured (Weisberg and Taylor, 2005 ) . One of these parameters, the
rate of change of the orbital period is caused by the orbital damping
due to energy loss through gravitational wave emission (Taylor et al.,
1979 ; Taylor and Weisberg, 1982 ) (see Figure LABEL:f:decay ). This was
the first indirect evidence of gravitational waves emission and Hulse
and Taylor received the 1993 Physics Nobel Prize in recognition of their
discovery.

There are about two dozens pulsars with at least one measured PK
parameter and more than half a dozen of them permit one or more tests of
gravity because they have more than three measured PK parameters (Nice,
2006 ) . The current best test of general relativity has been made in
the double pulsar PSR J0737 @xmath 3039A/B by Kramer et al. ( 2006 )
using the PK Shapiro ‘shape’ parameter. The observation agrees with the
predicted value to within an uncertainty of 0.05%.

#### 2.7.2 Other Tests of Gravity

Other tests of general relativity and gravity have been performed using
binary pulsars and are described in the review by Stairs ( 2003 ) . Many
of them are related to different aspects of the Strong Equivalence
Principle. They include tests of preferred-frame effects,
preferred-location effect, non-conservation of momentum and
gravitational Stark effect, which are all derived from the high-timing
precision of pulsars. Changes in the Chandrasekhar mass, which could
imply a time variation of the fine-structure constant, has also been
tested by comparing masses of pulsars having different characteristic
ages. Finally, relativistic theories of gravity generally predicts
spin-orbit and spin-spin coupling. These two effects should introduce
high-order secular orbital variations that might be observed someday,
but they also cause the pulsar’s spin-axis to precess. Evidence of
relativistic precession due to spin-orbit coupling was qualitatively
observed as morphologic changes in the pulse profile of some
relativistic pulsars (Weisberg et al., 1989 ; Konacki et al., 2003 ) and
was qualitatively measured to low precision using a combination of pulse
morphology and polarization measurement by Stairs et al. ( 2004 ) . In
Chapter 4 we shall present a high-precision quantitative measurement
using a novel approach.

### 2.8 The Double Pulsar

More than 30 years after the discovery of the first relativistic binary
pulsar by Hulse and Taylor, about ten of these systems have been found.
As we explained in the previous section, these pulsars have provided
excellent tests of general relativity in the strong-field regime
(Stairs, 2003 , 2004 ) . The most celebrated relativistic binary pulsar,
PSR J0737 @xmath 3039A/B, is commonly known as the “double pulsar”
because both neutron stars in this system are observable radio pulsars.
The first member of this system, hereafter denoted pulsar A, is a 23-ms
pulsar found in 2003 by Burgay et al. ( 2003 ) in Parkes Multibeam
Pulsar Survey data. Pulsar B, the 2.8-s companion, went unnoticed for
several weeks until Lyne et al. ( 2004 ) found a second pulsar signal in
the data having exactly the same orbital period but a half-period shift
in its radial velocity signature. Pulsar B is an extremely dim radio
pulsar except in two particular regions of the orbit where it becomes
much brighter, hence why it did not clearly appear in the original
analysis.

The potential of the double pulsar for testing gravity was immediately
recognized. Its 2.4-hr orbital period is the shortest among all known
relativistic binary pulsars and consequently it is the most relativistic
double neutron star system. Indeed, it took only three years of timing
observations to achieve, and supersede, the precision reached at testing
general relativity that is obtained in other relativistic binary pulsars
that have been observed over a much longer period of time (Kramer
et al., 2006 ) . A record five post-Keplerian parameters have been
precisely measured from the radio timing of pulsar A. Furthermore, as
the companion is also a pulsar, it is possible to independently measure
the projected semi-major axis for each member of the system. The ratio
of their projected semi-major axis provides a theory-independent
measurement of their mass ratio, thus enabling an additional fourth test
of general relativity in this system only (Kramer et al., 2006 ) . The
future of double pulsar timing is promising as it could permit to
measure second-order PK parameters. Also, as the double pulsar lies
considerably closer to Earth than other known double neutron star
systems, the contribution from the Galactic potential acceleration to
its apparent orbital period decay amounts to only 0.02% of the total
value and therefore presents less limitation that the Hulse-Taylor
pulsar.

The double pulsar not only amalgamates great properties that make it a
wonderful duet of relativistic pulsars to time, it also exhibits several
unique phenomena – eclipses of pulsar A (see, e.g. McLaughlin et al.,
2004c ; Kaspi et al., 2004 ) , orbital modulation of the pulsed flux
from pulsar B (see, e.g. McLaughlin et al., 2004b ; Lyutikov, 2005 ) ,
subpulse drifting from pulsar B synchronized with pulsar A’s rotational
frequency (McLaughlin et al., 2004b ) , pulsed X-ray emission from
pulsar A and pulsar B (see, e.g. Campana et al., 2004 ; Pellizzoni
et al., 2004 ; McLaughlin et al., 2004a ; Granot and Mészáros, 2004 ;
Chatterjee et al., 2007 ; Possenti et al., 2008 ; Pellizzoni et al.,
2008 ) – that are clear indication of the interaction between the two
pulsars. Some of these phenomena, the eclipses and a relativistic
aberration phenomenon, will be investigated in more details in Chapter 4
and 5 . An excellent review of the recent studies related to the double
pulsar has been made by Kramer and Stairs ( 2008 ) .

## Chapter 3 The Unusual Binary Pulsar PSR J1744@xmath3922

“Genius is one percent inspiration and ninety-nine percent
perspiration.”

Thomas Alva Edison

This chapter presents the study of the binary pulsar PSR J1744 @xmath
3922. This pulsar exhibits a highly variable pulsed radio emission as
well as an unusual combination of spin and orbital characteristics
compared to typical recycled pulsars. We report on a statistical
multi-frequency study of the pulsed radio flux variability which
suggests that this phenomenon is extrinsic to the pulsar and possibly
tied to the companion, although not strongly correlated with orbital
phase. We also investigate the nature of this pulsar, which presents
unexplained properties in the context of binary evolution, and suggest
that it belongs to a previously misidentified class of binary pulsars.
Near-infrared observations allowed us to detect a possible companion’s
counterpart and appears to support alternative evolutionary scenarios.

This work was originally published as: R. P. Breton, M. S. E. Roberts,
S. M. Ransom, V. M. Kaspi, M. Durant, P. Bergeron, and A. J. Faulkner.
The Unusual Binary Pulsar PSR J1744 @xmath 3922: Radio Flux Variability,
Near-Infrared Observation, and Evolution . ApJ, 661:1073–1083, June 2007

### 3.1 Introduction

A mid-Galactic latitude pulsar survey with the Parkes Radio Telescope
(Crawford et al., 2006 ) detected three new pulsars in binary systems,
none of which easily fits within the standard evolutionary scenarios
proposed for the majority of recycled pulsars (see a review of binary
pulsar evolution in § 2.6.1 ). One of them, PSR J1744 @xmath 3922, was
independently discovered during the reprocessing of the Parkes Multibeam
Pulsar Survey data (Faulkner et al., 2004 ) . This 172-ms binary pulsar
has a relatively high surface dipole magnetic field strength ( @xmath ,
see Equation 2.16 ) suggesting it is mildly recycled. However, it
appears to have a very light companion (minimum mass @xmath ) in a tight
and nearly circular 4.6-hr orbit (see Table LABEL:t:orbparams ). This
type of orbit and companion are typical of those of fully recycled
pulsars (which we define as pulsars with @xmath ms and @xmath G) with He
white dwarf (WD) companions (see § 2.6.2 ). Thus, why PSR J1744 @xmath
3922 escaped being fully recycled is a puzzle.

In addition to this atypical combination of spin and orbital properties,
PSR J1744 @xmath 3922 exhibits strong pulsed radio flux modulations,
making the pulsar undetectable at 1400 MHz for lengths of time ranging
from a few tens of seconds to tens of minutes. It has been suggested by
Faulkner et al. ( 2004 ) that this behavior might be the nulling
phenomenon seen in a handful of slow, isolated pulsars. Nulling is a
broad-band, if not total, interruption of the radio emission for a
temporary period of time. On the other hand, although nulling could
affect pulsars in binary systems as well, many binary pulsars vary due
to external effects such as eclipses. Such external effects might
explain PSR J1744 @xmath 3922’s variability as well.

In this chapter, we first report on multi-frequency observations of
PSR J1744 @xmath 3922 that suggest the radio variability is not
intrinsic to the pulsar. However, our analysis does not show strong
evidence of a correlation between radio flux and orbital phase, as one
might expect from traditional eclipse-like variability. We then report
on our infrared search for a counterpart of the companion using the
Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope (CFHT). This observation has identified a
@xmath ¹ ¹ 1 Throughout this thesis, numbers in parentheses denote
@xmath errors on the last significant digits. star at the position
determined by the radio timing observations. Finally, we examine why
other properties of this pulsar make it incompatible with standard
evolutionary scenarios, and identify a few other systems which have
similar characteristics. The addition of PSR J1744 @xmath 3922 as an
extreme case among this group motivates us to identify a possible new
class of binary pulsars. We propose several possible evolutionary
channels which might produce members of this class and explain how the
nature of the companion to PSR J1744 @xmath 3922 could be used to
constrain the origin of these systems.

### 3.2 Pulsed Radio Flux Variability

The observed average pulsed radio emission from a pulsar can fluctuate
for several different reasons. These include effects from the pulsar
itself, as in nulling (e.g. Backer, 1970 ) , its environment, as in
eclipsing binary pulsars (e.g. Fruchter et al., 1988a ) , or the
interstellar medium, as in scintillation (e.g. Rickett, 1970 ) ² ² 2 The
scintillation of pulsars is related to the same physical mechanism as
the scintillation of quasars, which accidentally led to the discovery of
pulsars (see § 1.2.1 ) . In the case of PSR J1744 @xmath 3922, during a
typical 1400 MHz observation, the radio emission seems to turn on and
off randomly on timescales varying from tens of seconds to tens of
minutes (see Figure LABEL:f:profile for sample folded profiles). In many
instances, the pulsar is undetectable through entire observations (
@xmath min). In a previous analysis of these radio flux modulations,
Faulkner et al. ( 2004 ) concluded on the basis of observations at
1400 MHz that PSR J1744 @xmath 3922 is probably a pulsar experiencing
pulse nulls. As nulling is a broad-band phenomenon (e.g. Bartel et al.,
1981 ) , we decided to investigate the frequency dependence of the
fluctuations in order to test the nulling hypothesis.

#### 3.2.1 Data and Procedure

The work we report is based on an extended dataset combining both the
data reported independently by Faulkner et al. ( 2004 ) and by Ransom
et al. ( 2008 ) . A total of 112 radio timing observations of PSR J1744
@xmath 3922 were made at the Parkes and the Green Bank telescopes
between 2003 June and 2006 January (see § 2.4 for more details about
radio telescopes and pulsar observing systems). Relevant details for the
current study are summarized in Table LABEL:t:setups and we refer to the
above two papers for more details about the observational setups and
timing results.

For the purpose of studying the radio emission variability, we made time
series of the pulsed flux intensity. We dedispersed the data at the
pulsar’s dispersion measure (DM) of 148.5 pc cm @xmath and then folded
the resulting time series in 10-s intervals using the timing ephemerides
from Ransom et al. ( 2008 ) and the pulsar analysis package PRESTO
(Ransom et al., 2002 , please also refer to § 2.5 for more details about
pulsar timing) . For each observation, the pulse phase was determined
from the profile averaged over the entire observation. We fit each 10-s
interval of the folded pulse profile with a constant baseline plus a
Gaussian of variable amplitude having a fixed width at the predetermined
phase. A Gaussian FWHM=0.01964 @xmath , where @xmath is the pulse
period, nicely fits the profile averaged over many observations in the
frequency range 680-4600 MHz. Errors on the best-fit amplitudes returned
by our least-square minimization procedure were scaled under the
assumption that the off-pulse region RMS represents the total system
noise.

Although no flux standard has been observed, we obtained pulsed flux
density estimates by using the radiometer equation and scale the
observed off-pulse RMS levels by the predicted noise levels. The system
temperature was assumed to be the sum of the receiver temperature
(provided in Table LABEL:t:setups ) and the sky temperature, which we
determined from the 408 MHz all-sky survey and converted to other
frequencies by assuming a power-law spectrum having a spectral index
@xmath (Haslam et al., 1982 , 1995 ) . Hence the predicted off-pulse RMS
level is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the gain, @xmath the observed bandwidth (see Table
LABEL:t:setups ), @xmath the integration time per pulse bin and @xmath
is the system temperature.

We also accounted for the offset between the telescope pointing and the
real position of the source (since in the early observations the
best-fit timing position had not yet been determined) by approximating
the telescope sensitivity to be an azimuthally symmetric Gaussian having
a FWHM corresponding to the radio telescope beam size, which is 8.8
@xmath and 13.8 @xmath at 1400 MHz for GBT and Parkes, respectively.

In this way, we generated flux time series for all 112 observations of
PSR J1744 @xmath 3922 (see Figure LABEL:f:lightcurve for examples). As
we describe next, these results show that scintillation and nulling are
highly unlikely to be the origin of the observed variability.

#### 3.2.2 Radio-frequency-dependent Variability

As Faulkner et al. ( 2004 ) discussed previously, interstellar
scintillation (ISS) is unlikely to be the source of fluctuations in
PSR J1744 @xmath 3922. As we mentioned in § 1.2.1 , scintillation is
produced by a diffractive scattering medium along our line of sight and
the typical diffractive scintillation timescale can be expressed as (see
Cordes and Rickett, 1998 ) :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath the distance to the source in kpc, @xmath the decorrelation
bandwidth in MHz, @xmath the observed frequency in GHz and @xmath the
velocity of ISS diffraction pattern in km s @xmath . For the 1400 MHz
observation shown in Figure LABEL:f:profile , for example, the NE2001
model for the Galactic distribution of free electrons (Cordes and Lazio,
2002 ) predicts @xmath MHz in the line of sight of PSR J1744 @xmath 3922
at a distance of 3.0 kpc estimated from the DM. @xmath is typically
dominated by the pulsar velocities, which are in the range 10-100 km s
@xmath for most binaries. Therefore, we estimate the scintillation
timescale to be of the order of a few seconds to a minute at most. This
could be compatible with the fast flux variations but can certainly not
explain the extended periods where the pulsar goes undetected. Perhaps
most importantly, strong scintillations will be averaged away since
typical observing bandwidths are much larger than the decorrelation
bandwidth, and therefore contain many “scintles” (i.e. intensity
modulations). Such averaging effectively rules out the ISS hypothesis.

Another possibility is that the flux modulation is related to intrinsic
nulling of the pulsar. Based on observations at 1400 MHz only, Faulkner
et al. ( 2004 ) identified it as the most likely explanation. Only
observed in old, isolated pulsars so far, (though nothing prevents a
binary pulsar from being a nuller) nulling is a broad-band, if not
total, interruption of the radio emission (e.g. Bartel et al., 1981 ) .

Considering the fraction of observations with no detection of radio
emission at various frequencies (see Table LABEL:t:nodetection ), we
note qualitatively that PSR J1744 @xmath 3922 is regularly undetectable
at low frequencies but easily detectable at high. For instance, we
obtained four Parkes observations at 680 and 2900 MHz simultaneously in
which the pulsar is detected twice at 2900 MHz while remaining
undetected at 680 MHz. In addition, seven long GBT observations centered
at 1850 and 1950 MHz show highly variable emission but little evidence
that the pulsar ever disappears completely (see Figure
LABEL:f:lightcurve ). Clearly, however, observations could be biased by
the relative instrumental sensitivity in each band and by the intrinsic
spectrum of the pulsar.

To investigate the effect of instrumental sensitivity and spectral
energy distribution, we analysed the pulsed flux densities at different
frequencies. Measured values were estimated using the radiometer
equation as explained in § 3.2.1 and are displayed in Table LABEL:t:flux
. We note that Faulkner et al. ( 2004 ) reported a different flux
density than ours at 1400 MHz (0.20(3) vs. 0.11(3) mJy, respectively).
The discrepancy could be because the average flux density changes
depending on the amount of time PSR J1744 @xmath 3922 spends in its
“bright state” during an observation. The large standard deviation
(0.16 mJy, see Table LABEL:t:flux ) at this frequency suggests that by
restricting the calculation to observations for which PSR J1744 @xmath
3922 is nicely detected, a higher flux value can be obtained.

For the simultaneous observations at 680 and 2900 MHz in which the
pulsar was not detected at 680 MHz (see Table LABEL:t:setups ), we can
put an interesting approximate lower limit on the spectral index, @xmath
, of the pulsar if we assume that the minimum detectable pulsed flux at
680 MHz is an upper limit to the pulsed flux at this frequency:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Such a value is extremely flat compared to that of the average
population of pulsars, which has a spectral index of @xmath (Maron
et al., 2000 ) . Thus either PSR J1744 @xmath 3922 has a spectrum very
different from those of most pulsars and/or the flux variability is
intrinsically frequency dependent.

The distribution of pulsed flux density values for all 1400 and 1950 MHz
observations is shown in Figure LABEL:f:histogram . It is clear from the
distribution at 1400 MHz that the numerous non-detections are
responsible for the peak below the sensitivity threshold. We also
observe that the 1400 MHz flux density has a higher average value and is
much more variable than at 1950 MHz. This frequency dependence suggests
some sort of scattering mechanism with the unscattered flux level much
higher than the observed average flux at 1400 MHz, and argues against it
being classical nulling. Therefore, we conclude that this unknown
mechanism affecting the lower frequency flux might be responsible for
the apparent flat spectrum derived from the simultaneous 680-2900 MHz
observation.

Recent simultaneous multi-frequency observations of PSR B1133+16, a
well-established nuller, show that single pulse nulls do not always
happen simultaneously at all frequencies (Bhat et al., 2007 ) . They
also observe, however, that the overall null fraction does not present
any evidence of frequency dependence, which might mean that sometimes
nulls are simply delayed at some frequencies. In the case of PSR J1744
@xmath 3922, the S/N limits us to consider the pulsed flux over times
corresponding to many pulse periods only. Therefore, the kind of
non-simultaneous, frequency-dependent effect seen by Bhat et al. ( 2007
) is not relevant to our analysis and thus we expect the variability to
be independent of frequency if really caused by nulling.

Although our flux measurements at other frequencies are not
simultaneous, we can assume they are good statistical estimates of the
normal flux of the pulsar and use them to characterize its spectrum. In
an attempt to estimate an unbiased spectral index, we can use the
approximate maximum flux value at each frequency. The 1400, 1850, 1950,
2900 and 4600 MHz data give a spectral index lying between @xmath and
@xmath , which is similar to many known pulsars. However, it seems that
the flux at 820 MHz is much smaller than expected from a single
power-law spectrum. Since flux variations are very important at low
frequency and we only have a single detection at 820 MHz, the reported
maximum value is probably not representative of the real flux of the
pulsar at this frequency.

In summary, the facts that the pulsar radio emission rarely drops below
our detection threshold at 1950 MHz and that the radio variability is
frequency dependent, demonstrate that the flux modulation is probably
not classical nulling. A non-nulling origin for the fluctuations at
1400 MHz also explains why PSR J1744 @xmath 3922 does not fit in with
expectations based on the correlations observed between null fraction
and spin period (Biggs, 1992 ) , and between null fraction and
equivalent pulse width (Li and Wang, 1995 ) . In comparison with
nullers, it has one of the smallest spin periods and a small pulse width
( @xmath ms), but one of the largest “null” fractions ( @xmath % at
1400 MHz). Since this pulsar is in a tight binary system, the
possibility of influence by its companion is therefore an important
alternative to consider.

#### 3.2.3 Orbital Correlation Analysis

Even though a quick examination of the time series confirms that the
flux decreases observed for PSR J1744 @xmath 3922 are not due to
systematic eclipses of the pulsar by its companion, a more subtle
orbital correlation could exist. To search for such an effect, we ask
whether or not the pulsar is more likely to be detected at a particular
orbital phase. For this analysis, we folded the time series in 1-min
intervals, and defined the pulse as detected if the best-fit Gaussian
amplitude was greater than its 1 @xmath uncertainty. In order to limit
spectral effects, we restrict the analysis to observations covering the
range 1237.5--1516.5 MHz at Parkes ³ ³ 3 This is the common range of the
observing modes centered at 1375 and 1400 MHz. and 1404.5–1497.5 MHz at
GBT.

The results of this analysis are shown in Figure LABEL:f:analysis a. The
histogram represents the fraction of detected pulses with respect to the
total number observed, as a function of orbital phase. Errors were
determined using Poisson statistics, implicitly assuming our assigning
of each interval as a detection or non-detection is accurate. There is a
suggestion that PSR J1744 @xmath 3922 is more often undetectable between
phases @xmath . The best-fit constant model gives a @xmath (the
histogram has 10 orbital phase bins), which, if correct, would be highly
significant. To test the accuracy of our errors, we performed a Monte
Carlo simulation consisting of 10000 trials where we assigned each
measurement a random orbital phase. The mean @xmath with a standard
deviation of 0.18, suggesting our error estimates are significantly
overestimated.

To investigate further, we performed an analysis similar to the previous
one but for the pulsed flux density measured at each orbital phase
averaged over all observations. We selected two subsets of data: the
Parkes and GBT observations made at 1400 MHz and the GBT 1950 MHz
observations. The first one includes 101 observations which are on
average @xmath minutes long, but there are a few observations which are
significantly longer. The latter subset includes four observations, two
of which have full orbital coverage, one covering @xmath of the orbit
and the last one @xmath . Observations with no detection of PSR J1744
@xmath 3922 are assigned upper limit values of three times the
background noise level (which is very small compared with the average
pulse of the pulsar when it is on). Errors in each bin of the histogram
are estimated from the RMS of the individual values in each orbital bin.
Results are plotted in Figure LABEL:f:analysis b. For the 1400 MHz data,
a fit to a constant line has a @xmath , and for the GBT 1950 MHz data,
we find a @xmath . Randomizing the individual data points and folding
them resulted in a @xmath at both frequencies, suggesting our error
estimates are reasonable. Although this analysis strongly rules out the
constant model for our folded light curves, the shapes of these curves
at 1400 and 1950 MHz are not consistent with each other. This leads us
to wonder how would an orbital correlation be possible and, in addition,
be showing a different behavior at these two frequencies?

This could be a result of the paucity of observations (typically 3–5) at
any given orbital phase. Therefore, random fluctuations in the flux on
timescales of tens of minutes (which we see in the time series) would
likely not be averaged out. To test whether or not the significant
deviation from a constant model depends on the particular phasing of our
observations, we again performed Monte Carlo simulations in which 10000
trial histograms similar to those shown in Figure LABEL:f:analysis were
generated from the real data by adding a random orbital phase shift at
the beginning of each time series and then determining the @xmath value
for a constant model. From the resulting distribution of @xmath values,
we estimate the chance probability of obtaining the particular @xmath
values obtained, or higher, using the real orbital phases. For the
on-off analysis, the probability is 0.102, or a formal @xmath . For the
1400 and 1950 MHz flux density light curves, the probabilities are 0.015
( @xmath ) and 0.212 ( @xmath ). This suggests there may be some
correlation with the orbit, but the shapes of our folded light curves
are still dominated by more stochastic flux variations given our limited
data set. We would expect a standard eclipse mechanism to make the
pulsar dimmer when the companion is in front of it at phase 0.25, which
does not seem to be the case. There may be large orbit to orbit
variations in the eclipse depths, durations, and phases. This kind of
behavior has been observed in other binary pulsar systems such as Ter5A,
Ter5P, Ter5ad and NGC6397A (see Ransom et al., 2005 ; Hessels et al.,
2006 ; D’Amico et al., 2001 , for examples) , but a much larger data set
would be required to obtain a reliable average light curve to show if
this is the case for PSR J1744 @xmath 3922. It is still possible that
the short time scale pulsed flux variations tend to group in “events”
during which the pulse gets dimmer. These “events” may last for a
significant fraction of the orbital phase causing the apparent marginal
orbital correlation given our limited statistics.

#### 3.2.4 Accretion and mass loss limits

Many other systems are known to exhibit strong flux radio variations for
which the orbital dependence is well established. One of them is
PSR B1718 @xmath 19 (Lyne et al., 1993 ) . Interestingly, this pulsar
has a low-mass companion and orbital properties similar to those of
PSR J1744 @xmath 3922 and is also harder to detect at low frequency. At
408 and 606 MHz, PSR B1718 @xmath 19 gets so dim that it is barely
detectable ( @xmath mJy) during a large part of the orbit in spite of
good instrument sensitivity and the large observed peak flux density
(0.7 and 1.3 mJy, respectively). On the other hand, at 1404 and 1660 MHz
the orbital modulation of the average flux is much less important. This
flickering is probably made by material left over by the wind of the
companion, a bloated main sequence (MS) star (Janssen and van Kerkwijk,
2005 ) . Although the companion of PSR B1718 @xmath 19 is not large
enough to come near to filling its Roche-lobe, this could happen in a
tighter binary system like that of PSR J1744 @xmath 3922. In this case,
some kind of tidal stripping could be occuring, leaving material around
the system. This could explain why the pulsar does not disappear at
conjunction like PSR B1718 @xmath 19 does, but in a more stochastic way.

If the companion is losing mass, one might expect to observe small
changes in the orbital parameters (§ 2.6.1 ). From radio timing (see
Ransom et al., 2008 ) , we can set an upper limit of @xmath s s @xmath
and @xmath lt-s s @xmath on the rate of change of the orbital period and
the rate of change of the projected semi-major axis, respectively. We
can use the latter quantity to evaluate the implied mass loss limit. For
a circular orbit, which is a good approximation here, we can express the
rate of change of the semi-major axis as (Verbunt, 1993 ) :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the mass of the companion
and the pulsar, respectively, @xmath is the total angular momentum of
the system, @xmath is the fraction of mass accreted by the pulsar and
@xmath is the specific angular momentum of the mass lost in units of the
companion star’s specific angular momentum.

For the case in which the total orbital angular momentum of the system
is preserved ( @xmath ) we can see that mass loss from the companion ⁴ ⁴
4 Here we implicitly assume that @xmath . ( @xmath ) would necessarily
lead to a widening ( @xmath ) of the orbit if: 1) the mass transfer is
conservative ( @xmath ), or 2) the mass transfer is non-conservative (
@xmath ) and @xmath (see Verbunt, 1993 , for more details) .

By considering the conservative case, in which @xmath , we obtain an
upper limit on a possible mass accretion rate by the pulsar @xmath .
This would be even lower for the non-conservative case. Accretion onto
the pulsar is possible if the corotation radius:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

is larger than the magnetospheric radius of the pulsar:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are, respectively, the spin period and the
surface dipole magnetic field in units of PSR J1744 @xmath 3922’s @xmath
and @xmath (172 ms and @xmath G); @xmath is the mass of the pulsar in
units of @xmath ; @xmath is the radius of the pulsar in units of 10 km;
and @xmath is the accretion rate in units of @xmath @xmath yr @xmath .
Given the upper limit on the mass accretion rate, and the likely
conservative @xmath value for the neutron star radius, we find that
@xmath ( @xmath km) is likely larger than @xmath ( @xmath km). This
argues against any significant accretion occurring in the system.

That no significant accretion is occuring is also supported by an
XMM-Newton observation that allows Ransom et al. ( 2008 ) to put a
conservative upper limit @xmath erg s @xmath on the unabsorbed X-ray
flux from accretion in the 0.1-10 keV range. Assuming

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

with a conversion efficiency of accretion energy into observed X-rays
@xmath , we get @xmath for accretion at the surface of the pulsar and
@xmath if accretion is limited to the boundary of the magnetospheric
radius. Therefore, it appears unlikely that PSR J1744 @xmath 3922 is
accreting and, if the companion is losing mass, it is probably expelled
away from the system.

### 3.3 Infrared Observations

The radio flux variability, which might be due to material leaving the
surface of the companion, and the atypical evolutionary characteristics
of the pulsar (see § 3.4 ) can be investigated further by observing its
companion at optical or near-infrared wavelengths. We imaged the field
of PSR J1744 @xmath 3922 at @xmath -band on the night of 2005 April 19
using the Canada-France-Hawaii 3.6-m Telescope (CFHT) at Mauna Kea. The
telescope is equipped with the Adaptive Optic Bonette (AOB) (Rigaut
et al., 1998 ) , which provides good correction for atmospheric seeing,
and KIR, the 1024 @xmath 1024 pixel HAWAII infrared detector with 0.0348
@xmath pixel scale. The total integration time was 30 s @xmath 59
integrations = 1770 s.

We substracted a dark frame from each image, and then constructed a
flat-field image from the median of the science frames. The images were
then flat-fielded, registered and stacked to make the final image. The
final stellar profile has a FWHM of 0.17 @xmath , degraded somewhat from
the optimal correction provided by the AOB system due to a high airmass
( @xmath ) and poor natural seeing. Figure LABEL:f:IRimage shows the
final image we obtained.

We analyzed the final CFHT image using the standard routine daophot
(Stetson, 1987 ) for PSF fitting photometry, and calibrated the image
using the standard star FS34 (Casali and Hawarden, 1992 ) . To find the
photometric zero point, we performed photometry on the standard star
with a large aperture containing most of the flux, and applied an
aperture correction for the PSF stars in the science image. Careful
calibration of measurement errors has been done by adding artificial
stars of known magnitude to blank parts of the image and then measuring
their magnitude through the PSF fitting process along with the real
stars. Thus, errors on the magnitude returned by daophot can be rescaled
by calculating the standard deviation for the added stars.

We found the astrometric solution for the image by cross-identifying
five stars with the 2MASS catalogue (Skrutskie et al., 2006 ) , fitting
for scale, rotation and displacement. The final astrometric uncertainty
is 0.34 @xmath at the @xmath confidence level. This value depends on the
matching to the reference stars because the error on the radio timing
position of PSR J1744 @xmath 3922 is negligible, ( @xmath ). The final
image is displayed in Figure LABEL:f:IRimage , with the positional error
circle centered at the radio position of PSR J1744 @xmath 3922: @xmath
and @xmath . Only one star falls inside this circle, and for this we
measure ⁵ ⁵ 5 Our calibration was made against the Vega photometric
system. @xmath . We observe that, above the @xmath detection limit, the
average stellar density is 0.079 arcsec @xmath and hence the probability
of a star falling in the error circle is only 2.9 %. Due to its
positional coincidence and the low probability of chance superposition,
we henceforth refer to this object as the possible counterpart to
PSR J1744 @xmath 3922.

Unfortunately our near-infrared observation does not tightly constrain
the nature of the companion to PSR J1744 @xmath 3922, mainly because of
the uncertainties in the distance to the system and in the companion
mass, as well as the fact that its temperature is unknown. Assuming the
NE2001 electron density model (Cordes and Lazio, 2002 ) is correct, we
infer a DM distance of @xmath kpc and hence a distance modulus ranging
from 11.9 to 12.8. Using the three-dimensional Galactic extinction model
of Drimmel et al. ( 2003 ) we get a value of @xmath for a distance of
3.0 kpc. Converting ⁶ ⁶ 6 For simplicity, and because the error on the
magnitude is dominated by the distance estimate, we hereafter assume
that K and @xmath are similar. the inferred extinction to @xmath band
gives @xmath (see Rieke and Lebofsky, 1985 , for conversion factors) .
Therefore the estimated absolute magnitude of the counterpart lies in
the range @xmath .

We can evaluate how probable it is that the companion is a He WD, a
typical low-mass companion in binary pulsar systems, since WD cooling
models can put restrictions on the stellar mass and cooling age, given
an observed flux. Figure LABEL:f:cooling shows the absolute @xmath
magnitude as a function of cooling age for He WDs of different masses.
These cooling tracks were made by using WD atmosphere models based on
the calculations of Bergeron et al. ( 1995 ) , and thereafter improved
by Bergeron et al. ( 2001 ) and Bergeron ( 2001 ) , in combination with
evolution sequences calculated by Driebe et al. ( 1998 ) . Although the
mass range of models available to us does not go below 0.179 @xmath , we
can deduce that to be so luminous, a He WD would need to have a very low
mass and a cooling age much lower than the characteristic age of the
pulsar (1.7 Gyr). Even if the mass were equal to the lower limit of 0.08
@xmath derived from radio timing, it seems unlikely that such a
companion could be as old as the pulsar characteristic age. Therefore,
if the companion is indeed a He WD, the pulsar’s spin period must be
close to the equilibrium spin frequency it reached at the end of the
recycling process. In this case, its characteristic age is an
overestimate of its true age.

Another possibility is that the companion is not a He WD. If the
companion is a low-mass main sequence (MS) star, then the minimum mass
required to match the lower limit on the absolute @xmath flux is @xmath
0.25 @xmath , regardless of the pulsar age. Such a companion mass
requires a favorable face-on orbit but this cannot be ruled out from the
near-infrared and radio data. On the other hand, a lower-mass bloated MS
star could be equally as bright, so this is also a possibility.

We cannot constrain the nature of the counterpart very well from a
measurement in a single near-infrared filter. Ideally, obtaining a
spectrum could yield: 1) a precise determination of the nature of the
counterpart, 2) orbital Doppler shift measurements of the spectral lines
which can prove the association as well as determine the mass ratio, 3)
in the case of a white dwarf, an estimate of its cooling age from
spectral line fitting.

### 3.4 Binary Pulsar Evolution

The sporadic radio emission from PSR J1744 @xmath 3922 is not the only
indication that there is something unusual about the pulsar’s
interaction with its companion. The pulsar is in a tight and low
eccentricity ( @xmath ) orbit with an apparently very light companion
having a minimum mass of 0.08 @xmath . On the other hand it has a
relatively large surface magnetic field ( @xmath G) and an extremely
long spin period (172 ms) compared with other binary pulsars having
low-mass companions (see § 2.6.1 for a short review on binary pulsar
evolution and Stairs ( 2004 ); van Kerkwijk et al. ( 2005 ) for other
reviews from the literature). These properties, along with the
relatively bright near-infrared counterpart of the companion, make it
unusual and suggest it evolved differently than most binary pulsars.

As we argued in § 2.6.2 , the nature of the companion plays a key role
in determining the final spin and orbital characteristics of a pulsar
binary system. Most of the binary pulsar population consists of pulsars
with low-mass companions in low-eccentricity orbits — the case @xmath
class (see § 2.6.1 ). They are neutron stars (NS) which were spun up to
very short periods ( @xmath ms) after accreting matter from a low-mass
star during a long and steady Roche-lobe overflow (RLO) phase (§ 2.6.1
and Tauris and Savonije 1999 ). As we argued in § 2.6.1 , the recycling
process is responsible for the partial suppression of the surface
magnetic field to values of the order of @xmath G. The most robust
predictions of this model are the correlations linking the orbital
period to the mass of the He WD (Rappaport et al., 1995 ) (see Figure
LABEL:f:mass_comp ) and the eccentricity to the orbital period (Phinney,
1992 ) .

On the other hand, the case @xmath channel is made of pulsars having
more massive CO WD or ONeMg WD companions ( @xmath ) (§ 2.6.1 ). Their
intermediate mass progenitors did not sustain a stable RLO phase,
instead evolving in a short-duration, non-conservative, common envelope
(CE) phase during which the pulsar spiraled into its companion’s
envelope. This process only partly recycled the pulsar, leading to
intermediate spin periods ( @xmath ms) and leaving a higher magnetic
field ( @xmath G).

In Table LABEL:t:comparison , the expected properties of systems
resulting from these two evolutionary channels are compared with those
of PSR J1744 @xmath 3922. Both scenarios fail to account for all the
observed characteristics; this suggests a special evolution for
PSR J1744 @xmath 3922. This can also be seen from a @xmath diagram
(Figure LABEL:f:recycling_a ) made for binary pulsars in the Galactic
field having circular orbits. As opposed to isolated and other kinds of
non-recycled binary pulsars, there exists a very strong relationship
linking @xmath and @xmath which is presumably related to the recycling
process. To our knowledge, such a correlation has not been reported in
the recent literature although it was indirectly found by van den Heuvel
( 1995 ) who reported a possible correlation between @xmath and @xmath
for binary pulsars in circular orbits. The many binary pulsars
discovered in recent years may be making it easier to appreciate. In
Figure LABEL:f:recycling_a we see that pulsars having light companions (
case @xmath ) generally gather in the region of low magnetic field and
short spin period whereas the case @xmath pulsars lie in higher-valued
regions. Surprisingly, of the six highest magnetic field pulsars, five
of them, including PSR J1744 @xmath 3922, appear to have light
companions. The remaining one, PSR B0655+64, is an extreme system
associated with the case @xmath subclass since it has a massive WD
companion (van Kerkwijk et al., 2005 ) . However, the case @xmath
subclass cannot accommodate the other five pulsars because, assuming
random orbital inclinations, a simple statistical estimate gives less
than a 0.1 % probability for all of them to be more massive than the
required @xmath . For PSR J1744 @xmath 3922 in particular, the orbital
inclination would need to be less than 12.5 @xmath , which represents a
2.5% probability.

We also report in Table LABEL:t:comparison the principal characteristics
of binary pulsars that appear to be partly recycled (e.g. @xmath ms and
@xmath ) but have companions likely not massive enough to be explained
by the standard case @xmath scenario. These pulsars have related
properties and could have experienced similar evolutionary histories.
Apart from their strange position in the @xmath diagram, they also stand
out when we look at the @xmath relationship (Figure LABEL:f:recycling_b
). In this plot, we see that pulsars having low-mass companions ( case
@xmath ) occupy the bottom region, below @xmath ms, and their spin
periods are more or less independent of the orbital period. This arises
from the fact that recycling probably saturates for a given accretion
rate and/or accretion mass (Konar and Choudhuri, 2004 ) . On the other
hand, fewer constraints exist in this parameter space for pulsars with
massive WD companions ( case @xmath ). Their short CE evolution would
limit the recycling efficiency and thus the final parameters are more
sensitive to the initial conditions. Finally, we observe a third
category made of relatively slow pulsars with low-mass companions in
compact orbits. Neither the case @xmath nor the case @xmath scenarios is
able to explain such properties, especially for the most extreme systems
like PSR J1744 @xmath 3922 and PSR B1831 @xmath 00. Therefore, we
suggest a new “class” of binary pulsars having the following properties:
1) long spin periods (in comparison to millisecond pulsars), 2) large
surface magnetic fields ( @xmath G), 3) low-mass companions, likely
@xmath , having nature yet to be determined, 4) low eccentricities, and
possibly 5) short orbital periods ( @xmath d). On this last point, very
wide orbit systems like PSR B1800 @xmath 27 and PSR J0407+1607 might be
explained by the standard case @xmath scenario in which it is difficult
to achieve an extended period of mass transfer from the companion to the
pulsar.

### 3.5 Discussion

The existence of another “class” of binary pulsars is supported by the
fact that several pulsars now occupy a region of the parameter space
delimited by the spin period, orbital period, magnetic field and
companion mass that seems inaccessible to the standard evolutionary
channels. PSRs J1744 @xmath 3922, J1232 @xmath 6501, B1718 @xmath 19 and
B1831 @xmath 00 are certainly the most noticeable candidates. Although
other studies also identified that some of these pulsars have strange
characteristics (see, e.g. van den Heuvel, 1995 ; Sutantyo and Li, 2000
; Edwards and Bailes, 2001 ) , there is no consensus on their
evolutionary histories. For instance the case of PSR B1718 @xmath 19 was
considered somewhat unique because it is in a globular cluster and hence
has possibly been partly perturbed, or even greatly changed, by stellar
interactions (Ergma et al., 1996 ) (see § 2.6.3 for a discussion about
binary pulsars in globular clusters). The discovery of PSR J1744 @xmath
3922, in the Galactic field, is important because it strengthens the
possible connection between PSR B1718 @xmath 19 and other similar binary
pulsars in the field. Unless they do not have WD companions, these
pulsars were at least partially recycled because tidal circularization
is needed to explain eccentricities of 0.01 and smaller. However some of
them have eccentricities @xmath , relatively large given their very
short orbital periods, which is in contrast to tight case @xmath systems
having smaller eccentricity (Phinney, 1992 ) . In this section we
speculate and put constraints on some scenarios that may explain this
possible new class of pulsars.

#### 3.5.1 Recycled High Magnetic Field Pulsar Channel

One possibility is that pulsars like PSR J1744 @xmath 3922 may initially
have had a magnetar-strength magnetic field ( @xmath G) (§ 2.2.2 ). Such
a pulsar could experience standard case @xmath evolution involving
conservative RLO but since the initial magnetic field is higher than for
ordinary pulsars by 1–2 orders of magnitude, at the end of the recycling
process the field might be @xmath G instead, consistent with
observations. Since the recycling mechanism appears to strongly
correlate the final magnetic field with the final spin period, the
pulsar would also have an unusually long spin period as well.

Whether this extrapolation to magnetars and high magnetic field pulsars
is valid depends on accretion-induced decay models of the magnetic field
strength. Among the proposed mechanisms is magnetic field burial, in
which material accretes through the polar cap and, while piling up at
the poles, exerts a latitudinal pressure gradient by trying to spread
toward the equator. This effect tends to drag the field lines away from
the poles, increasing the polar cap radius and decreasing the magnetic
moment of the pulsar. Payne and Melatos ( 2004 ) show that the magnetic
field would naturally “freeze” to a minimum stable strength once the
amount of accreted mass exceeds some critical value, if the
magnetospheric radius is comparable to the size of the neutron star.
According to Payne ( 2005 ) , this critical mass could reach up to 1
@xmath for a @xmath G NS and hence magnetic field suppression would be
difficult to achieve due to the large amount of accretion mass required.
However, accounting for other effects like the natural decay of magnetic
field due to X-ray emission and high-energy bursts (see Woods and
Thompson, 2006 , for a recent review) , might make a partially
suppressed final magnetic field of @xmath G plausible.

A recycled high magnetic field pulsar is expected to leave a He WD
companion and follow the companion mass-orbital period relationship as
for the normal case @xmath systems. PSR B1718 @xmath 19 is excluded from
this kind of evolution because its companion is a bloated MS star. All
the other pulsars listed in Table LABEL:t:comparison are potential
members, albeit PSRs B1800 @xmath 27 and J0407+1607 would need
relatively face-on orbits ( @xmath and @xmath , implying 13 and 9%
probability for randomly oriented orbits, respectively) to match the
@xmath relationship (Figure LABEL:f:mass_comp ). Another interesting
prediction of this scenario is that, because the recycling process can
leave pulsars with relatively long spin periods, they might not be very
different from the spin periods when accretion ceased. Thus, the real
age could be much lower than the timing-based characteristic age, and
the WD companions would have younger cooling ages as well.

The fraction of Galactic field binary pulsars in this class ( @xmath
7/60) might naively be thought to be similar to the fraction of observed
magnetars with respect to the ordinary pulsars ( @xmath 10/1500).
However, the observed population of magnetars suffers from severe
selection effects because many of them appear to lie dormant, becoming
observable for only brief intervals, like XTE J1810 @xmath 197 (Ibrahim
et al., 2004 ) . Therefore, we can relate these parameters as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the number of pulsars in the new class, @xmath is the
number of binary pulsar systems, @xmath is the number of observed
magnetars, @xmath is the number of radio pulsars and @xmath the fraction
of magnetars in quiescence.

Hence we estimate that, due to quiescence, the fraction of observed
magnetars with respect to the total population is about @xmath . This
would make a total population of @xmath magnetars which is consistent
with the possible @xmath in our Galaxy estimated by Woods and Thompson (
2006 ) , who used @xmath . Our crude calculation has many caveats: Is
the binary magnetar population similar to the binary radio pulsar
population? Can the short lifetime of magnetars and high magnetic field
neutron stars limit the number of such recycled systems? Clearly, this
latter point depends strongly on the time evolution of the self-induced
decay of the magnetic field, which seems to operate on a time scale of a
few tens of thousands of years (Kaspi, 2004 ) .

#### 3.5.2 UCXB Evolutionary Track Channel

There exists a class of neutron stars and CO/ONeMg WDs that accrete from
light He WD donors in ultra tight (few tens of minutes) orbits. These
X-ray emitters, known as ultracompact X-ray binaries (UCXBs), may be the
result of wider @xmath -day systems that have decayed due to
gravitational wave radiation. A CE scenario has been proposed as a
viable channel for forming CO/ONeMg WD – He WD and NS – He WD systems
(Belczynski and Taam, 2004 ) . In fact such a channel would be very
similar to the case @xmath scenario but for an initially much lighter
companion. For companions not massive enough to experience the He flash,
a CE phase is possible if the onset of mass transfer occurs late enough
in the evolution so that the companion has reached the asymptotic giant
branch (Belczynski and Taam, 2004 ) . In this case, the RLO becomes
unstable and it bifurcates from the standard case @xmath track to the CE
phase (see Figure LABEL:f:evolution_cases for a diagram showing the
different evolution types as a function of orbital period and donor’s
mass at the onset of the mass transfer).

Pulsars experiencing this evolution would be partially recycled, like
case @xmath systems, but they would have He WD companions. After this
stage, only sufficiently tight systems with orbital periods of about one
hour or less can evolve to become UCXBs within a Hubble time because
gravitational decay is negligible for wider orbits. If PSR J1744 @xmath
3922-like pulsars belong to the long orbital separation high-end of the
UCXB formation channel, we might expect to see more such pulsars at
similar and smaller orbital separations than PSR J1744 @xmath 3922. It
is possible, however, that the observed sample is biased: as the orbital
separation decreases, wind and mass loss by the companion become more
important and would make them more difficult to detect in classical
pulsar surveys conducted at low frequency (i.e. @xmath 400 MHz) where
eclipses are more frequent and radio emission might simply turn off. The
ongoing ALFA survey at Arecibo, at 1400 MHz (Crawford et al., 2006 ) ,
could therefore find several new pulsars like PSR J1744 @xmath 3922.
Additionally, larger orbital accelerations make them more difficult to
find and, since gravitational wave radiation varies as the fourth power
of the orbital separation, their lifetimes are dramatically shorter.

In such a scenario, these pulsars might be born at a spin period that is
comparable with those of case @xmath pulsars having CO WD companions,
assuming that the short, high-accretion rate recycling would efficiently
screen the magnetic field during the mass transfer process. Afterwards,
because of their relatively larger magnetic field, they would spin down
more rapidly than case @xmath pulsars. Thus, they would necessarily have
longer spin periods and the true age is more likely to be in agreement
with the measured characteristic age.

#### 3.5.3 AIC Channel

Finally, a third scenario to explain the unusual properties of PSR J1744
@xmath 3922 is the accretion-induced collapse (AIC) of a massive ONeMg
WD into a NS. Most likely AIC progenitors would be massive ONeMg WDs (
@xmath ) accreting from MS donors in CV-like systems, or from red giants
or He WDs in UCXB systems (see Taam, 2004 ; Ivanova and Taam, 2004 , for
more details) . Nomoto and Kondo ( 1991 ) have shown that for accretion
rates @xmath and/or metal-rich accreted mass, the ONeMg WD would
collapse to a NS rather than explode in a supernova. More recent
calculations including Coulomb corrections to the equation of state by
Bravo and García-Senz ( 1999 ) demonstrate that AIC is possible for
critical densities of the accreting WD core that are @xmath lower than
previously found by Nomoto and Kondo ( 1991 ) , thus facilitating the
formation of neutron stars through this channel.

The properties predicted by the AIC scenario nicely agree with what we
observe for the class we are proposing: the mass transfer prior to the
NS formation would explain the low mass of the companion and the
collapse is expected to be a quiet event during which almost no mass is
lost in the system and only @xmath is converted in binding energy into
the NS. This would keep the final orbital period close to what it was
prior to the collapse (which is small in most scenarios leading to AIC)
and allow the eccentricity to be very small or, at least, circularize
rapidly. The survival rate of such systems is probably higher than for
standard systems which are more likely to be disrupted if a large amount
of mass is lost during the supernova process. Although the initial
properties of pulsars formed by AIC are not known, we may presume they
resemble those of “normal” pulsars with magnetic fields in the @xmath G
range. Another interesting point to consider is that the AIC channel
does not require a degenerate companion. As opposed to the other two
proposed scenarios (§ 3.5.1 and 3.5.2 ), the formation of a pulsar
through AIC can interrupt the mass transfer, thus postponing further
evolution. If the “evolutionary quiescence” is long enough, we would
expect to find some non-degenerate companions around young AIC pulsars
having circular orbits but with spin periods and magnetic fields that
are more typical of isolated pulsars. Finally, as the companion
continues to evolve to fill its now larger Roche lobe, a shortened
accretion phase might occur, thus transfering a very small amount of
mass to the pulsar and leaving it partly recycled despite its low-mass
companion.

Some binary pulsars among the group we highlighted, like PSRs B1831
@xmath 00 and B1718 @xmath 19, have been proposed as AIC candidates in
the past (van den Heuvel, 1995 ; Ergma, 1993 ) . However, there is no
firm evidence to support this. For instance, PSR B1718 @xmath 19 is
presumably a member of the globular cluster NGC 6342. As Janssen and van
Kerkwijk ( 2005 ) show, although observations suggest AIC is possible,
an encounter and tidal capture scenario cannot be ruled out and is very
reasonable given the plausible globular cluster association. On the
other hand, PSR B1718 @xmath 19 shares similarities with other binary
pulsars in the Galactic field, especially with PSR J1744 @xmath 3922.
PSR B1718 @xmath 19’s younger age, larger magnetic field and spin
period, as well as the fact that it has a non-degenerate companion, are
all compatible with it being an AIC pulsar in the intermediate
“quiescent” phase.

In this context, the other pulsars of our putative class would have
reached the final evolutionary stage and, hence, display mildly recycled
properties. If so, PSR J1744 @xmath 3922 likely has a very light He WD
companion. This might explain the lack of traditional eclipses as in
PSR B1718 @xmath 19 (Lyne et al., 1993 ) , large DM variations as in
NGC 6397A (D’Amico et al., 2001 ) , and orbital period derivatives as in
other compact binary pulsars (Nice et al., 2000 ) since tidal effects
are important for non-degenerate companions. If the residual recycling
phase left PSR J1744 @xmath 3922 with a long spin period, the cooling
age of its hypothetical WD companion could be smaller than the
characteristic age of the pulsar for the same reason described in the
recycled high magnetic field pulsar scenario (see § 3.5.1 ). Also,
pulsars forming through AIC can have lower masses than those made in
standard supernovae and since they only accrete a small amount of mass
from their companion afterwards, they might be less massive than
conventionally formed millisecond pulsars.

### 3.6 Conclusions

This study highlights the unusual nature of the binary pulsar system
PSR J1744 @xmath 3922. The puzzling radio flux modulation that it
exhibits does not show typical nulling properties as displayed by some
old isolated pulsars; specifically, we have found strong evidence that
its variation is highly frequency dependent. Although our orbital
modulation analysis does not show a significant correlation between
orbital phase and flux, the modulation could still be caused by a
process related to a wind from its companion, which results in short
time scale variations grouped in extreme modulation “events”. Additional
monitoring of both the pulsar and of its companion may prove useful in
this regard.

We pointed out that this pulsar has an unusual combination of
characteristics: long spin period, very low-mass companion, high
magnetic field and short orbital period, that are unexplained by
standard binary pulsar evolution scenarios. We propose that PSR J1744
@xmath 3922, along with a several other binary pulsar systems, are part
of a new class of low-mass binary pulsars which failed to be fully
recyled. Specifically, we suggest three alternative scenarios for this
class of binary pulsars. Distinguishing among them may be possible by
improving our knowledge of the nature of their companions. We also
reported the detection of a possible near-infrared counterpart to
PSR J1744 @xmath 3922’s companion, however, determining its nature will
require detailed near-infrared/optical follow-up.

## Chapter 4 The Eclipses of the Double Pulsar

“A theory is something nobody believes, except the person who made it.

An experiment is something everybody believes, except the person who
made it.” Albert Einstein

This chapter presents the results of an exhaustive study of the double
pulsar PSR J0737 @xmath 3039A/B eclipses. Once per orbit, the pulsar ‘A’
is eclipsed by its companion, pulsar ‘B’, for about 30 s. Eclipse
modeling allows us to reconstruct the geometrical orientation of pulsar
B with respect to the orbit and measure the relativistic precession of
its spin axis. This provides a test of general relativity and
alternative theories of gravity in the strong-field regime as well as
valuable information about the system’s geometry.

Part of this work — the 820 MHz eclipse modeling and the derived
measurement of relativistic spin precession — was originally published
as: R. P. Breton, V. M. Kaspi, M. Kramer, M. A. McLaughlin, M. Lyutikov,
S. M. Ransom, I. H. Stairs, R. D. Ferdman, F. Camilo, and A. Possenti.
Relativistic Spin Precession in the Double Pulsar . Science, 321, 104,
July 2008. The remaining part of this chapter will be published as a
second paper complementing the Science paper and will focus on the
phenomenological aspects of the eclipse, the multi-frequency
observations and the geometrical consequences of the eclipse modeling.

### 4.1 Introduction

#### 4.1.1 Unique Eclipses

As we described earlier in § 2.6.2 , PSR J0737 @xmath 3039A/B consists
of two neutron stars, both visible as radio pulsars, in a relativistic
2.45-hour orbit (Burgay et al., 2003 ; Lyne et al., 2004 ) .
High-precision timing of the pulsars, having spin periods of 23 ms and
2.8 s (hereafter called pulsars A and B, respectively), has already
proven to be the most stringent test-bed for GR in the strong-field
regime (Kramer et al., 2006 ) and enables four independent timing tests
of gravity, more than any other binary system (see § A for a discussion
about the notion of strong-field regime and § 2.7.1 for a brief review
of tests of general relativity involving binary pulsar timing).

The orbital inclination of the double pulsar is such that we observe the
system almost perfectly edge-on. This coincidence causes pulsar A to be
eclipsed by pulsar B at pulsar A’s superior conjunction (Lyne et al.,
2004 ) . The modestly frequency-dependent eclipse duration, about 30 s,
corresponds to a region extending @xmath 1.5 @xmath m (Kaspi et al.,
2004 ) . The light curve of pulsar A during its eclipse shows flux
intensity modulations that are spaced by half or integer numbers of
pulsar B’s rotational period (McLaughlin et al., 2004c ) . This
indicates that the material responsible for the eclipse corotates with
pulsar B. The relative orbital motions of the two pulsars and the
rotation of pulsar B thus allow a probe of different regions of pulsar
B’s magnetosphere in a plane containing the line of sight and the
orbital motion.

Synchrotron resonance with relativistic electrons is the most likely
mechanism for efficient absorption of radio emission over a wide range
of frequencies. It has been proposed by Lyutikov and Thompson ( 2005 )
that this absorbing plasma corotates with pulsar B and is confined
within the closed field lines of a magnetic dipole truncated by the
relativistic wind of pulsar A.

#### 4.1.2 Spin-Orbit Coupling

Spin is a fundamental property of most astrophysical bodies, making the
study of its gravitational interaction an important challenge (Will,
2001 ) . Spin interaction manifests itself in different forms. For
instance, we expect the spin of a compact rotating body in a binary
system with another compact companion to couple gravitationally with the
orbital angular momentum (relativistic spin-orbit coupling) and also
with the spin of this companion (relativistic spin-spin coupling) ¹ ¹ 1
The contribution from a classical quadrupolar moment is negligible for
compact bodies. (O’Connell, 1974 ) . Observing such phenomena provides
important tests for theories of gravity, because every successful theory
must be able to describe the couplings and to predict their
observational consequences. In a binary system consisting of compact
objects such as neutron stars, one can generally consider the spin-orbit
contribution acting on each body to dominate greatly the spin-spin
contribution — in the double pulsar, the spin-spin interaction scales as
only @xmath of the spin-orbit interaction. This interaction results in a
precession of the bodies’ spin axis around the orbital angular momentum
of the system, behavior we refer to as relativistic spin precession .

While relativistic spin precession is well studied theoretically in
general relativity (GR), the same is not true of alternative theories of
gravity and hence, quantitative predictions of deviations from GR spin
precession do not yet exist (Damour and Taylor, 1992 ) . For instance,
it is expected that in alternative theories relativistic spin precession
may also depend on strong self-gravitational effects, i.e. the actual
precession may depend on the structure of a gravitating body (Damour and
Taylor, 1992 ) . In the weak gravitational fields encountered in the
solar system, these strong-field effects generally cannot be detected
(Damour and Esposito-Farèse, 1992a , b , 1996a ) . Measurements in the
strong-field regime near massive and compact bodies such as neutron
stars and black holes are required. Relativistic spin precession has
been observed in some binary pulsars (e.g Weisberg et al., 1989 ;
Kramer, 1998 ; Hotan et al., 2005 ) , but it has usually only provided a
qualitative confirmation of the effect. Recently, the binary pulsar
PSR B1534+12 has allowed the first quantitative measurement of this
effect in a strong field, and although the spin precession rate was
measured to low precision, it was consistent with the predictions of GR
(Stairs, 2004 ) .

We may suppose that if the modulation features in the eclipse profile of
pulsar A are so tightly related to the spin phases of pulsar B, the
relativistic spin precession of the latter may give rise to observable
effects in the eclipse profile. In this respect, the Lyutikov and
Thompson ( 2005 ) model is making clear prediction about the
time-evolution behavior of the eclipse profile that should allow to
measure the precession rate if the model is successful. We shall test
this hypothesis in this chapter.

### 4.2 Observations and Data Reduction

We regularly observed the double pulsar from December 2003 to November
2007 ² ² 2 The monitoring campaign is still on-going as of the time of
writing this thesis. as part of a multi-purpose monitoring campaign
primarly aimed at the timing of the pulsars, but also at the
investigation of the different phenomena displayed by this system such
as the eclipses of pulsar A, the orbital modulation of pulsar B’s flux
and its subpulse drifting. Timing results were reported in Kramer et al.
( 2006 ) . Data used for the analysis presented in this chapter were
acquired at the Green Bank Telescope with the SPIGOT and BCPM
instruments (Kaplan et al., 2005 ; Backer et al., 1997 ) (see § 2.4 for
more details about data acquisition systems). Observations were
conducted at central frequencies 325, 427, 820, 1400, 1950 and 2200 MHz.
The SPIGOT back-end provides a 50 MHz bandwidth segmented into 1024
channels for observations at 325, 427, 820 MHz, and a 800 MHz bandwidth
with the same number of channels for observations at 1950 MHz. The
recording sample time is 81.92 @xmath s. The BCPM back-end provides 96
channels over a bandwidth of 48 MHz at 820 MHz and lower frequencies,
and 96 MHz at 1400 MHz and 2200 MHz. The sampling time of BCPM is 72
@xmath s. Typically, most data were recorded during biannual observing
campaigns consisting of several (3-5) individual 4-7 hour long
observations taking place over consecutive days. Occasionally,
additional observations were made between these observing campaigns.
Because the orbital period of the double pulsar is 2.45 hours, we
usually recorded 1-3 eclipses per observation.

We performed the initial data reduction using the pulsar analysis
packages PRESTO (Ransom et al., 2002 ) and SIGPROC ( Lorimer, ) (see §
2.5 ). First, we dedispersed the data to correct for the
frequency-dependent travel time in the ionized interstellar medium by
adding time shifts to frequency channels ³ ³ 3 General details about
pulsar timing can be found in § 2.5 and specific information about the
double pulsar timing were reported in Kramer et al. ( 2006 ) . . Then,
we generated folded data products for both pulsars using the predicted
spin periods of pulsar A and pulsar B. For these two steps, we used the
timing solution presented in Kramer et al. ( 2006 ) , which has slightly
evolved over time since the earliest observations in 2003.

We generated a time series of pulsar A’s pulsed flux for each segment of
observation containing an eclipse of pulsar A. We first made a high
signal-to-noise ratio pulse template of pulsar A from the folded data
integrated over each observation. Then, we calculated the relative
pulsed flux density of pulsar A by fitting the corresponding pulse
profile template to the individual fold intervals. We have chosen the
fold intervals to be the sum of four individual pulses of pulsar A (
@xmath ms) in order to have a good balance between signal-to-noise ratio
and time resolution. Note that as opposed to SIGPROC , which can fold at
an integer number of pulses, PRESTO ’s folding algorithm is based on
byte size and hence, despite the exact number of pulses being generally
four, there is a handful of data points consisting of three pulses only.
These data points were renormalized to correct for their shorter time
integration. Finally, to facilitate the data analysis we normalized the
time series such that the flux average in the out-of-eclipse region is
unity.

Using the timing solution of Kramer et al. ( 2006 ) we calculated the
orbital phase corresponding to each data point in the flux time series.
Throughout this work, we shall refer to the orbital phases using the
superior conjunction of pulsar A (i.e. when pulsar A passes behind
pulsar B) as the reference point. For eclipse modeling purposes, we also
determined the spin phases of pulsar B associated to each data point of
pulsar A’s pulsed flux time series. We empirically determined the spin
phases by calculating the phase shift to apply to the predicted spin
phases from the integrated pulse profile over each observation.

Over the four years that our data span, we found significant changes in
pulsar B’s pulse profile (see Figure LABEL:f:profile_evolution ), likely
due to the precession of its spin axis, which were also reported in
Burgay et al. ( 2005 ) . Around 2003, the average pulse profile was
unimodal, resembling a Gaussian function. It evolved such that by 2007,
it displayed two narrow peaks. Using the pulse peak maximum as a
fiducial reference point is certainly not appropriate. We find, however,
that the unimodal profile gradually became wider and then started to
form a gap near the center of its peak. Since then, the outer edges of
the pulse profile have not significantly changed but the gap evolved
such that two peaks are now visible. This lets us presume that the
underlying average profile is reminiscent of a Gaussian-like profile to
which some “absorption” feature has been superimposed near the center,
leaving a narrow peak on each side. We therefore defined the fiducial
reference point to lie at the center of the unimodal “envelope” that we
reconstructed from the first ten Fourier bins of the pulse profile,
which contains 512 bins in total (see Figure LABEL:f:profile_evolution
for an illustration of the pulse profile evolution).

### 4.3 Eclipse Phenomenology

The presence of eclipses in the double pulsar is not unique to this
system. A handful of other binary pulsars are periodically occulted near
superior conjunction when they pass behind their companion (see also §
3.2.3 ). There are numerous origins to these eclipses. Sometimes, the
stellar wind of a Be companion star screens the pulsar for part of the
orbit. In other cases the orbital separation can be such that mass
transfer from the companion to the pulsar may turn off the pulsar
emission mechanism temporarily. In every case, binary pulsar eclipses do
not appear to be caused by the surface of their companions, as in the
case of solar and lunar eclipses for example.

The double pulsar eclipses are peculiar in that this is the first
occurrence of such phenomenon in a double neutron star system. Mass
transfer from degenerate objects like neutron stars is excluded unless
the system is ultra-compact (i.e. an orbital separation of about 30 km
would be required for the neutron star to fill its Roche lobe) ⁴ ⁴ 4 In
a double neutron star system, the mass ratio, @xmath , is the order of
unity. For mass transfer to happen, the Roche-lobe must be the size of
the neutron star. Using the approximation of Eggleton ( 1983 ) , the
Roche-lobe radius of body 1, expressed in units of orbital separation
@xmath , is given by @xmath , with @xmath . This implies @xmath for
@xmath , hence @xmath km for a neutron star radius of about 10 km. and
despite the fact that some pulsars can produce strong winds able to
power pulsar wind nebulae, the energetics of this system is such that
the spin-down energy released by pulsar A is about 3600 times larger
than from pulsar B. Hence, if the interaction of pulsar A on pulsar B
might be considerable, the converse is likely negligible. We therefore
conclude that during the eclipses the radio emission from pulsar A has
to be absorbed since pulsar B only plays a passive role. The short
eclipse duration, @xmath s, implies a projected cross-sectional eclipse
region of about 18000 km at the distance that separates pulsar B from
pulsar A (Kaspi et al., 2004 ) . This physical scale of the eclipse fits
well within the light-cylinder of pulsar B, @xmath km.

#### 4.3.1 Modulations

The double pulsar eclipses present phenomenological aspects that clearly
contrast with anything seen before in other astronomical eclipsing
system. The eclipse light curve is strongly asymmetric (Kaspi et al.,
2004 ) — the egress occurs roughly 4 times faster than the ingress — and
very rapid flux variations were discovered in the high time resolution
analysis of an 820 MHz observation (McLaughlin et al., 2004c ) . The
most astounding property of this flux variability is that it shows a
synchronicity with the rotational phase of pulsar B, which lies in front
of pulsar A during the eclipse (see Figure LABEL:f:profile_with_phases
for a sample eclipse light curve). This kind of behavior has
considerable implications for the physical mechanism creating the
eclipses. It was initially proposed, before the modulations were found,
that the eclipses could originate from the magnetosheath of pulsar B,
which probably resembles that of the Earth (Arons et al., 2005 ;
Lyutikov, 2004 ) . The relativistic shock of pulsar A’s wind on pulsar
B’s magnetosphere share many similarities with the effect of the Solar
wind on the Earth’s magnetosphere. Such a model, however, was later
excluded because it is unable to explain the rapid modulation of pulsar
A’s flux.

##### Periodicity

Even though the connection between the flux variability and the
rotational phase of pulsar B is well established qualitatively
(McLaughlin et al., 2004c ) , no thorough quantitative analysis has been
reported and the presence of such behavior at other radio frequencies,
although logically expected, is yet to be confirmed. For various
reasons, pulsar A is detected with a stronger signal-to-noise ratio at
820 MHz than at other frequencies. Whereas the flux modulation is easily
perceptible at this frequency, it is certainly more difficult to assess
their presence at other frequencies.

To address these two questions, we performed a Fourier analysis of
pulsar A’s pulsed flux light curves. Their raw power spectra present a
strong energy content at low frequencies because of the overall change
in flux intensity during the eclipse (see Figure
LABEL:f:eclipse_lightcurve ). For this reason, we subtracted a smoothed
time series from the raw time series in order to obtain a high-pass
filtered time series, which has an average flux level of zero. This
enables us to conduct further analysis on the short term variability
only (see Figure LABEL:f:eclipse_lightcurve ). From these filtered light
curves, we found very significant excess power above the noise level at
the exact spin frequency of pulsar B as well as at a number of
harmonically related frequencies (see Figure
LABEL:f:eclipse_powerspectrum ). This behavior is visible at all radio
frequencies between 325 and 1950 MHz, even when the modulations are not
obviously distinguishable from the noise (see Figures
LABEL:f:eclipse_325MHz , LABEL:f:eclipse_427MHz ,
LABEL:f:eclipse_1400MHz and LABEL:f:eclipse_1950MHz ). Furthermore, we
observe that power in the first harmonic dominates the modulation
content (i.e. twice the spin frequency of pulsar B). The only exception
is the 2200 MHz observation made with the BCPM instrument, which does
not show modulation (see Figure LABEL:f:eclipse_2200MHz ). The
signal-to-noise ratio at this frequency is very poor because: 1) pulsar
A becomes dimmer at increasing frequency, 2) RFI contamination and 3)
smaller bandwidth of the BCPM instrument compared to SPIGOT . Since the
800 MHz bandwidth of the SPIGOT 1950 MHz data overlaps with the BCPM
2200 MHz data, we conclude that the no-detection at this frequency is
only an instrumental effect and that the flux modulation in the eclipse
light curve is a frequency independent phenomenon.

More information about the modulation behavior can be obtained from a
windowed Fourier transform ⁵ ⁵ 5 The windowed Fourier transform is also
referred to as dynamic Fourier transform. . This technique consists in
calculating the Fourier transform within a subsection of a time series.
The Fourier transform is then recalculated after repeatedly translating
the top-hat window kernel over the time series. This allows one to
determine the dynamic dependence of the power content of a time series.
A representative example of such a dynamic power spectrum obtained for
an 820 MHz observation is showed in Figure LABEL:f:dynamic .

Our dynamic power spectrum analysis yields two important results. First,
outside the eclipse region the time series is well described by white
noise and no periodic flux variations are found. Even though our pulsed
flux time series are made from data folded at pulsar A’s spin period and
should consequently wash out the signature of pulsar B in the time
series, the absence of modulation outside the eclipse region confirms
that the modulation behavior is not an artifact of the data processing.
The origin of the modulation is therefore directly connected to the
physical process causing the eclipse. The second finding is that the
power content significantly evolves over the course of the eclipse. From
the December 2003 data presented in Figure LABEL:f:dynamic , we observe
that the eclipse ingress is characterized by modulation at twice the
frequency of pulsar B while a ‘mode switching’ appears to occur around
orbital phase @xmath . The modulation then becomes a single peak per
rotational period of pulsar B. Finally, at the eclipse egress, the
modulation behavior briefly returns to the original double-peak mode.
The two above conclusions are independent of the observed radio
frequency.

##### Folded Light Curve

An interesting way of appreciating the connection between the pulsed
flux modulation of pulsar A during the eclipse and the spin phase of
pulsar B, as well as visualizing the mode switching behavior consists in
folding the eclipse light curve at the spin period of pulsar B. With
this method, we obtain a continuous eclipse profile of pulsar A for
every spin phase of pulsar B. Figure LABEL:f:fold illustrates such a
folded eclipse profile made for the data presented in Figure
LABEL:f:dynamic . From this figure, we clearly see that the ingress
starts very early and abruptly for regions corresponding to two specific
spin phases of pulsar B. As the eclipse progresses, the opacity
increases for all the spin phases of pulsar B except around phase 0.25
where the flux remains similar to the out-of-eclipse level for nearly
the entire eclipse. This explains how the modulation switches from two
bright regions per rotational phase of pulsar B to one region. Finally,
the egress presents a fast rise at phase 0.25 as well as phase 0.75,
thus causing the final mode switching.

We also observe that the enhanced pulsed flux features regularly return
to the out-of-eclipse level. This question could not easily be addressed
in the original eclipse modulation analysis because the time resolution
was twice as long as the one we used here (McLaughlin et al., 2004c ) .
Several features are very narrow, and hence a coarser resolution has the
effect of averaging the data points down to lower values. It appears,
however, that some of the enhanced features do not reach the
out-of-eclipse level.

#### 4.3.2 Duration

Kaspi et al. ( 2004 ) reported that the eclipse duration is nearly
frequency independent in the range @xmath MHz. They separately fitted a
Fermi function to each half of the eclipse and compared the inferred
full width at half-max duration at different frequency. They found a
small, non-zero linear decrease in the eclipse duration of @xmath
orbits MHz @xmath . The low time resolution used in their analysis
averages out the flux modulation, hence only providing information about
the overall eclipse trend.

Because our data set includes observations made over a larger range of
frequencies, we conducted a similar analysis in order to verify the
behavior of the eclipse duration. We chose observations made around the
same epoch in order to reduce effects of long-term evolution of the
eclipse profile. Instead of fitting the ingress and the egress
separately, we fitted the whole raw light curve to the following model:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

This equation is simply a two-sided Fermi function having inflection
points @xmath and @xmath at the ingress and egress, respectively, with
corresponding sharpness factors @xmath and @xmath . Because the flux may
not drop completely to zero during the eclipse, we allow for an offset
@xmath . We force the asymptotical upper value to be unity, however,
since the eclipse light curves are normalized such that the
out-of-eclipse level is unity. One can determine the eclipse duration,
which is defined as the full width at half maximum (FWHM), by
calculating @xmath directly. Results are presented in Table
LABEL:t:duration .

From this analysis, we do not find any significant correlation between
@xmath and the observed frequency nor between the ratio @xmath and the
observed frequency. We observe, however, that the eclipse FWHM does
decrease with increasing observed frequency (see Figure LABEL:f:duration
). We fitted the duration for a linear relationship, FWHM @xmath and
found: @xmath orbit  MHz @xmath and @xmath orbit with a reduced @xmath
(15 degrees of freedom). Our fitted slope is in agreement, within @xmath
uncertainties, with the result from Kaspi et al. ( 2004 ) who found
@xmath orbit  MHz @xmath . The fitted intercepts, however, are different
( Kaspi et al. ( 2004 ) obtained 0.003412(2) orbit). The difference in
our best-fit intercept may result from the fact that our time series
have a much smaller time resolution — a factor @xmath 22 — that those of
Kaspi et al. ( 2004 ) . Since short timescale modulations are not
visible in time series with coarser resolution, this also explain the
smaller fit uncertainties reported by Kaspi et al. ( 2004 ) . Another
noticeable difference comes from the fact that we fit the eclipse as a
whole instead of considering the ingress and the egress separately.

We also fitted the duration for a power-law relationship, FWHM @xmath
and obtained: @xmath and @xmath with a reduced @xmath (15 degrees of
freedom). It therefore appears that the eclipse duration more closely
follows a power-law relationship with a small power-law index than a
linear relationship. A possible reason why it did not appear in the
original analysis by Kaspi et al. ( 2004 ) is the shorter frequency
baseline, which did not show the steep increase in duration at 325 MHz
and slower decrease above 1400 MHz. It would be interesting to follow
the eclipse behavior at much higher frequency in order to determine if
there exists a cutoff in the eclipse duration. Unfortunately, pulsar A,
like most radio pulsars, becomes very faint with increasing frequency
and hence it would make such measurement impossible.

### 4.4 Eclipse Modeling

#### 4.4.1 The Lyutikov and Thompson Model

The presence of periodic flux modulation synchronized with the
rotational phase of pulsar B is strong evidence that the eclipse
material must co-rotate with the neutron star. Furthermore, an
additional constraint on the eclipse mechanism comes from the fact that
the physical process responsible for the radio absorption must be
efficient over a wide range of frequencies. It was soon recognized that
synchrotron absorption is the most likely physical process responsible
for the radio absorption during the eclipses (Kaspi et al., 2004 ;
McLaughlin et al., 2004c ; Arons et al., 2005 ; Lyutikov, 2004 ) .

The model proposed by Lyutikov and Thompson ( 2005 ) is particular in
that it is tightly connected to geometrical aspects of the system. Hot
relativistic electrons are confined within the closed field lines of
pulsar B’s magnetosphere, which is assumed to have a dipolar structure.
Because magnetic bottling is efficient and the plasma cooling time is
long, a large particle density can slowly build up to values that could
reach @xmath times the Goldreich-Julian density according to Lyutikov
and Thompson ( 2005 ) . The total synchrotron optical depth along the
line of sight to pulsar A varies as a function of the spin phase of
pulsar B and the relative position of the two pulsars induced by the
orbital motion. This naturally opens the possibility of generating flux
modulation since the optical depth can vary rapidly on a time scale
corresponding to the spin period of pulsar B.

Some extra ingredients must be added to the model in order to work.
First, the plasma is expected to leak through the open field lines of
pulsar B. Hence, we assume that the density profile of the plasma is
constant within the magnetosphere up to some radius @xmath beyond which
it drops abruptly, as a step-function, because not enough particles are
retained to sustain a significant amount of synchrotron absorption. This
‘hard’ boundary condition is supplemented by the extra condition that
the local synchrotron frequency must be larger than the radio frequency
of the emission from pulsar A, otherwise synchrotron absorption does not
occur at this point of the space. On the other hand there is a radius,
@xmath , from which particles can precipitate to the neutron star
surface before cooling by cyclotron or synchrotron cooling. The size of
this region is estimated to be a small fraction, @xmath % of @xmath .
Overall, the region of the magnetosphere opaque to the radio waves
coming from pulsar A resembles a torus.

#### 4.4.2 Technical Definitions

##### Geometry

We conducted data modeling based on the work of Lyutikov and Thompson (
2005 ) . Here, we summarize critical technical aspects of this model and
adapt it to our needs.

We define a cartesian coordinate system centered on pulsar B: the @xmath
-axis points in direction of Earth, along our line of sight, the @xmath
-axis is parallel to the projected orbital motion of pulsar A during the
eclipse, and the @xmath -axis is in the plane of the sky, coplanar with
the orbital angular momentum vector (see Figure LABEL:f:schematic for a
schematic view of the geometry).

We represent the orientation of pulsar B’s spin axis in space using two
angles: @xmath is the colatitude of the spin axis with respect to the
@xmath -axis and @xmath is the longitude of the spin axis with respect
to the @xmath -axis. We can relate this cartesian system with another
one, also centered on pulsar B, but for which the @xmath -axis is
aligned with the orbital angular momentum of the system, while the
@xmath -axis is parallel to the @xmath -axis and the @xmath -axis is
coplanar with the @xmath plane. In other words, the @xmath and the
@xmath coordinate systems are related by a rotation about the @xmath
-axis or, equivalently, the @xmath -axis. This rotation corresponds to
@xmath . If we denote @xmath and @xmath the colatitude and the longitude
of the spin axis in this coordinate system (following the notation
introduced in Damour and Taylor ( 1992 ) ), then we can write:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Because the orbital inclination of the system is very close to @xmath —
the timing yields @xmath (Kramer et al., 2006 ) — we can make the
following approximation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

This implies that the orientation of pulsar B’s spin axis derived from
the eclipse does not depend on the system’s geometry derived from the
timing.

We allow the dipole magnetic field of pulsar B to be misaligned with
respect to its spin axis by an angle @xmath . Also, we define the
truncation radius beyond which the synchrotron opacity becomes
negligible as @xmath .

Because the orbital plane is not exactly coincident with our line of
sight vector, pulsar A describes an apparent motion during the eclipse
along the @xmath -axis at a fixed, non-zero @xmath position that we
choose to be @xmath .

##### Dipolar Magnetosphere

For each point in the eclipse light curve, we calculate the synchrotron
optical depth as follow:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is the position along the @xmath -axis expressed in units
of @xmath and @xmath is the local dipole magnetic field strength in unit
of @xmath , the magnetic field strength on the last field line that
closes within @xmath . The angle between our line of sight and the local
dipole magnetic field direction is @xmath and the observing frequency
@xmath in GHz. The scaling parameter @xmath accounts for the physical
properties of the magnetosphere and is defined as (see Lyutikov and
Thompson, 2005 , Equation 52) :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the above equation, @xmath is the electron multiplicity, @xmath is a
dimensionless parameter that rescales the magnetospheric radius size to
account for the fact that the pulsar does not spin down in vacuum and is
strongly perturbed by the relativistic wind of pulsar B, @xmath is the
Boltzmann constant, @xmath and @xmath are the electron temperature and
mass, and @xmath the speed of light.

The eclipse intensity profile — i.e. the transmitted flux from pulsar A
— corresponds to @xmath . We can readily conclude that @xmath modifies
the overall eclipse “depth” but has no effect on the location of the
modulation features, which are uniquely determined by the geometrical
aspects of the model.

An additional free parameter, @xmath , must be added in order to account
for the mapping of the observed orbital phases to the coordinate system,
which uses the magnetospheric size, @xmath , as reference unit. This
implies that @xmath scales the size of the magnetosphere relative to the
orbit.

The dipole magnetic field strength is simply found using:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the position in spherical coordinates, @xmath is the
dipole moment, and @xmath is the magnetic polar angle:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The components of the dipole unit vector are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the spin period of pulsar B.

##### Rotational Phases of Pulsar B

We should mention that this spin phase definition, originally introduced
by Lyutikov and Thompson ( 2005 ) , possesses the important caveat that
it does not strictly correspond to the observed spin phase. Hence, the
emission cone of pulsar B is not necessarily oriented toward Earth when
@xmath for any value of @xmath and @xmath . Let us consider the case of
radio emission emitted parallel to the magnetic moment, which is
orthogonal to the spin axis (e.g. @xmath ). For @xmath and @xmath , the
magnetic pole of pulsar B is indeed pointing toward Earth when @xmath .
If, however, @xmath and @xmath , the magnetic pole is perpendicular to
Earth when @xmath . Relating the observed spin phases to the model spin
phases is essential not only to determine the correct model parameters
from eclipse fitting, but also to ensure that a time variation of the
geometric orientation of pulsar B would not be partly absorbed in a
redefinition of the effective spin phase. While we do not make any
assumption about the emission geometry, we suppose that radio pulses
from pulsar B are observed when its magnetic pole is maximally oriented
toward Earth. That is @xmath .

#### 4.4.3 Relativistic Spin Precession

Relativistic spin precession is expected to cause the spin angular
momentum vector of pulsar B to precess around the total angular momentum
of the system. Since this effect changes the geometry of the spin axis
orientation, it should result in observable changes in the eclipse light
curve that can be quantified using the modeling.

We argued in § 4.4.2 that the orbital angular momentum of the system and
the @xmath -axis are closely aligned and can be approximated to be the
same (see Equations 4.4 and 4.5 ). In this case, the time evolution of
the pulsar spin axis can be written as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the angles defined in § 4.4.2 , @xmath is
the precession rate, and @xmath is the longitude of the spin axis at the
reference epoch.

### 4.5 Eclipse Model Fitting

The eclipse model comprises 7 free parameters: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Because of the large number of
model parameters, it is technically challenging to search the full
parameter space for a best-fit solution. Several least-squares and
related maximization methods exist but most of them are not suited for
the needs of our work. We require a method that can handle nonlinear
models, is efficient with a large number of dimensions, can find a
global maximum and can provide information about the topology of the a
posteriori probability distribution of the model parameters as well as
allowing to derive confidence intervals for the best-fit solution.

#### 4.5.1 MCMC Analysis

We identified Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods as very well
suited to meet the needs that we enumerated above. MCMC methods are a
class of algorithms designed to sample from a probability distribution
that asymptotically converges toward a desired distribution by
constructing a Markov Chain. As opposed to a ‘plain’ Monte Carlo
algorithm, which evenly samples all regions of the parameter space, an
MCMC algorithm spends more time in the ‘interesting’ regions of the
parameter space — to be more precise, the sampling rate is
asymptotically proportional to the a posteriori probability.

Many MCMC algorithms exist but one of the simplest to implement, and yet
very efficient, is called the Metropolis-Hasting algorithm. The
Metropolis-Hasting algorithm draws samples in the parameter space using
a random walk and uses an adoption-rejection criteria to decide whether
or not a new sample is added to the Markov Chain, hence ensuring
convergence toward the targeted distribution.

The implementation of the Metropolis-Hasting algorithm is done as
follows. Let @xmath represents a vector of parameters in the parameter
space at step @xmath of the Markov Chain and let @xmath be a candidate
parameter vector sampled from a proposal distribution @xmath .
Requirements for this proposal distribution are not very strigent (see
Gilks and Spiegelhalter, 1996 , for more details) and a very common
choice — the one we used here — is a random walk @xmath where the random
step @xmath is chosen from a multivariate normal distribution @xmath
having a 0 mean and a covariance matrix @xmath . Let @xmath be the
target distribution. In our case, the target distribution is the a
posteriori density distribution of the model defined using the Bayes
theorem as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath refers to the priors and @xmath to the data. In the present
case, we simply assume flat priors and hence @xmath can be ignored since
it is absorbed in the normalizing constant @xmath , which ensures that
the integrated probability of @xmath is unity. The conditional
probability of the data, @xmath , is often referred to as the
likelihood, @xmath , which we define as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is just the regular chi square, i.e. @xmath .

The pseudo-code of the Metropolis-Hasting MCMC is:

1.  Initialize the Markov Chain with a random vector in the phase space,
    @xmath .

2.  Choose a candidate vector, @xmath from the proposal distribution
    @xmath
    @xmath .

3.  Choose a random number, @xmath , in the interval @xmath .

4.  Accept the candidate vector if it represents an improvement in the a
    posteriori probability: @xmath , i.e. @xmath .

    Otherwise, accept it if:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.20)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Set @xmath if the candidate vector is accepted and @xmath otherwise.
    Our proposal distribution is symmetrical, @xmath , hence the simple
    form of the above equation.

5.  Repeat steps 2 to 4 until convergence ⁶ ⁶ 6 One of the properties of
    Markov Chains is that they asymptotically converge toward a
    stationary distribution. In a more practical way, convergence means
    that the obtained distribution is ‘close’ enough to the ‘real’
    underlying distribution. In this case, the calculated statistics
    such as the estimated mean, the moments and the standard
    distribution would yield comparable values to what one would obtain
    if these were calculated from the ‘real’ distribution.
    Mathematically, there are a number of ways of assessing convergence
    (Gilks and Spiegelhalter, 1996 ) . For example, one can compare the
    estimated mean in different segments of the Markov Chain or the
    variance of several independent chains having different starting
    points. to the target distribution.

We slightly modified the above algorithm in order to include a simulated
annealing scheme that allows to boost the efficiency of our
Metropolis-Hasting MCMC algorithm at exploring the parameter space. The
concept of simulated annealing (Kirkpatrick et al., 1983 ; Cerny, 1985 )
, by analogy to the slow cooling of metals and crystal latices, employs
a temperature parameter, @xmath , that initially flattens the likelihood
space when the temperature is high. This increases the acceptance rate
of proposed moves, thus improving the mobility of the Markov Chain in
the parameter space. Gradually, the temperature is lowered according to
an annealing scheme and the algorithm converges toward the equilibrium
temperature of 1. In a pure simulated annealing algorithm, the
temperature is generally reduced below unity. One can show that, if
@xmath is reached in an infinite amount of time (or a time long enough
compared to the “thermodynamic” time scale of the system), the algorithm
will converge to the global maximum (Geman and Geman, 1984 ) .

Step 4 of our above algorithm therefore becomes:

1.  1.  The system temperature is adjusted using the following annealing
        scheme: @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are adjustment
        parameters ⁷ ⁷ 7 Typically, @xmath ( @xmath necessarily has to
        be less than 1 in order for the temperature to decrease) and
        @xmath . Tuning @xmath and @xmath allows one to determine how
        fast the temperature converges toward the final temperature. for
        the rate for temperature change, and @xmath and @xmath are the
        initial and final temperature, respectively.

    2.  Accept the candidate vector if @xmath . Otherwise, accept it if:

          -- -------- -- --------
             @xmath      (4.21)
          -- -------- -- --------

        Set @xmath if the candidate vector is accepted and @xmath
        otherwise.

#### 4.5.2 MCMC Results

As we mentioned in § 4.4.2 , @xmath has no effect on the location of the
modulation features and only modifies the deepness of the eclipse.
Because the optical depth increases very sharply within the @xmath
boundary, it is very difficult to probe the inner magnetosphere. Hence,
it is impossible to obtain any reliable constraint on @xmath — any
‘reasonable’ value between 0 and 0.5 @xmath yields undistinguishable
light curves considering the noise in the data. The large optical depth
of the magnetosphere also implies that the constant electron
distribution in the magnetosphere produces good results and,
unfortunately, investigating the intricate details of the electron
density profile will prove to be out of reach with the current
sensitivity of the instruments. The parameters @xmath and @xmath can be
constrained reasonably well. They mainly control the eclipse duration as
well as the appearance of certain modulation features in the light
curve. Finally, the parameters related to the geometry of pulsar B —
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath — are those playing the most important role
for the modeling since they govern the modulation behavior and the
transition from the ‘double’ modulation mode to the ‘single’ modulation
mode, and vice versa (see Movie ‘Eclipses’ at
http://www.physics.mcgill.ca/~bretonr/doublepulsar/ for an illustration
of the eclipse modeling). They show covariance between themselves but
little with the other parameters.

#### 4.5.3 Grid Search

We show in Figure LABEL:f:long_term_evolution the 820 MHz eclipse
profile at different epochs over the last four years. Even though the
signal-to-noise ratio varies depending on the number of eclipses used to
make the plots, we observe that the modulation behavior changed over
time. For instance, prominent “absorption” features gradually appeared
in the egress where nothing was visible in the early days of our
monitoring. The location of the transition of the modulation behavior —
from two to one flux enhancement per rotation of pulsar B — has drifted
toward the ingress. The Lyutikov and Thompson ( 2005 ) model offers the
possibility to quantify such kinds of long-term changes in eclipse
profile and relate them to the geometry of pulsar B. This task requires
the incorporation of the eclipse model in a framework accounting for the
evolution of the parameters.

Except for @xmath , we do not find any significant secular evolution of
the model parameters from their marginal a posteriori probability ⁸ ⁸ 8
Marginalization is a common technique used in Bayesian analysis that
consists of integrating the joint a posteriori probability over the
parameters that are not of interest so that it is reduced, in this case,
to a one-dimensional probability for the parameter that we wish to
consider (Gregory, 2005a ) . In principle, relativistic spin precession
of pulsar B’s spin axis around the total angular momentum should induce
a secular change of the longitude of the spin axis, @xmath (see § 4.4.3
). Since the Markov Chain Monte Carlo technique poorly samples regions
of low probability, we fixed @xmath , @xmath (projected size of the
magnetosphere in terms of orbital phase) and @xmath , their best-fit
values, before making a deeper investigation of pulsar B’s geometric
evolution.

We performed a high-resolution mapping of the likelihood of this
subspace in order to investigate subtle changes in the geometry and
verify whether the pulsar could experience precession. Because of
correlation between @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , we jointly evaluated
the best-fit geometry of pulsar B using a time-dependent model in which
@xmath and @xmath are constants, and @xmath varies linearly with time,
i.e. @xmath , where @xmath is the rate of change of pulsar B’s spin axis
longitude and the epoch of @xmath is May 2, 2006 (MJD 53857).

#### 4.5.4 Grid Search Results

Figure LABEL:f:eclipse_evolution shows the time evolution of the
parameters and the fit derived from this joint time-dependent model
(Table LABEL:t:fit_result , see also Figure LABEL:f:eclipse_pdf for one
and two-dimensional projections of the marginalized a posteriori
probability distributions). The precession rate @xmath of @xmath agrees
⁹ ⁹ 9 Unless otherwise stated, uncertainties are quoted at the 68%
confidence level. with the precession rate predicted by GR (Barker and
O’Connell, 1975 ) , @xmath , within an uncertainty of 13% (68%
confidence level) ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 The uncertainty on the predicted GR spin
precession rate arises because the value depends on the masses of the
system, which are determined from two measured post-Keplerian
parameters: the Shapiro delay @xmath parameter and the advance of
periastron @xmath . .

#### 4.5.5 Analysis of Systematics

We investigated the importance of systematics in the eclipse modeling
and concluded that two main effects should contribute to increasing the
total uncertainty in our best-fit geometric parameters above the
statistical value. First, we observe considerable changes in the pulse
profile of pulsar B as shown in Figure LABEL:f:profile_evolution . Since
the spin phases of pulsar B are input data for the modeling, losing the
fiducial reference to the neutron star surface will introduce additional
error in the fitted eclipse parameters. While we do not require a
measurement of the spin phases as accurate as for timing purposes, a few
percent offset translates into slightly different geometrical
parameters. The main effect of varying spin phases is to assign earlier
or later rotational phases that mimic a slightly faster or slower
precession rate. The pulse profile evolution of pulsar B is likely
caused by the changing viewing geometry due to relativistic spin
precession (see § 4.4.3 ). Although it is not clear how pulsar B’s pulse
profile geometry is related to its surface, we are confident that the
technique we used to determine the spin phases yields reliable results.

A second source of systematics arises from the choice of the eclipse
region to include in the fit. Changes in the eclipse light curve due to
relativistic spin precession are not uniform and the eclipse model tends
to perform better toward the eclipse center than at the ingress or the
egress. As opposed to the eclipse center, where our sight line to pulsar
A goes deep inside and outside the magnetosphere of pulsar B as it
rotates, our sight line only briefly intersects the edge of the
magnetosphere at the beginning and the end of the eclipse. Therefore,
local distortions of pulsar B’s magnetic field or variations of the
plasma density may give rise to a slight departure from our model.
Indeed, we observe that fitting the whole eclipse does not generally
provide qualitatively good fits. The narrow and periodic modulations in
the eclipse center are very important markers for the geometric
orientation of pulsar B but they tend to be misfitted because broader
features in the egress region lead to larger variations of the
goodness-of-fit. We find that excluding the egress more accurately fits
the overall light curves, without sacrificing critical information
derived from narrow modulations, while still qualitatively reproducing
the egress. Therefore, we chose to fit the eclipse in the range @xmath
centered around conjunction (see Figure LABEL:f:eclipse_fit ).

Determining the boundaries of the region to fit is arbitrary and hence
we estimated how much dispersion in the best-fit values is induced by
other choices of limits. We compared our actual choice, @xmath , with
the full eclipse, @xmath , the eclipse center, @xmath , and the extended
center, @xmath , fits. In a Bayesian framework, we can easily
incorporate the effect of systematics as priors on the model parameters.
For simplicity and because the functional form of the systematics is
poorly defined we assume Gaussian priors. Therefore, we can recast the a
posteriori probability distribution of our pre-systematics analysis
work, for which we were assuming constant priors:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a Gaussian distribution of mean @xmath and standard
deviation @xmath . The likelihood, @xmath , is defined as @xmath , with
@xmath being the standard reduced chi-square. From the analysis of
systematics due to the choice of the region to fit, along with the
additional uncertainty in the spin phase of pulsar B due to the
long-term pulse profile variations, we estimate that systematics
contribute @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Note that incorporating Gaussian
priors due to systematics has the effect of convolving the
three-dimensional likelihood obtained from the eclipse fitting, @xmath ,
with a three-dimensional Gaussian. Note that the results reported above
include these priors and so do the confidence interval reflect it.

### 4.6 New Strong-Field Regime Test from Relativistic Spin Precession

This relatively simple model (Lyutikov and Thompson, 2005 ) is able to
reproduce the complex phenomenology of the eclipses (see Figure
LABEL:f:eclipse_fit ) except at the eclipse boundaries where slight
magnetospheric distortions or variations in plasma density are likely to
occur. Fits including the egress generally are poor in the central
region where we observe narrow modulation features, which are critical
for determining pulsar B’s geometry. By analyzing the model quality in
different portions of the eclipse, we have been able to asses credible
confidence intervals that encompass excellent fits throughout the center
region while still producing qualitatively good predictions near the
eclipse ingress and egress. The overall success of the model implies
that the geometry of pulsar B’s magnetosphere is accurately described as
predominantly dipolar; a pure quadrupole, for instance, does not
reproduce the observed light curves. Although the model does not exclude
the possibility that higher-order multipole components may exist close
to the surface of pulsar B, our modeling supports the conclusions
(Lyutikov and Thompson, 2005 ) that these eclipses yield direct
empirical evidence supporting the long-standing assumption that pulsars
have mainly dipolar magnetic fields far from their surface.

The direct outcome from modeling the eclipse profile evolution is a
measurement of the effect of relativistic spin precession (see Movie
‘Spin Precession’ at http://www.physics.mcgill.ca/~bretonr/doublepulsar/
for an illustration of the time evolution of the eclipse). We can use
the inferred precession rate to test GR (see Figure LABEL:f:mass_mass )
and to further constrain alternative theories of gravity and the
strong-field aspects of relativistic spin precession. We use the generic
class of relativistic theories that are fully conservative
(Lorentz-invariant) and based on a Lagrangian, as introduced by Damour
and Taylor ( 1992 ) . In this way we can study the constraints of our
observations on theories of gravity by describing the spin-orbit
interaction within a specific theory by coupling functions appearing in
the corresponding part of the Lagrangian. In this framework, we can
write the precession rate of pulsar B in a general form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the orbital angular momentum of the system, @xmath is
the semimajor axis of the relative orbit between the pulsars, @xmath the
eccentricity of the orbit and @xmath is a generic strong-field
spin-orbit coupling constant. Since @xmath and @xmath are not directly
measurable, it is more convenient to write the above expression using
observable Keplerian and post-Keplerian parameters. While alternative
forms generally involve a mixture of gravitational theory-dependent
terms, the particular choice:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the only one that does not incorporate further theoretical terms
other than the spin-orbit coupling constant, @xmath , the speed of
light, @xmath , and a generalized gravitational constant for the
interaction between the two pulsars, @xmath . In this expression, the
Keplerian parameters @xmath and @xmath , the angular orbital frequency,
are easily measurable for any binary system. On the other hand, the
post-Keplerian Shapiro delay shape parameter @xmath , equivalent to the
sine of the orbital inclination angle (Damour and Taylor, 1992 ) ,
requires relatively edge-on orbits to be observed. Measurement of the
projected semi-major axes of the two orbits ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 The projected
semi-major axes are expressed in terms of light-travel time across the
orbit. , @xmath and @xmath , found in the above equation, necessitates
that each body must be timeable. Therefore, the double pulsar is the
only relativistic binary system that allows a direct constraint on the
spin-orbit coupling in general theories of gravity. Using the inferred
precession rate of @xmath , we derive @xmath . Every successful theory
of gravity in the given generic framework must predict this value —
these observations provide a strong-field test of gravity that
complements and goes beyond the weak-field tests of relativistic spin
precession (O’Connell, 2008 ) . In GR, we expect to measure @xmath ,
where we have used the masses determined from the precisely observed
orbital precession and the Shapiro delay shape parameter under the
assumption that GR is correct (Kramer et al., 2006 ) . Comparing the
observed value with GR’s predictions, we find @xmath . Hence, GR passes
this test of relativistic spin precession in a strong-field regime,
confirming, within uncertainties, GR’s effacement property of gravity
even for spinning bodies, i.e. the notion that strong internal
gravitational fields do not prevent a compact rotating body from
behaving just like a spinning test particle in an external weak field
(Damour, 1987 ) .

#### 4.6.1 Future Perspectives

The spin precession rate, as well as the timing parameters entering in
the calculation of @xmath , are all independent of the assumed theory of
gravity. If the main contribution limiting the precision of this new
strong-field test comes from the inferred spin precession rate, we
expect that the statistical uncertainty should decrease significantly
with time, roughly as the square of the monitoring baseline for similar
quantity and quality of eclipse data. The contribution of systematics to
the error budget should also decrease, but its functional time
dependence is difficult to estimate. Although the orbital and spin
phases of pulsar B are input variables to the eclipse model, our ability
to determine the orientation of pulsar B in space does not require the
degree of high-precision timing needed for measurement of post-Keplerian
parameters; evaluating spin phases to the percent-level, for instance,
is sufficient. Therefore, the intrinsic correctness of the model and its
ability to reproduce future changes in the eclipse profile due to
evolution of the geometry are the most likely limitations to improving
the quality of this test of gravity, at least until the measured
precession rate reaches a precision comparable with the timing
parameters involved in the calculation of @xmath . Better eclipse
modeling could be achieved from more sensitive observations and thus new
generation radio telescopes such as the proposed Square Kilometer Array
could help make important progress. Pulsar A does not show evidence of
precession (Manchester et al., 2005b ; Ferdman et al., 2008 ) likely
because its spin axis is aligned with the orbital angular momentum; it
should therefore always remain visible, thus allowing long-term
monitoring of its eclipses. Pulsar B, however, could disappear if spin
precession causes its radio beam to miss our line of sight (Burgay
et al., 2005 ) . In this event, we would need to find a way to
circumvent the lack of observable spin phases for pulsar B, which are
necessary to the eclipse fitting.

### 4.7 Lessons from the Geometry

#### 4.7.1 Degenerate Solutions

Lyutikov and Thompson ( 2005 ) demonstrated the potential of their
eclipse model using a qualitative fit that reproduced the overall
morphology of the eclipse. Although this result is by itself impressive
given the complicated structure of the profile, it is important to
assess whether only one or multiple solutions exist. We investigated the
existance of degenerate solutions both analytically and using the
results from MCMC presented in § 4.5.2 .

From Equations 4.10 and 4.13 , we find four degenerate solutions that
yield exactly the same eclipse light curve, two of which are not trivial
transformations. Here is the list of parameter transformations that
related these solutions:

1.  @xmath :
    This degenerate solution is the same as the original one modulo half
    a rotation of pulsar B. This half spin period shift is however
    absorbed in a redefinition of the correspondence between the model
    spin phase, @xmath , and the observed spin phase.

2.  @xmath :
    This degenerate solution consists in flipping the north and south
    magnetic poles of the pulsar, which are undistinguishable here.

3.  @xmath . This degenerate solution arises from the fact that the
    direction of the orbital inclination is not known because only
    @xmath is measured. Therefore, @xmath is undistinguishable from
    @xmath . In our geometrical framework, @xmath and conversely.
    Consequently, the above degeneracy controls the sign of @xmath and
    hence determines whether @xmath is greater or lower than @xmath .
    Even though the true value of @xmath should theoretically alter
    @xmath and @xmath , the orbital inclination is too close to @xmath
    for such an effect to have an observable impact.

4.  @xmath :
    This degenerate solution is a consequence of the fact the
    synchrotron absorption yields the same result upon a reversal of the
    light travel direction. A degeneracy therefore arise if the Earth
    and pulsar A are swapped. Practically, such an identical eclipse
    light curve is obtained by flipping the spin direction ( @xmath ).
    It also requires to mirror the spin longitude with respect to the
    @xmath plane ( @xmath ). It’s important to note that reversing the
    spin direction itself can be distinguished by the model. However,
    there is no way to determine whether the spin direction is prograde
    (parallel with respect to the orbital angular momentum) or
    retrograde (anti-parallel with respect to the orbital angular
    momentum). If it was possible, this degeneracy would break down.

From an inspection of the likelihood resulting from the MCMC analysis (§
4.5.2 ), we confirm the above degeneracies and assess that no other
solution having significant probability exists. This is good since any
credible theoretical model should be able to reproduce the observations
using a minimal number of free parameters and have predicative behavior.

#### 4.7.2 Spin Direction and Direction of Precession

In Chapter 4 , we report on the quantitative measurement of the
relativistic spin precession of pulsar B. This work is more specifically
targeting the spin precession rate. It is important to mention, however,
that relativistic spin precession is a vector quantity defined as
(Damour and Taylor, 1992 ) ¹² ¹² 12 Here we present the quantities in
brackets to denote that they are averaged over an orbit. :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the spin angular momentum of pulsar B, and @xmath has
been defined in Equation 4.24 .

As we can easily see, the spin precession vector is oriented along the
orbital plane in a direction provided by @xmath , that is, if both spin
and orbital angular momentum are positive/parallel, the spin precession
direction is positive, whereas if they have opposite signs, the spin
precession direction is negative (i.e. opposite with respect to the spin
direction). This interpretation is based on the assumption that other
quantities than @xmath and @xmath in Equation 4.26 are all positive
quantities. Examination of Equation 4.24 allows us to concluded that
only @xmath could possibly be negative. In general relativity, this
constant is strictly positive and has a value @xmath , which depends on
the masses in the system only. The definition of @xmath in alternative
theories of gravity could possibly take other forms and allow a negative
value. Hence, although testing the spin precession rate is highly
praised, it is also interesting to verify that the spin precession
direction is consistent, or not, with @xmath being positive as predicted
by general relativity.

After examining the eclipse model, we conclude that it is possible to
unambiguously assess the direction of the spin precession provided that
there exists only one best-fit solution — we argued in § 4.7.1 that this
is the case and we shall demonstrate here that the degenerate solutions
do not affect this conclusion. In the eclipse model, an arbitrary
orbital motion direction is chosen according to the coordinate system.
The spin direction is then fitted without any restriction to whether it
is parallel or anti-parallel to the orbital angular momentum vector.
Bear in mind that the colatitude of the spin axis, @xmath , varies in
the range @xmath , while the longitude of the spin axis, @xmath , does
in range @xmath . As we pointed out in § 4.7.1 , a reversal of the spin
direction has a noticeable effect on the light curve and hence the spin
direction relative to the orbital motion direction can be uniquely
determined.

As far as degenerate solutions are concerned, the first three solutions
clearly do not change the spin direction. The fourth degeneracy,
however, does invert the spin direction. It turns out that this shall
not change the above statement because spin precession affects the spin
axis geometry as follow: @xmath , where @xmath is the precession rate.
Since the two geometric configurations are related by a symmetry, @xmath
, it follows that time derivative of this angle will suffer a change in
direction: @xmath . This necessarily implies that regardless of what the
right solution is, there is a way of testing the consistency of @xmath
with general relativity. In our geometrical framework, the orbital
motion direction is arbitrarily fixed but we should point out that
reversing it obviously implies that the entire system geometry is
inverted, thus providing the exact same solution as before.

Using the coordinate system defined in § 4.4.2 , we deduce that the
chosen orbital angular momentum is negative, or clockwise as seen from
above the @xmath plane. The solution we shall present in Chapter 4 ,
with @xmath , implies a negative spin angular momentum, i.e.
counter-clockwise. Since the observed spin longitude goes toward
decreasing values, we infer that the spin precession direction is also
counter-clockwise. This imposes that @xmath and, by extension, @xmath
are both positive. This result is therefore consistent with the
prediction of general relativity.

#### 4.7.3 Orbital Inclination

In principle, the eclipse modeling permits to derive the orbital
inclination of the system independently from the timing. The impact
parameter @xmath measures the projected distance at conjunction between
the two pulsars in units of @xmath . Since @xmath measures the size of
@xmath relative to the orbit, we can use the small angle approximation
in order to find the following expression for the orbital inclination:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath has units of degrees @xmath . From the eclipse modeling, we
found @xmath and @xmath , which implies that @xmath or @xmath . As we
mentioned in the third degenerate solution of § 4.7.1 , we do not know
whether the orbital angular momentum vector is inclined toward or away
from us with respect to the sky plane, hence why the two possible
inclination values. Although that we have not performed a thorough
analysis of the a posteriori probability distribution of @xmath and
@xmath yet ¹³ ¹³ 13 This should be done as a follow up project to the
work presented in this thesis. See § 6 for more details. , we estimate
the relative uncertainties to be the order of 10% in both cases. Under
the assumption of Gaussian a posteriori probability distributions, this
implies that the relative uncertainty on the misalignment of our line of
sight with the orbital plane of the system — i.e. @xmath — is about
@xmath , which means @xmath .

According to our estimated values, our derived inclination angle agrees
with the result reported by Kramer et al. ( 2006 ) , @xmath , within the
@xmath uncertainties. Note, however, that since @xmath it would be
unlikely that we obtain @xmath from the eclipse modeling unless @xmath
was much larger than the above value. On the other hand, our measurement
appears to exclude the inclination angle value derived from
scintillation measurements obtained by Coles et al. ( 2005 ) , @xmath ,
but is consistent with the one obtained by Ransom et al. ( 2004 ) ,
@xmath .

#### 4.7.4 Emission Geometry of Pulsar B

##### Pulse Profile Changes

In the traditional pulsar lighthouse model, the radio emission is
emitted as a cone directed along the open field lines above the magnetic
poles. The pulse profile owes its morphology to the emission structure
in the plane intersected by the line of sight as the pulsar rotates.
Phenomenological and semi-phenomenological models of pulsar emission
have been proposed by many authors (see, e.g. Radhakrishnan and Cooke,
1969 ; Sturrock, 1971 ; Ruderman and Sutherland, 1975 ; Lyne and
Manchester, 1988 ; Qiao et al., 2007 ; Karastergiou and Johnston, 2007 )
. The general picture is that the emission comes from the edge of one or
several concentric hollow cones and/or from the central inner region of
this cone. This model framework is qualitatively able to explain several
observed features such as multipeak profiles showing symmetries and
single ‘Gaussian’-looking peak (Lyne and Manchester, 1988 ) .

One of the clear consequences of relativistic spin precession is the
evolution of the pulse profile morphology caused by changes in the
viewing geometry (see § 2.7.2 ). In the Hulse-Taylor pulsar, for
example, the profile presents two peaks separated by about 40 @xmath in
spin longitude having a bilateral symmetry and connected by a bridge of
weaker emission. It is believed that the radio emission comes from a
hollow cone (Taylor et al., 1979 ; Kramer, 1998 ) . Weisberg et al. (
1989 ) observed that the relative intensity of the two peaks was slowly
varying with time and attributed it to relativistic spin precession.
Although a change in the pulse component separation is also expected if
our line of sight intercepts the emission cone at a different latitude,
no significant change was found until Kramer ( 1998 ) revisited the
problem about 10 years later. Using the predicted precession rate from
general relativity, he determined the geometry of the pulsar and showed
that no change in separation was initially seen because of the
particular geometrical configuration at the time. Eventually the
pulsar’s radio beam should miss our line of sight and the pulsar will
disappear until its spin axis gets oriented favorably for us to see it
again. It is difficult to use these observations in order to obtain a
quantitative measurement of relativistic spin precession since the beam
geometry is not trivial in reality. Any attempt at measuring the
precession rate is highly model dependent. Furthermore, it is not clear
whether the emission does remain stable over an extended period of time.
Nevertheless, one can simply assume that general relativity is correct
and use the predicted precession rate to infer the emission geometry and
the pulsar orientation. For PSR B1913+16, Clifton and Weisberg ( 2008 )
recently showed that the beam shape appears to resemble an hourglass.

Pulse profile changes have also been observed in the double pulsar
already. As reported in Breton et al. ( 2008 ) and earlier by Burgay
et al. ( 2005 ) , pulsar B’s profile displayed dramatic morphologic
changes over the last four years and its overall pulsed flux intensity
has decreased at the same time (see also § 4.2 ). This is clear evidence
of the precession of its spin axis. On the other hand, while pulsar B’s
profile is evolving, the pulse profile of pulsar A has remained
extremely stable over the same period (Manchester et al., 2005b ;
Ferdman et al., 2008 ) and it seems to indicate that its spin axis is
closely aligned with the total angular momentum of the system, hence
explaining why no apparent precession is observed. We shall investigate
this possibility in Chapter 5 .

##### Pulsar B Becomes ‘Invisible’

As we showed in Figure LABEL:f:profile_evolution , pulsar B appeared to
become more difficult to detect toward the end of our observing campaign
that it was initially in December 2003. Using the information about the
geometry of pulsar B obtained from the eclipse modeling, we can
calculate the minimum angle between our line of sight and the magnetic
axis of pulsar B over the course of one rotation of the pulsar. This
angle, also known as the impact parameter @xmath , is widely used in the
context of pulsar’s linear polarization measurements (see § 4.7.4 ) and
corresponds to (see, e.g., Equations 2.25b and 3.36a Damour and Taylor,
1992 ) :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the magnetic inclination defined in § 4.4.2 , and @xmath
is the angle between our line of sight and the spin axis:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.29)
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here the variables are the same as in § 4.4.2 . We make use of the fact
that @xmath and the identities defined in Equations 4.4 and 4.5 .

Figure LABEL:f:los_separation shows the value of @xmath as a function of
time based on the values reported in Table LABEL:t:fit_result . As we
can see, our line of sight was almost intercepting the magnetic pole of
pulsar B in 2003 — @xmath — whereas it slowly drifted away since then
such that the separation is now (as of December 2008) @xmath . The
behavior of pulsar B, which has gradually become dimmer, is therefore
normal if the source of radio emission is located along or close to the
magnetic axis. It appears, however, that the emission geometry of pulsar
B strongly departs from a circular cone centered on the magnetic axis
given that the width of the pulse is @xmath in spin longitude but was
observed over a range of @xmath in spin latitude. It would therefore
resemble a rather elongated oval shape. Such a non-circular emission
beam geometry has also been observed in the relativistic binary pulsar
PSR B1913+16, which has been suggested to have an hourglass-shaped beam
(Clifton and Weisberg, 2008 ) .

If the trend continues, it seems that the radio beam from pulsar B could
miss our line of sight in a very near future. In this case, pulsar B
would disappear and PSR J0737 @xmath 3039A/B would no longer be the
‘double pulsar’, thus becoming a ‘normal’ pulsar - neutron star binary
like the Hulse-Taylor pulsar and the other known relativistic binary
pulsars. Of course, this has considerable impact of the perspective of
improving the current relativistic tests in the double pulsar and
potentially measuring higher-order post-Keplerian parameters that could
yield an estimate of the moment of inertia of pulsar A (Lattimer and
Schutz, 2005 ; Iorio, 2009 ) .

In the event that pulsar B would disappear, it would not be invisible
forever. In fact, assuming that the emission geometry would remain
stable over time, we could predict how long it would take until pulsar B
reappears. This corresponds to the time interval between the node
marking the time at which pulsar B disappears and the following node
having the same impact parameter. For example, if pulsar B was to
disappear during Fall 2008, it would reappear around Spring 2024 (see
Figure LABEL:f:los_separation ), which implies that it would be
invisible for slightly less than 16 years. If it disappears later, the
invisibility period would be even shorter.

We can place a lower limit on the visibility duty cycle of pulsar B if
we assume that it is visible if our line of sight lies within 20 @xmath
(i.e. @xmath ) of pulsar B’s magnetic pole, which represents the
approximate impact parameter at the time of taking our latest data in
the Summer 2008 when it was still barely visible. Of course the caveat
here is that we presume that the emission geometry is symmetrical for
positive and negative impact parameters, which might not necessarily be
the case. Under these assumptions, it appears that pulsar B would be
visible for about 22 years during a full precession cycle of 71 years,
which implies a duty cycle of @xmath %.

Conversely, our line of sight will describe a similar pattern with
respect to the other magnetic pole of pulsar B (see Figure
LABEL:f:los_separation ). We may therefore expect to see the other pole
if it also produces radio pulsed emission. If we suppose that the pulsed
emission from this pole is perfectly symmetric to the pole that we
actually observe, its visibility duty cycle would also be @xmath %. The
visibility periods for both poles are out of phase and slightly overlap.
This has two implications. First, we might be able to see pulsed
emission from both poles during the overlap periods. Second, this
contributes to increase the detectability of pulsar B to about 41 years,
which implies a @xmath % duty cycle. Our line of sight should enter
within @xmath of this second pole’s magnetic axis in mid-2033. One will
have to wait until then to determine whether or not it also produces
radio emission.

Because pulsar A’s spin axis seems aligned with the orbital angular
momentum of the system (Ferdman et al., 2008 ) (see also Chapter 5 ),
its does not display signs of precession and hence should always remain
visible. The total probability of observing PSR J0737 @xmath 3039A/B as
a double pulsar at a given random time is therefore @xmath % for
emission from one pole and @xmath % if one allows both poles to be
visible.

##### RVM Predictions

Since radio emission is produced by synchrotron emission of relativistic
electrons gyrating along the open field lines, the linear polarization
direction should be oriented radially with respect to the location of
the magnetic pole. A simple pulse profile consisting of radio emission
coming from one cone should, in principle, display an ‘S’ swing in the
position angle of its linear polarization as the line of sight crosses
the leading, middle and trailing part of the cone (Radhakrishnan et al.,
1969 ) . This polarization model is referred to as the ‘rotating vector
model’ (RVM) and we could make clear prediction on what the linear
polarization of pulsar B should look like (Richards and Comella, 1969 )
. Unfortunately, it appears that the radio emission from pulsar B only
shows very weak linear polarization (Demorest et al., 2004 ) , hence
making the RVM’s prediction hard, if not impossible, to verify.

## Chapter 5 Latitudinal Aberration in the Double Pulsar

“All of physics is either impossible or trivial.

It is impossible until you understand it, and then it becomes trivial.”
Ernest Rutherford

This chapter presents the results of a study of the stability of the
radio pulse profile of pulsar A, PSR J0737 @xmath 3039A. We
independently timed the two pulse components of this pulsar, which
displays a bilateral symmetry and are separated by about half a spin
period, in order to search for the presence of an orbital-dependent
behavior in their separation. Such variations would result from the
relativistic latitudinal aberration of the pulsed emission due to the
orbital motion of the pulsar. The intricate details of this phenomenon
are strongly related to the geometry of the pulsar in space and we have
been able to constrain elements of its radio emission geometry and
spatial orientation using it.

This work is part of a larger investigation of pulsar A’s pulse profile,
looking for signs of latitudinal aberration on the orbital time scale
(presented here) but also for long term changes potentially related to
relativistic spin precession. This additional work is independently made
by Robert D. Ferdman and other collaborators and should eventually be
published in a peer reviewed journal.

### 5.1 Introduction

In binary pulsars, effects of special and general relativity are easily
observable in the timing. The TOAs of the pulses are normally altered as
a consequence of the departure of the orbit from Newtonian motion and
also from the travel of light in the gravitational field of its
companion. In addition to changing the observed spin frequency,
relativistic effects can also act on the structure of the pulse itself.
Unfortunately, it is generally extremely difficult, if not impossible,
to observe these phenomena because: 1. some effects, such as
relativistic longitudinal aberration, are not measurable separately and
are absorbed in a redefinition of other PK parameters (Damour and
Taylor, 1992 ) ; 2. the implied changes are very small (Damour and
Taylor, 1992 ) ; 3. disentangling relativistic pulse profile changes
from those attributed to other intrinsic and extrinsic causes is
challenging (Kramer, 1998 ) .

A typical example of profile changes is due by the relativistic spin
precession of the pulsar’s spin axis around the total angular momentum
of the system. As we discussed in Chapter 4 , the change in the spin
axis orientation implies that our line of sight intercepts the pulsar’s
radio emission beam at varying locations over time, thus causing the
pulse profile to evolve. Pulse profile changes have been observed in
several relativistic binary pulsars already — PSR B1913+16 (Weisberg
et al., 1989 ) , PSR B1534+12 (Arzoumanian, 1995 ) , PSR J1141 @xmath
6545 (Hotan et al., 2005 ) , PSR J1906+0746 (Lorimer et al., 2006 ) and
PSR J0737 @xmath 3039B (Burgay et al., 2005 ; Breton et al., 2008 ) (see
also Chapter 4 ) — and despite the fact that they provide strong
evidence of spin precession, they do not yield constraining quantitative
tests of relativity because the inferred precession rate depends on the
presumed emission geometry and on the assumption that the profile itself
remains stable over time (Kramer, 1998 ; Clifton and Weisberg, 2008 ) .
Nevertheless, Stairs et al. ( 2004 ) measured an orbital phase-dependent
modulation of the total intensity profile of PSR B1534+12 as well as its
secular time evolution, which is a consequence of relativistic
aberration. They combined this measurement to the secular change in the
position angle of the linear polarization of the pulse profile in order
to derive a quantitative, “model-independent” relativistic spin
precession rate.

In this chapter, we present the results of a study of the pulse profile
of PSR J0737 @xmath 3039A, hereafter ‘pulsar A’. We investigated the
orbital phase-dependent stability of the pulse profile over three
consecutive orbits. Although no significant changes were detected, our
analysis allowed us to put meaningful upper limits on the relativistic
latitudinal aberration phenomenon proposed by Rafikov and Lai ( 2006 ) .
Furthermore, we discuss implications on the geometry of pulsar A.

### 5.2 Theoretical Background

Rafikov and Lai ( 2006 ) recently suggested that delays due to
latitudinal aberration and gravitational lensing would modify the pulse
profile of pulsar A in the double pulsar system PSR J0737 @xmath
3039A/B. These relativistic effects translate to a change of the
colatitude of the emission vector and even though they are normally
absorbed in the pulsar’s timing, the profile of pulsar A, which presents
a double-peak pulse, allows us to potentially observe it (see Figure
LABEL:f:profile_pulsarA ). In fact, the latitudinal aberration and
gravitational lensing do not affect every emission vector in the same
way. We expect different components of the pulse profile to be
distorted/shifted in a distinct way. In the particular case of pulsar A,
we shall see that, as demonstrated by Rafikov and Lai ( 2006 ) , the
separation between the two pulse peaks would in principle change as a
function of the orbital phase.

Let’s consider an element of the pulse profile emitted at a colatitude
@xmath and spin longitude @xmath from an emission cone having a
half-opening angle @xmath . The magnetic axis makes an angle @xmath with
respect to the spin axis ¹ ¹ 1 Please refer to Appendix B for a
comprehensive list of the variables used in this chapter. (see Figure
LABEL:f:geometry_aberration for a schematic view of the geometry). Due
to latitudinal aberration and gravitational lensing, the emission will
suffer a shift @xmath defined as (Rafikov and Lai, 2006 ) :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the angle on the celestial sphere between the arc
connecting our line of sight vector @xmath and the spin axis vector
@xmath and the arc connecting @xmath and the magnetic axis vector @xmath
the spin longitude @xmath . This also corresponds to the angle of linear
polarization in the rotating vector model (RVM):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The colatitudinal variation of the emission vector is (Rafikov and Lai,
2006 ) :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the aberration component is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the gravitational lensing component is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath the orbital angular frequency; @xmath where @xmath is the
semi-major axis; @xmath and @xmath the pulsar of the pulsar and its
companion, respectively; @xmath the speed of light; @xmath the
eccentricity; @xmath the orbital inclination; @xmath is the angle
between the ascending node and the projection of @xmath on the sky
plane; @xmath is the true anomaly measured from the ascending node;
@xmath the longitude of the periastron; @xmath the distance between the
two pulsars ( @xmath ); and @xmath the distance at conjunction projected
along our line of sight ( @xmath ).

The displacement of the pulsar image is defined as (Rafikov and Lai,
2006 ) :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the Einstein radius

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that the gravitational lensing component is important only in a
short range near the conjunction.

Equations 5.5 and 5.6 show that latitudinal aberration and gravitational
lensing delays are made of a pre-factor that acts like an amplitude term
and depends on quantities known from the timing ² ² 2 Here we assume the
orbital inclination value derived from the timing’s Shapiro delay ‘s’
parameter. , as well as an orbital phase-dependent part ( @xmath ). The
only unknown variable remaining in these equations is @xmath . This
angle is expected to change with time as a result of relativistic spin
precession (Damour and Taylor, 1992 ) . At a given epoch, however,
@xmath can be considered as a free, unknown constant parameter.

Even though the amplitudes of these delays are not likely to be very
large (a few tens of @xmath s, c.f. Rafikov and Lai 2006 ), they present
a particular orbital phase-dependent signature that might be detectable
if several orbits are analyzed coherently. Given the geometry derived
from the timing (orbital inclination, longitude of periastron, etc.), we
find that the amplitudes of the delays depend on pulsar A’s orientation
in space as well as on its the emission geometry.

### 5.3 Observations and Data Reduction

The data we used for this analysis consist of a @xmath 5-hour long
820 MHz observation obtained with the SPIGOT instrument (Kaplan et al.,
2005 ) at GBT on December 23, 2003. More details about the observing
setup can be found in Chapter 4 . We observed slightly more than two
full orbits continuously, which include three eclipses of pulsar A. Data
were folded with 256 bins per pulse period and 30 s per time interval
using the PRESTO package (Ransom et al., 2002 ) . The length of the time
intervals was chosen so that a relatively good signal-to-noise ratio is
obtained, but no attempt to determine an optimal time integration has
been performed (see below for more details).

Our data were incoherently dedispersed and thus provide limited
sensitivity at resolving the pulse profile. For this reason, we focus
our analysis on possible variations of the separation between the two
main pulse peaks rather than on the individual properties of each
component. Such an analysis will be performed separately (see Ferdman
et al., 2008 , for preliminary results) . Also, we do not consider the
contribution from the gravitational lensing term because it is likely
impossible to detect. This is for two reasons. First, the orbital
inclination angle derived from the timing (Kramer et al., 2006 ) is not
close enough to @xmath to give rise to a measurable gravitational
lensing effect — it would likely be a few @xmath s at the most. Second,
because the effect only lasts a few seconds centered around conjunction,
it would be difficult to observe since the eclipses of pulsar A by
pulsar B strongly reduce the transmitted flux at the critical time. We
therefore concentrate our efforts on the latitudinal aberration, which
operates throughout the whole orbit and hence facilitate their
detection.

### 5.4 Simplified Model

An important assumption that we are making in this analysis is that each
pulse peak is shifted in a different way, hence giving rise to an
observable orbital phase-dependent effect. Any shift of the overall
pulse profile would otherwise be absorbed in the timing model. As we can
see in Equations 5.5 and 5.6 , at a given epoch, the only time-dependent
terms are related to the orbital phase. This implies that, in a very
general way, latitudinal aberration causes different components of the
pulse profile to experience shifts having sinusoidal signatures. They
all have the same phase and their period is equal the orbital period of
the system. The only difference lies in the amplitude of the effect,
which varies as a function of spin longitude and this is precisely what
causes the aberration of the profile.

For the analysis, we will consider that distortions of the pulse profile
structure are relatively minor but that the separation between the two
peaks, which are presumably emitted on opposite edges of the emission
cone, are easier to detect. Note, however, that we will not assume any
particular emission geometry in the Bayesian analysis presented below in
§ 5.5 .

Technically, we measure the TOA of a peak by cross-correlating the
folded time interval with a high signal to noise template just like for
regular timing (see § 2.5 ). The difference here is that the half-pulse
window centered on each component is timed independently (see Figure
LABEL:f:separation_fit for a sample fit). This process produces two time
series of observed TOAs that are converted to spin longitudes, @xmath
and @xmath . We then subtract one from the other in order to search for
changes in the relative separation between the peaks as a function of
orbital phase. The time series we obtained is presented in Figure
LABEL:f:separation .

We can rewrite the shift of a pulse component located at @xmath (see
Equation 5.1 ) in a more practical form for fitting purposes. We ignore
the lensing contribution (see § 5.3 ) and assume that the geometry of
the system does not change — this is the case for data obtained at a
given epoch. In this case:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

This quantity is a constant that can be fitted and which acts like an
amplitude parameter. More generally, if the emission geometry remains
constant (i.e. @xmath and @xmath are fixed), then we would expect @xmath
to change only because of the evolution of the system geometry due to
relativistic spin precession. This implies that @xmath and @xmath .
However, given the duration of our observation ( @xmath h) we can still
assume that these two angles are constant since precession acts on a
75-year time scale. In this case, we can finally rewrite Equation 5.1
as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

can be calculated directly since it depends on observed timing values
only. Equation 5.11 leaves the model to be fitted with only two free
parameters: @xmath . Hence @xmath . Both @xmath and @xmath are constant
for a given observation and their predicted long time evolution due to
relativistic spin precession can be derived quite easily.

### 5.5 Bayesian Analysis

In order to determine whether or not the change in separation between
the two pulse components of pulsar A is detectable, and also to
characterize the amplitude of this effect, we use a Bayesian analysis to
perform model selection and parameter estimation.

From Baye’s theorem (see Gregory, 2005a , for more details) :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath               
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath               (5.15)
     @xmath   @xmath               
                                   
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In the context of model comparison, the hypothesis @xmath becomes the
model that is being considered.

#### 5.5.1 Constant Model, @xmath

The simplest model to consider is the constant separation model, which
we refer as @xmath . That is, for @xmath , no change in pulse separation
is present in the data and the measurement errors can account for the
observed signal. Let @xmath be the measured half-separation between the
pulse components from which the average has been subtracted and @xmath
the associated errors. Under the assumption of Gaussian errors the
likelihood can be written as:

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.18)
  -- -- -- --------

The priors are simply @xmath because all models are assumed to be as
probable as each other.

Therefore, the posterior probability ³ ³ 3 Note that for reasons that
will become apparent later, we neglect the normalizing constant @xmath
in this equation and we write a pseudo posterior probability, @xmath ,
instead. The same thing will be done for the other considered models. of
this model is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 5.5.2 Constant Model + Noise, @xmath

We can imagine that our understanding of the signal is not perfect. One
possibility is that our estimation of the errors does not reflect the
real noise level. Another possibility is that a real signal, which is
not necessarily understood, is present in the data and not accounted for
by the constant separation model. For this reason, we can consider a
constant separation model including an extra noise parameter having the
following pseudo posterior probability:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The pseudo posterior probability is calculated using the following
quantities:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We choose to use modified Jeffrey’s priors for the noise parameter
priors, @xmath . Jeffrey’s priors imply an equal probability per decade
(scale invariant), which is convenient for a noise parameter that can
vary on different scales (Jeffreys, 1946 ; Jaynes, 1968 ) . Since we
want to allow @xmath to be zero, the normal Jeffrey’s priors ( @xmath )
have to be modified in order to become linear at a sufficiently small
@xmath value, otherwise the priors probability would blow up at @xmath
(Gregory, 2005b ) .

Because the typical uncertainty on the phase separation is @xmath in
units of spin phase (see Figure LABEL:f:separation ), it is reasonable
to let @xmath vary between @xmath and @xmath , and set @xmath in units
of spin phase ⁴ ⁴ 4 Typically, one wants to allow the unknown source of
noise to scale between 0 and 10 times the average estimated uncertainty
level in the data. A common choice for the linearization parameter, also
known as the ‘knee’, is to set it at 10% the average estimated
uncertainty level (see, e.g. Gregory, 2005b ) . . We performed the
numerical integration on @xmath using a simple 1000-point grid
integration over the parameter space domain. We obtained:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 5.5.3 Rafikov and Lai Model + Noise, @xmath

Finally, the third model we investigated is the Rafikov and Lai ( 2006 )
model including a noise parameter. As we mentioned in § 5.4 , the
Rafikov and Lai model depends on two free parameters: @xmath and @xmath
. In this case, the pseudo posterior probability is written as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.27)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.29)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Again, we choose modified Jeffrey’s priors for the noise parameter
priors, @xmath , as well as for the amplitude parameter priors, @xmath ,
since the amplitude is a scaling parameter. On the other hand, @xmath is
an angle and thus flat priors are more adequate in this situation.
@xmath is calculated using Equation 5.11 .

For the noise parameter we again set @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . For
the amplitude parameter @xmath we set @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . For
the @xmath parameter we set @xmath and @xmath . The numerical
integrations are done using a @xmath -point grid for @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , respectively. We obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 5.5.4 Model Selection

Model selection results from the calculation of the odds ratio of the
different model. The results are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
     @xmath      (5.32)
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we can see, the constant separation model @xmath is very unlikely to
explain the data. However, the constant separation model having extra
noise @xmath and the Rafikov and Lai model having extra noise @xmath are
both relatively as likely, although the odds slightly favor @xmath . In
this situation, the Occam’s razor tells us that we should choose the
simpler model and conclude that there is no evidence of a detectable
change in the separation between the pulse peaks that can be explained
by the Rafikov and Lai model.

#### 5.5.5 Upper Limit on the Amplitude Parameter @xmath

Even though there is no evidence for a shift of the pulse components due
to latitudinal aberration, we can put an upper limit on the amplitude of
this effect. Here, we are interested in the marginal posterior
probability function of the amplitude parameter @xmath . The angle
@xmath and the extra noise term @xmath can be considered as nuisance
parameters and can thus be marginalized. Hence:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Figure LABEL:f:c_pdf shows the resulting marginal posterior probability
function of @xmath . From this, we find the following upper limits:
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , which correspond to the @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath confidence levels, respectively.

We observe that @xmath drops rapidly and then reaches a plateau. This
makes the @xmath upper limit relatively constraining but it leaves the
@xmath and @xmath upper limits more unconstrained. This behavior is
partly related to the high covariance between the amplitude parameter
@xmath and the angle @xmath as we can see in Figure LABEL:f:cs_pdf ,
which shows the joint posterior probability function @xmath for these
two parameters. When the angle @xmath approaches @xmath or @xmath the
colatitudinal variation of the emission vector @xmath becomes close to
zero and hence the phase shift @xmath remains very small for a wide
range of amplitudes @xmath (see Figure LABEL:f:eta for an example).

It is interesting to note that the lack of detection of latitudinal
aberration does not necessarily imply that, with the same observing
setup, one could not detect it in the future. Indeed, @xmath is expected
to change with time because of relativistic spin precession and hence
one possibility is that no aberration was seen at the time that our data
were obtained because of a (un)fortunate geometric configuration.

### 5.6 Discussion

In the previous Bayesian analysis, we refer to the @xmath model as the
Rafikov and Lai model. After working a quick algebraic rearrangement of
Equation 5.11 , one can realize that it actually consists of a simple
sinusoid having an unknown phase and amplitude. This leaves the
interpretation of the results quite general though in the context of the
Rafikov and Lai model, we can relate the parameters to physically
meaningful quantities. The amplitude parameter @xmath depends on three
quantities: the magnetic inclination, @xmath , the colatitude of the
emission vector, @xmath , and the spin longitude @xmath . The other free
parameter, @xmath , is related to the well-known impact parameter @xmath
, which is used in the rotating vector model (RVM), as following: @xmath
.

#### 5.6.1 Single-Cone Emission

As pointed out by Rafikov and Lai ( 2006 ) , the simplest emission
geometry to consider is that coming from a single cone. The remarkable
symmetry between the two pulse peaks suggests that the emission is
produced at the boundary of a hollow cone. As this cone sweeps across
our line of sight it naturally produces two main features — one at the
leading edge and the other one at the trailing edge — that are
characterized by a steep rise on the outer side and slower decay in the
inner side. The recent detection of X-ray pulsations from pulsar A by
Chatterjee et al. ( 2007 ) also appears to support this idea because the
X-ray pulse profile, which is similar to its radio counterpart, presents
hints of X-ray emission bridging the two peaks in what is believed to be
the inner part of the cone.

In this context, interpreting the result of the Bayesian analysis is
fairly trivial. Because of the symmetry in the pulse profile, we impose
that the leading and trailing peaks are located at spin longitude @xmath
and @xmath , respectively (see Figure LABEL:f:aberration_profile for an
schematic view of the model). Consequently, they experience shifts of
@xmath and @xmath , respectively, and hence the separation between the
two components is @xmath . In the previous analysis we fitted the
Rafikov and Lai model for variations around the mean of the
half-separation, which implies that we measured @xmath . Therefore, the
value of the amplitude parameter @xmath directly corresponds to that of
Equation 5.10 . Furthermore, as we discussed above, the upper limit on
the amplitude parameter @xmath given in § 5.5.5 yields a direct joint
constraint on @xmath and @xmath . Figure LABEL:f:alpha_zeta shows the
joint probability of @xmath and @xmath derived from the upper limit on
@xmath . This result is suggestive that the value of @xmath is
restricted to be close to @xmath whereas the value of @xmath is left
relatively unconstrained. Following from this joint constraint is the
implied half-opening angle of the emission cone, which is obtained using
the following relation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the observed half-separation between the two peaks is measured to
be @xmath (from peak to peak, see Figure LABEL:f:separation ). For
comparison, the same joint constraint is also presented in Figure
LABEL:f:alpha_zeta90 for @xmath .

Although the joint constraint on @xmath and @xmath is relatively poor at
a high confidence level, we can compare this result to the study by
Demorest et al. ( 2004 ) of the linear polarization. They also report a
joint constraint on @xmath and @xmath based on the application of the
rotating vector model (RVM) to the position angle of the linear
polarization (see Figure LABEL:f:demorest for an illustration of the
joint probability that they obtained).

The combined probability from our work and that of Demorest et al. (
2004 ) makes the low @xmath solution found by Demorest et al. ( 2004 )
very unlikely and strongly favors @xmath . The colatitude of the
emission vector @xmath remains more or less unconstrained, although the
probability reaches a maximum near @xmath . This large @xmath value,
together with the observed spin longitude @xmath , yields @xmath . This
value is relatively independent of @xmath for @xmath .

The implication of @xmath is that pulsar A’s spin axis is parallel to
the sky plane. Because no pulse profile changes were found (Manchester
et al., 2005b ) , this naturally imposes that the spin axis is almost
coincident with the orbital angular momentum since we know that we
observe the system almost perfectly edge-on ( @xmath ). In the case of
@xmath , pulsar A would be an orthogonal rotator. Our analysis also
indicates that @xmath , which would imply an extremely wide emission
beam that would in fact look like a ring around the pulsar’s magnetic
equator. Obviously, we question whether or not this kind of
configuration is physically possible. In this case, it is unclear why we
would not see the emission from both magnetic poles. Although our joint
constraint on @xmath and @xmath is not stringent at a high confidence
level, it appears unlikely that pulsar A has a narrow emission beam
since narrow beam configurations favor larger aberration amplitudes, and
hence are less probable.

#### 5.6.2 Two-Cone Emission

Another possibility is that the two pulse components are emitted by
different cones. In order to restrain the number of free parameters in
this two-cone emission geometry, we can make the simple assumption that
the north and the south poles are diametrically opposed to each other
(i.e. perfect dipole) and that their associated emission cones are
identical (i.e. they have the same half-opening angle). In this case,
the pulse features are created by the intersection of our line of sight
with the edge of each cone. It is interesting to note that unless the
impact parameter, @xmath , is precisely equal to the half-opening angle
of the cones (see Figure 3 in Rafikov and Lai ( 2006 ) ), our line of
sight will intersect the edge of each cone twice. One would therefore
expect four and not only two pulse components to arise from such a
geometry. To keep the model as general as possible, we delay this
discussion to later and simply assume that only one edge of each cone is
“bright”, i.e. is contributing to the observed pulse profile.

In this two-cone emission geometry framework, we consider the
latitudinal aberration from each cone separately and deal with their
associated pulse component, labeled 1 and 2, respectively. Hence, the
equation for the variation in spin longitude of each pulse component can
be written as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath is independent of the emission beam geometry (see Equation
5.4 for a reference), we find that the two-cone emission geometry
presents the same sinusoidal signature as in the single-cone emission
geometry; i.e. it has the same period and phase. In this case, however,
the physical interpretation of the “amplitude” parameter, @xmath , is
slightly different since it corresponds to the expression in brackets of
Equation 5.37 .

Because of the symmetries imposed to the model, we can relate the
following quantities:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.38)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.39)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.40)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.41)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.42)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the observed separation between the two pulse
components.

This simplifies the equation for the amplitude parameter:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.43)
              @xmath   @xmath      (5.44)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

This leaves three unknown: @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . However, we can
make use of the @xmath identity and its definition (Equation 5.36 ) to
obtain one additional constraint:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

which reduces the number of free parameters to two. This is just as much
as in the single-cone emission geometry. This means that for any
combination of @xmath and @xmath , we can solve Equations 5.45 , 5.46
and 5.47 in order to obtain an associated @xmath value. Provided an
upper limit on @xmath , we can derive credible joint @xmath confidence
regions (see the results in Figure LABEL:f:alpha_zeta_two_pole ). Note
that Equation 5.47 imposes stringent restrictions on possible @xmath and
@xmath values since any combination of these two parameters, given an
@xmath value, do not necessarily lead to a valid solution. Also, for
each possible @xmath value, there are two associated @xmath , which
implies two different @xmath . The second solution, however, is
trivially related to the first one — @xmath — and corresponds to a
simply interchange of the two poles.

Surprisingly, the two-cone emission geometry also favors the orthogonal
rotator scenario with a spin axis closely aligned with the orbital
angular momentum. In this case, the implied emission cone is much
smaller and is in better agreement with the commonly accepted pulsar
emission picture. Given the span in spin longitude of each pulse
component, it appears that the radio emission comes from a region that
has a width comparable the emission cone opening. Hence, even though our
line of sight crosses the edge of each emission cone twice, there is no
need to fine tune the model since the emission can simply come for the
whole slice of the cones rather than from their edges. The caveat of
this scenario, however, is that it is more difficult to reconcile with
the X-ray observations that show a bridge of emission between the two
pulse components (Chatterjee et al., 2007 ) .

### 5.7 Conclusion

We performed an analysis of the pulse profile of pulsar A in the double
pulsar PSR J0737 @xmath 3039A/B that was specifically targeted at
identifying an orbital dependence in the separation between the two
peaks of its pulse profile. A Bayesian analysis of the data showed that
they are consistent with no sinusoidal variability of the pulse
components separation with a period equal to the orbital period of the
binary system. Such a variability would result from latitudinal
aberration Rafikov and Lai ( 2006 ) . However, it appears that an
additional noise term is required to account for the data variability.
This is likely due to the fact that the uncertainties on the measured
TOAs were underestimated.

From the constraint on the amplitude parameter @xmath of a putative
sinusoidal variation in the separation between the two pulse components,
we can infer interesting constraints on the emission geometry. First, in
the case of a single-cone emission geometry, we find that pulsar A is
likely an orthogonal rotator, whose spin axis is probably aligned with
the orbital angular momentum of the system. This geometry argues against
the possibility of a narrow emission beam, instead favoring an
anomalously wide, ring-like cone. Second, we generalized the single-cone
emission geometry proposed by Rafikov and Lai ( 2006 ) to a two-cone
emission geometry. In this case, we also conclude that pulsar A is
likely an orthogonal rotator and that its spin axis probably coincides
with orbital angular momentum. This alternative emission geometry
imposes more stringent constraints than the other one since both
emission cones requires to be intercepted by our line of sight. It
appears that much narrower emission cones would be possible in this
two-cone model. With data having better sensitivity, such as what would
be recorded by a coherent dedispersion back-ends, better geometrical
constraints could be obtained. A similar analysis conducted on data
acquired at a different epoch would also help improving the constraints
since it would provide a coherent coverage of the @xmath parameter
space, which is expected to vary because of relativistic spin
precession.

## Chapter 6 Conclusion

“I love to rove amidst the starry height,

To leave the little scenes of Earth behind,

And let Imagination wing her flight

On eagle pinions swifter than the wind.

I love the planets in their course to trace;

To mark the comets speeding to the sun,

Then launch into immeasurable space,

Where, lost to human sight, remote they run.

I love to view the moon, when high she rides

Amidst the heav’ns, in borrowed lustre bright;

To fathom how she rules the subject tides,

And how she borrows from the sun her light.

O! these are wonders of th’ Almighty hand,

Whose wisdom first the circling orbits planned.” Love of Night, T. Rodd

Pulsars, and more particularly those in binary systems, are highly
praised astronomical objects to study astrophysics but also to
investigate fundamental physics. The reasons making pulsars so
attractive can be summarized by a few key attributes: 1) small, massive
and compact, 2) large magnetic field, 3) fast rotation and 4) beamed,
coherent emission. The first three features allow one to study the
physics of dense matter and a wide variety of astrophysical phenomena
involving strong gravitational forces and electromagnetic processes. The
last characteristic, about the nature of the pulsar emission itself, is
central in the context that astrophysics is an observation-driven
science. That pulsar emission is modulated at the rotational period of
the pulsar enables a myriad of measurements that would not be possible
if they were emitting persistent electromagnetic radiation only.

In this regard, pulsars in binary systems constitute, at some level, a
perfect cocktail of physical and observational ingredients. The regular
tick of pulsars permits one to deduce the presence of a companion and to
infer its orbital motion with an astonishing precision. The large
density and the small size of pulsars allow them to be found in compact,
relativistic orbits. When these two elements are combined, one can
expect to observe relativistic effects and test them against the
prediction of general relativity and alternative theories of gravity.

So far, relativistic binary pulsars have been celebrated laboratories to
probe general relativity via its effects on the orbital motion of
pulsars. In this thesis, we presented in Chapter 4 the results of
research attacking a very different ground: the effect of general
relativity on the spin of a pulsar. In relativistic theories of gravity,
the spin and the orbit of an object in a binary system are no longer
independent and the coupling of spin to the orbit manifests itself,
among other things, as a precession of the spin axis around the total
angular momentum of the system.

Determining the spatial orientation of a 10-km pulsar located about
1700 light-years away from Earth is not such a trivial task to perform.
Thanks to an amazing cosmic coincidence, we have been to probe the
precise geometry of a pulsar by modeling the eclipses visible in the
double pulsar system PSR J0737 @xmath 3039A/B. Because two pulsars are
visible in this system, we were able to use the modulation of the light
from the pulsar behind, which is partly absorbed in the magnetosphere of
the pulsar passing in front, in order to reconstruct the spatial
orientation of the latter. Using data obtained over a four-year
monitoring campaign, we were able to show that the pulsar precesses in a
way consistent with general relativity. Also, with the help of other
parameters measured from the timing of the pulsars in this system, we
derived a “theory-independent” measurement of the strength of the
spin-orbit coupling in a gravitating object. This work is complementary
to parallel research conducted in the Solar System since pulsars in
relativistic binary systems are so far the most extreme gravitational
field environment in which these measurement were obtained. The
manifestation of relativistic effects depends on the orbital periods,
the masses and the orbital velocities involved in the problem (see §
2.5.3 ) and in that respect, double neutron star systems lie one to
several orders of magnitude ahead of our Solar System (see § A ). On the
other hand, because of their large densities, pulsars also present a
different regime of matter and the behavior of gravity could, in certain
theories, depart from that of general relativity when tested in such
extreme conditions. We also measured the direction of relativistic spin
precession with respect to the spin and orbital angular momenta
directions and showed that it also agrees with general relativity.

Obtaining such a knowledge about the geometry of the pulsar in space
also has interesting astrophysical implications. We estimated the
inclination of the orbit based of the eclipse geometry and found that it
agrees, within uncertainties, with the value derived from the timing. As
pulsars precess, their emission beam intercepts our line of sight at the
same location. We can make use of this property to estimate the
visibility duty cycle of such a pulsar. In the event that relativistic
spin precession would cause the emission beam to miss our line of sight,
we can make predictions as to when the pulsar will become visible again.

We plan to follow up this study of the eclipses. Among the goals that we
pursue, we wish to reconstruct the emission beam of pulsar B using the
changes in viewing geometry induced by relativistic spin precession.
Although one can argue that the strong interaction between the two
pulsars would make the results very specific to this system, it would
certainly provide additional clues about the physical processes
responsible for the radio pulsar emission. Our knowledge about the
geometry of pulsar B could also provide essential information to
understand the mechanism responsible for the X-ray pulsations of pulsar
B that have recently been detected in specific portion of the orbit
(Pellizzoni et al., 2008 ) . We also wish to investigate in more details
the consequences of our modeling on the magnetospheric physics of the
pulsar. Potential work would involve tomographic reconstruction of the
magnetosphere using the prior information about the orientation of the
pulsar’s spin axis. This could help to understand ‘second-order’
deviation from the dipolar geometry, which we assume in the eclipse
model.

Relativity can be tested using relativistic binary pulsars but one can
also assume that relativity is correct and use its predictive power as a
tool to study pulsars. We illustrated this in Chapter 5 with a study of
latitudinal aberration in the pulse profile of pulsar A in the double
pulsar PSR J0737 @xmath 3039A/B. Despite the fact that no detection of
orbital phase-dependent pulse profile variation was made, we showed
that, even with data of restricted quality, obtaining an upper limit on
the amplitude of this effect can yield interesting results. Given the
large separation between the two pulse components, the non-detection of
latitudinal aberration imposes restrictions on the radio emission
geometry. It suggests that the canonical hollow cone model is not viable
if both pulse components come from the same cone, unless the emission
beam is surprisingly wide. Alternatively, the emission could be produced
by two opposite poles. In this case the emission cones would have
moderate openings, but the X-ray observations would be more difficult to
reconcile. This paradox highlights that even though the pulsar toy model
works surprisingly well in general, there are still many missing pieces
to the puzzle.

Among the long-standing pulsar problems is the origin of the low
magnetic field in binary pulsars and MSPs. Certainly, the concept of
pulsar recycling in binary systems is well established, but several
questions remain unanswered. What happened to the MSPs that are
isolated? Is recycling the only cause for the low magnetic field pulsars
or would a secondary mechanism be possible? Is the magnetic field
temporarily buried/screened or it is permanently suppressed? How
important are the initial conditions and the amount of accreted mass on
the ‘recycling’ process? Understanding the characteristics of the binary
pulsar population is crucial to shed light on many of these questions
and part of the solution likely lies in understanding the differences
between ‘normal’ binary systems and those presenting ‘odd’ properties.

We presented a contribution to this quest in Chapter 3 with the study of
the binary pulsar PSR J1744 @xmath 3922. Our work demonstrated that, as
opposed to the ‘standard’ scenario, which predicts fast spin periods and
low magnetic fields for binary pulsars with low-mass companions, some of
these pulsars are found with long spin periods and large magnetic
fields. We showed that there might be a small sub-population of such
binary pulsars. Their exact formation mechanism is still uncertain
though. We found that binary pulsars in circular orbits present a
power-law relationship relating their magnetic fields and their spin
periods. The possible ‘new’ class of binary that we identified is no
exception. Since this correlation does not exist in normal isolated
pulsars and in eccentric binaries, this hints that all circular binaries
must share a key evolution mechanism. Interesting clues might lie in the
nature and properties of their companions. In this view, we are planning
to focus future research on these binary pulsar companions. We have
already obtained optical observations of PSR J1744 @xmath 3922’s
companion that should provide better constraints on its nature.

##### Concluding Remark

Pulsar research, like other branches of astrophysics, certainly
contributes to pushing further the limits of our understanding of the
Universe. Even though pulsar astrophysics is a very narrow area of
research, it is amazing to realize how many breakthroughs have been made
by studying these dead stars. In their afterlife, massive stars are far
from being boring: they display a broad variety of extreme
characteristics and behaviors that are challenging to understand. At the
same time, pulsars also provide tools to address some fundamental
physics questions such as the validity of general relativity. In this
thesis, we attempted to make a modest step forward in both directions in
order to decipher the nature of pulsars and use their properties to
understand our Universe.

## Appendix A Remarks About the Notion of Strong-Field Regime

The concept of a ‘strong-field’ regime is arguably loosely defined. In
one of its more ‘extreme’ interpretations, ‘strong field’ means that the
body under consideration is located only a few Schwarzschild radii (
@xmath ) away from the gravitational source. In the case of the double
pulsar PSR J0737 @xmath 3039A/B, which is the most relativistic binary
pulsar known to date, the mean orbital separation is of the order of
@xmath cm. This is about @xmath , far from a few Schwarzschild radii.
However, to put this into perspective, Mercury is located @xmath from
the Sun, which is 200 times larger than the double pulsar’s orbital
scale. This, and the fact that pulsars are more massive than planets,
implies that the gravitational field of a binary pulsar is strong
relative to that of the Solar System. For instance, relativistic effects
yield large post-Keplerian orbital corrections, and second-order
corrections are envisioned to be necessary for the double pulsar timing
in the near future (Kramer et al., 2006 ) .

Another important factor to take into consideration is that pulsars are
very compact objects. As we mentioned in § 2.1 , @xmath of the total
mass of a neutron star consists of gravitational binding energy — this
is more than 8 orders of magnitude larger than that of the Earth!
Studying gravity in the vicinity of strong self-gravitating bodies is
particularly relevant for testing aspects of gravitational theories
related to the Strong Equivalence Principle. A consequence of the Strong
Equivalence Principle in general relativity is that the dynamics of
gravitating bodies are uniquely determined by their external
gravitational fields, provided that they are far enough apart from each
other for classical tidal effects to be negligible (Will, 2001 ) . This
concept is often referred to as the “effacement” of the internal
structure of gravitational bodies (Damour, 1987 ) . In this context,
pulsar tests are highly complementary to experiments made in the Solar
System regime.

While we recognize that the observed binary pulsar systems do not
possess the strong gravitational fields that theoreticians may encounter
in simulations of black hole mergers and other kinds of high energy
astrophysical phenomena, they nevertheless represent an important
practical landmark for observational tests of gravitational theories.
Even though black hole binaries and more compact neutron stars probably
exist, it is not trivial that they offer accessible ways of studying
their dynamical behavior in a fashion similar to binary pulsars.
Although they lie somewhere between the weak-field regime and the
‘extremely’ strong-field regime, binary pulsars can provide useful
constraints on different aspects of gravitational theories. For example,
they can limit the parameter space of tensor-biscalar theories and the
non-linear parameters of gravitational theories (e.g. the “1PN” @xmath
and @xmath parameters), as well as restrict the existence of
preferred-frame effects and other violations of the Weak and Strong
Equivalence Principles (Stairs, 2003 ) .

For in-depth reviews of binary pulsar tests of gravitational theories,
we recommend Stairs ( 2003 ); Will ( 2001 , 1993 ); Damour and
Esposito-Farèse ( 1996b , 1992a ) .

## Appendix B Definition of Variables Used in Chapter 5

By order of appearance.

 @xmath  :  

    unit vector from the binary system to the observer.

 @xmath  :  

    unit vector along pulsar A spin axis.

 @xmath  :  

    unit vector along pulsar A magnetic axis.

 @xmath  :  

    colatitude of the emission vector (angle between @xmath and @xmath
    ).

 @xmath  :  

    spin longitude. @xmath is defined as zero when @xmath , @xmath and
    @xmath are coplanar.

 @xmath  :  

    half opening angle of the emission cone.

 @xmath  :  

    angle between @xmath and @xmath .

 @xmath  :  

    angle between the arc connecting @xmath and @xmath and the arc
    connecting @xmath and @xmath at the edges of the pulse. This also
    corresponds to the angle of linear polarization in the rotating
    vector model (RVM).

 @xmath  :  

    orbital angular frequency.

 @xmath  :  

    @xmath .

 @xmath  :  

    orbital semi-major axis.

 @xmath  :  

    pulsar mass.

 @xmath  :  

    companion mass.

 @xmath  :  

    speed of light.

 @xmath  :  

    orbital eccentricity.

 @xmath  :  

    orbital inclination.

 @xmath  :  

    angle between the ascending node of the orbit and the projection of
    @xmath on the sky plane.

 @xmath  :  

    true anomaly measured from the ascending node.

 @xmath  :  

    angle of periastron measured from the ascending node.

 @xmath  :  

    distance between the two pulsars @xmath .

 @xmath  :  

    distance at the conjunction projected along our line of sight @xmath
    .

 @xmath  :  

    angle between @xmath and @xmath .

 @xmath  :  

    projected semi-major axis @xmath .
