Arguments arising from quantum mechanics and gravitation theory as well
as from string theory, indicate that the description of space-time as a
continuous manifold is not adequate at very short distances. An
important candidate for the description of space-time at such scales is
provided by noncommutative space-time where the coordinates are promoted
to noncommuting operators. Thus, the study of quantum field theory in
noncommutative space-time provides an interesting interface where
ordinary field theoretic tools can be used to study the properties of
quantum space-time.

The three original publications in this thesis encompass various aspects
in the still developing area of noncommutative quantum field theory,
ranging from fundamental concepts to model building. One of the key
features of noncommutative space-time is the apparent loss of Lorentz
invariance that has been addressed in different ways in the literature.
One recently developed approach is to eliminate the Lorentz violating
effects by integrating over the parameter of noncommutativity.
Fundamental properties of such theories are investigated in this thesis.
Another issue addressed is model building, which is difficult in the
noncommutative setting due to severe restrictions on the possible gauge
symmetries imposed by the noncommutativity of the space-time. Possible
ways to relieve these restrictions are investigated and applied and a
noncommutative version of the Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model is
presented. While putting the results obtained in the three original
publications into their proper context, the introductory part of this
thesis aims to provide an overview of the present situation in the
field.
