PhysicsWai-Mo Suen, Chair
,Quo-Shin Chi
,Ramanath Cowsik
,Zohar Nussinov
,Xiang Tang
,Clifford M. WillDecember 2009 {acknowledgements}

The people who made this dissertation possible is innumerable. First and
foremost, I would like to thank my advisor, Wai-Mo Suen, who gave me the
opportunity to pursue my ambition in the field of general relativity at
large, to be initiated into the field of numerical relativity in his
group and who taught me physical intuition and skepticism, and clarity,
conciseness and forcefulness in thought. Without him, I will not be
where I am now.

Special thanks to Ke-Jian Jin for sharing his work of many years on the
code that has enabled us to gain a deeper understanding of the findings
in neutron star critical gravitational collapses; for his comradeship
and collaboration. Not forgetting also my WUGRAV colleagues, Jing Zeng,
Hui-Min Zhang, Jian Tao, Han Wang, Randy Wolfmeyer and Dimitris
Manolidis who have provided precious companionship during those hard
times, mental and emotional support, invaluable discussions on general
relativity and numerical relativity at large and various collaborations
throughout my entire graduate career at Washington University.

Many thanks to Emanuele Berti, Renato Feres, José Antonio Font, Carsten
Gundlach, Adam Helfer, Jérôme Novak, Luciano Rezzolla, Ulrich Sperhake,
Xiang Tang and Clifford Will for the various discussions and input
relevant to this dissertation. Thanks to Ke-Jian Jin, Sai Iyer and
Richard Bose for help and input on all things technical.

I thank the Physics Department and the Graduate School for providing the
means of financial support for four years and the Dean’s Dissertation
Fellowship for the fifth year and for all the support provided on the
academics at large. I am deeply grateful to Julia Hamilton for all the
motherly, kind and genuine support in all things that make a graduate
student’s life especially that of an alien in a foreign country, so much
move livable. Thanks Sarah Hadley and Alison Verbeck for making all the
little things happen, without which academics just would not survive.

I would also like thank the various friends and family for their genuine
love, kindness, friendship and practical advice without which I would
not be able to make it. I will be forever indebted to my parents who
gave of themselves to me, even throughout this journey of pursuing my
dream.

\defheaders \FANCY \tables 111 Physics2009Wai-Mo Suen

Critical phenomena in gravitational collapse opened a new mathematical
vista into the theory of general relativity and may ultimately entail
fundamental physical implication in observations. However, at present,
the dynamics of critical phenomena in gravitational collapse scenarios
are still largely unknown. My thesis seeks to understand the properties
of the threshold in the solution space of the Einstein field equations
between the black hole and neutron star phases, understand the
properties of the neutron star critical solution and clarify the
implication of these results on realistic astrophysical scenarios. We
develop a new set of neutron star-like initial data to establish the
universality of the neutron star critical solution and analyze the
structure of neutron star and neutron star-like critical collapses via
the study of the phase spaces. We also study the different time scales
involved in the neutron star critical solution and analyze the
properties of the critical index via comparisons between neutron star
and neutron star-like initial data. Finally, we explore the boundary of
the attraction basin of the neutron star critical solution and its
transition to a known set of non-critical fixed points.

\defheaders \FANCY

PhysicsWai-Mo Suen, Chair
,Quo-Shin Chi
,Ramanath Cowsik
,Zohar Nussinov
,Xiang Tang
,Clifford M. WillDecember 2009 {acknowledgements}

The people who made this dissertation possible is innumerable. First and
foremost, I would like to thank my advisor, Wai-Mo Suen, who gave me the
opportunity to pursue my ambition in the field of general relativity at
large, to be initiated into the field of numerical relativity in his
group and who taught me physical intuition and skepticism, and clarity,
conciseness and forcefulness in thought. Without him, I will not be
where I am now.

Special thanks to Ke-Jian Jin for sharing his work of many years on the
code that has enabled us to gain a deeper understanding of the findings
in neutron star critical gravitational collapses; for his comradeship
and collaboration. Not forgetting also my WUGRAV colleagues, Jing Zeng,
Hui-Min Zhang, Jian Tao, Han Wang, Randy Wolfmeyer and Dimitris
Manolidis who have provided precious companionship during those hard
times, mental and emotional support, invaluable discussions on general
relativity and numerical relativity at large and various collaborations
throughout my entire graduate career at Washington University.

Many thanks to Emanuele Berti, Renato Feres, José Antonio Font, Carsten
Gundlach, Adam Helfer, Jérôme Novak, Luciano Rezzolla, Ulrich Sperhake,
Xiang Tang and Clifford Will for the various discussions and input
relevant to this dissertation. Thanks to Ke-Jian Jin, Sai Iyer and
Richard Bose for help and input on all things technical.

I thank the Physics Department and the Graduate School for providing the
means of financial support for four years and the Dean’s Dissertation
Fellowship for the fifth year and for all the support provided on the
academics at large. I am deeply grateful to Julia Hamilton for all the
motherly, kind and genuine support in all things that make a graduate
student’s life especially that of an alien in a foreign country, so much
move livable. Thanks Sarah Hadley and Alison Verbeck for making all the
little things happen, without which academics just would not survive.

I would also like thank the various friends and family for their genuine
love, kindness, friendship and practical advice without which I would
not be able to make it. I will be forever indebted to my parents who
gave of themselves to me, even throughout this journey of pursuing my
dream.

\defheaders \FANCY \tables 111 Physics2009Wai-Mo Suen

Critical phenomena in gravitational collapse opened a new mathematical
vista into the theory of general relativity and may ultimately entail
fundamental physical implication in observations. However, at present,
the dynamics of critical phenomena in gravitational collapse scenarios
are still largely unknown. My thesis seeks to understand the properties
of the threshold in the solution space of the Einstein field equations
between the black hole and neutron star phases, understand the
properties of the neutron star critical solution and clarify the
implication of these results on realistic astrophysical scenarios. We
develop a new set of neutron star-like initial data to establish the
universality of the neutron star critical solution and analyze the
structure of neutron star and neutron star-like critical collapses via
the study of the phase spaces. We also study the different time scales
involved in the neutron star critical solution and analyze the
properties of the critical index via comparisons between neutron star
and neutron star-like initial data. Finally, we explore the boundary of
the attraction basin of the neutron star critical solution and its
transition to a known set of non-critical fixed points.

\defheaders \FANCY

{main}
