Superconductivity, discovered by Kamerlingh Onnes in 1911, continues to
be a fascinating subject of condensed matter physics today. Much
interest has been devoted to the study of the superconductivity induced
in a metal which by itself is not superconducting but is in electrical
contact with a superconductor. As the carriers of superconductivity, the
Cooper pairs, diffuse across the contact into the metal they remain
correlated, although the pairing mechanism is lifted; we call this the
proximity effect. The observation of these superconducting correlations
has come within the reach of experiments in the last decade. With
state-of-the-art fabrication techniques mesoscopic samples have been
produced which are small and clean enough for the quantum mechanical
coherence of the electrons to be preserved over the sample size. This
thesis focuses on the variety of signatures of single-particle physics
that appear in the electrical transport and the magnetic screening
properties of these systems.

The main contribution of this thesis to the field of mesoscopic
superconductivity consists in the study of the thermodynamic properties
in the presence of a magnetic induction. We map out the phase diagram of
a normal-metal–superconductor (NS) hybrid system in the space spanned by
the temperature ( @xmath ) and the magnetic field ( @xmath ). The region
of the @xmath diagram of interest lies well below the transition
temperature and the critical field line, i.e. in the Meissner phase, of
the superconductor. The involved energy scales are determined by the
geometric system size @xmath and the mean free path @xmath of the normal
metal and are given by the single-particle level spacing @xmath or the
Thouless energy @xmath , respectively, in ballistic or diffusive
systems.

We distinguish two phases in the @xmath diagram: a diamagnetic state (at
low temperature and field) where the applied field is effectively
screened, and a normal state where the magnetic field penetrates into
the normal metal. The magnetic breakdown of the Meissner field expulsion
occurring at the frontier of the two regimes is interpreted as the
critical field of the proximity layer. We give a complete
characterization of this first order transition for a ballistic NS
structure, determining the spinodals, the magnetization jump, as well as
the latent heat, and find a critical point, beyond which the two phases
are connected by a continuous cross-over.

We study the magnetic screening in the diamagnetic phase for a NS hybrid
layer. We find that the current–field relation is typically non-local in
the proximity effect producing a high sensitivity of the diamagnetic
susceptibility to the mean free path. We classify the behavior into
several regimes between the clean ( @xmath ) and the dirty ( @xmath )
limit. The reduction of the screening density and the non-locality range
with decreasing purity affect the screening in an opposite way,
competing in the diamagnetic susceptibility observed in the experiments.

The screening properties can be traced back to the quasi-particle
excitation spectrum in the absence of the field. We thus establish a
connection to the transport properties of NS junctions: We explain the
resonance structure in the conductance and the shot noise at finite
voltage, which appears as a signature of the quantum behavior of the
discrete electrons.

Back to the @xmath phase diagram: in the field penetration phase, where
the screening is negligible, we analyze the geometry of a ballistic SNS
Josephson link. We show that the combination of the non-locality and the
finite size of the junction produces an anomalous critical-current–flux
dependence. As a function of increasing field @xmath we find a
cross-over from the usual single to a double flux quantum periodicity.

In the low-temperature low-field corner of the @xmath phase diagram we
discover a new paramagnetic phase by considering the effect of a
repulsive electron–electron interaction in the proximity metal.
Quasi-particles are found to be trapped at the NS interface,
accumulating to a density of states peak at the Fermi energy. This peak
induces a paramagnetic instability towards spontaneous magnetic moments.
On top of the Meissner phase we find a first order transition as the
moments polarize in the applied field. The hysteresis and the
dissipation accompanying a paramagnetic reentrance in the susceptibility
provide the characteristic features observed in fascinating experiments
on NS cylinders.

Finally, we consider the transport in Josephson junctions with
unconventional superconductors, where the current–phase relation
exhibits a double frequency. We propose to exploit this @xmath
-periodicity for the implementation of a quantum computer.
