representation is @xmath . The condition @xmath is also called a
shortening condition since the four-dimensional representation has a
smaller dimension than the minimal possible dimension for arbitrary
@xmath .

An exceptional feature of the @xmath algebra is that its central
extension has two central charges in addition to @xmath , therefore a
complete centrally extended @xmath algebra is @xmath . The centrally
extended algebra possesses @xmath group of external automorphisms. These
features are due to the fact that there exists an antisymmetric
invariant bilinear form @xmath which allows raising and lowering of
indexes. Due to this the adjoint actions of the bosonic subalgebra
@xmath on @xmath and on @xmath are equivalent. To fix the notation we
define

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let us introduce

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then the commutation relations of the fermionic generators are given by
³ ³ 3 This form of the commutator is related to the fact that the
centrally extended @xmath can be viewed as a @xmath limit of the
exceptional Lie superalgebra @xmath . The latter has @xmath bosonic
subalgebra. The generators of the bosonic subalgebra are identified with
@xmath and @xmath . Fermionic subspace is spanned by @xmath . Adjoint
action of @xmath and @xmath on @xmath -s is given by the fundamental
representation related respectively to @xmath and @xmath indices. The
commutator of @xmath -s is given by

@xmath (6.9)

For generic @xmath the generators @xmath do not commute with each other.
But they do in the limit @xmath . In this limit we recover ( 6.10 ) from
( 6.9 ).

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is a symmetric matrix of central charges. @xmath . In the
notations of [ 9 ] @xmath and @xmath .

The @xmath outer automorphisms rotate the third index of @xmath . The
matrix @xmath form a symmetric three-dimensional representation of the
external @xmath group with an invariant @xmath .

The existence of a four dimensional representation is possible if a
shortening condition @xmath is satisfied. We will denote such
representation by @xmath .

For @xmath the four dimensional representation is not faithful since
@xmath . The faithful representation with nonzero central charges is
infinite dimensional. The faithful infinite dimensional representation
is important for identification of the scattering matrix. Therefore we
will now discuss this representation.

The basis in the vector space of the faithful representation is chosen
to be the following: @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is integer. The
bosonic generators @xmath and @xmath do not act on @xmath . They act on
@xmath and @xmath according to ( 6.1.1 ).

The action of the other generators is the following

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is either @xmath or @xmath .

The closure of the commutation relations requires that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The case ( 6.1.1 ) corresponds to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . If we
reduce the representation to four dimensions by identifying @xmath , it
is easy to see that ( 6.13 ) is equivalent to the shortening condition
@xmath .
