#### 1.2.1 Linear algebra

###### Vectors, operators, and inner products

The vector space @xmath of all @xmath -tuples of complex numbers is
called a complex Euclidean space . Complex Euclidean spaces are denoted
by capital script letters such as @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath so as to
better facilitate discussions involving multiple distinct spaces.

Vectors in a complex Euclidean space are denoted by lowercase Roman
letters such as @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . The standard orthonormal
basis of each @xmath -dimensional complex Euclidean space is typically
written @xmath where @xmath denotes the @xmath -tuple whose @xmath th
component equals 1 with all other components equal to 0. The standard
inner product between two vectors @xmath is denoted @xmath . In this
thesis, this inner product is conjugate linear in the first argument and
linear in the second argument. In particular, if

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The standard Euclidean norm of a vector @xmath is denoted @xmath and is
given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Each vector @xmath induces a dual vector @xmath , which is a linear
function @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We sometimes use the alternate notation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The vector @xmath obtained by applying a linear operator @xmath to a
vector @xmath is denoted by the simple juxtaposition @xmath . Similarly,
the operator @xmath obtained by composing the linear operators @xmath
and @xmath is denoted by the juxtaposition @xmath .

Each pair of vectors @xmath induces an operator @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . By analogy with the inner product, the operator @xmath
is sometimes called the outer product of @xmath and @xmath , but we will
not use that terminology in this thesis.

The adjoint of a linear operator @xmath is the unique operator @xmath
satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every @xmath . The standard inner product for operators is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Matrix representation of vectors and operators

It is sometimes convenient to think of a linear operator @xmath as an
@xmath matrix and of an element @xmath as a @xmath column vector, so
that the @xmath column vector @xmath obtained by applying @xmath to
@xmath is given by standard matrix multiplication:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In this view, the asterisk superscript indicates the conjugate-transpose
matrix operation. In particular, the conjugate operator @xmath and
transpose operator @xmath are the linear operators whose matrix
representations are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the matrix representation of the adjoint operator @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The asterisk notation for matrices is consistent with the definition of
the dual vector. Indeed, matrix multiplication can be used to compute
the vector inner product:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Matrix multiplication is also employed to compute the matrix
representation of the operator @xmath :

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Similarly, matrix multiplication can be used to compute the matrix inner
product—the composition @xmath of linear operators is computed by matrix
multiplication of @xmath and @xmath , and the familiar trace function
@xmath equals the sum of the diagonal entries of the resulting matrix
@xmath .

###### Tensor products

The tensor product is a mathematical concept that is so fundamental to
quantum information that discussion always implicitly assumes a working
knowledge. The concept is important because it is the mechanism by which
two separate quantum systems are viewed as a single system.

For any two complex Euclidean spaces @xmath and any two vectors @xmath ,
the tensor product associates a third vector @xmath , which is an
element of a third vector space @xmath of dimension @xmath .
Specifically, letting

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

denote the standard bases of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ,
respectively, the vector @xmath is specified in terms of standard basis
elements as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The complex Euclidean space @xmath is called the tensor product of the
spaces @xmath and @xmath . (Indeed, any complex Euclidean space @xmath
whose dimension is not a prime number may be viewed as a tensor product
@xmath of two nontrivial spaces @xmath and @xmath .)

From this definition, it is possible to derive many of the widely known
basic properties of the tensor product. For example, the bilinear
mapping defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is universal , meaning that any bilinear transformation @xmath for some
complex Euclidean space @xmath can alternately be written as a linear
operator @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As the set of all linear operators from one complex Euclidean space to
another is itself a complex vector space, the tensor product may be
extended in the obvious way to linear operators. From there it is
possible to derive all the widely known properties of the tensor product
for operators. We shall not list these properties here.

The tensor product of two or more vectors, spaces, or operators is
defined inductively, as suggested by the expression

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As the tensor product operation is associative, there is no ambiguity in
writing simply @xmath .

Under the matrix representation, properties of the tensor product may be
derived from the following straightforward definition. For @xmath
matrices

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This definition extends in the obvious way to arbitrary matrices of any
dimension, including column vectors and non-square matrices. In this
context, the tensor product might also be called the Kronecker product .

Often in this thesis our discussion involves tensor products of finite
sequences of vectors, spaces, operators, and so on. As such, it is
convenient to adopt the following shorthand for such a product: if
@xmath are arbitrary operators then we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for integers @xmath . A similar notation shall be used for vectors and
complex Euclidean spaces.

###### Sets of operators

A linear operator @xmath is called an isometry if it holds that @xmath
for all @xmath . This condition can only be met when @xmath . When
@xmath and @xmath have equal dimension, an isometry is also called a
unitary operator.

The (complex) vector space of linear operators of the form @xmath is
denoted @xmath . The identity operator in @xmath is denoted @xmath and
the subscript is dropped whenever the space @xmath is clear from the
context.

An element @xmath of @xmath is Hermitian (or self-adjoint ) if @xmath .
The set of all Hermitian operators within @xmath forms a (real) vector
space, which we denote by @xmath .

An operator @xmath is positive semidefinite if @xmath is a nonnegative
real number for each vector @xmath . Every positive semidefinite
operator is also Hermitian, and the set of all positive semidefinite
operators within @xmath is denoted @xmath . In general, the use of bold
font is reserved for sets of operators. For an arbitrary set @xmath of
Hermitian operators, we let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

denote the set of positive semidefinite elements in @xmath .

We adopt the notation @xmath to indicate that the operator @xmath is
positive semidefinite. As suggested by this notation, the semidefinite
partial ordering on Hermitian operators is defined so that @xmath if and
only if @xmath is positive semidefinite. For each positive semidefinite
operator @xmath there exists a unique positive semidefinite operator
@xmath called the square root of @xmath with the property that @xmath .

###### Super-operators

A super-operator is a linear operator of the form @xmath . The identity
super-operator from @xmath to itself is denoted @xmath and the subscript
is dropped at will.

Whereas the application of an operator to a vector is denoted by simple
juxtaposition, the operator @xmath obtained by applying the
super-operator @xmath to an operator @xmath is always denoted with
parentheses: @xmath . Similarly, whereas operator composition is denoted
by simple juxtaposition, the super-operator @xmath obtained by composing
the linear operators @xmath and @xmath is denoted @xmath .

The standard inner product for super-operators @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the standard basis for @xmath . That this definition is
a natural extension of the operator inner product can be argued from the
fact that the operator inner product satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any two operators @xmath .

Just as the definition of the tensor product is extended in a natural
way to operators, so too can it be extended to super-operators.

A super-operator @xmath is said to be

-   Hermitian-preserving if @xmath is Hermitian whenever @xmath is
    Hermitian.

-   positive on @xmath if @xmath is positive semidefinite whenever
    @xmath .

-   positive if @xmath is positive on @xmath .

-   completely positive if @xmath is positive for every choice of
    complex Euclidean space @xmath .

-   trace-preserving if @xmath for all @xmath .

While the definition of complete positivity might seem awkward at first,
it is significantly simplified by the observation that @xmath is
completely positive if and only if @xmath is positive for a space @xmath
with @xmath . In particular, there is no need to verify positivity of
@xmath for infinitely many spaces @xmath .

An important example of a completely positive and trace-preserving
super-operator is the partial trace . For any complex Euclidean spaces
@xmath , this super-operator has the form @xmath . It is most easily
specified by its actions upon product operators @xmath for @xmath by the
expression

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The importance of the partial trace stems from the fact that this
super-operator is used to compute the quantum state of a portion of some
larger system whose quantum state is already known.

Just as with operators, the adjoint of a super-operator @xmath is the
unique super-operator @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every @xmath .

Every super-operator @xmath may be expressed in the operator-sum
notation, whereby there exist operators @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath , from which it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . It holds that @xmath is completely positive if and only
if it has a symmetric operator-sum decomposition, so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath .

Each super-operator also has a Stinespring representation , whereby
there exists a complex Euclidean space @xmath and operators @xmath such
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . By analogy to the operator-sum representation, @xmath
is completely positive if and only if it has a symmetric Stinespring
representation, so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . If, in addition, @xmath is also trace-preserving then
the operator @xmath must be an isometry.

###### The operator-vector and Choi-Jamiołkowski isomorphisms

In this thesis we make use of an unconventional but useful isomorphism
@xmath that associates with each operator @xmath a unique vector @xmath
in the complex Euclidean space @xmath . Letting @xmath and @xmath denote
the standard bases of @xmath and @xmath , this isomorphism defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that this correspondence is basis-dependent, and we have chosen the
standard basis in our definition.

In the matrix representation, the column vector @xmath is obtained from
the entries of the matrix @xmath by taking each row of @xmath ,
transposing that row to form a column vector, and then stacking each of
these column vectors so as to form one large column vector. For example,
the @xmath mapping acts as follows on @xmath matrices:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The @xmath isomorphism has many convenient properties, some of which we
list here. Each of these identities may be verified by straightforward
calculation.

###### Proposition 1.1 (Properties of the @xmath isomorphism).

The following hold:

1.   The @xmath mapping preserves the standard inner products of
    operators and vectors. That is, for each @xmath it holds that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.   For any operators @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath for which the
    composition @xmath is defined it holds that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.   For each @xmath it holds that

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

4.   For each @xmath and @xmath it holds that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

The Choi-Jamiołkowski isomorphism associates with each super-operator
@xmath a unique operator @xmath . Letting @xmath denote the standard
basis of @xmath , this isomorphism defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As with the @xmath isomorphism, the Choi-Jamiołkowski isomorphism is
basis-dependent and it is always defined with respect to the standard
basis.

Given that @xmath , we obtain the following alternate characterization
of the Choi-Jamiołkowski isomorphism:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Like the @xmath isomorphism, the Choi-Jamiołkowski isomorphism has many
convenient properties, some of which we list here.

###### Proposition 1.2 (Properties of the Choi-Jamiołkowski
isomorphism).

The following hold for all super-operators @xmath :

1.   The Choi-Jamiołkowski isomorphism preserves the standard inner
    product of super-operators and operators. That is, for each @xmath
    it holds that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.   For each @xmath it holds that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.   If @xmath has operator-sum and Stinespring representations given by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for all @xmath then it holds that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    respectively.

4.  @xmath is Hermitian-preserving if and only if @xmath is Hermitian.

5.  @xmath is completely positive if and only if @xmath is positive
    semidefinite.

6.  @xmath is trace-preserving if and only if @xmath .

A generalization of item 2 is proven in Proposition 9.4 of Chapter 9 .
An additional identity involving the Choi-Jamiołkowski isomorphism
appears later in this section in Proposition 1.3 .

###### Operator decompositions

There are two operator decompositions that are so fundamental to quantum
information that, like the tensor product, they are often used
implicitly. Indeed, in this thesis we make little explicit mention of
these decompositions, yet our discussion always assumes a working
knowledge of their existence.

The Singular Value Theorem states that every operator @xmath has at
least one singular value decomposition , whereby there exist orthonormal
sets @xmath and @xmath and positive real numbers @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is the rank of the operator @xmath . The real numbers @xmath
are called the singular values of @xmath . Sometimes, the vectors @xmath
are called the left singular vectors of @xmath , whereas @xmath are
called the right singular vectors of @xmath .

The Spectral Theorem implies that an operator @xmath is Hermitian if and
only if there exists at least one spectral decomposition whereby there
is an orthonormal set @xmath and real numbers @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Again, @xmath is the rank of @xmath . The real numbers @xmath are called
the eigenvalues of @xmath and the vectors @xmath are called the
eigenvectors of @xmath .

It is easy to see that a Hermitian operator @xmath is positive
semidefinite if and only if each of its eigenvalues is nonnegative. It
follows immediately from the Spectral Theorem that every Hermitian
operator @xmath has a Jordan decomposition whereby there exist positive
semidefinite operators @xmath and @xmath with the property that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath —that is, @xmath and @xmath act on orthogonal subspaces. The
absolute value @xmath of @xmath is a positive semidefinite operator
defined via the Jordan decomposition by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A positive semidefinite operator @xmath is called a projection if each
of its eigenvalues is either zero or one.

###### Norms of vectors and operators

For each real number @xmath and each vector @xmath in some @xmath
-dimensional complex Euclidean space, the vector @xmath -norm @xmath of
@xmath is defined by

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

with @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These norms satisfy @xmath whenever @xmath , and it also holds that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The standard Euclidean norm @xmath is an instance of the vector @xmath
-norm with @xmath , so that @xmath for all @xmath .

Each vector @xmath -norm induces a norm on operators via the singular
value decomposition. In particular, the Schatten @xmath -norm @xmath of
an operator @xmath is defined as the vector @xmath -norm of the singular
values of @xmath . As such, the Schatten @xmath -norms inherit many
properties from the vector @xmath -norms. For example, @xmath whenever
@xmath and

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

for operators @xmath with @xmath .

In this thesis we are interested only in the Schatten @xmath -norms for
the values @xmath . The Schatten @xmath -norm for @xmath is also called
the trace norm and is alternately denoted @xmath .

The Schatten @xmath -norm for @xmath is also called the Frobenius norm
and is alternately denoted @xmath . The Frobenius norm is merely the
standard Euclidean norm for complex Euclidean spaces applied to the
complex vector space of linear operators:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Schatten @xmath -norm for @xmath is also called the standard
operator norm and is alternately denoted without any subscript by @xmath
. The operator norm is induced from the standard Euclidean norm for
vectors:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In this thesis we prefer the notation @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath to
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

We now prove a simple identity involving the trace norm of the
Choi-Jamiołkowski representation of a completely positive and
trace-preserving super-operator.

###### Proposition 1.3.

For any completely positive and trace-preserving super-operator @xmath
it holds that @xmath .

###### Proof.

By definition, we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

As @xmath is positive semidefinite, so too must be @xmath , from which
we obtain

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

As @xmath is trace-preserving, it holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, it is easy to verify that @xmath , from which it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

##### 1.2.2 Convexity

###### Carathéodory’s Theorem

A subset @xmath of a real vector space @xmath is called convex if for
every @xmath and every real number @xmath it holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For vectors @xmath and nonnegative real numbers @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the vector

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is called a convex combination of @xmath . For an arbitrary set @xmath ,
the convex hull of @xmath is the subset of @xmath consisting of all
convex combinations of elements in @xmath . Carathéodory’s Theorem is a
useful result that bounds the number of terms in the sum of a given
convex combination.

###### Fact 1.4 (Carathéodory’s Theorem).

Let @xmath be an arbitrary set. Every element @xmath of the convex hull
of @xmath can be written as a convex combination of no more than @xmath
elements of @xmath .

Proofs of Carathéodory’s Theorem can be found, for example, in
Rockafellar [ Roc70 ] or Barvinok [ Bar02 ] .

###### Separation Theorem

The fundamental Separation Theorem tells us that every pair of disjoint
convex sets may be separated by a hyperplane. There are many variants of
the Separation Theorem, each of which differs only slightly based upon
properties of the sets in question such as whether or not they are open,
closed, bounded, or cones. (A subset @xmath is called a cone if for
every @xmath and every positive real number @xmath it holds that @xmath
.) The following variant of the Separation Theorem serves all our needs
in this thesis.

###### Fact 1.5 (Separation Theorem).

Let @xmath be nonempty disjoint convex sets such that @xmath is open.
There exists a vector @xmath and a real number @xmath with the property
that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Moreover, if @xmath is a cone then we may take @xmath .

###### Proof.

It follows from Theorem 11.3 of Rockafellar [ Roc70 ] that there exists
a nonzero vector @xmath and a real number @xmath with @xmath for all
@xmath and @xmath . Suppose toward a contradiction that there is a
@xmath with @xmath . Choose any vector @xmath with @xmath , so that
@xmath . By rescaling @xmath and using the fact that @xmath is open, we
may assume @xmath , which contradicts the fact that @xmath for all
@xmath .

Next, suppose that @xmath is a cone and let @xmath denote the infimum of
@xmath over all @xmath , so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath and @xmath . Our proof that @xmath follows that of
Theorem 11.7 of Rockafellar [ Roc70 ] . First, suppose toward a
contradiction that @xmath and choose @xmath with @xmath . Then @xmath
can be made into an arbitrarily large negative number by an
appropriately large choice of @xmath , contradicting the lower bound
@xmath on the infimum @xmath . Conversely, suppose toward a
contradiction that @xmath and choose @xmath small enough so that @xmath
, contradicting the definition of @xmath . ∎

###### Convexity and Hermitian operators

As noted in Section 1.2.1 , the set @xmath of all Hermitian operators is
a real vector space of dimension @xmath . As such, the formalism of
convexity translates without complication to Hermitian operators. For
example, the set @xmath of all positive semidefinite operators within
@xmath is a closed convex cone. Moreover, Carathéodory’s Theorem and the
Separation Theorem have natural analogues in the context of @xmath .
Indeed, it is worth restating Fact 1.5 (Separation Theorem) in terms of
Hermitian operators.

###### Fact 1.6 (Separation Theorem, Hermitian operator version).

Let @xmath be nonempty disjoint convex sets such that @xmath is open.
There exists a Hermitian operator @xmath and a real number @xmath with
the property that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Moreover, if @xmath is a cone then we may take @xmath .

##### 1.2.3 Quantum information

###### Quantum states

Associated with each @xmath -level physical system is a @xmath
-dimensional complex Euclidean space @xmath . The quantum state of such
a system at some fixed point in time is described uniquely by a positive
semidefinite operator @xmath with trace equal to one. Such an operator
might also be called a density operator .

A quantum state @xmath called pure if @xmath has rank one—that is @xmath
for some unit vector @xmath . It follows immediately from the Spectral
Theorem that every quantum state may be written as a convex combination
(or probabilistic ensemble) of orthogonal pure states.

Two distinct physical systems with associated complex Euclidean spaces
@xmath and @xmath may be viewed as a single larger system with
associated complex Euclidean space @xmath . If @xmath is the state of
this larger system then the state @xmath of the subsystem associated
only with @xmath is given by the partial trace

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Conversely, if the systems with associated spaces @xmath and @xmath are
in states @xmath and @xmath respectively then it must hold that the
state @xmath of the larger system satisfies @xmath and @xmath . Any
state @xmath meeting these conditions is said to be consistent with
@xmath and @xmath . If there is no correlation or entanglement between
these two subsystems then @xmath is given by the tensor product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Such a state is called a product state . For each @xmath there are many
states @xmath consistent with @xmath other than product states. For
example, each state @xmath may be purified . In other words, there
always exists a complex Euclidean space @xmath with @xmath and a pure
state @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The state @xmath is called a purification of @xmath .

###### Quantum operations

A quantum operation is a physically realizable discrete-time mapping (at
least in an ideal sense) that takes as input a quantum state @xmath of
some system @xmath and produces as output a quantum state @xmath of some
system @xmath . Every quantum operation is described uniquely by a
completely positive and trace-preserving super-operator @xmath , so
that, for each input state @xmath , the corresponding output state
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As noted in Section 1.2.1 , each quantum operation @xmath has a
Stinespring representation whereby there exists a complex Euclidean
space @xmath with @xmath and an isometry @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Naturally, two quantum operations @xmath for @xmath acting upon distinct
physical systems may be viewed as one large quantum operation acting
upon one large system via the tensor product:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using our shorthand notation, this tensor product can alternately be
written

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Quantum measurements

Many applications of quantum information necessitate the ability to
extract classical information from a quantum state of some physical
system @xmath . This extraction is accomplished via quantum measurement
. Each measurement is uniquely specified by a finite set @xmath of
measurement outcomes and a finite set @xmath of positive semidefinite
measurement operators obeying the condition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(These measurement operators are sometimes called POVM elements for
historical reasons—we avoid that terminology in this thesis.) For any
state @xmath of the system @xmath , the probability with which the
measurement @xmath yields a particular outcome @xmath is given by the
inner product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is convenient to adopt the convention that the physical system
associated with @xmath is destroyed when the measurement is applied.
There is a simple and common modification of the formalism of quantum
measurements that admits non-destructive measurements that do not
destroy the system upon which they act, but we do not require such a
formalism in this thesis.

A measurement is called projective if each of its measurement operators
is a projection. An arbitrary measurement @xmath may be “simulated” by a
projective measurement in the sense that there always exists a complex
Euclidean space @xmath , an isometry @xmath and a projective measurement
@xmath with the property that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every quantum state @xmath .

## Part I Quantum Strategies

### Chapter 2 Introduction to Quantum Strategies

In this chapter we develop two distinct formalisms for quantum
strategies. We begin with a naive operational formalism in Section 2.1 ,
and we provide a new formalism in Section 2.2 .

#### 2.1 Operational formalism

In this section we develop an intuitive, operational formalism for
quantum strategies and discuss some properties and problems associated
with that formalism.

##### 2.1.1 Formal definitions

At a high level, a strategy is a complete description of one party’s
actions in a multiple-round interaction involving the exchange of
quantum information with one or more other parties. For convenience, let
us call this party Alice . As we are only concerned for the moment with
Alice’s actions during the interaction, it is convenient to bundle the
remaining parties into one party, whom we call Bob .

From Alice’s point of view, every finite interaction decomposes
naturally into a finite number @xmath of rounds . In a typical round a
message comes in, the message is processed, and a reply is sent out.
Naturally, this reply might depend upon messages exchanged during
previous rounds of the interaction. To account for such a dependence, we
allow for a memory workspace to be maintained between rounds.

In order to facilitate discussion of the distinct strategies available
to Alice for a given interaction, it is convenient to adopt the
convention that the interaction specifies the number @xmath of rounds
and the size of each message in the interaction. In particular,
individual strategies for Alice are not free to specify messages whose
number or size deviates from those dictated by the interaction. By
contrast, an interaction does not dictate the size of the memory
workspace to be used by each party. In particular, different strategies
for Alice may call for different amounts of memory between rounds, and
there is no limit on the amount of memory workspace a strategy may use.
(However, we shall see in Chapter 3 that every possible strategy can be
implemented with a reasonable fixed amount of memory workspace.)

The complex Euclidean spaces corresponding to the incoming and outgoing
messages in an arbitrary round @xmath shall be denoted @xmath and @xmath
, respectively. The space corresponding to the memory workspace to be
stored for the next round shall be denoted @xmath . As the size of each
message is fixed by the interaction, the dimension of the spaces @xmath
and @xmath are also fixed by the interaction. Conversely, the dimension
of the spaces @xmath may be arbitrarily large and these dimensions may
vary among different strategies for the same interaction.

Thus, in a typical round @xmath of the quantum interaction, Alice’s
actions are faithfully represented by a quantum operation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The first round of the interaction is a special case: there is no need
for an incoming memory space for this round, so the quantum operation
@xmath has the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The final round of the interaction is also a special case: there is no
immediate need for an outgoing memory space for this round. However, the
presence of this final memory space better facilitates the forthcoming
discussion of strategies involving measurements. Thus, the quantum
operation @xmath representing Alice’s actions in the final round of the
interaction has the same form as those from previous rounds:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In order to extract classical information from the interaction, it
suffices to permit Alice to perform a single quantum measurement on her
final memory workspace. Sufficiency of a single measurement at the end
of the interaction follows from foundational results on mixed state
quantum computations [ AKN98 ] , which tell us that any quantum
operation calling for one or more intermediate measurements can be
efficiently simulated by an operation with a single measurement at the
end.

Discussion thus far in this section is aptly summarized by the following
formal definition.

###### Definition 2.1 (Operational definition of a strategy).

Let @xmath and @xmath be complex Euclidean spaces. An operational @xmath
-round non-measuring strategy for an interaction with input spaces
@xmath and output spaces @xmath consists of:

1.  complex Euclidean spaces @xmath , called memory spaces , and

2.  an @xmath -tuple of quantum operations @xmath of the form

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

An operational @xmath -round measuring strategy with outcomes indexed by
@xmath consists of items 1 and 2 above, as well as:

1.  a measurement @xmath on the last memory space @xmath .

Figure 2.1 illustrates an @xmath -round non-measuring strategy. ∎

Having formalized the notion of a strategy for Alice, it is
straightforward to formalize the notion of a compatible strategy for
Bob. Essentially, Bob must provide to Alice incoming messages with
corresponding spaces @xmath and accept her outgoing replies with
corresponding spaces @xmath .

###### Definition 2.2 (Operational definition of a co-strategy).

Let @xmath and @xmath be complex Euclidean spaces. An operational @xmath
-round non-measuring co-strategy for an interaction with input spaces
@xmath and output spaces @xmath consists of:

1.  complex Euclidean memory spaces @xmath ,

2.  a quantum state @xmath , and

3.  a @xmath -tuple of quantum operations @xmath of the form

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

An operational @xmath -round measuring co-strategy with outcomes indexed
by @xmath consists of items 1, 2 and 3 above, as well as:

1.  a measurement @xmath on the last memory space @xmath .

Figure 2.2 depicts the interaction between a @xmath -round strategy and
co-strategy. ∎

##### 2.1.2 Immediate observations

###### Generality of the definition

Our definition of a strategy allows for trivial input or output spaces
with dimension one—such spaces correspond to empty messages. Hence,
simple actions such as the preparation of a quantum state or performing
a measurement without producing a quantum output can be viewed as
special cases of strategies.

While we require that Alice receive the first message and send the last
message, any interaction that deviates from this format can easily be
recast to fit this mold at the possible expense of one additional round
of messages, some of which might be empty.

Indeed, our definition is flexible enough that any @xmath -round
co-strategy may equivalently be viewed as a @xmath -round strategy with
input spaces @xmath and output spaces @xmath . It is only for later
convenience that we have chosen to define strategies and co-strategies
as distinct objects.

###### Restriction to finite interactions

In this thesis we restrict our attention to interactions in which the
size and number of messages exchanged is fixed. As we shall see in
Section 2.2 , this restriction permits us the luxury of representing
every conceivable strategy for a given interaction by a single positive
semidefinite operator of fixed finite dimension. Many of the results
proven in this thesis rely crucially upon the finiteness of these
representations of strategies.

At first, this restriction might seem overly constraining. For example,
one might reasonably wish to study strategies for, say, coin-flipping
protocols wherein two parties continue exchanging messages until they
reach an agreement. With each round of messages, this agreement might be
reached only probabilistically according to some quantum measurement.
Such an interaction is infinite in the sense that it admits strategies
with the property that, for every number @xmath of rounds, there is a
nonzero probability that it will not terminate in @xmath rounds or
fewer. (Indeed, this scenario also admits silly strategies in which the
interaction never terminates.) To forbid interactions such as this might
seem careless, as our study aspires to absolute generality for quantum
strategies.

While it would certainly be desirable to include in our formalism
potentially infinite interactions, the generality that we sacrifice in
the name of finiteness is less of a liability than it might at first
seem. Many “infinite” interactions of any interest—such as the previous
coin-flipping example—will terminate after a finite number of messages
with probability 1. Interactions such as this can be approximated to
arbitrary precision with only a finite number of messages simply by
truncating the interaction appropriately.

Admittedly, the precise extent to which generality is sacrificed by our
restriction to finite interactions remains to be seen. But it cannot be
denied that the set of finite interactions encompasses a very wide swath
of interesting quantum interactions. In the real world, all interactions
are finite.

###### Restriction to isometric quantum operations

When convenient, we shall assume without loss of generality that each of
Alice’s quantum operations @xmath are actually linear isometries,
meaning that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some linear isometry @xmath . Similarly, we may assume that Bob’s
initial state @xmath is actually a pure state, and that each of Bob’s
quantum operations @xmath have the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some linear isometry @xmath . Moreover, if Alice’s or Bob’s strategy
is a measuring strategy then we may also assume that the measurements
@xmath for Alice and @xmath for Bob are actually projective
measurements, meaning that each @xmath and @xmath is actually a
projection operator.

These assumptions follow from the Stinespring representation for quantum
operations mentioned in Section 1.2.1 . Specifically, an arbitrary
quantum operation @xmath may be written @xmath for some auxiliary space
@xmath and some isometry @xmath . As the memory spaces for strategies
may be arbitrary, the auxiliary space @xmath for a given round @xmath
may be “absorbed” into the private memory space @xmath of Alice’s
quantum operation @xmath , thus removing the need for the partial trace
over @xmath and leaving us with @xmath as desired.

The justification for projective measurements is similar: Naimark’s
Theorem implies that any measurement on the final memory space @xmath
may be simulated by a projective measurement on @xmath for some
auxiliary space @xmath . As before, @xmath may be “absorbed” into the
definition of @xmath , leaving us with only a projective measurement on
this space.

###### Undesirable properties of the operational formalism

Definition 2.1 (Operational definition of a strategy) is very natural in
the sense that it is clear that any conceivable actions taken by Alice
during an interaction can be represented by a strategy of that form.
Unfortunately, this definition has several undesirable mathematical
properties that make this formalization cumbersome to use.

Picking an example arbitrarily, it is easy to see that the set of all
strategies for a given interaction lacks a convenient distributive
property for probabilistic combinations of strategies. In particular,
suppose Alice plays according to @xmath with probability @xmath ,
otherwise she plays according to @xmath . What is the @xmath -tuple of
quantum operations that describes this probabilistic combination of
strategies? In an ideal world, this @xmath -tuple would be given by the
simple convex combination

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the @xmath th component of the resulting @xmath -tuple is given in
the usual way by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Alas, this identity does not always hold. Indeed, unless @xmath and
@xmath happen to agree on the choice of memory spaces @xmath , the above
convex combination is not even well-defined! Of course, this issue is
easily overcome by “padding” the smaller memory spaces so that their
dimensions agree with those of the larger spaces. But this frivolous
observation ignores the larger problem.

Indeed, it is easy to exhibit a pair of strategies for which the above
identity does not hold, even when the two strategies agree on the
dimension of their memory spaces. The simple example we present here is
a toy classical strategy expressed in the quantum formalism.

###### Example 2.3 (Lack of distributive property).

Consider a two-round interaction wherein Alice’s incoming messages are
empty. Letting @xmath denote two distinct quantum states, the 2-tuples
@xmath and @xmath each specify a silly strategy for Alice that uses no
memory space and returns the same state in both rounds. Suppose Alice
plays one of @xmath and @xmath uniformly at random. At the end of this
interaction, Bob has received from Alice a combined state

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But the 2-tuple resulting from the naive computation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

results in strategy for Alice in which Bob is instead left with the
state

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

at the end of the interaction. As these final states for Bob are not
equal, it follows that the naive convex combination @xmath does not
denote the desired probabilistic combination of the strategies described
by @xmath and @xmath .

∎

This lack of a convenient distributive property suggests a cumbersome
nonlinear dependence of probabilistic combinations @xmath of strategies
upon their constituent strategies @xmath . Other examples of undesirable
properties include:

  Strategies are not unique.  

    There exist pairs of strategies that differ in each component, yet
    they specify the same actions for an interaction in the sense that
    no interacting co-strategy could possibly distinguish the two.

    This lack of uniqueness suggests that our operational formalism is
    carrying around some unnecessary information, which typically leads
    to unnecessary complication.

  Outcomes depend nonlinearly on strategies.  

    For a multi-round interaction between Alice and Bob, the probability
    of obtaining a given measurement outcome at the end of the
    interaction depends multilinearly upon each component @xmath of
    Alice’s strategy and @xmath of Bob’s strategy. But the dependence of
    this probability as a function of the two @xmath -tuples @xmath and
    @xmath is highly nonlinear.

    As a consequence, existing algorithms for standard linear and
    semidefinite optimization problems cannot be employed to efficiently
    compute some important properties of strategies, such as the maximum
    probability with which a given strategy can be forced to yield a
    given measurement outcome.

#### 2.2 New formalism

In the previous section we saw that the operational representation for
quantum strategies has several drawbacks. In this section, we develop a
new representation for quantum strategies that rectifies these problems.

##### 2.2.1 Formal definitions

We begin with several new definitions for non-measuring and measuring
quantum strategies and co-strategies.

###### Definition 2.4 (New formalism for non-measuring strategies).

Let @xmath be an operational representation of a non-measuring strategy
for input spaces @xmath and output spaces @xmath . Our new
representation for quantum strategies associates with every such
operational strategy a single positive semidefinite operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

via the following construction. Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

denote the super-operator composed of @xmath as suggested by Figure 2.3
.

Specifically, @xmath is the @xmath -fold composition of @xmath on the
memory spaces @xmath followed by a partial trace on @xmath . With some
abuse of notation, this composition may be expressed succinctly as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(Here a tensor product with the identity super-operator @xmath on the
appropriate spaces is implicitly inserted where necessary in order for
this composition to make sense.)

The @xmath -round non-measuring strategy is given by @xmath . An
operator @xmath is a valid representation of an @xmath -round
non-measuring strategy if and only if it has this form. ∎

###### Definition 2.5 (New formalism for measuring strategies).

With each operational representation @xmath of an @xmath -round
measuring strategy for input spaces @xmath and output spaces @xmath we
associate a finite set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of positive semidefinite operators via the following construction. For
each measurement outcome @xmath let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the super-operator @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(Compare: for non-measuring strategies we defined @xmath via the partial
trace @xmath . For measuring strategies we define @xmath via @xmath
instead of the partial trace.)

The @xmath -round measuring strategy @xmath is given by @xmath for each
@xmath . A set @xmath of operators is a valid representation of an
@xmath -round measuring strategy if and only if it has this form. ∎

###### Definition 2.6 (New formalism for co-strategies).

Non-measuring co-strategies are defined in the same manner as
non-measuring strategies, except the operator @xmath is given by @xmath
instead of @xmath . Similarly, measuring co-strategies are defined in
the same manner as measuring strategies, except the operators @xmath are
given by @xmath instead of @xmath for each @xmath .

Let us clarify this new representation for co-strategies. Let @xmath
denote an operational representation of an @xmath -round non-measuring
co-strategy for input spaces @xmath and output spaces @xmath , so that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The induced super-operator @xmath is depicted in Figure 2.4 for the case
@xmath .

The adjoint super-operator has the form @xmath In particular, we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

By taking @xmath , we ensure that strategies and co-strategies for the
same input and output spaces lie within the same space @xmath of
Hermitian operators—with @xmath occurring before @xmath in the tensor
product.

Incidentally, it is instructive to note that @xmath is a valid
representation of an @xmath -round strategy for input spaces @xmath and
output spaces @xmath according to Definition 2.4 .

Conversely, if @xmath is a super-operator for which @xmath is an @xmath
-round strategy for input spaces @xmath and output spaces @xmath then
@xmath denotes a valid @xmath -round co-strategy for input spaces @xmath
and output spaces @xmath . ∎

##### 2.2.2 Immediate observations

Some basic properties of this new representation for quantum strategies
may be pointed out immediately. However, a more comprehensive discussion
of basic properties of strategies must wait until Section 3.4 , at which
point the results of Chapter 3 are employed to establish with ease some
additional basic properties.

###### Zero-round strategies

It is convenient to adopt the convention that an @xmath -round
non-measuring strategy or co-strategy @xmath denotes the scalar 1 when
@xmath . Similarly, if @xmath is a zero-round measuring strategy or
co-strategy then @xmath denotes a finite set of nonnegative real numbers
that sum to one.

###### Representation in terms of isometries

Let @xmath be an operational description of an @xmath -round strategy.
As discussed in Section 2.1.2 , we may assume without loss of generality
that each of the quantum operations @xmath is actually an isometric
operation, so that @xmath for some isometry @xmath . In this case, the
super-operator @xmath in Definition 2.4 (New formalism for non-measuring
strategies) has the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is an isometry defined as the composition of @xmath on the
memory spaces @xmath . With some abuse of notation, this composition may
be expressed succinctly as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where a tensor product with the identity operator @xmath on the
appropriate spaces is inserted where necessary in order for this product
to make sense.

Under the new formalism for strategies, the operator @xmath representing
@xmath has the special form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For a measuring strategy with measurement @xmath , each element of
@xmath may be written

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is a co-strategy, rather than a strategy, then by Definition
2.6 (New formalism for co-strategies) we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for non-measuring co-strategies and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for measuring co-strategies.

###### Measuring strategy elements sum to a non-measuring strategy

We conclude this chapter with an exercise that should help to wet our
feet before diving into Chapter 3 .

###### Proposition 2.7.

A set @xmath of positive semidefinite operators is a measuring strategy
or co-strategy if and only if @xmath is a non-measuring strategy or
co-strategy, respectively.

###### Proof.

The proof for co-strategies is completely symmetric to the proof for
strategies, so we only prove the proposition for strategies.

The “only if” portion of the proof is straightforward. As @xmath is a
measuring strategy, there is an @xmath -tuple @xmath of isometries and a
measurement @xmath with the property that each @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the isometry @xmath is given by the @xmath -fold composition
@xmath is as noted earlier in this section. Then by linearity we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

which is an @xmath -round non-measuring strategy as required.

We now proceed to the “if” portion of the proof. As @xmath is a
non-measuring strategy, there is an @xmath -tuple @xmath of isometries
with the property that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where again the isometry

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is given by @xmath . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the operator obtained from @xmath by swapping the spaces @xmath and
@xmath . (In other words, @xmath is the image of @xmath under the
mapping @xmath on standard basis states.) We may thus write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath denote the Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse of @xmath , so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the projection onto the image of @xmath . For each
outcome @xmath we let @xmath . As @xmath is positive semidefinite, it is
clear that @xmath is also positive semidefinite. Observe that @xmath ,
which follows from

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the final equality follows from the fact that the image of @xmath
is contained in the image of @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

As @xmath it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As each @xmath is positive semidefinite, the set @xmath is a quantum
measurement and hence @xmath is a measuring strategy. ∎

### Chapter 3 Three Important Properties

In this chapter we establish three fundamental and powerful properties
of our new representation for quantum strategies. For ease of reference,
we begin with rigorous statements for each of these properties. Their
proofs appear in the subsequent sections, and the chapter concludes with
a short list of other basic properties of strategies.

The first of these three properties establishes a bilinear dependence of
the probability of a given measurement outcome upon the interacting
strategy and co-strategy. (By contrast, recall that the operational
representation for strategies led to a nonlinear dependence of outcomes
on strategies in Section 2.1.2 .)

###### Theorem 3.1 (Interaction output probabilities).

Let @xmath be a measuring strategy and let @xmath be a compatible
measuring co-strategy. For each pair @xmath of measurement outcomes, the
probability with which the interaction between @xmath and @xmath yields
@xmath is given by the inner product @xmath .

The second property provides a recursive characterization of @xmath
-round strategies in terms of @xmath -round strategies.

###### Theorem 3.2 (Characterization of strategies).

Let @xmath be an arbitrary positive semidefinite operator. The following
hold:

1.  @xmath is an @xmath -round strategy if and only if there exists an
    @xmath -round strategy @xmath with the property that @xmath
    Moreover, @xmath is obtained from @xmath by terminating that
    strategy after @xmath rounds.

2.  @xmath is an @xmath -round co-strategy if and only if there exists
    an operator @xmath for which @xmath and @xmath is an @xmath -round
    co-strategy. Moreover, @xmath is obtained from @xmath by terminating
    that co-strategy after @xmath rounds.

3.   Every @xmath -round strategy or co-strategy @xmath may be described
    by isometries in such a way that the final memory space has
    dimension equal to @xmath .

The recursive characterization of Theorem 3.2 may be equivalently
expressed as an explicit list of linear constraints on positive
semidefinite operators. These linear constraints are efficiently
checkable and hence amenable to standard algorithms for semidefinite
optimization problems.

###### Theorem 3.2 (Characterization of strategies, alternate version).

An operator @xmath is an @xmath -round strategy if and only if there
exist operators

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath such that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Moreover, each @xmath is obtained from @xmath by terminating that
strategy after @xmath rounds.

It follows immediately from this characterization that the sets of
strategies and co-strategies are compact and convex. For completeness,
we provide a formal proof of this important fact as Proposition 3.15 in
Section 3.4 .

Our third property of strategies provides a formula for the maximum
probability with which some co-strategy can force a given measuring
strategy to output a given measurement outcome. Whereas the previous two
properties are fundamental—both in their statements and their
proofs—this third property is more advanced. It’s proof relies crucially
upon the previous two properties, as well as more advanced ideas from
analysis such as convex polarity or semidefinite optimization duality.

###### Theorem 3.3 (Maximum output probability).

Let @xmath be a measuring strategy. For each outcome @xmath , the
maximum probability with which @xmath can be forced to output @xmath by
a compatible co-strategy is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

An analogous result holds for co-strategies.

#### 3.1 Interaction output probabilities

This section is devoted to a proof of Theorem 3.1 (Interaction output
probabilities). We preface the proof with a discussion of a
super-operator called the contraction , whose useful properties will be
employed in the proof that follows.

###### The contraction operation

Informally speaking, the contraction operation is defined so that a
composition of operators

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the image under the contraction of the tensor product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The ability to “unravel” operator compositions in this fashion is useful
for our purpose because it allows us to isolate the actions of Alice
@xmath from those of Bob @xmath in some @xmath -round interaction.

Still speaking informally, the existence of an operation such as the
contraction follows from the fact that the composition @xmath is
multilinear in the operators @xmath . Of course, the tensor product
@xmath is also multilinear in these operators. Indeed, as noted in
Section 1.2.1 , the tensor product possesses a special universality
property whereby any multilinear mapping on @xmath could equivalently be
expressed as a linear mapping on the tensor product @xmath . In our
case, that linear mapping is the contraction operation.

Let us formally define this operation.

###### Definition 3.4 (Contraction operation).

The contraction operation in its full generality is more easily defined
as a linear functional on vectors. For any complex Euclidean space
@xmath we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the standard basis for @xmath .

Just as the trace function is tensored with the identity to yield the
partial trace, the contraction is often tensored with the identity to
yield the partial contraction over @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(The exact ordering of the three spaces in the above tensor product
@xmath is immaterial—the contraction is defined similarly for other
orderings.)

The partial contraction is often viewed as a super-operator as follows.
If @xmath for some operator @xmath then we may dispense with the @xmath
notation and simply write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally, we write @xmath as shorthand for the composition @xmath . ∎

Two useful properties of the contraction operation—including the ability
to “unravel” operator compositions—are noted in the following
proposition. Each item in this proposition is proven by a
straightforward but tedious exercise in “index gymnastics.”

###### Proposition 3.5.

The following hold:

1.   For any operators @xmath and @xmath we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    In particular, if @xmath then @xmath .

2.   For any operators @xmath and @xmath we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We begin with item 1 . Throughout the proof it might be helpful to
remember that @xmath and its contraction take the following forms:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We denote the standard bases of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath                     
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

Then for some complex numbers @xmath we may write

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

By the definitions of the contraction and of matrix multiplication, we
obtain

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

For item 2 , we denote the standard bases of @xmath and @xmath by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Then for some complex numbers @xmath we may write

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

By the definitions of the contraction, matrix multiplication, and the
trace we obtain

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

as desired. ∎

###### Proof of Theorem 3.1 (Interaction output probabilities)

We are now ready to provide the promised proof. The theorem is restated
here for convenience.

###### Theorem 3.1 (Interaction output probabilities).

Let @xmath be a measuring strategy and let @xmath be a compatible
measuring co-strategy. For each pair @xmath of measurement outcomes, the
probability with which the interaction between @xmath and @xmath yields
@xmath is given by the inner product @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose @xmath is described by isometries @xmath and a projective
measurement @xmath . Similarly, suppose @xmath is described by a pure
state @xmath , isometries @xmath , and a projective measurement @xmath .
For each pair @xmath let @xmath denote the vector obtained by applying
the measurement operator @xmath to the pure state of the entire system
at the end of the interaction. That is, @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(Our notation here suppresses the numerous tensors with identity.) Then
the desired probability is equal to @xmath . The remainder of this proof
is dedicated to proving that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We use the contraction operation to pull apart the composition of @xmath
and express it as a contraction of the tensor product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

over every space except @xmath and @xmath . For convenience, this
expression for @xmath is written

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where the operators

  -- -- --
        
        
  -- -- --

are given by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

With an eye toward the end of the proof, we observe that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

as per Definition 2.4 (New formalism for non-measuring strategies).

Let @xmath and @xmath denote the standard bases of @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively, and for each @xmath define the operators

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

by

  -- -------- -- --
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --

Again, with an eye toward the end of the proof we observe that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The @xmath th component of @xmath (in the standard basis) is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Employing the cyclic property of the trace, we find that the modulus
squared of the @xmath th component of @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Then the desired norm @xmath is the sum of these moduli squared:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

∎

#### 3.2 Characterization of strategies

This section is devoted to a proof of Theorem 3.2 (Characterization of
strategies). Before providing the proof, it is appropriate to comment on
the relationship between our characterization of strategies and prior
work on so-called “no-signaling” quantum operations.

###### Relationship between strategies and no-signaling operations

The content of Theorem 3.2 was originally established in 2002 within the
context of no-signaling operations via the combined work of Beckman et
al. [ BGNP01 ] and Eggeling, Schlingemann, and Werner [ ESW02 ] . The
proof presented in this thesis was developed by the present author and
Watrous in 2007 [ GW07 ] within the context of quantum strategies and
without any knowledge of this prior work.

Let us elaborate upon the connection between strategies and no-signaling
operations. Simply put, Theorem 3.2 states that @xmath is an @xmath
-round strategy if and only if it obeys the partial trace condition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath -round strategy @xmath . This partial trace condition
also appears in Beckman et al. [ BGNP01 , Theorem 8] , wherein it was
established that the above condition also captures the one-directional
no-signaling property of certain quantum operations.

For quantum strategies, this property means that it is impossible to
send information (a “signal”) from the system @xmath to any of the
systems @xmath for each @xmath . Intuitively, we should expect quantum
strategies to obey a no-signaling condition of this sort. Any “strategy”
that disobeys this condition could be used to communicate backwards in
time—from future rounds of interaction to previous rounds. A world that
permitted such clairvoyant strategies would be an interesting world
indeed! Alas, such a world is not causally consistent.

While Beckman et al. showed that the partial trace condition of Theorem
3.2 is a necessary condition for quantum strategies, it was Eggeling,
Schlingemann, and Werner who established that this condition is also
sufficient . In particular, they showed that any quantum operation that
forbids signaling in one direction may be implemented by two separate
quantum operations, possibly with communication in the other direction.

For quantum strategies, signaling is forbidden in the future-past
direction, but permitted in the past-future direction. In this context,
such past-future communication is better known as “memory” and the two
separate quantum operations can be taken to represent the actions of the
strategy in two distinct rounds of the interaction. In this way, a
quantum strategy is constructed from an operation that obeys the
one-directional no-signaling operation, just as in Theorem 3.2 .

###### Proof of Theorem 3.2 (Characterization of strategies)

Let us present the promised proof. The theorem is restated here for
convenience.

###### Theorem 3.2 (Characterization of strategies).

Let @xmath be an arbitrary positive semidefinite operator. The following
hold:

1.  @xmath is an @xmath -round strategy if and only if there exists an
    @xmath -round strategy @xmath with the property that @xmath
    Moreover, @xmath is obtained from @xmath by terminating that
    strategy after @xmath rounds.

2.  @xmath is an @xmath -round co-strategy if and only if there exists
    an operator @xmath for which @xmath and @xmath is an @xmath -round
    co-strategy. Moreover, @xmath is obtained from @xmath by terminating
    that co-strategy after @xmath rounds.

3.   Every @xmath -round strategy or co-strategy @xmath may be described
    by isometries in such a way that the final memory space has
    dimension equal to @xmath .

###### Proof.

We begin with a proof of item 1 . Along the way, we will also prove item
3 . Item 2 follows from item 1 —a fact we establish at the end of this
proof.

Suppose first that @xmath is an @xmath -round strategy and let @xmath
denote the @xmath -round strategy obtained from @xmath by terminating
that strategy after the first @xmath rounds. We will prove that @xmath .

Toward that end, let @xmath be the quantum operations satisfying @xmath
and @xmath . As illustrated in Figure 3.1 , is clear that the
super-operators @xmath and @xmath are equal. We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as desired.

Next, assume that @xmath satisfies @xmath for some @xmath -round
strategy @xmath . We will prove that @xmath is an @xmath -round
strategy. Along the way, we will also establish item 3 in the statement
of the theorem.

This portion of the proof is by induction on the number of rounds @xmath
. We begin with the base case @xmath . It is clear that @xmath is a
one-round strategy if and only if @xmath for some quantum operation
@xmath . As @xmath is a quantum operation, it must be the case that
@xmath By convention, the zero-round strategy @xmath that we seek must
be represented by the scalar 1. The desired expression @xmath follows
from the simple observation that @xmath . Item 3 for this case follows
from the usual Stinespring representation: there exists a space @xmath
with @xmath and an isometry @xmath such that @xmath .

For the case @xmath , let @xmath be isometries that describe @xmath and
let @xmath denote the @xmath -fold composition of these isometries, so
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By the induction hypothesis, the memory space @xmath has @xmath . As
required for item 3 , we let @xmath be a complex Euclidean space with
dimension equal to @xmath . Let @xmath be any operator satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Such a choice of @xmath must exist given that the dimension of @xmath is
large enough to admit a purification of @xmath . Note that @xmath is
also a purification of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will now identify a second purification of @xmath . Toward that end,
let @xmath be a complex Euclidean space with @xmath and let @xmath be an
arbitrary unitary operator. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will now use the isometric equivalence of purifications to define an
isometry

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

for the @xmath th round that will complete the proof. Because @xmath has
the minimal dimension required to admit a purification of @xmath , it
follows that there exists an isometry @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This expression may equivalently be written

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We now define @xmath so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In other words, @xmath is given by the @xmath -fold composition @xmath .
As

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it follows that @xmath is an @xmath -round strategy described by the
isometries @xmath . The proofs of items 1 and 3 are thus complete.

Let us now prove item 2 . Essentially, the proof consists of several
applications of item 1 with different choices of input and output
spaces.

As noted in Definition 2.6 (New formalism for co-strategies), each
@xmath -round co-strategy may be viewed as an @xmath -round strategy
with input spaces @xmath and output spaces @xmath and vice versa . With
this fact in mind, item 1 tells us

  -- -------- -------- --
                       
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

(Of course, @xmath for every @xmath .) To complete the proof, it
suffices to show that

  -- -------- -------- --
                       
              @xmath   
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

For once this equivalence is shown, item 2 follows from the fact that
the linear conditions in question are robust with respect to taking
adjoints. In particular, it holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all super-operators @xmath and all appropriate choices of spaces
@xmath .

It remains only to establish the stated equivalence between @xmath and
@xmath . Toward that end, suppose first that @xmath is an @xmath -round
strategy for the input spaces @xmath and output spaces @xmath . By item
1 it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is an @xmath -round strategy for the input spaces @xmath
and output spaces @xmath . It is not hard to see that @xmath denotes a
valid @xmath -round strategy for the input spaces @xmath and output
spaces @xmath . Hence, @xmath is as claimed.

Conversely, suppose that @xmath is an @xmath -round strategy for the
input spaces @xmath and output spaces @xmath . By item 1 it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is an @xmath -round strategy for the input spaces @xmath
and output spaces @xmath . By item 1 again, it must be that @xmath is an
@xmath -round strategy for the input spaces @xmath and output spaces
@xmath as desired. ∎

#### 3.3 Maximum output probabilities

This section is devoted to a proof of Theorem 3.3 (Maximum output
probability). We offer two distinct proofs of this theorem. The first is
provided in Section 3.3.1 and employs the formalism of convex polarity,
while the second is provided in Section 3.3.2 and employs the formalism
of semidefinite optimization duality. Both proofs make use of the fact
that the sets of strategies and co-strategies are compact and convex—an
immediate implication of Theorem 3.2 that was noted at the start of this
chapter and shall be proven at the end of this chapter.

The theorem is restated here for convenience and is followed by a simple
lemma employed in both our proofs.

###### Theorem 3.3 (Maximum output probability).

Let @xmath be a measuring strategy. For each outcome @xmath , the
maximum probability with which @xmath can be forced to output @xmath by
a compatible co-strategy is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

An analogous result holds for co-strategies.

###### Lemma 3.6.

Suppose that Theorem 3.3 is known to hold for strategies. Then Theorem
3.3 also holds for co-strategies. The converse is also true.

###### Proof.

Suppose that Theorem 3.3 is known to hold for strategies. Let @xmath be
an @xmath -round measuring co-strategy for input spaces @xmath and
output spaces @xmath . For each outcome @xmath let @xmath be the
super-operator with @xmath . Then @xmath denotes an @xmath -round
measuring strategy for input spaces @xmath and output spaces @xmath . As
such, it holds that

  -- -------- -------- --
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The result follows from the fact that @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all choices of super-operators @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . The
proof of the converse statement is identical. ∎

##### 3.3.1 Proof by convex polarity

Our first proof of Theorem 3.3 (Maximum output probability) employs a
notion from convex analysis known as “polarity.” But before we discuss
this notion in detail, let us first introduce some notation. We let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

denote the set of all @xmath -round non-measuring strategies for input
spaces @xmath and output spaces @xmath . Similarly, we let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

denote the set of all @xmath -round non-measuring co-strategies for
these input and output spaces. In keeping with our convention, we have
@xmath . We mentioned earlier that the sets @xmath and @xmath are
compact and convex.

For any set @xmath of positive semidefinite operators, we write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A key component of this proof of Theorem 3.3 is a characterization of
the polar sets of @xmath and @xmath .

###### Introduction to polarity

For any non-empty set @xmath of Hermitian operators, the polar @xmath of
@xmath is defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the support and gauge functions for @xmath are defined as

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Let us list some basic facts concerning these objects.

###### Proposition 3.7.

Let @xmath be non-empty sets of Hermitian operators. The following hold:

1.   If @xmath then @xmath .

2.   If @xmath for each positive semidefinite operator @xmath then every
    element of @xmath is positive semidefinite.

3.   If @xmath is closed, convex, and contains the origin then the same
    is true of @xmath . In this case we have @xmath and @xmath

The first two items of Proposition 3.7 are elementary; a proof of the
third may be found in Rockafellar [ Roc70 ] .

###### A characterization of polar sets of strategies

We now establish a useful characterization of polar sets derived from
strategies and co-strategies.

###### Proposition 3.8 (Polar sets of strategies).

The following polarity relations hold for the sets @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We begin with a simple observation implying that the two equalities in
Proposition 3.8 are equivalent.

###### Lemma 3.9.

Let @xmath be non-empty, closed, and convex sets of positive
semidefinite operators, and suppose

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The lemma is proved by showing @xmath , from which the desired result
@xmath immediately follows. Let us start by proving @xmath . As @xmath
for every positive semidefinite @xmath , it follows that every element
of the polar @xmath is positive semidefinite. Clearly @xmath , and
therefore @xmath . By definition, @xmath consists of the positive
semidefinite elements of @xmath , so we have @xmath .

On the other hand, we have that every @xmath is contained in @xmath ,
implying that @xmath for all @xmath . As @xmath is positive
semidefinite, this also implies that @xmath for all @xmath .
Consequently, @xmath . Thus @xmath as desired. ∎

We also require a technical statement that simplifies computations
involving @xmath and @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.10.

Let @xmath be any closed, convex set that contains the origin and let
@xmath be given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is also a closed, convex set that contains the origin and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

That @xmath is closed, convex, and contains the origin follows
immediately from its definition. Let us compute @xmath . The assumption
@xmath implies that @xmath for every positive semidefinite @xmath , and
hence every element of the polar @xmath must be positive semidefinite.
If it is the case that @xmath then for all @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so @xmath as desired.

On the other hand, if @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . If in addition @xmath is positive semidefinite then it
also holds that @xmath for all @xmath and therefore @xmath . ∎

We are now ready to prove the desired characterization of polar sets of
strategies.

###### Proof of Proposition 3.8 (Polar sets of strategies).

The proof is by induction on the number of rounds @xmath . For the base
case @xmath , we have @xmath and @xmath and so the lemma holds when
@xmath .

For the general case, we note that the two items in the statement of the
proposition are equivalent by Lemma 3.9 , so it suffices to prove only
the first. Let

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Then by Theorem 3.2 (Characterization of strategies) we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We apply Lemma 3.10 twice—once with @xmath and once with @xmath —to
obtain

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

By the induction hypothesis we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Substituting this expression into the above expression for @xmath we
find that the proposition follows from Theorem 3.2 (Characterization of
strategies). ∎

###### First proof of Theorem 3.3 (Maximum output probability)

###### First proof of Theorem 3.3.

We prove the theorem for strategies—the result for co-strategies then
follows from Lemma 3.6 . Let @xmath denote the maximum probability with
which @xmath can be forced to output @xmath in an interaction with some
compatible co-strategy. It follows from Theorem 3.1 (Interaction output
probabilities) that @xmath . Using Proposition 3.8 (Polar sets of
strategies), along with the fact that @xmath is positive semidefinite,
we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which completes the proof. ∎

##### 3.3.2 Proof by semidefinite optimization duality

Our second proof of Theorem 3.3 (Maximum output probability) employs the
powerful machinery of semidefinite optimization duality. The idea is to
construct a semidefinite optimization problem that captures the maximum
output probability, compute its dual problem, and then show that the
primal and dual problems satisfy the conditions for so-called “strong”
duality.

###### Overview of semidefinite optimization

The semidefinite optimization problems we consider are expressed in
super-operator form . While the super-operator form differs
superficially from the more conventional standard form for these
problems, the two forms can be shown to be equivalent and the
super-operator form is more convenient for our purpose. Watrous provides
a helpful overview of this form of semidefinite optimization [ Wat09 ] .
For completeness, that overview is reproduced here.

Let @xmath be complex Euclidean spaces. A semidefinite optimization
problem for these spaces is specified by a triple @xmath where @xmath is
a Hermitian-preserving super-operator and @xmath and @xmath . This
triple specifies two optimization problems:

  -- -- -------- -- -------- --
                             
        @xmath      @xmath   
        @xmath      @xmath   
        @xmath      @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -- -------- --

An operator @xmath obeying the constraints of the primal problem is said
to be primal feasible , while an operator @xmath obeying the constraints
of the dual problem is called dual feasible . The functions @xmath and
@xmath are called the primal and dual objective functions ,
respectively. We let

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

denote the optimal values of the primal and dual problems. (If there are
no primal or dual feasible operators then we adopt the convention @xmath
and @xmath , respectively.) It is not always the case that the optimal
value is actually attained by a feasible operator for these problems.

Semidefinite optimization problems derive great utility from the notions
of weak and strong duality . Essentially, weak duality asserts that
@xmath for all triples @xmath , whereas strong duality provides
conditions on @xmath under which @xmath . Two such conditions are stated
explicitly as follows.

###### Fact 3.11 (Strong duality conditions).

Let @xmath be a semidefinite optimization problem. The following hold:

1.   (Strict primal feasibility.) Suppose @xmath is finite and there
    exists a primal feasible operator @xmath such that @xmath is
    positive definite and @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath is achieved by
    some dual feasible operator.

2.   (Strict dual feasibility.) Suppose @xmath is finite and there
    exists a dual feasible operator @xmath such that @xmath is positive
    definite and @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath is achieved by some
    primal feasible operator.

###### A semidefinite optimization problem for maximum output
probabilities

We now construct a triple @xmath whose primal problem captures the
maximum probability with which a given measuring co-strategy @xmath can
be forced to output a given outcome @xmath by some compatible strategy.
The dual problem will capture the minimization stated in Theorem 3.3 .
Equality between these two values will follow when we establish strong
duality for @xmath .

It is convenient to express the components of our triple @xmath in block
form. The operators @xmath are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the super-operator @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

To be clear, @xmath depends only upon the diagonal blocks @xmath of the
input matrix.

###### Correctness of the primal problem

Let us verify that the primal problem expresses the desired maximum
output probability for the measurement outcome @xmath . For any operator
@xmath with diagonal blocks @xmath , the primal objective value at
@xmath is given by @xmath . Hence, the desired quantity is precisely the
supremum of @xmath over all @xmath for which @xmath is a strategy. It
remains only to verify that the constraint @xmath enforces this property
of @xmath . The following lemma serves that purpose.

###### Lemma 3.12 (Correctness of the primal problem).

For every primal feasible solution @xmath there exists another primal
feasible solution @xmath whose objective value meets or exceeds that of
@xmath and whose diagonal blocks @xmath have the property that @xmath is
an @xmath -round non-measuring strategy for each @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath denote the diagonal blocks of @xmath . As @xmath is primal
feasible, we know that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

It is clear that there is a @xmath such that @xmath . Similarly, for
each @xmath there is a @xmath such that @xmath . The desired operator
@xmath is then obtained from @xmath by replacing its diagonal blocks
with @xmath . That @xmath follows from the fact that @xmath and @xmath .
That @xmath are non-measuring strategies follows from Theorem 3.2
(Characterization of strategies). ∎

###### Correctness of the dual problem

Before we can show correctness of the dual problem, we must compute the
adjoint super-operator @xmath . Let us verify that @xmath where @xmath
is given by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Let @xmath be any operators in the domains of @xmath , respectively, and
let @xmath and @xmath denote the diagonal blocks of @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively, so that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
                       
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

As this equality holds for all @xmath , it follows from the definition
of the adjoint that @xmath as claimed.

We now prove a lemma that establishes the link between the dual problem
and the minimization condition of Theorem 3.3 (Maximum output
probability).

###### Lemma 3.13 (Correctness of the dual problem).

For every dual feasible solution @xmath there exists another dual
feasible solution @xmath whose objective value @xmath equals that of
@xmath and whose diagonal blocks @xmath have the property that @xmath is
a non-measuring co-strategy multiplied by @xmath for each @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath denote the diagonal blocks of @xmath . As @xmath is feasible,
we know that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The objective value for @xmath is then given by @xmath . If @xmath then
it must hold that @xmath , so the lemma holds trivially in this case.
For the remainder of the proof we shall assume @xmath .

It is clear that there is a @xmath such that @xmath . Similarly, for
each @xmath there is a @xmath such that @xmath . As @xmath , it must
also be the case that @xmath . The desired operator @xmath is then
obtained from @xmath by replacing its diagonal blocks with @xmath . That
@xmath follows from the equality @xmath . Finally, it follows from
Theorem 3.2 (Characterization of strategies) that each @xmath is a
non-measuring co-strategy. ∎

As any feasible solution @xmath has @xmath , it must be that the @xmath
th diagonal block @xmath of @xmath has the property that @xmath . By
Lemma 3.13 we may also assume that @xmath is a scalar multiple of a
co-strategy. It is clear then that the optimal value of the dual problem
equals the infimum over all such scalar multiples, subject to @xmath ,
as required by Theorem 3.3 .

###### Strong duality of the semidefinite optimization problem

We already argued that the two quantities appearing in Theorem 3.3 are
captured by the primal and dual semidefinite optimization problems
associated with the triple @xmath . To prove Theorem 3.3 , it remains
only to show that these two quantities are equal. This equality is
established by showing that @xmath satisfies the conditions for strong
duality.

###### Lemma 3.14 (Strong duality of @xmath).

There exists a primal feasible operator @xmath and a dual feasible
operator @xmath such that @xmath .

###### Proof.

We prove strong duality via item 1 of Fact 3.11 (Strong duality
conditions). That is, we show that @xmath is finite and the primal
problem is strictly feasible. Then by Fact 3.11 it follows that @xmath
and that @xmath is achieved for some dual feasible operator. We complete
the proof by noting that the optimal value @xmath is also achieved by a
primal feasible operator.

First, let us argue that @xmath is finite. As @xmath , any dual feasible
solution has nonnegative objective value. Thus, to show that @xmath is
finite it suffices to exhibit a single dual feasible solution. Toward
that end, let @xmath be a non-measuring co-strategy with @xmath . Let
@xmath be such that @xmath and for each @xmath choose @xmath so that
@xmath . (That each of @xmath exists follows from Theorem 3.2
(Characterization of strategies).) Finally, let @xmath be the
block-diagonal operator whose diagonal blocks are @xmath . It is clear
that @xmath is dual feasible.

Next, we show that the primal is strictly feasible. Choose @xmath and
let @xmath be the block-diagonal operator whose @xmath th diagonal block
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is clear that @xmath and it is tedious but straightforward to verify
that @xmath . In particular, we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

It now follows from item 1 of Fact 3.11 that @xmath and that @xmath is
achieved by some dual feasible operator.

It remains only to show that @xmath is also achieved by some primal
feasible operator. By Lemma 3.12 it suffices to consider only those
primal feasible @xmath whose diagonal blocks are strategies. As the set
of strategies is compact (Proposition 3.15 ), it follows that the
optimal @xmath is finite and is achieved by a primal feasible solution.
∎

###### Second proof of Theorem 3.3 (Maximum output probability)

###### Second proof of Theorem 3.3.

We prove the theorem for co-strategies—the result for strategies then
follows from Lemma 3.6 . Let @xmath denote the maximum probability with
which @xmath can be forced to output @xmath in an interaction with some
compatible strategy. By Lemma 3.12 , the optimal value of the primal
problem associated with @xmath equals @xmath . By Lemma 3.13 , the
optimal value of the dual problem associated with @xmath equals the
minimum @xmath such that @xmath for some non-measuring co-strategy
@xmath . That these two values are equal follows from Lemma 3.14 . ∎

#### 3.4 Other properties of strategies

We conclude this chapter with three simple applications of the
properties of strategies established in Theorems 3.1 and 3.2 . In
particular, we point out that Theorem 3.2 immediately implies that the
set of all strategies is compact and convex. We also show that
representations of strategies are unique and that they satisfy a
convenient distributive property. The results in this section are proven
only for strategies, but it is trivial to repeat each proof for
co-strategies.

###### The set of strategies is compact and convex

###### Proposition 3.15 (Convexity of strategies).

The set of all @xmath -round strategies is compact and convex, as is the
set of all @xmath -round co-strategies.

###### Proof.

That the set of strategies is bounded follows from Proposition 1.3 and
the fact that every strategy is the Choi-Jamiołkowski representation of
some quantum operation.

That the set of strategies is closed and convex follows from Theorem 3.2
, which characterizes this set as an intersection between two closed and
convex sets—the positive semidefinite operators and those operators
satisfying the linear constraints appearing in the theorem. ∎

###### Equivalence and uniqueness of strategies

In Section 2.1.2 we noted that operational descriptions of strategies
are not unique in the sense that two distinct descriptions could specify
equivalent strategies. For the new representation of strategies, this is
not so.

###### Proposition 3.16 (Uniqueness of strategies).

Two strategies @xmath may be distinguished with nonzero bias by a
compatible measuring co-strategy if and only if @xmath . A similar
statement holds for co-strategies.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be any measuring co-strategy. By Theorem 3.1 , the
probability with which @xmath outputs a given outcome @xmath after an
interaction with @xmath or with @xmath is given by @xmath or @xmath ,
respectively. If @xmath then it holds that @xmath for every operator
@xmath and so @xmath cannot distinguish @xmath from @xmath with nonzero
bias.

Conversely, if @xmath then for each spanning set @xmath of operators
there must exist some @xmath with @xmath . We claim that the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a spanning set, from which the proposition follows.

One way to verify this claim is to note that the identity operator
@xmath (suitably normalized) denotes a valid non-measuring co-strategy.
It follows from Proposition 2.7 that for each positive semidefinite
operator @xmath (again, suitably normalized) there exists a measuring
co-strategy of which @xmath is an element. The claim then follows from
the fact that the set of all operators @xmath is a spanning set. ∎

###### Distributive property for probabilistic combinations of
strategies

In Example 2.3 it was shown that the operational description of
strategies lacks a convenient distributive property for probabilistic
combinations of strategies. This problem is rectified under the new
representation for strategies.

###### Proposition 3.17 (Distributive property for strategies).

Let @xmath be strategies and let @xmath . The strategy that plays
according to @xmath with probability @xmath and according to @xmath
otherwise is given by the convex combination @xmath . A similar
statement holds for co-strategies.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath denote the probabilistic combination of @xmath and @xmath
described in the statement of the proposition. For any measuring
co-strategy @xmath and any outcome @xmath we let @xmath denote the
probability with which the interaction between @xmath and @xmath yields
the outcome @xmath . We also define @xmath and @xmath similarly in terms
of @xmath and @xmath , respectively. By definition, @xmath .

By Theorem 3.1 and the linearity of the inner product, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from which it follows that @xmath cannot distinguish @xmath from @xmath
with nonzero bias. That these two operators are equal then follows from
Proposition 3.16 . ∎

### Chapter 4 Applications

In this chapter we present several applications of the formalism for
quantum strategies developed in Chapter 3 :

-   In Section 4.1 we develop a general formalism for zero-sum quantum
    games. A quantum analogue of von Neumann’s Min-Max Theorem for
    two-player zero-sum games is established, and an efficient algorithm
    to compute the value of a zero-sum quantum game is presented.

-   Section 4.2 contains complexity theoretic applications of quantum
    strategies, including the collapse of the complexity classes @xmath
    and @xmath and parallel repetition results for single-prover quantum
    interactive proofs and for quantum interactive proofs with two
    competing provers.

-   In Section 4.3 we provide a simplified proof of Kitaev’s bound for
    strong quantum coin-flipping.

With the exception of the parallel repetition results, each of these
applications first appeared in Ref. [ GW07 ] . The parallel repetition
result for single-prover quantum interactive proofs is due to Watrous
and was not published prior to the present thesis.

#### 4.1 Theory of zero-sum quantum games

In this section we develop a general formalism for zero-sum quantum
games. Specifically, we prove a quantum analogue of von Neumann’s
Min-Max Theorem for two-player zero-sum games in Section 4.1.1 and we
provide an efficient algorithm to compute the value of such a game in
Section 4.1.2 .

##### 4.1.1 Min-max theorem for zero-sum quantum games

This section begins with a brief introduction to games and min-max
theorems, after which we provide our formalism for quantum games and the
quantum min-max theorem.

While it is natural to expect a min-max theorem to hold for two-player
zero-sum quantum games, the absence of a mathematically convenient
formalism for these games has precluded the appearance of such a theorem
in the literature. (Lee and Johnson established a min-max theorem for
the special case of one-round quantum games, wherein only a single round
of messages is exchanged between the players and a referee [ LJ03 ] .)

###### Two-player games and min-max theorems

A game consists of a interaction between two or more players, followed
by a payout that is awarded to each player at the end of the
interaction. It is the goal of each player to maximize his or her own
payout. A two-player game is zero-sum if the sum of the payouts awarded
to the players is always zero. Two-player zero-sum games are always
competitive, as the players never have incentive to co-operate. Many
popular examples of games fall into this category, including Poker,
Checkers, and Go. (Win-lose games such as Checkers and Go can be
represented as a zero-sum game wherein the only possible payouts are
@xmath .)

Let us call the two players in a zero-sum game Alice and Bob. In the
context of these games, a min-max theorem is an assertion that every
game has a value @xmath with the following properties:

1.  There exists a strategy for Alice that ensures a payout of at least
    @xmath regardless of Bob’s strategy.

2.  There exists a strategy for Bob that ensures a payout of at most
    @xmath to Alice regardless of her strategy.

In other words, there always exist strategies for the players that are
optimal in the sense that the players never have incentive to deviate
from their optimal strategies. The original Min-Max Theorem for
classical games was established by von Neumann in 1928 [ vN28 ] .

In an analytical context, min-max theorems are statements about sets
@xmath and functions @xmath . While it must always hold that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

a min-max theorem provides conditions upon @xmath under which these two
quantities are equal. For example, the following well-known min-max
theorem will prove useful for our purpose.

###### Fact 4.1 (Convex-bilinear min-max theorem).

If @xmath are compact convex subsets of finite-dimensional real vector
spaces and @xmath is bilinear then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

While Fact 4.1 does not follow immediately from von Neumann’s original
Min-Max Theorem, it does follow from an early generalization due to
Ville [ Vil38 ] . Additional citations and an English-language proof can
be found in Rockafellar [ Roc70 ] .

Analytical min-max theorems such as Fact 4.1 can be used to establish a
min-max theorem for a given game or class of games. To do so, it
suffices that @xmath represent the sets of all possible strategies for
Alice and Bob and that @xmath denotes the payout to Alice when she
employs strategy @xmath and Bob employs strategy @xmath .

###### Formal definition of a zero-sum quantum game

Classical two-player games have several distinct mathematical
formalizations, each with its own advantages. One of these
formalisms—the refereed game —lends itself particularly well to
generalization to quantum games. This formalism encapsulates the rules
of a particular game into a referee , who exchanges messages with each
of the two players. The referee enforces the rules of the game and
decides when to terminate the interaction and award a payout to the
players. In a quantum refereed game the players and referee may exchange
and process quantum information and the payout is determined by a
measurement made by the referee at the end of the interaction.

###### Definition 4.2 (Quantum game).

An @xmath -round referee is an @xmath -round measuring co-strategy
@xmath whose input spaces @xmath and output spaces @xmath take the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for complex Euclidean spaces @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath for
@xmath . An @xmath -round quantum game consists of an @xmath -round
referee along with payout functions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

defined on the referee’s set @xmath of measurement outcomes. For each
such outcome @xmath , Alice’s payout is @xmath and Bob’s payout is
@xmath . Such a game is zero-sum if @xmath for all @xmath .

During each round, the referee simultaneously sends a message to Alice
and a message to Bob, and a response is expected from each player. The
spaces @xmath and @xmath correspond to the messages sent by the referee
during the @xmath th round, while @xmath and @xmath correspond to their
responses. After @xmath rounds, the referee produces an output @xmath
and awards the payouts @xmath to Alice and @xmath to Bob. ∎

Notice that Definition 4.2 places no restrictions on the strategies
available to the players. For example, the players might employ a
strategy that allows them to exchange quantum information directly, as
opposed to an indirect exchange via messages to the referee.
Alternatively, they might share entanglement or randomness but be
forbidden from direct communication, or they might even be forbidden
from sharing entanglement or randomness altogether.

###### Min-max theorem for zero-sum quantum games

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

denote the set of all @xmath -round non-measuring strategies for Alice’s
input spaces @xmath and output spaces @xmath . Similarly, let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

denote the set of all @xmath -round non-measuring strategies for Bob’s
input spaces @xmath and output spaces @xmath .

In a zero-sum quantum game it cannot simultaneously be to both players’
advantage to communicate directly with each other or to share a source
of randomness or entanglement. Thus, we may assume that Alice and Bob
play independent strategies represented by @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. In particular, their combined @xmath -round strategy for
the referee’s input spaces @xmath and output spaces @xmath is described
by the tensor product @xmath .

For any zero-sum quantum game with referee @xmath and payout functions
@xmath we write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and define the Hermitian operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Theorem 3.1 (Interaction output probabilities) Alice’s expected
payout for this game is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

while Bob’s expected payout is @xmath . Because the inner product @xmath
is a bilinear function of @xmath and @xmath and because the sets @xmath
are compact and convex (as noted in Proposition 3.15 ), we may employ
Fact 4.1 (Convex-bilinear min-max theorem) to obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The real number represented by the two sides of this equation is called
the value of the game. Any strategy @xmath achieving the maximum of the
left side of this equality is an optimal strategy for Alice, while any
strategy @xmath achieving the minimum of the right side of this equality
is an optimal strategy for Bob. The following theorem is now proved.

###### Theorem 4.3 (Min-max theorem for zero-sum quantum games).

Every two-player zero-sum @xmath -round quantum game has a value @xmath
with the following properties:

1.   There exists a strategy for Alice that ensures a payout of at least
    @xmath regardless of Bob’s strategy.

2.   There exists a strategy for Bob that ensures a payout of at most
    @xmath to Alice regardless of her strategy.

##### 4.1.2 Efficient algorithm to compute the value

Theorem 4.3 (Min-max theorem for zero-sum quantum games) asserts that
each zero-sum quantum game has a value. But can this value be easily
computed? In this section we answer this question in the affirmative by
exhibiting an efficient deterministic algorithm that takes as input a
description of a referee @xmath and produces as output the value of the
zero-sum quantum game defined by @xmath .

This goal is achieved by expressing the value of the game as a
semidefinite optimization problem and then employing the existence of
efficient algorithms for semidefinite optimization. As these algorithms
apply only to certain semidefinite optimization problems whose feasible
sets are “well-bounded,” it is necessary to establish the
well-boundedness of our semidefinite optimization problem for zero-sum
quantum games.

###### An optimization problem for the value of a game

Let @xmath be an @xmath -round referee and consider the following
super-operator defined for each measurement outcome @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
  -- -------- -------- --

These super-operators have the property that @xmath for each measurement
outcome @xmath and each choice of strategies @xmath for Alice and @xmath
for Bob. Indeed, the set @xmath is the @xmath -round measuring
co-strategy for Alice’s input spaces @xmath and output spaces @xmath
obtained by “hard-wiring” Bob’s strategy @xmath into the referee.

Let @xmath denote the payout to Alice in a zero-sum quantum game with
referee @xmath . For the moment, it is convenient to restrict our
attention to payout functions with @xmath for all @xmath . But we shall
soon see that the ensuing discussion is easily generalized to arbitrary
payout functions.

Borrowing from the previous subsection, we define the super-operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that Alice’s expected payout is given by @xmath when Alice and Bob
play according to the strategies @xmath and @xmath , respectively.
Naturally, Alice’s maximum expected payout when Bob plays according to
@xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath denote the set of co-strategies for Alice’s input and output
spaces. Because @xmath for all @xmath , it follows that, regardless of
the choice of @xmath , the operator @xmath is always an element of some
measuring co-strategy. Hence, we may apply Theorem 3.3 (Maximum output
probability) to obtain the following alternate expression for Alice’s
maximum expected payout:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, the value of the game is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which can equivalently be written as an optimization problem:

  -- -- -------- -- -------
        @xmath      
        @xmath      (4.1)
        @xmath      
        @xmath      
  -- -- -------- -- -------

Thus, an efficient solution for this optimization problem yields an
efficient algorithm to compute the value of a zero-sum quantum game,
provided that the payouts all fall within the interval @xmath . To
compute the value of a game with an arbitrary payout function @xmath we
simply shift and scale @xmath to a payout function @xmath with payouts
in @xmath by defining

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and then solve the optimization problem associated with @xmath , from
which the original value is easily recovered.

###### A semidefinite optimization problem for the value of a game

Let us argue that the optimization problem ( 4.1 ) can be expressed as a
semidefinite optimization problem in the super-operator form described
in Section 3.3.2 . Specifically, we construct a triple @xmath with the
property that the optimal value of ( 4.1 ) equals the optimal value of
the dual problem

  -- -- -------- --
        @xmath   
        @xmath   
        @xmath   
  -- -- -------- --

To this end, we choose the super-operator @xmath so that the
semidefinite variable @xmath can be assumed without loss of generality
to be block-diagonal with the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is convenient to decompose @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath into a
hierarchy of block-diagonal operators as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

It is clear that the condition @xmath is equivalent to

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The idea is that we will choose @xmath so that the first two constraints
ensure that @xmath is a valid @xmath -round strategy for Bob and that
@xmath is (a scalar multiple of) a valid @xmath -round co-strategy for
Alice’s input and output spaces. The third constraint clearly captures
the semidefinite inequality condition of ( 4.1 ).

Let us fill in the details for @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Define

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the objective function, we select

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Correctness of the semidefinite optimization problem

Let us verify that the optimal value of the dual problem @xmath equals
the optimal value of ( 4.1 ). To the extent that @xmath resembles the
semidefinite optimization problem appearing in Section 3.3.2 , the
material in that section—particularly the proofs of Lemmas 3.12 and 3.13
—can be reused in the present setting.

###### Lemma 4.4 (Correctness of @xmath).

For each dual feasible @xmath for @xmath there is another dual feasible
@xmath whose objective value @xmath equals that of @xmath and whose
diagonal blocks @xmath , @xmath have the property that

1.  @xmath is an @xmath -round non-measuring strategy, and

2.  @xmath is an @xmath -round non-measuring co-strategy multiplied by
    @xmath

for each @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath , @xmath denote the diagonal blocks of @xmath . First, we
choose @xmath and show that they satisfy item 1 in the statement of the
lemma. The proof is nearly identical to that of Lemma 3.12 . As @xmath
is feasible, we know that @xmath and therefore

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

It is clear that there is a @xmath such that @xmath . Similarly, for
each @xmath there is a @xmath such that @xmath . That @xmath are
non-measuring strategies follows from Theorem 3.2 (Characterization of
strategies).

Next, we choose @xmath and show that they satisfy item 2 in the
statement of the proposition. The proof is nearly identical to that of
Lemma 3.13 . As @xmath is feasible, we know that @xmath and therefore

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

As @xmath has objective value @xmath , it must be that @xmath . If
@xmath then it must hold that @xmath , so item 2 holds trivially for the
choice @xmath .

Assume then that @xmath . It is clear that there is a @xmath such that
@xmath . Similarly, for each @xmath there is a @xmath such that @xmath .
Taking @xmath and using the fact that @xmath , it follows from Theorem
3.2 (Characterization of strategies) that each @xmath is a non-measuring
co-strategy.

At this point, we have chosen the diagonal blocks @xmath , @xmath of
@xmath . That @xmath and @xmath have the same objective value follows
immediately from the choice @xmath . It remains only to verify that
@xmath . But this inequality follows immediately from the facts that
@xmath , that @xmath , and that the super-operator @xmath is completely
positive. ∎

###### Computational efficiency and well-boundedness

Now that we have expressed the value of a zero-sum quantum game as a
semidefinite optimization problem, it remains only to argue that an
existing algorithm for semidefinite optimization can be applied to our
specific problem @xmath .

The algorithm we employ is the ellipsoid method [ Kha79 , GLS88 ] ,
which approximates the optimal value of a semidefinite optimization
problem to arbitrary precision in polynomial-time, provided that the set
of feasible solutions is well-bounded —that is, it contains a ball of
radius @xmath and is, in turn, contained in a ball of radius @xmath such
that the ratio @xmath is not too large. More precisely, we have the
following.

###### Fact 4.5 (Efficient algorithm for semidefinite optimization).

The following promise problem admits a deterministic polynomial-time
solution:

  Input.  

     A semidefinite optimization problem @xmath and positive real
    numbers @xmath . The numbers @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are given
    explicitly in binary, as are the real and complex parts of each
    entry of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

  Promise.  

     There exists a primal [dual] feasible solution @xmath such that for
    all Hermitian operators @xmath with @xmath it holds that @xmath is
    primal [dual] feasible. Moreover, for all primal [dual] feasible
    solutions @xmath it holds that @xmath .

  Output.  

     A real number @xmath such that @xmath , where @xmath is the optimal
    value of the primal [dual] problem associated with @xmath .

In addition to the ellipsoid method, interior point methods are also
used for semidefinite optimization [ dK02 , BV04 ] . The reader is
referred to Watrous [ Wat09 ] and the references therein for more
detailed discussion of algorithms for semidefinite optimization problems
written in super-operator form.

Unfortunately, the set of dual feasible solutions associated with our
problem @xmath is unbounded—if @xmath is dual feasible then so is @xmath
for all @xmath . To remedy this problem, it suffices to augment the
original problem @xmath with the additional constraint @xmath on dual
feasible solutions @xmath for some appropriately large choice of @xmath
. Such a constraint can be incorporated into the super-operator form by
defining

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

If @xmath is large enough so that an optimal solution @xmath for the
dual problem @xmath has @xmath then @xmath is also optimal for @xmath .
In this case, we can obtain the optimal value for @xmath by solving
@xmath . Thus, it suffices to prove well-boundedness for @xmath .

###### Lemma 4.6 (Well-boundedness of @xmath).

There exists a dual feasible @xmath for @xmath and positive real numbers
@xmath such that:

1.   For all Hermitian operators @xmath with @xmath it holds that @xmath
    is dual feasible with @xmath .

2.   The optimal value of the dual problem @xmath is achieved by a dual
    feasible @xmath with @xmath .

In particular, we may select

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Proof.

First, we select @xmath and @xmath ; the quantity @xmath will be chosen
at the end of the proof. We begin by choosing the first collection
@xmath of diagonal blocks for @xmath . For each @xmath let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and let @xmath be any Hermitian operator with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As in the proof of Lemma 3.14 , it is tedious but straightforward to
verify that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Next, we choose the remaining diagonal blocks @xmath for @xmath . To
this end, let @xmath be a real number large enough to guarantee that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

regardless of the choice of @xmath . (The precise value of @xmath will
be chosen later.) For each @xmath let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and let @xmath be any Hermitian operator with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

It follows from these semidefinite inequalities that the block-diagonal
operator @xmath with diagonal blocks @xmath , @xmath is a strictly dual
feasible solution to @xmath . Moreover, for any Hermitian operator
@xmath with diagonal blocks @xmath , @xmath and @xmath it must be that
@xmath is also a strictly feasible solution, provided

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next, let us choose an appropriate value for @xmath , which will enable
us to establish the desired upper bound @xmath . For notational
convenience, write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath is completely positive, it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is an operator with @xmath for some completely positive and
trace-preserving super-operator @xmath . Proposition 1.3 tells us that
@xmath , from which we obtain @xmath and hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence we may select

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is straightforward but tedious to verify that for every Hermitian
@xmath with @xmath it holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Substituting our choice of @xmath , we find that it suffices to select

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To see that this choice of @xmath also bounds the trace of an optimal
solution, we note that by Lemma 4.4 the diagonal blocks @xmath , @xmath
of any optimal solution @xmath can be assumed to be strategies and
co-strategies, respectively, from which it is easy to see that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

∎

Lemma 4.6 (Well-boundedness of @xmath ) provides all that we need in
order to apply Fact 4.5 (Efficient algorithm for semidefinite
optimization). While the bound @xmath on the set of feasible solutions
to @xmath from Lemma 4.6 is stated in terms of the trace norm, it is
straightforward to convert this quantity into a bound @xmath in terms of
the Frobenius norm via the norm inequalities listed in Section 1.2.1 .
The following theorem is now proved.

###### Theorem 4.7 (Efficient algorithm to compute the value of a
quantum game).

The following problem admits a deterministic polynomial-time solution:

  Input.  

     A two-player zero-sum quantum game specified by an @xmath -round
    quantum referee @xmath , a payout function @xmath , and an accuracy
    parameter @xmath . The real numbers @xmath and @xmath are each given
    explicitly in binary, as are the real and complex parts of each
    entry of the matrices @xmath .

  Output.  

     A real number @xmath such that the value of the game specified by
    @xmath and @xmath lies in the open interval @xmath .

#### 4.2 Quantum interactive proofs

In this section we provide an application of the theory of zero-sum
quantum games developed in Section 4.1 to quantum interactive proofs. In
particular, we observe that the existence of an efficient algorithm that
computes the value of a zero-sum quantum game implies the equivalence of
the complexity classes @xmath and @xmath . Here @xmath is the class of
problems that admit quantum interactive proofs with two competing
provers, whereas @xmath is the fundamental class of problems that admit
deterministic (classical) exponential-time solutions.

We also extend an existing parallel repetition result for single-prover
quantum interactive proofs so that it applies to interactions with an
arbitrary number of messages, as opposed to interactions with only three
messages. The technique employed toward this end is then applied to
yield a similar parallel repetition result for quantum interactive
proofs with competing provers.

This section begins with a primer on interactive proofs, followed by a
brief historical survey before the results are presented.

###### Interactive proofs

An interactive proof consists of an interaction between a verifier and a
prover regarding some common input @xmath , which is viewed as an
instance of a yes-no decision problem @xmath . Throughout the
interaction the verifier is restricted to randomized polynomial-time
computations, while the prover’s computational power is unlimited. After
the interaction the verifier produces a binary outcome indicating
acceptance or rejection of @xmath . The verifier’s goal is to accept
those inputs that are yes-instances of @xmath and reject those inputs
that are no-instances of @xmath . Typically, the verifier does not have
the computational power to make this determination himself and so he
must look to the prover and his unlimited computational power for help.
However, the goal of the prover is always to convince the verifier to
accept, regardless of whether the input @xmath is actually a
yes-instance. Hence, the verifier must be careful to distinguish
truthful proofs from false proofs.

A decision problem @xmath is said to admit an interactive proof if there
exists a verifier with the property that a prover can convince him to
accept every yes-instance of @xmath with high probability, yet no prover
can convince him to accept any no-instance of @xmath except with small
probability. Such an interactive proof is said to solve the problem
@xmath . The complexity class of decision problems that admit
interactive proofs is denoted @xmath . In a quantum interactive proof,
the verifier and prover may process and exchange quantum information.
Whereas a classical verifier is restricted to randomized polynomial-time
computations, a quantum verifier is instead restricted to quantum
circuits that can be generated uniformly in deterministic polynomial
time. The corresponding complexity class is denoted @xmath .

An interactive proof with competing provers has two provers—one, as
before, whose goal is always to convince the verifier to accept, and
another, whose goal is to convince the verifier to reject. The class of
problems that admit interactive proofs with competing provers is denoted
@xmath , for “refereed games”, owing to the similarity between these two
models of interaction. As above, we may speak of quantum interactive
proofs with competing provers and the associated complexity class @xmath
.

###### Background

Interactive proofs were introduced [ Bab85 , GMR89 ] as a generalization
of efficiently verifiable proofs—a fruitful concept that characterizes
the ubiquitous complexity class @xmath . The generalization lies in the
interaction: whereas any problem in @xmath may be verified with a single
message from the prover to the verifier, interactive proofs allow the
verifier to ask a series of questions of the prover, possibly basing
future questions upon previous answers. In order to make this
generalization from @xmath to @xmath nontrivial, the verifier is
permitted a source of randomness. (Hence the allowance in interactive
proofs for a small probability of error.)

Naturally, every problem in @xmath admits an interactive proof.
Moreover, it is conjectured that interactive proofs with only a constant
number of messages cannot solve problems outside @xmath [ MV99 ] . On
the other hand, interactive proofs with an unbounded number of messages
are surprisingly powerful: every problem in @xmath admits such an
interactive proof [ LFKN92 , Sha92 ] . By contrast, in any quantum
interactive proof it suffices that the verifier and prover exchange only
three messages [ KW00 ] . It is not difficult to see that @xmath
contains @xmath , from which the characterization @xmath then follows.
In a recent breakthrough, Jain, Ji, Upadhyay, and Watrous proved that
@xmath also contains @xmath , from which one obtains @xmath [ JJUW10 ] .

Feige and Kilian showed that every problem that can be solved in
deterministic exponential-time can also be solved by an interactive
proof with competing provers [ FK97 ] . That these proofs can be
simulated in deterministic exponential time follows from Ref. [ KM92 ] ,
and hence we have the complexity theoretic equality @xmath . In this
section we employ the algorithm from Section 4.1.2 for computing the
value of a zero-sum quantum game to show that @xmath .

###### Containment of @xmath inside @xmath

###### Theorem 4.8 (@xmath).

Every decision problem that admits a quantum interactive proof with
competing provers also admits a deterministic exponential-time solution.
It follows that @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be any problem that admits a quantum interactive proof with
competing provers. We will exhibit a deterministic exponential-time
algorithm that, for each input @xmath , correctly decides whether @xmath
is a yes-instance of @xmath or a no-instance.

For each fixed input @xmath , the actions of the verifier may be
represented by a two-outcome measuring co-strategy @xmath where the two
provers combine to implement the corresponding strategy. The operators
in this co-strategy may be computed explicitly in deterministic
exponential time by running the polynomial-time algorithm that generates
a description of the quantum circuits corresponding to the actions of
the verifier on input @xmath and then converting that description into
an exponential-sized measuring co-strategy in the standard way.

Consider the two-player zero-sum quantum refereed game defined by the
referee @xmath and the payout function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The value of this game equals the probability with which the verifier is
convinced to accept the input when the two-provers act according to
optimal strategies. By Theorem 4.7 (Efficient algorithm to compute the
value of a quantum game), there is a deterministic algorithm that
approximates this value to arbitrary precision in time polynomial in the
bit length of @xmath , which we know to be exponential in the input
@xmath . By running this algorithm and computing this probability, it is
possible to determine whether or not @xmath is a yes-instance of @xmath
. Thus, @xmath . As @xmath was selected arbitrarily from @xmath , it
follows that @xmath . As @xmath is already known to contain @xmath , it
follows that @xmath ∎

###### Parallel repetition of many-message quantum interactive proofs

Thus far, our discussion of interactive proofs has been restricted to
protocols that succeed with high probability. But this condition is
quite vague—what is a “high” probability? Can interactive proofs be
somehow transformed so as to amplify their probability of success?

To address these questions, we need a more specific definition of
interactive proof. A decision problem @xmath is said to admit an
interactive proof with completeness error @xmath and soundness error
@xmath if the following hold:

1.  If @xmath is a yes-instance of @xmath then there is a prover who can
    convince the verifier to accept with probability at least @xmath .

2.  If @xmath is a no-instance of @xmath then no prover can convince the
    verifier to accept with probability larger than @xmath .

It is not difficult to see that any decision problem whatsoever admits
an interactive proof with @xmath . Clearly then, interactive proofs are
only interesting when @xmath . When this condition is met, the
interactive proof may be transformed so as achieve @xmath for any
desired @xmath . This reduction in error is achieved by a method called
sequential repetition , whereby the verifier simply repeats the protocol
many times in succession and then bases his final decision upon a
weighted vote of the outcomes of the individual repetitions. Under
sequential repetition, the probability of error decreases exponentially
in the number of repetitions.

A side-effect of sequential repetition is that the number of messages
exchanged between the verifier and prover increases with each
repetition. Sometimes, it is desirable to achieve error reduction
without increasing the number of messages in the interaction. The
standard transformation meeting this criterion is called parallel
repetition , whereby many copies of the protocol are executed
simultaneously instead of sequentially. The danger of parallel
repetition is that the prover need not treat each repetition
independently. Instead, he might somehow attempt to correlate the
repetitions so as to thwart the exponential reduction in error.
Therefore, before parallel repetition may be relied upon to reduce
error, it must first be established that the prover cannot significantly
affect the probability of acceptance by deviating from a strategy that
treats the repetitions independently.

For classical single-prover interactive proofs, it can be shown that
parallel repetition works as desired to achieve exponential error
reduction. For quantum single-prover interactive proofs, parallel
repetition is known to work only when

1.  the verifier and prover exchange at most three messages , and

2.  the verifier’s final decision depends upon a unanimous vote of the
    repetitions (as opposed to some other weighting of the repetitions,
    such as a majority vote).

(See Kitaev and Watrous for proofs of this and other properties of
quantum interactive proofs [ KW00 ] .)

In this section, we show that condition (i) is unnecessary.
Specifically, we prove the following.

###### Theorem 4.9 (Parallel repetition of many-message quantum
interactive proofs).

Consider the @xmath -fold parallel repetition of an arbitrary @xmath
-round quantum interactive proof with soundness error @xmath . If the
verifier in the repeated protocol accepts only when all @xmath
repetitions accept then the repeated protocol has soundness error @xmath
.

###### Proof.

Suppose that the interactive proof in the statement of the theorem
solves the decision problem @xmath . The theorem makes no claim about
the case where the input is a yes-instance of @xmath , so we need only
consider those inputs which are no-instances of @xmath . We must show
that the verifier in the repeated protocol can be made to accept such an
input with probability not exceeding @xmath .

For any such input, the actions of the verifier may be represented by a
two-outcome @xmath -round measuring strategy @xmath where the prover
implements the corresponding @xmath -round co-strategy. As the verifier
has soundness error @xmath , it follows from Theorem 3.3 (Maximum output
probability) that there exists an @xmath -round non-measuring strategy
@xmath for the referee’s input and output spaces with the property that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows from a semidefinite inequality proven in Ref. [ CSUU06 ,
Proposition 5] that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(The cited inequality is not as explicit in the final journal version [
CSUU08 ] of Ref. [ CSUU06 ] .)

For the repeated protocol with unanimous vote, Theorem 3.3 implies that
the maximum probability with which the verifier can be made to accept is
given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Taking @xmath and @xmath completes the proof. ∎

Theorem 4.9 makes no claim about the effect of a unanimous vote on the
completeness error. But for single-prover interactive proofs the
question is moot, since these proofs can be assumed to have zero
completeness error [ KW00 ] . In particular, for yes-instances of @xmath
the prover in the @xmath -fold repeated protocol can achieve zero
completeness error by playing an independent copy of the zero-error
strategy for each of the @xmath repetitions.

###### Parallel repetition of quantum interactive proofs with competing
provers

Fortunately, Theorem 4.9 can be adapted with little difficulty to say
something meaningful about the parallel repetition of quantum
interactive proofs with competing provers.

###### Theorem 4.10 (Parallel repetition of quantum interactive proofs
with competing provers).

Consider the @xmath -fold parallel repetition of an arbitrary @xmath
-round quantum interactive proof with competing provers that has
completeness error @xmath and soundness error @xmath .

If the verifier in the repeated protocol accepts only when all @xmath
repetitions accept then the repeated protocol has completeness error
@xmath and soundness error @xmath . Similarly, if the verifier in the
repeated protocol rejects only when all @xmath repetitions reject then
the repeated protocol has completeness error @xmath and soundness error
@xmath .

###### Proof.

We prove only the first claim in the statement of the theorem, as the
second claim follows by symmetry.

Suppose that the interactive proof in the statement of the theorem
solves the decision problem @xmath and suppose first that the input is a
yes-instance of @xmath . We must show that there is a “yes-prover” who
convinces the verifier in the repeated protocol to accept with
probability at least @xmath , regardless of the strategy employed by the
other prover, whom we call the “no-prover”.

The yes-prover we seek merely plays an independent copy of the optimal
strategy for each of the @xmath repetitions. Of course, no no-prover can
win any one of the @xmath repetitions with probability greater than
@xmath . It then follows from the union bound that the repeated game
with unanimous vote has completeness error at most @xmath .

Now suppose that the input is a no-instance of @xmath . For this case,
we must find a no-prover who convinces the verifier in the repeated
protocol to reject with probability at least @xmath , regardless of the
strategy employed by the yes-prover.

Toward that end, consider an optimal no-prover for the original
protocol. Borrowing from the proof of Theorem 4.9 , the combined actions
of the verifier and no-prover in this protocol may be represented by a
two-outcome @xmath -round measuring strategy @xmath where the yes-prover
implements the corresponding @xmath -round co-strategy. That the
verifier-no-prover combination for the repeated protocol specified by
@xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has soundness error @xmath now follows exactly as in the proof of
Theorem 4.9 .

Moreover, we see from this proof that the desired optimal no-prover for
the repeated protocol simply plays an independent copy of the optimal
strategy for each of the @xmath repetitions. ∎

Theorem 4.10 tells us that we may achieve an exponential reduction in
completeness (or soundness) at the cost of a linear increase in
soundness (or completeness). Such a transformation is useful, for
example, for protocols for which either completeness or soundness is
already small—these proofs can be transformed so that both completeness
and soundness are small.

More specifically, suppose we have a family of protocols with the
property that, for some fixed constants @xmath and for any desired
@xmath , there is a protocol in the family with completeness error
@xmath and soundness error @xmath . Then for any desired @xmath , we may
choose @xmath large enough and employ @xmath -fold parallel repetition
with unanimous vote to obtain a protocol in which both completeness
error and soundness error are no larger than @xmath . Indeed, such a
transformation was employed in Ref. [ GW05 ] to reduce error for
so-called “short quantum games”.

#### 4.3 Kitaev’s bound for strong coin-flipping

In this section we provide a simplified proof of Kitaev’s bound for
strong quantum coin-flipping, which states that a cheating party can
always force any desired outcome upon an honest party with probability
at least @xmath . We begin with a definition of the coin-flipping
problem, followed by a brief survey, before ending the section with our
contribution.

###### Strong and weak coin-flipping

Suppose that two parties—Alice and Bob—wish to agree on a random bit.
(That is, they wish to flip a fair coin.) The parties are physically
separated, so the agreement must be reached by an exchange of messages
via remote communication. Moreover, the two parties do not trust each
other, meaning that each party suspects that the other might attempt to
force a particular result of the coin flip rather than settle for a
uniformly random result. The goal is to devise a protocol that produces
the fairest possible coin flip, even in the case where one cheating
party deliberately attempts to bias the result of the flip.

For example, Alice could simply flip a fair coin for herself and
announce the result to Bob, who meekly agrees to whatever Alice
dictates. If both parties adhere to these honest strategies then it is
clear that they will produce a perfectly correlated random bit as
desired. Even if Bob cheats, there’s nothing he can do to prevent Alice
from producing a perfectly fair coin toss. (Indeed, Alice’s honest
strategy is to completely ignore Bob.) But if Alice decides to cheat
then Bob is out of luck; his mindless strategy of taking Alice at her
word allows Alice to force Bob to produce any outcome she desires. While
this simple protocol is robust against a cheating Bob, it is completely
vulnerable to a cheating Alice and is therefore a poor solution to the
problem at hand.

Let us be more specific about this problem. A strong coin-flipping
protocol with bias @xmath consists of an honest strategy for Alice and
an honest strategy for Bob such that:

1.  If both parties follow their honest strategies then both parties
    produce the same outcome, and that outcome is chosen uniformly at
    random from @xmath .

2.  If only one party follows his or her honest strategy then the
    maximum probability with which the cheating party can force the
    honest party to produce a given outcome is at most @xmath .

The adjective strong refers to the fact that a cheater cannot bias an
honest party’s outcome toward either result 0 or 1. By contrast, weak
protocols assume that one player desires outcome 0 and the other desires
outcome 1. The only requirement for weak protocols is that a cheater
cannot bias the result toward his or her desired outcome. In a quantum
coin-flipping protocol, the parties may process and exchange quantum
information.

###### Background

This problem was introduced in the classical setting by Blum [ Blu81 ] ,
who called it coin-flipping by telephone . The problem is of interest to
cryptographers because it is a primitive—a basic tool—for secure
two-party computations. In this setting there is little need to
distinguish between strong and weak coin-flipping. Indeed, Blum showed
that even strong coin-flipping with zero bias is possible under certain
computational assumptions. Conversely, without any such assumptions it
is not difficult to see that even weak coin-flipping is impossible. In
particular, for each outcome @xmath either (i) a computationally
unrestricted cheating Alice can force outcome @xmath upon honest-Bob
with certainty, or (ii) a computationally unrestricted cheating Bob can
force the opposite outcome upon honest-Alice with certainty.

The quantum version of this problem admits some surprising contrasts to
its classical counterpart. Whereas unconditional classical coin-flipping
is impossible, there is a weak quantum coin-flipping protocol that
achieves arbitrarily small bias in the limit of the number of messages
exchanged between the parties [ Moc07 ] . Moreover, the existence of
such a protocol for weak quantum coin-flipping implies the existence of
a strong quantum coin-flipping protocol that achieves bias arbitrarily
close to @xmath [ CK09 ] . This protocol for strong quantum
coin-flipping is the best possible, as it matches a lower bound due to
Kitaev [ Kit02 ] . (Kitaev did not publish this proof, but it appears in
Refs. [ ABDR04 , Röh04 ] .) More comprehensive histories of quantum
coin-flipping can be found in the breakthrough works of Mochon [ Moc07 ]
, and Chailloux and Kerenidis [ CK09 ] .

###### Our contribution

We now provide an alternate and simplified proof of Kitaev’s lower bound
for strong quantum coin-flipping.

###### Theorem 4.11 (Kitaev’s bound for strong quantum coin-flipping).

In any strong quantum coin-flipping protocol, a computationally
unrestricted cheating party can always force a given outcome on an
honest party with probability at least @xmath .

###### Our new proof.

In any quantum coin-flipping protocol the actions of honest-Alice are
represented by a two-outcome measuring strategy @xmath and the actions
of honest-Bob are represented by a two-outcome measuring co-strategy
@xmath . By Theorem 3.1 (Interaction output probabilities), the
definition of a quantum coin-flipping protocol requires

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Choose any outcome @xmath and let @xmath denote the maximum probability
with which a cheating Bob could force honest-Alice to output @xmath .
Obviously we have @xmath . Theorem 3.3 (Maximum output probability)
implies that there must exist a strategy @xmath for Alice such that
@xmath . If a cheating Alice plays this strategy @xmath then honest-Bob
outputs @xmath with probability

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath for all @xmath , it follows that either honest-Alice or
honest-Bob can be convinced to output @xmath with probability at least
@xmath . ∎

This proof makes clear the limitations of strong coin-flipping
protocols: the inability of Bob to force Alice to output @xmath directly
implies that Alice can herself bias the outcome toward @xmath . By
definition, weak coin-flipping protocols are not subject to this
limitation.

### Chapter 5 Distance Measures

In this chapter we introduce a new norm for super-operators that
generalizes the diamond norm and we argue that this norm quantifies the
observable difference between quantum strategies. Indeed, we establish
an extension of a result from Ref. [ GW05 ] stating that each pair of
convex sets @xmath of @xmath -round strategies has a fixed @xmath -round
measuring co-strategy @xmath with the property that any pair @xmath can
be distinguished by @xmath with probability determined by the minimal
distance between @xmath and @xmath as measured by our new norm.

In order to prove this distinguishability result we also establish
several properties of the new norm, including characterizations of its
unit ball and dual norm. We end the chapter with a discussion of the
dual of the diamond norm.

When not explicitly stated otherwise, the results of this chapter are
the sole work of the author and were not published prior to the present
thesis.

#### 5.1 A new norm for strategies

In order to best argue that our new norm captures the distinguishability
of quantum strategies, we begin with a discussion of the trace norm and
explain its use in distinguishing quantum states. We then proceed with a
discussion of the diamond norm for super-operators and explain its use
in distinguishing quantum operations. Only then do we introduce our new
norm and note the similarities with the diamond norm and trace norm for
the purpose of distinguishing quantum strategies. We conclude the
section with several immediate observations concerning this new norm,
including the fact that it agrees with the diamond norm wherever it is
defined.

###### The trace norm as a distance measure for quantum states

Recall from Section 1.2.1 that the trace norm @xmath of an arbitrary
operator @xmath is defined as the sum of the singular values of @xmath .
If @xmath is Hermitian then it is a simple exercise to verify that its
trace norm is given by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The trace norm provides a physically meaningful distance measure for
quantum states in the sense that it captures the maximum likelihood with
which two states can be correctly distinguished. Let us illustrate this
fact with a simple example involving two parties called Alice and Bob
and a fixed pair of quantum states @xmath . Suppose Bob selects a state
@xmath uniformly at random and gives Alice a quantum system prepared in
state @xmath . Alice has a complete description of both @xmath and
@xmath , but she does not know which of the two was selected by Bob. Her
goal is to correctly guess which of @xmath was selected based upon the
outcome of a measurement she conducts on @xmath .

Since Alice’s guess is binary-valued and completely determined by her
measurement, that measurement can be assumed to be a two-outcome
measurement @xmath wherein outcome @xmath indicates a guess that Bob
prepared @xmath . Letting @xmath denote the event that Alice’s guess is
correct, basic quantum formalism tells us that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

implying that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath , we obtain the following alternate expression for the
probability with which Alice’s guess is correct:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with equality achieved at the optimal measurement @xmath for Alice. This
fundamental observation was originally made by Helstrom [ Hel69 ] .

###### The diamond norm as a distance measure for quantum operations

The trace norm extends naturally to super-operators, but this extension
does not lead to an overly useful distance measure for quantum
operations. To achieve such a measure, the trace norm must be modified
as follows.

###### Definition 5.1 (Super-operator trace norm, diamond norm).

For an arbitrary super-operator @xmath the super-operator trace norm
@xmath of @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The diamond norm @xmath of @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the supremum is taken over all finite-dimensional complex
Euclidean spaces @xmath . ∎

Much is known of the diamond norm. For example, if @xmath has the form
@xmath then the supremum in the definition of @xmath is always achieved
by some space @xmath whose dimension does not exceed that of the input
space @xmath [ Kit97 , AKN98 ] . As a consequence, the supremum in the
definition of the diamond norm can be replaced by a maximum. Moreover,
if @xmath is Hermitian-preserving and @xmath then the maximum in the
definition of @xmath is always achieved by some positive semidefinite
operator @xmath [ RW05 ] . Thus, if @xmath is Hermitian-preserving then
its diamond norm is given by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where the maxima in these two expressions are taken over all spaces
@xmath with dimension at most @xmath , all states @xmath , and all
two-outcome measurements @xmath .

The diamond norm is to quantum operations as the trace norm is to
quantum states: it provides a physically meaningful distance measure for
quantum operations in the sense that the value @xmath quantifies the
observable difference between two quantum operations @xmath . As before,
this fact may be illustrated with a simple example. Suppose Bob selects
an operation from @xmath uniformly at random. Alice is granted
“one-shot, black-box” access to @xmath and her goal is to correctly
guess which of @xmath was applied. Specifically, Alice may prepare a
quantum system in state @xmath and send a portion of that system to Bob,
who applies @xmath to that portion and then returns it to Alice.
Finally, Alice performs a two-outcome measurement @xmath on the
resulting system @xmath where outcome @xmath indicates a guess that
@xmath .

Letting @xmath denote the event that Alice’s guess is correct, we may
repeat our previous derivation of @xmath to obtain

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

with equality achieved at the optimal input state @xmath and measurement
@xmath for Alice.

It is interesting to note that the ability to send only part of the
input state @xmath to Bob and keep the rest for herself can enhance
Alice’s ability to distinguish some pairs of quantum operations, as
compared to a simpler test that involves sending the entire input state
to Bob. Indeed, there exist pairs @xmath of quantum operations that are
perfectly distinguishable when applied to half of a maximally entangled
input state—that is, @xmath —yet they appear nearly identical when an
auxiliary system is not used—that is, @xmath . An example of such a pair
of super-operators can be found in Watrous [ Wat08 ] , along with much
of the discussion that has occurred thus far in this section. It is this
phenomenon that renders the super-operator trace norm less useful than
the diamond norm for the study of quantum information.

Additional properties of the diamond norm are established in this thesis
by Lemmas 5.12 , 5.14 , and 5.17 of Section 5.3 .

###### The strategy @xmath-norm as a distance measure for quantum
strategies

The simple guessing game between Alice and Bob extends naturally from
quantum operations to quantum strategies. Let @xmath be arbitrary @xmath
-round quantum strategies and suppose Bob selects @xmath uniformly at
random. Alice’s task is to interact with Bob and then decide after the
interaction whether Bob selected @xmath or @xmath .

Theorem 3.1 (Interaction output probabilities) establishes an inner
product relationship between measuring strategies and co-strategies that
is analogous to the relationship between states and measurements. As
such, much of our previous discussion concerning the task of
distinguishing pairs of states can be re-applied to the task of
distinguishing pairs of strategies . In particular, Alice can be assumed
to act according to some two-outcome @xmath -round measuring co-strategy
@xmath for Bob’s input and output spaces, with outcome @xmath indicating
a guess that Bob acted according to strategy @xmath . Moreover, letting
@xmath denote the event that Alice’s guess is correct, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Naturally, Alice maximizes the probability of a correct guess by
maximizing this expression over all @xmath -round measuring
co-strategies @xmath .

Of course, this guessing game is symmetric with respect to strategies
and co-strategies. In particular, if Bob’s actions @xmath are
co-strategies instead of strategies then Alice’s actions @xmath must be
a measuring strategy instead of a measuring co-strategy. The probability
with which Alice correctly guesses Bob’s strategy is still given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

except that Alice now maximizes this probability over all @xmath -round
measuring strategies @xmath .

With this example in mind, we propose two new norms—one that captures
the distinguishability of strategies and one that captures the
distinguishability of co-strategies.

###### Definition 5.2 (Strategy @xmath-norm).

For any Hermitian-preserving super-operator @xmath we define

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Sometimes it is convenient to write @xmath instead of @xmath ,
particularly when @xmath is an operator derived from quantum strategies.
Similarly, we may sometimes write @xmath instead of @xmath . ∎

If @xmath are strategies for input spaces @xmath and output spaces
@xmath then it follows immediately that the maximum probability with
which Alice can correctly distinguish @xmath from @xmath is

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Likewise, if @xmath are co-strategies rather than strategies then the
maximum probability with which Alice can correctly distinguish @xmath
from @xmath is

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

It may seem superfluous to allow both strategies and co-strategies as
descriptions for Bob’s actions in this simple example, as every
co-strategy may be written as a strategy via suitable relabelling of
input and output spaces. But there is something to be gained by
considering both the norms @xmath and @xmath . Later, we will show that
these norms are dual to each other and we will use this duality to
generalize the simple guessing game of this section.

###### Both a trace norm and an operator norm

We just argued that the norms @xmath and @xmath are to strategies and
co-strategies as the trace norm is to states—a distance measure.

But these new norms also admit a different interpretation. It is easy to
see that the maximum probability over all states @xmath with which a
standard quantum measurement @xmath produces a given outcome @xmath is
given by @xmath . (This maximum is achieved for @xmath where @xmath is
an eigenvector associated with the largest eigenvalue of @xmath .) This
observation extends unhindered to measuring strategies and
co-strategies.

###### Proposition 5.3 (Maximum output probability from the strategy
@xmath-norm).

Let @xmath be an @xmath -round measuring strategy. The maximum
probability with which a compatible @xmath -round co-strategy could
force @xmath to produce a given measurement outcome @xmath is given by
@xmath .

Similarly, if @xmath is an @xmath -round measuring co-strategy then the
maximum probability with which a compatible @xmath -round strategy could
force @xmath to produce a given measurement outcome @xmath is given by
@xmath .

###### Proof.

The proofs of the two statements are completely symmetric, so we prove
only the first. As each @xmath is positive semidefinite, the maximum in
the definition of @xmath is achieved at an @xmath -round measuring
co-strategy @xmath with @xmath . That is,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The proposition follows from Theorem 3.1 (Interaction output
probabilities). ∎

Thus, the strategy @xmath -norm and its dual are to measuring strategies
and co-strategies as the operator norm is to measurements—a measure of
maximum output probability. Juxtaposing these two interpretations, we
see that both the norms @xmath and @xmath act as both a trace norm and
an operator norm in the appropriate contexts.

###### The strategy @xmath-norm agrees with the diamond norm

As suggested by the notation @xmath , this new norm agrees with the
diamond norm on Hermitian-preserving super-operators for the case @xmath
. The proof of this fact is a simple exercise that serves as a
convenient introduction to some of the techniques that will be employed
later in this chapter.

###### Proposition 5.4 (Agreement with the diamond norm).

For every Hermitian-preserving super-operator @xmath it holds that
@xmath .

###### Proof.

The proposition is trivially true for @xmath , so we assume @xmath
throughout. We also assume that @xmath has the form @xmath .

The proposition is a simple consequence of Theorem 3.1 that is somewhat
complicated by the fact that it must be proven for all
Hermitian-preserving super-operators—not just those which represent
strategies. Strictly speaking, Theorem 3.1 applies only to measuring
strategies and co-strategies and therefore cannot be directly applied to
an arbitrary Hermitian-preserving super-operator @xmath . In order to
use Theorem 3.1 , we first decompose @xmath into a linear combination of
measuring strategy elements.

Toward that end, we note that the Hermitian-preserving property of
@xmath implies that @xmath is a Hermitian operator. In particular, it
has a Jordan decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the operators @xmath are positive semidefinite and act on
orthogonal subspaces. Let @xmath be a positive real number with the
property that @xmath and @xmath are both elements of some three-outcome
one-round measuring strategy @xmath for the input space @xmath and
output space @xmath . An easy way to accomplish this is to take

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

For any one-round measuring co-strategy @xmath for the input space
@xmath and output space @xmath , Theorem 3.1 tells us that the
probability with which an interaction between @xmath and @xmath yields
measurement outcomes @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly, let @xmath be an operational description of the strategy
@xmath and let @xmath be an operational description of the co-strategy
@xmath . These objects take the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

for some choice of spaces @xmath and @xmath . Basic quantum formalism
tells us that the probability with which an interaction between @xmath
and @xmath yields measurement outcomes @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the super-operators with @xmath , so that @xmath .
According to Definition 2.5 (New formalism for measuring strategies),
the actions of @xmath on any @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

In particular,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then by linearity we obtain

  -- -------- -------- --
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

To prove the proposition, first select the co-strategy @xmath so that
its operational description @xmath achieves the maximum in the
definition of the diamond norm. In this case, the above expression
implies @xmath . For the reverse inequality, select a co-strategy @xmath
that achieves the maximum in the definition of @xmath . In this case,
the above expression implies @xmath . ∎

###### Extension to non-Hermitian-preserving super-operators?

According to Definition 5.2 (Strategy @xmath -norm), the norms @xmath
and @xmath are defined only when @xmath is a Hermitian-preserving
super-operator. Is there a natural extension of these norms to all
super-operators? Ideally, such an extension would agree with Definition
5.2 on Hermitian-preserving super-operators and with the diamond norm
when @xmath .

What would such an extension look like? Presumably, it would require a
generalization of quantum strategies as they appear in Definitions 2.1
and 2.4 . For example, an @xmath -tuple @xmath might denote an
operational representation of a generalized strategy if and only if each
of the super-operators @xmath preserves trace norm.

Indeed, a generalization of Theorem 3.1 (Interaction output
probabilities) would probably be required in order to reason about these
generalized strategies and define a generalized strategy @xmath -norm.
Moreover, in the next section we will see that several basic properties
of the strategy @xmath -norm are established via Proposition 3.8 (Polar
sets of strategies) and ultimately Theorem 3.2 (Characterization of
strategies). Presumably, a proper generalization of the strategy @xmath
-norm would also require corresponding generalizations of these two
results. Essentially, much of the formalism developed so far in this
thesis for quantum strategies would need to be re-derived in a more
general setting.

What use could such a generalization find in quantum information theory?
In looking to the diamond norm for inspiration, we find few examples of
its use on non-Hermitian-preserving super-operators in a quantum
information context. Perhaps the most notable such use is the “maximum
output fidelity” characterization of the diamond norm:

###### Fact 5.5 (Maximum output fidelity characterization of the diamond
norm).

Let @xmath be an arbitrary super-operator. Let @xmath be a space and let
@xmath be operators with @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the super-operators @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and @xmath denotes the fidelity function on pairs of quantum states and
the maximum is taken over all quantum states @xmath .

This characterization has been employed in the study of quantum
interactive proofs [ RW05 ] and a proof may be found in Ref. [ KSV02 ] .
Could this characterization be generalized so as to yield an interesting
quantum information theoretic application of the strategy @xmath -norm
to non-Hermitian-preserving super-operators?

While an endeavor to generalize the strategy @xmath -norm would no doubt
be an interesting mathematical exercise, its applicability to quantum
information is not readily apparent. In this thesis, our foray into the
realm of mathematical curiosity of this flavor is limited to the study
of the dual of the diamond norm in Section 5.3 .

#### 5.2 Distinguishing convex sets of strategies

In this section we generalize the guessing game example from the
previous section from a problem of distinguishing individual states,
operations, or strategies to distinguishing convex sets of states,
operations, or strategies.

Specifically, suppose two convex sets @xmath of quantum states are
fixed. Suppose that Bob arbitrarily selects @xmath and @xmath and then
selects @xmath uniformly at random and gives Alice a quantum system
prepared in state @xmath . Alice’s goal is to correctly guess whether
@xmath or @xmath based upon the outcome of a measurement she conducts on
@xmath . It is clear that this problem is a generalization of that from
the previous section, as the original problem is recovered by
considering the singleton sets @xmath and @xmath .

This problem of distinguishing convex sets of states was solved in Ref.
[ GW05 ] , wherein it was shown that there exists a single measurement
@xmath that depends only upon the sets @xmath with the property that any
pair @xmath , @xmath may be correctly distinguished with probability at
least

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

In particular, even if two distinct pairs @xmath and @xmath both
minimize the trace distance between @xmath and @xmath then both pairs
may be optimally distinguished by the same measurement @xmath .

What about distinguishing convex sets of quantum operations or
strategies? Nothing was known of either problem prior to the work of the
present thesis. In this section, we prove that the distinguishability
result for convex sets of states extends unhindered to operations and
strategies. In particular, we prove that two convex sets @xmath of
@xmath -round strategies can be correctly distinguished with probability
at least

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It then follows trivially that two convex sets @xmath of @xmath -round
co-strategies can be correctly distinguished with probability at least

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As a special case, it holds that two convex sets @xmath of quantum
operations can be distinguished with probability at least

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Properties of the strategy @xmath-norm

Our proof of the distinguishability of convex sets of strategies is
essentially a copy of the proof appearing in Ref. [ GW05 ] with states
and measurements replaced by strategies and co-strategies and the trace
and operator norms replaced with the strategy @xmath -norm and its dual.

To ensure correctness of the new proof, we must identify the relevant
properties of the trace and operator norms employed in Ref. [ GW05 ] and
then establish suitable analogues of those properties for the new norms
@xmath and @xmath . The relevant properties of the trace and operator
norms are:

1.  The trace norm and operator norm are dual to each other, meaning
    that

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath            
         @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

    for all operators @xmath .

2.  If @xmath is Hermitian then

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

    Here @xmath where @xmath is a Jordan decomposition of @xmath .

Property 2 is really just a circuitous way of saying that a Hermitian
operator has operator norm at most @xmath if and only if all its
eigenvalues are no larger than @xmath in absolute value. Compared to the
duality of the trace and operator norms (property 1 ), this observation
is not deep or significant in and of itself. It is only phrased as such
so as to highlight the forthcoming generalization to the strategy @xmath
-norm and its dual.

Our generalization of property 1 states that the norms @xmath and @xmath
are dual to each other. Because our proof of this fact relies upon the
generalization of property 2 , we first establish the latter.

###### Unit ball of the strategy @xmath-norms

###### Proposition 5.6 (Unit ball of the strategy @xmath-norms).

For any Hermitian-preserving super-operator @xmath it holds that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

for some @xmath -round non-measuring strategy @xmath for input spaces
@xmath and output spaces @xmath . Similarly,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath -round non-measuring co-strategy @xmath for input spaces
@xmath and output spaces @xmath .

Proposition 5.6 follows immediately from the following two lemmas.

###### Lemma 5.7.

For any Hermitian-preserving super-operator @xmath it holds that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Lemma 5.8.

For each positive semidefinite operator @xmath it holds that

  -- -------- -------- --
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Lemma 5.8 is an immediate corollary of Proposition 3.8 (Polar sets of
strategies), which was proven in Section 3.3.1 . Hence, we do not prove
Lemma 5.8 here—it is restated only for ease of reference without the
polarity notation. It remains only to prove Lemma 5.7 .

###### Proof of Lemma 5.7 and hence also of Proposition 5.6.

The proofs of the two desired equivalences are completely symmetric, so
we prove only the first. As @xmath is Hermitian-preserving, it holds
that @xmath is a Hermitian operator. As such, it has a Jordan
decomposition @xmath with @xmath .

We first prove the easier implication. Suppose @xmath for all
co-strategies @xmath and choose any measuring co-strategy @xmath . We
must show that @xmath . As @xmath is a measuring co-strategy, it holds
that @xmath is a nonmeasuring co-strategy. Taking @xmath , we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as desired.

For the other direction, suppose @xmath and choose any co-strategy
@xmath . We must show that @xmath . Our goal is to decompose @xmath in
such a way that @xmath is a measuring co-strategy with @xmath . Such a
choice of @xmath ensures that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The lemma is then established by noting that the left side of this
expression is at most 1 and the right side of this expression equals
@xmath .

It remains to choose the appropriate @xmath . Letting @xmath denote the
projection onto the support of @xmath , we choose

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

That @xmath follows from the fact that @xmath and @xmath have orthogonal
support. Finally, it is easy to verify that @xmath denotes a valid
measuring co-strategy: as @xmath is a co-strategy, so too is the sum
@xmath . As @xmath is positive semidefinite, so too are @xmath . ∎

###### Duality of the strategy @xmath-norms

We are now ready to prove that the norms @xmath and @xmath are dual to
each other.

###### Proposition 5.9 (Duality of the strategy @xmath-norms).

The norms @xmath and @xmath are dual to each other. In other words, for
any Hermitian-preserving super-operator @xmath it holds that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Proof.

The proofs of the two desired equalities are completely symmetric, so we
prove only the first. We begin by proving

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be an @xmath -round measuring co-strategy attaining the
maximum in the definition of @xmath , so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The desired inequality follows from the claim that @xmath . To verify
this claim, we note that any @xmath -round measuring strategy @xmath
attaining the maximum in the definition of @xmath has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

That the final inner product equals one follows immediately from Theorem
3.1 (Interaction output probabilities) and the observation that @xmath
may be viewed as a one-outcome measuring strategy and @xmath may be
viewed as a one-outcome measuring co-strategy.

For the reverse inequality, choose a Hermitian-preserving super-operator
@xmath with @xmath that maximizes the inner product @xmath . Proposition
5.6 tells us that @xmath for some @xmath -round non-measuring
co-strategy @xmath . Let @xmath be the Jordan decomposition of @xmath
and let @xmath be the @xmath -round measuring co-strategy given by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Then

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

as desired. ∎

###### Distinguishability of convex sets of strategies

As mentioned earlier, our proof of the distinguishability of convex sets
of strategies closely resembles the proof of the distinguishability of
convex sets of states appearing in Ref. [ GW05 ] . Now that we have
identified and established the relevant properties of the norm @xmath
and its dual @xmath , we are ready to translate the proof of Ref. [ GW05
] onto the domain of quantum strategies.

###### Theorem 5.10 (Distinguishability of convex sets of strategies).

Let @xmath be nonempty convex sets of @xmath -round strategies. There
exists an @xmath -round measuring co-strategy @xmath with the property
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all choices of @xmath and @xmath . A similar statement holds in
terms of the dual norm @xmath for convex sets of co-strategies.

###### Proof.

The proof for co-strategies is completely symmetric to the proof for
strategies, so we only address strategies here. Let @xmath denote the
minimum distance between @xmath and @xmath as stated in the theorem. If
@xmath then the theorem is satisfied by the trivial @xmath -round
measuring co-strategy corresponding to a random coin flip. (For this
trivial co-strategy, both @xmath and @xmath are equal to the identity
divided by @xmath .) For the remainder of this proof, we shall restrict
our attention to the case @xmath .

Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

denote the open ball of radius @xmath with respect to the @xmath norm.
The sets @xmath and @xmath are nonempty disjoint sets of Hermitian
operators, both are convex, and @xmath is open. By the Separation
Theorem (Fact 1.6 ), there exists a Hermitian operator @xmath and a
scalar @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath and @xmath .

For every choice of @xmath we have @xmath as well, from which it follows
that @xmath for all @xmath and hence @xmath . Moreover, as @xmath is the
open ball of radius @xmath in the norm @xmath , it follows from
Proposition 5.9 (Duality of the strategy @xmath -norms) that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now let @xmath be the normalization of @xmath with @xmath and let @xmath
be the Jordan decomposition of @xmath . By Proposition 5.6 (Unit ball of
the strategy @xmath -norms) we have @xmath for some co-strategy @xmath .
Let @xmath be the measuring co-strategy given by

  -- -------- -- --
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --

It remains only to verify that @xmath has the desired properties: for
every choice of @xmath and @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as desired. ∎

The claimed result regarding the distinguishability of convex sets of
strategies now follows immediately. To recap, let @xmath be convex sets
of strategies and let @xmath denote the measuring co-strategy from
Theorem 5.10 that distinguishes elements in @xmath from elements in
@xmath . Suppose Bob selects @xmath and @xmath arbitrarily and then
selects @xmath uniformly at random. As derived in Section 5.1 , if Alice
acts according to @xmath then the probability with which she correctly
guesses whether @xmath or @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as desired.

#### 5.3 The dual of the diamond norm

In Proposition 5.4 we established that the strategy @xmath -norm @xmath
agrees with the diamond norm @xmath on Hermitian-preserving
super-operators @xmath . Can the same be said of the duals of these
norms? In this section we answer that question in the affirmative. In
order to do so, we also establish several basic facts concerning the
dual of the diamond norm. While none of these facts are surprising, the
only proofs we can offer are nontrivial and possibly interesting in
their own right. Thus, in this section we take a “detour” from the
strategy @xmath -norm in order to study the dual of the diamond norm,
returning only at the very end to answer this section’s opening
question.

###### Definition 5.11 (Dual of the diamond norm).

As with any norm, the dual @xmath of the diamond norm @xmath is defined
for every super-operator @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

That the dual of the dual of the diamond norm equals the diamond norm
follows from the Duality Theorem, a proof of which can be found in Horn
and Johnson [ HJ85 ] . In other words, it holds that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

While much is known of the diamond norm, its dual has never been
studied. In this section, we establish the following basic facts about
this norm:

1.  If @xmath is completely positive then the maximum in the definition
    of @xmath is achieved by a completely positive and trace-preserving
    super-operator.

2.  If @xmath is Hermitian-preserving then the maximum in the definition
    of @xmath is achieved by a Hermitian-preserving super-operator.

3.  For each of the two maxima

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

    there exist super-operators @xmath such that the maximum is not
    attained by any Hermitian-preserving super-operator @xmath .
    Moreover, there exist Hermitian-preserving super-operators @xmath
    such that the maximum is not attained by any completely positive
    super-operator @xmath .

4.  If @xmath is Hermitian-preserving then @xmath .

###### Useful lemmas involving the diamond norm

We begin with three technical lemmas, two of which establish facts about
the diamond norm. The first lemma follows immediately from Refs. [ RW05
, AHW00 ] . We provide an alternate proof for completeness.

###### Lemma 5.12.

For any completely positive super-operator @xmath it holds that @xmath .
Moreover, the maximum in the definition of @xmath is achieved by a
positive semidefinite operator.

###### Proof.

It is clear that @xmath , so let us concentrate only on the reverse
inequality. Suppose @xmath has the form @xmath . As @xmath is completely
positive, there exists a space @xmath and a density operator @xmath with
the property that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

By convexity, we may assume that @xmath is a pure state—that is, @xmath
for some unit vector @xmath . For any orthonormal basis @xmath of @xmath
we may write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some choice of unit vectors @xmath (not necessarily orthogonal) and
nonnegative real numbers @xmath that sum to one. Then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

for @xmath . ∎

For any operator @xmath of rank @xmath it follows from the Singular
Value Theorem (Section 1.2.1 ) that it is possible to choose vectors
@xmath , @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Given such a choice of vectors, we define the positive semidefinite
operators @xmath , @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is Hermitian then it is clear that we may take @xmath . As a
consequence, if @xmath is positive semidefinite then we may take @xmath
. The following simple lemma is a special case of Ref. [ Wat05 , Lemma
2] .

###### Lemma 5.13.

For any operators @xmath and any decompositions @xmath and @xmath of
those operators it holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be decompositions of @xmath that yield @xmath and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
                       
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where the inequality follows from Cauchy-Schwarz. ∎

For any super-operator @xmath and any decomposition @xmath of @xmath we
let @xmath denote the super-operators with @xmath and @xmath . As @xmath
are positive semidefinite, it holds that @xmath are completely positive.

###### Lemma 5.14.

For any super-operator @xmath there exists a decomposition @xmath ,
@xmath of @xmath with

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Proof.

It was noted in the conclusion of Ref. [ Wat05 ] that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the infimum is taken over all decompositions @xmath of @xmath .
The existence of a fixed pair @xmath that achieve this infimum may be
argued as in Ref. [ KSV02 ] . By rescaling, we may assume that @xmath ,
from which it follows that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The lemma then follows from Lemma 5.12 . ∎

###### Achieving the maximum

We are now ready to exhibit two theorems that establish two of the
claims from the beginning of this section.

For any Hermitian-preserving super-operator @xmath , we let @xmath
denote the completely positive super-operator with @xmath . Just as with
operators, there is a decomposition @xmath of @xmath with @xmath .
Moreover, if @xmath is completely positive then we may take @xmath .

###### Theorem 5.15 (Achieving the maximum for completely positive
super-operators).

For any Hermitian-preserving super-operator @xmath it holds that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Moreover, the maximum in the definition of @xmath is achieved by a
completely positive and trace-preserving super-operator.

As a consequence, if @xmath is completely positive then the maximum in
the definition of @xmath is achieved by a completely positive and
trace-preserving super-operator.

###### Proof.

First we show that the maximum is attained by a completely positive
super-operator—the trace-preserving property will be established later.

Let @xmath be any super-operator with @xmath achieving the maximum in
the definition of @xmath , so that @xmath . By Lemma 5.14 there exists a
decomposition @xmath of @xmath with

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Moreover, @xmath and @xmath are completely positive.

As @xmath is Hermitian-preserving, there is a decomposition @xmath of
@xmath with @xmath . By Lemma 5.13 we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Thus, @xmath and the maximum in the definition of @xmath is attained by
a completely positive super-operator @xmath .

For the trace-preserving property, we note that @xmath . Then by
Proposition 5.6 and the complete positivity of @xmath it holds that
@xmath for some completely positive and trace-preserving super-operator
@xmath with @xmath . The desired result follows from the observation
that @xmath . ∎

###### Theorem 5.16 (Achieving the maximum for Hermitian-preserving
super-operators).

For any Hermitian-preserving super-operator @xmath the maximum in the
definition of @xmath is achieved by a Hermitian-preserving
super-operator.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a Jordan decomposition of @xmath , so that @xmath . By
Theorem 5.15 it holds that @xmath and the maximum in the definition of
@xmath is achieved by a completely positive and trace-preserving
super-operator @xmath .

Let @xmath denote the projections onto the support of @xmath and let
@xmath denote the Hermitian-preserving super-operator with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is easily verified that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The left side of this equality is @xmath , which we know to be at least
as large as @xmath . Hence, the desired result will follow once we
establish that the Hermitian-preserving super-operator @xmath has @xmath
.

Toward that end, we note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath is completely positive and trace-preserving, it holds that
@xmath denotes a one-round non-measuring strategy. Thus, by Proposition
5.6 it holds that @xmath . The theorem follows from Proposition 5.4 ,
which tells us that @xmath . ∎

###### Not achieving the maximum

We now show that Theorems 5.15 and 5.16 cannot be extended beyond
completely positive and Hermitian-preserving super-operators,
respectively. Our counterexamples rely upon the following lemma.

###### Lemma 5.17 (Diamond norm for 1-dimensional spaces).

The following hold for any super-operator @xmath :

1.   Suppose @xmath and let @xmath be the operator with @xmath . It
    holds that @xmath .

2.   Suppose @xmath and let @xmath be the operator with @xmath . It
    holds that @xmath .

###### Proof.

Item 1 is a simple consequence of the fact that the auxiliary space
@xmath in the definition of the diamond norm can be assumed to have
dimension no larger than @xmath . This fact immediately implies @xmath .
It follows immediately from the definition of the super-operator trace
norm that @xmath .

For item 2 , choose a space @xmath and vectors @xmath with

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Let @xmath be a unitary such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and let @xmath be the vector given by @xmath , so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As in the proof of Lemma 5.12 , choose an orthonormal basis @xmath of
@xmath and write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some choice of unit vectors @xmath and probability distributions
@xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the final inequality is Cauchy-Schwarz. Equality is obtained for
real numbers @xmath and unit vectors @xmath maximizing the inner product
@xmath . We have thus established @xmath . As @xmath , we also have
@xmath . ∎

###### Proposition 5.18 (Theorems 5.15 and 5.16 do not extend).

For each of the two maxima

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

there exist super-operators @xmath such that the maximum is not attained
by any Hermitian-preserving super-operator @xmath .

Moreover, there exist Hermitian-preserving super-operators @xmath such
that the maximum is not attained by any completely positive
super-operator @xmath .

###### Proof.

The counterexamples presented here are all achieved via reduction from
the diamond norm and its dual to the trace norm and its dual (the
operator norm).

Let @xmath be a space of dimension one, so that for each super-operator
@xmath there is an operator @xmath with @xmath . For any @xmath it is
easily verified that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, it is clear that @xmath is Hermitian-preserving if and only if
@xmath is Hermitian and that @xmath is completely positive if and only
if @xmath is positive semidefinite. By Lemma 5.17 it holds that

  -- -- -- -------
           (5.1)
  -- -- -- -------

We now exhibit an operator @xmath such that the maximum is not achieved
by any Hermitian operator @xmath . Consider the operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The quantity

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

is known as the numerical radius @xmath of @xmath . It is easy to
compute @xmath , which is strictly smaller than @xmath .

Next, let @xmath be a space of dimension one, so that for each
super-operator @xmath there is an operator @xmath with @xmath . For any
@xmath it is easily verified that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, it is clear that @xmath is Hermitian-preserving if and only if
@xmath is Hermitian and that @xmath is completely positive if and only
if @xmath is positive semidefinite. By Lemma 5.17 it holds that

  -- -- -- -------
           (5.2)
  -- -- -- -------

Consider the operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are nonzero orthogonal projections. It is easy to verify
that the maximum is not achieved by any positive semidefinite @xmath .

The proposition is now proved for the maximum @xmath The proof for the
other maximum follows along similar lines. ∎

###### The dual of the strategy @xmath-norm agrees with the dual of the
diamond norm

Finally, we have what we need to establish agreement between @xmath and
@xmath for Hermitian-preserving super-operators.

###### Proposition 5.19 (Agreement with the dual of the diamond norm).

For every Hermitian-preserving super-operator @xmath it holds that
@xmath .

###### Proof.

We have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
                       
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The first equality is Theorem 5.16 , the second Proposition 5.4 , and
the third Proposition 5.9 . ∎

## Part II Local Operations with Shared Entanglement

### Chapter 6 Introduction to Local Operations

In Part II of this thesis we are interested in various classes of
“local” quantum operations, which are operations that can be jointly
implemented by two or more parties who act on distinct portions of the
input system and who do not communicate once they receive their portions
of the input.

In this introductory chapter for Part II we provide formal definitions
and immediate observations for three such classes: local operations,
local operations with shared randomness, and local operations with
shared entanglement. We also introduce convenient shorthand notations
for separable operators and for the vector space spanned by the local
operations—objects which are of fundamental importance to the work in
this part of the thesis.

###### Local operations and the space that they span

The simplest examples of quantum operations that can be implemented
jointly by multiple parties without communication are the product
operations, which consist of several completely independent quantum
operations juxtaposed and viewed as a larger single operation.

###### Definition 6.1 (Local operation).

A quantum operation @xmath is @xmath -party local with respect to the
input partition @xmath and output partition @xmath if it can be written
as a product operation of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where each @xmath is a quantum operation. Typically, the partition of
the input and output spaces is implicit and clear from the context. ∎

The vector space of super-operators spanned by the local operations is
of paramount interest in Part II of this thesis. As such, we introduce a
convenient shorthand notation for this space.

Toward that end, recall that a super-operator @xmath denotes a quantum
operation if and only if @xmath is completely positive and
trace-preserving. In terms of Choi-Jamiołkowski representations, the
trace-preserving property of @xmath is characterized by the condition
@xmath . The set of all operators @xmath obeying the inhomogeneous
linear condition @xmath is not a vector space, but this set is easily
extended to a unique smallest vector space by including its closure
under multiplication by real scalars.

###### Definition 6.2 (Shorthand notation for the space spanned by local
operations).

For complex Euclidean spaces @xmath , let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

denote the subspace of the real vector space @xmath of Hermitian
operators @xmath of the form @xmath for which @xmath is a
trace-preserving super-operator, or a scalar multiple thereof.
(Throughout this thesis, the spaces @xmath are implicit whenever the
notation @xmath is used.)

Let @xmath and @xmath be complex Euclidean spaces. Employing our
shorthand notation for Kronecker products, the subspace @xmath of @xmath
spanned by the @xmath -party local operations is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

By the end of Part II , we will see that the space @xmath contains not
only all the local operations, but also the local operations with shared
randomness and with shared entanglement, as well as an even broader
class of local quantum operations called “no-signaling” operations.
Moreover, in Chapter 10 we will also see a converse result—that any
quantum operation whose Choi-Jamiołkowski representation lies inside
@xmath is necessarily a no-signaling operation.

###### Local operations with shared randomness, separable operators

Local (product) operations are not the only quantum operations admitted
by our model. In particular, there is nothing to stop the parties from
meeting ahead of time so as to prepare shared resources that might allow
them to correlate their separate quantum operations.

Consider, for example, a convex combination @xmath of @xmath -party
local operations @xmath . Such a quantum operation is legal in our model
because it can be implemented by @xmath parties who share prior
knowledge of an integer @xmath sampled according to the probability
distribution @xmath . In this case, the shared resource is randomness.

###### Definition 6.3 (Local operation with shared randomness (LOSR)).

A quantum operation @xmath is a @xmath -party LOSR operation if it can
be written as a convex combination of @xmath -party local operations. ∎

As a convex combination of products of positive semidefinite operators,
the Choi-Jamiołkowski representation of a LOSR operation belongs to a
broader class of operators called “separable” operators.

###### Definition 6.4 (Separable operator).

Let @xmath be arbitrary spaces of Hermitian operators. An element @xmath
of the product space @xmath is said to be @xmath -separable if @xmath
can be written as a convex combination of product operators of the form
@xmath where each @xmath is positive semidefinite. The set of @xmath
-separable operators forms a cone inside @xmath . ∎

Using this terminology, Definition 6.3 states that a quantum operation
@xmath is a LOSR operation if and only if @xmath is a @xmath -separable
operator.

Another important example of separable operators are the separable
quantum states. A state @xmath is called separable if @xmath can be
written as a convex combination of product states of the form @xmath
where each @xmath is a density operator. In other words, @xmath denotes
a separable state if and only if @xmath is a @xmath -separable operator
with trace equal to one. (Quantum states that are not separable are
called entangled .)

###### Local operations with shared entanglement

LOSR operations are not the only quantum operations that can be
implemented locally without communication. In the most general case, the
parties could each hold a portion of some distinguished quantum state
@xmath ; each party produces his output by applying some quantum
operation to his portions of the input system and @xmath . In this case,
the shared resource is @xmath .

###### Definition 6.5 (Local operation with shared entanglement (LOSE)).

A quantum operation @xmath is a @xmath -party LOSE operation with finite
entanglement if there exist spaces @xmath , a quantum state @xmath , and
quantum operations @xmath for each @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This arrangement is depicted for the two-party case in Figure 6.1 .

The operation @xmath is a finitely approximable @xmath -party LOSE
operation if it lies in the closure of the set of @xmath -party LOSE
operations with finite entanglement. The term “LOSE operation” is used
to refer to any finitely approximable LOSE operation; the restriction to
finite entanglement is made explicit whenever it is required. ∎

###### Finite and infinite shared entanglement

The need to distinguish between LOSE operations with finite entanglement
and finitely approximable LOSE operations arises from the fascinating
fact that there exist LOSE operations that cannot be implemented with
any finite amount of shared entanglement, yet can be approximated to
arbitrary precision by LOSE operations with finite entanglement [ LTW08
] .

Specifically, there exists an infinite sequence @xmath of LOSE
operations with the property that the dimension of the space @xmath
associated with the shared state of @xmath is ever increasing with
@xmath . Moreover, this sequence is known to converge to a quantum
operation that is not a LOSE operation with finite entanglement.

An analytic consequence of this fact is that the set of LOSE operations
with finite entanglement is not a closed set. Fortunately, the work of
this thesis is unhindered by a more encompassing notion of LOSE
operation that includes the closure of that set.

###### Equivalence of shared randomness and shared separable states

The following straightforward but tedious proposition asserts that a
LOSR operation is merely a LOSE operation for which the shared state is
@xmath -partite separable. It establishes that, as shared resources, a
quantum state differs from randomness only when the state in question is
entangled among the different parties.

Also established by this proposition is an explicit bound on the
dimension of the shared state as a function of the dimensions of the
input and output spaces. Thus, while there exist LOSE operations that
cannot be implemented with a finite shared state, every LOSR operation
can be implemented with a finite shared state whose size scales
favorably in the size of the input and output states.

###### Proposition 6.6 (Equivalence of shared randomness and shared
separable states).

A quantum operation @xmath is an @xmath -party LOSR operation if and
only if there exist

1.   spaces @xmath of dimension @xmath ,

2.   a @xmath -separable state @xmath , and

3.   quantum operations @xmath

such that @xmath

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -separable state and let @xmath be quantum
operations such that @xmath . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be a decomposition of @xmath into a convex combination of product
states, where each @xmath . For each @xmath and @xmath define a quantum
operation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and observe that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as desired.

Conversely, suppose that @xmath may be decomposed into a convex
combination of product quantum operations as above. By Carathéodory’s
Theorem (Fact 1.4 ), this sum may be assumed to have no more than @xmath
terms. Let @xmath be complex Euclidean spaces of dimension @xmath and
let @xmath be mutually orthogonal pure states for each @xmath . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be a @xmath -separable state, let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be quantum operations, and observe that @xmath . ∎

###### Convexity of local operations with shared entanglement

It is not difficult to see that the set of local operations is not a
convex set. By definition, the set of LOSR operations is convex. That
the set of LOSE operations with finite entanglement is also convex
follows from a simple argument that is similar in principle to that of
Proposition 6.6 .

###### Proposition 6.7 (Convexity of LOSE operations).

The set of @xmath -party LOSE operations with finite entanglement is
convex. As a consequence, the set of finitely approximable @xmath -party
LOSE operations is also convex.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be LOSE operations with finite entanglement. Choose spaces
@xmath of large enough dimension so that there exist states @xmath and
quantum operations @xmath such that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Let @xmath be two-dimensional spaces, let @xmath be orthogonal pure
states for each @xmath , and let

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

be quantum operations. For positive real numbers @xmath that sum to one,
let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be a state in @xmath . It is easy to verify that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

implying that the convex combination @xmath is also a LOSE operation
with finite entanglement.

That the set of finitely approximable LOSE operations is convex follows
immediately from the fact that this set is the closure of the set of
LOSE operations with finite entanglement, which we just showed to be
convex. ∎

### Chapter 7 Ball Around the Completely Noisy Channel

In this chapter we show that any quantum operation @xmath for which
@xmath lies in the product space @xmath and close enough to a
distinguished “completely noisy” quantum operation @xmath must
necessarily be a LOSR operation. In other words, there is a ball of LOSR
operations surrounding @xmath .

For each input space @xmath and output space @xmath , the completely
noisy channel @xmath is the unique quantum operation defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The quantum state @xmath is known as the completely mixed state of the
system associated with @xmath . Intuitively, this state denotes complete
noise of the underlying system—it represents a uniform classical
distribution over each of the @xmath levels in the system. Thus, the
completely noisy channel is the quantum operation that always produces
complete noise as output, regardless of the input.

The reason for interest in the completely noisy channel is that it is
the unique super-operator whose Choi-Jamiołkowski representation equals
the identity. More specifically, the completely noisy channel @xmath has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is convenient for us to temporarily ignore the scalar multiple and
deal directly with the unnormalized version @xmath of @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The existence of a ball of LOSR operations around the completely noisy
channel is established by proving that every operator in @xmath and
close enough to the identity must be a @xmath -separable operator.
Indeed, this fact is shown to hold not only for the specific choice
@xmath of subspaces, but for every choice @xmath of subspaces that
contain the identity.

Choosing @xmath to be full spaces of Hermitian operators yields an
alternate (and simpler) proof of the existence of a ball of separable
quantum states surrounding the completely mixed state and, consequently,
of the NP-completeness of separability testing for quantum states.
However, the ball of separable states implied by the present work is not
as large as that exhibited by Gurvits and Barnum [ GB02 , GB03 ] .

The technical results we require are proven in Section 7.1 , as is a new
bound for norms of super-operators. The application of these results to
establish the existence of the ball of LOSR operations is provided in
Section 7.2 along with some discussion of the details of this ball.

#### 7.1 General results on separable operators

Due to the general nature of the results in this chapter, discussion in
the present section is abstract—applications to quantum information are
deferred until Section 7.2 . The results presented herein were inspired
by Chapter 2 of Bhatia [ Bha07 ] .

###### Hermitian subspaces generated by separable cones

Let @xmath be any subspace of Hermitian operators that contains the
identity. The cone @xmath always generates @xmath , meaning that each
element of @xmath may be written as a difference of two elements of
@xmath . As proof, choose any @xmath and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is clear that @xmath and that @xmath (using the fact that @xmath ).
Moreover, it holds that @xmath for this particular choice of @xmath .

In light of this observation, one might wonder whether it could be
extended in product spaces to separable operators. In particular, do the
@xmath -separable operators generate the product space @xmath ? If so,
can elements of @xmath be generated by @xmath -separable operators with
bounded norm? The following theorem answers these two questions in the
affirmative.

###### Theorem 7.1 (Generation via bounded separable operators).

Let @xmath be subspaces of Hermitian operators—all of which contain the
identity—and let @xmath . Then every element @xmath may be written
@xmath where @xmath are @xmath -separable with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

First, it is proven that there is an orthonormal basis @xmath of @xmath
with the property that every element @xmath may be written @xmath where
@xmath are @xmath -separable with @xmath . The proof is by
straightforward induction on @xmath . The base case @xmath follows
immediately from the earlier observation that every element @xmath is
generated by some @xmath with @xmath . In particular, any element @xmath
of any orthonormal basis of @xmath has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the general case, the induction hypothesis states that there is an
orthonormal basis @xmath of @xmath with the desired property. Let @xmath
be any orthonormal basis of @xmath . As in the base case, each @xmath is
generated by some @xmath with @xmath . Define the orthonormal basis
@xmath of @xmath to consist of all product operators of the form @xmath
for @xmath and @xmath . Define

  -- -------- -- --
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --

It is clear that @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -separable. Moreover,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A similar computation yields @xmath , which establishes the induction.

Now, let @xmath and let @xmath be the unique coefficients of @xmath in
the aforementioned orthonormal basis @xmath . Define

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

It is clear that @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -separable. Employing the
triangle inequality and the vector norm inequality @xmath , it follows
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A similar computation yields @xmath , which completes the proof. ∎

###### Separable operators as a subtraction from the identity

At the beginning of this section it was observed that @xmath lies in
@xmath for all @xmath . One might wonder whether more could be expected
of @xmath than mere positive semidefiniteness. For example, under what
conditions is @xmath a @xmath -separable operator? The following theorem
provides three such conditions. Moreover, the central claim of this
section is established by this theorem.

###### Theorem 7.2 (Ball of separable operators surrounding the
identity).

Let @xmath be subspaces of Hermitian operators—all of which contain the
identity—and let @xmath . The following hold:

1.  @xmath is @xmath -separable whenever @xmath is a product operator of
    the form @xmath where each @xmath .

2.  @xmath is @xmath -separable whenever @xmath is @xmath -separable.

3.  @xmath is @xmath -separable for every @xmath .

###### Proof.

The proof of item 1 is an easy but notationally cumbersome induction on
@xmath . The base case @xmath was noted at the beginning of Section 7.1
. For the general case, it is convenient to let @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath denote the identity elements of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ,
respectively. The induction hypothesis states that the operator @xmath
is @xmath -separable. Just as in the base case, we know @xmath lies in
@xmath . Isolating the identity elements, these expressions may be
rewritten

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- --

Taking the Kronecker product of these two equalities and rearranging the
terms yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The right side of this expression is clearly a @xmath -separable
operator; the proof by induction is complete.

Item 2 is proved as follows. By Carathéodory’s Theorem (Fact 1.4 ),
every @xmath -separable operator @xmath may be written as a sum of no
more than @xmath product operators. In particular,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where each @xmath is an element of @xmath . As each term in this sum is
positive semidefinite, it holds that @xmath for each @xmath . Item 1
implies that the sum

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is also @xmath -separable. Naturally, each of the identity terms

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in this sum may be replaced by @xmath without compromising @xmath
-separability, from which it follows that @xmath is also @xmath
-separable.

To prove item 3 , apply Theorem 7.1 to obtain @xmath where @xmath are
@xmath -separable with @xmath By item 2 , it holds that @xmath is @xmath
-separable, implying that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is also @xmath -separable. To complete the proof, it suffices to note
that adding @xmath to this operator yields another @xmath -separable
operator. ∎

###### Norms of positive super-operators

We are now in a position to prove new bounds on the capacity of a
positive super-operator to increase the norm of its output relative to
that of its input. While these new bounds are not used later in this
thesis, it is worthwhile to note them and compare them to previously
known bounds of this nature.

The seminal such bound is due to Russo and Dye and states that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath whenever @xmath is positive [ RD66 ] . In particular, if
@xmath does not increase the operator norm of the identity then @xmath
does not increase the operator norm of any operator. When discussing
bounds of this form, it is convenient to make the assumption that @xmath
, which allows us to state the bound more succinctly as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Of course, the original bound, which applies to all positive @xmath ,
can be recovered from this succinct version via suitable rescaling of
@xmath by a factor of @xmath .

Consider a subspace @xmath that contains the identity. In Bhatia [ Bha07
] it is shown that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

for all @xmath whenever @xmath is positive on @xmath . Essentially, the
Russo-Dye bound weakens by a factor of @xmath when we relax the
positivity requirement to a mere subspace of the input space. Gurvits
and Barnum showed that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

for all @xmath whenever @xmath is positive on the unit ball

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

surrounding the identity [ GB03 ] . This bound is considerably weaker
than the previous two because the operator norm @xmath of @xmath is
replaced with the Frobenius norm @xmath . On the other hand, it has the
advantage that @xmath need not be positive on an entire subspace of
@xmath . Gurvits and Barnum used this additional flexibility to
establish the existence of a ball of multipartite separable quantum
states surrounding the completely mixed state.

To the above list of bounds we add one of our own. While the
Gurvits-Barnum bound applies only to super-operators @xmath that are
positive on a set that spans all of @xmath (namely, the unit ball around
the identity), the super-operators to which our bound applies might only
be positive on a set that does not span all of @xmath . Alas, this
flexibility comes at the cost of a multiple of the dimension of the
input space. For context, our bound is stated as an extension of Theorem
2.6.3 of Bhatia [ Bha07 ] .

###### Theorem 7.3 (Norms of positive super-operators).

Let @xmath be subspaces of Hermitian operators—all of which contain the
identity—and let @xmath . Let @xmath be a super-operator acting on
@xmath with the property that @xmath is positive on @xmath -separable
operators. The following hold:

1.  @xmath whenever @xmath is a product operator of the form @xmath
    where each @xmath .

2.  @xmath whenever @xmath is @xmath -separable.

3.  @xmath for every @xmath .

###### Proof.

To prove item 1, we observe that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

is positive semidefinite. As @xmath and @xmath are also positive
semidefinite, it follows that @xmath Item 2 is proved by the same
argument with @xmath in place of @xmath .

To prove item 3, apply Theorem 7.1 to obtain @xmath where @xmath are
@xmath -separable with @xmath . As @xmath are positive semidefinite, we
have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

∎

#### 7.2 Ball around the completely noisy channel

In Chapter 6 we noted that a quantum operation @xmath is a LOSR
operation if and only if @xmath is @xmath -separable. We then
established via Theorem 7.2 of the previous section that any operator in
the product space @xmath and close enough to the identity is necessarily
a @xmath -separable operator, from which the existence of a ball of LOSR
operations around the completely noisy channel follows.

###### Theorem 7.4 (Ball around the completely noisy channel).

Let @xmath and let @xmath For each operator @xmath with @xmath there
exists an unnormalized LOSR operation @xmath for which

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As a consequence, any quantum operation @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a LOSR operation. Here @xmath denotes the completely noisy channel
and @xmath .

Theorem 7.4 establishes a ball of LOSR operations (and hence also of
LOSE operations) surrounding the completely noisy channel. However,
there seems to be no obvious way to obtain a bigger ball if such a ball
is allowed to contain operations that are LOSE but not LOSR. Perhaps a
more careful future investigation will uncover such a ball.

###### The subspace containing the ball of LOSR operations

The ball of Theorem 7.4 is contained within the product space @xmath ,
which is a strict subspace of the space spanned by all quantum
operations @xmath . Why was attention restricted to this subspace? The
answer is that there are no LOSE or LOSR operations @xmath for which
@xmath lies outside @xmath . In other words, @xmath is the largest
possible space in which to find a ball of LOSR operations. We shall
return to this topic in Chapter 10 wherein it is shown that the space
@xmath is generated by the so-called no-signaling quantum operations.

Of course, there exist quantum operations arbitrarily close to the
completely noisy channel that are not no-signaling operations, much less
LOSE or LOSR operations. This fact might seem to confuse the study of,
say, the effects of noise on such operations because a completely
general model of noise would allow for extremely tiny perturbations that
nonetheless turn no-signaling operations into signaling operations. This
confusion might even be exacerbated by the fact that separable quantum
states, by contrast, are resilient to arbitrary noise: any conceivable
physical perturbation of the completely mixed state is separable, so
long as the perturbation has small enough magnitude.

There is, of course, nothing unsettling about this picture. In any
reasonable model of noise, perturbations to a LOSE or LOSR operation
occur only on the local operations performed by the parties involved, or
perhaps on the state they share. It is easy to see that realistic
perturbations such as these always maintain the no-signaling property of
these operations. Moreover, any noise not of this form could, for
example, bestow faster-than-light communication upon spatially separated
parties.

### Chapter 8 Recognizing LOSE Operations is NP-hard

In this chapter the existence of the ball of LOSR operations around the
completely noisy channel is employed to prove that the weak membership
problem for LOSE operations is strongly @xmath -hard. Informally, the
weak membership problem asks,

  “Given a description of a quantum operation @xmath and an accuracy
  parameter @xmath , is @xmath within distance @xmath of a LOSE
  operation?”

This result is achieved in several stages. Section 8.1 reviews a
relevant recent result of Kempe et al. pertaining to quantum games. In
Section 8.2 this result is exploited in order to prove that the weak
validity problem—a relative of the weak membership problem—is strongly
@xmath -hard for LOSE operations. Finally, Section 8.3 illustrates how
the strong @xmath -hardness of the weak membership problem for LOSE
operations follows from a Gurvits-Gharibian-style application of Liu’s
version of the Yudin-Nemirovskiĭ Theorem. It is also noted that similar
@xmath -hardness results hold trivially for LOSR operations, due to the
fact that separable quantum states arise as a special case of LOSR
operations in which the input space is empty.

#### 8.1 Co-operative quantum games with shared entanglement

Local operations with shared entanglement have been previously studied
in the context of two-player co-operative games. In these games, a
referee prepares a question for each player and the players each respond
to the referee with an answer. The referee evaluates these answers and
declares that the players have jointly won or lost the game according to
this evaluation. The goal of the players, then, is to coordinate their
answers so as to maximize the probability with which the referee
declares them to be winners. In a quantum game the questions and answers
are quantum states.

In order to differentiate this model from a one-player game, the players
are not permitted to communicate with each other after the referee has
sent his questions. The players can, however, meet prior to the
commencement of the game in order to agree on a strategy. In a quantum
game the players might also prepare a shared entangled quantum state so
as to enhance the coordination of their answers to the referee.

More formally, a quantum game @xmath is specified by:

-   A positive integer @xmath denoting the number of distinct questions.

-   A probability distribution @xmath on the question indices @xmath ,
    according to which the referee selects his questions.

-   Complex Euclidean spaces @xmath corresponding to the different
    quantum systems used by the referee and players.

-   A set @xmath of quantum states @xmath . These states correspond to
    questions and are selected by the referee according to @xmath .

-   A set @xmath of unitary operators @xmath . These unitaries are used
    by the referee to evaluate the players’ answers.

For convenience, the two players are called Alice and Bob . The game is
played as follows. The referee samples @xmath according to @xmath and
prepares the state @xmath , which is placed in the three quantum
registers corresponding to @xmath . This state contains the questions to
be sent to the players: the portion of @xmath corresponding to @xmath is
sent to Alice, the portion of @xmath corresponding to @xmath is sent to
Bob, and the portion of @xmath corresponding to @xmath is kept by the
referee as a private workspace. In reply, Alice sends a quantum register
corresponding to @xmath to the referee, as does Bob to @xmath . The
referee then applies the unitary operation @xmath to the three quantum
registers corresponding to @xmath , followed by a standard measurement
@xmath that dictates the result of the game.

As mentioned at the beginning of this subsection, Alice and Bob may not
communicate once the game commences. But they may meet prior to the
commencement of the game in order prepare a shared entangled quantum
state @xmath . Upon receiving the question register corresponding to
@xmath from the referee, Alice may perform any physically realizable
quantum operation upon that register and upon her portion of @xmath .
The result of this operation shall be contained in the quantum register
corresponding to @xmath —this is the answer that Alice sends to the
referee. Bob follows a similar procedure to obtain his own answer
register corresponding to @xmath .

For any game @xmath , the value @xmath of @xmath is the supremum of the
probability with which the referee can be made to accept taken over all
strategies of Alice and Bob.

###### Theorem 8.1 (Kempe et al. [Kkm@xmath08]).

There is a fixed polynomial @xmath such that the following promise
problem is @xmath -hard under mapping (Karp) reductions:

  Input.  

     A quantum game @xmath . The distribution @xmath and the sets @xmath
    are each given explicitly: for each @xmath , the probability @xmath
    is given in binary, as are the real and complex parts of each entry
    of the matrices @xmath and @xmath .

  Yes.  

     The value @xmath of the game @xmath is 1.

  No.  

     The value @xmath of the game @xmath is less than @xmath .

#### 8.2 Strategies and weak validity

Viewing the two players as a single entity, a quantum game may be seen
as a two-message quantum interaction between the referee and the
players—a message from the referee to the players, followed by a reply
from the players to the referee. The actions of the referee during such
an interaction are completely specified by the parameters of the game.

In the language of Part I , the game specifies a one-round measuring
co-strategy for the referee represented by some positive semidefinite
operators

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which are easily computed given the parameters of the game.

In these games, the players implement a one-round non-measuring strategy
compatible with @xmath whose representation is given by a positive
semidefinite operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For any fixed strategy @xmath for the players, Theorem 3.1 tells us that
the probability with which the players cause the referee to accept is
given by the inner product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In any game, the players combine to implement some physical operation
@xmath It is clear that a given super-operator @xmath denotes a legal
strategy for the players if and only if @xmath is a LOSE operation. As
the players implement a one-round non-measuring strategy, the
representation @xmath of their strategy is given by @xmath

Thus, the problem studied by Kempe et al. [ KKM @xmath 08 ] of deciding
whether @xmath can be reduced via the formalism of strategies to an
optimization problem over the set of LOSE operations:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The following theorem is thus proved.

###### Theorem 8.2.

The weak validity problem for the set of LOSE [LOSR] operations is
strongly @xmath -hard [ @xmath -complete] under mapping (Karp)
reductions:

  Input.  

     A Hermitian matrix @xmath , a real number @xmath , and a positive
    real number @xmath . The number @xmath is given explicitly in
    binary, as are the real and complex parts of each entry of @xmath .
    The number @xmath is given in unary, where @xmath denotes @xmath .

  Yes.  

     There exists a LOSE [LOSR] operation @xmath such that @xmath .

  No.  

     For every LOSE [LOSR] operation @xmath we have @xmath .

###### Remark 8.2.1.

The hardness result for LOSR operations follows from a simple reduction
from separable quantum states to LOSR operations: every separable state
may be written as a LOSR operation in which the input space has
dimension one. That weak validity for LOSR operations is in @xmath (and
is therefore @xmath -complete) follows from the fact that all LOSR
operations may be implemented with polynomially-bounded shared
randomness (Proposition 6.6 ).

#### 8.3 The Yudin-Nemirovskiĭ Theorem and weak membership

Having established that the weak validity problem for LOSE operations is
strongly @xmath -hard, the next step is to follow the leads of Gurvits
and Gharibian [ Gur02 , Gha08 ] and apply Liu’s version [ Liu07 ] of the
Yudin-Nemirovskiĭ Theorem [ YN76 , GLS88 ] in order to prove that the
weak membership problem for LOSE operations is also strongly @xmath
-hard.

The Yudin-Nemirovskiĭ Theorem establishes an oracle-polynomial-time
reduction from the weak validity problem to the weak membership problem
for any convex set @xmath that satisfies certain basic conditions. One
consequence of this theorem is that if the weak validity problem for
@xmath is @xmath -hard then the associated weak membership problem for
@xmath is also @xmath -hard. Although hardness under mapping reductions
is preferred, any hardness result derived from the Yudin-Nemirovskiĭ
Theorem in this way is only guaranteed to hold under more inclusive
oracle reductions.

The basic conditions that must be met by the set @xmath in order for the
Yudin-Nemirovskiĭ Theorem to apply are

1.  @xmath is bounded,

2.  @xmath contains a ball, and

3.  the size of the bound and the ball are polynomially related to the
    dimension of the vector space containing @xmath .

It is simple to check these criteria against the set of LOSE operations.
For condition (i), an explicit bound is established by Proposition 1.3 .
The remaining conditions then follow from Theorem 7.4 .

The following theorem is now proved. (As in Remark 8.2.1 , the analogous
result for LOSR operations follows from a straightforward reduction from
separable quantum states.)

###### Theorem 8.3.

The weak membership problem for the set of LOSE [LOSR] operations is
strongly @xmath -hard [ @xmath -complete] under oracle (Cook)
reductions:

  Input.  

     A Hermitian matrix @xmath and a positive real number @xmath . The
    real and complex parts of each entry of @xmath are given explicitly
    in binary. The number @xmath is given in unary, where @xmath denotes
    @xmath .

  Yes.  

    @xmath for some LOSE [LOSR] operation @xmath .

  No.  

    @xmath for every LOSE [LOSR] operation @xmath .

### Chapter 9 Characterizations of Local Operations

Characterizations of LOSE and LOSR operations are presented in this
chapter. These characterizations are reminiscent of the well-known
characterizations of bipartite and multipartite separable quantum states
due to Horodecki et al. [ HHH96 , HHH01 ] .

Specifically, it is proven in Section 9.1 that @xmath is a LOSR
operation if and only if @xmath for every linear functional @xmath that
is positive on the cone of @xmath -separable operators. (This cone is
defined in Definitions 6.4 and 6.2 .) This characterization of LOSR
operations is proved by a straightforward application of the fundamental
Separation Theorems of convex analysis (Facts 1.5 and 1.6 ).

More interesting is the characterization of LOSE operations presented in
Section 9.2 : @xmath is a LOSE operation if and only if @xmath for every
linear functional @xmath that is completely positive on that same cone
of @xmath -separable operators. Prior to the present work, the notion of
complete positivity was only ever considered in the context wherein the
underlying cone is the positive semidefinite cone. Indeed, what it even
means for a super-operator or functional to be “completely” positive on
some cone other than the positive semidefinite cone must be clarified
before any nontrivial discussion can occur.

#### 9.1 Characterization of local operations with shared randomness

The characterization of LOSR operations presented herein is an immediate
corollary of the following simple proposition.

###### Proposition 9.1.

Let @xmath be any closed convex cone. A vector @xmath is an element of
@xmath if and only if @xmath for every linear functional @xmath that is
positive on @xmath .

###### Proof.

The “only if” part of the proposition is immediate: as @xmath is in
@xmath , any linear functional positive on @xmath must also be positive
on @xmath . For the “if” part of the proposition, suppose that @xmath is
not an element of @xmath . The Separation Theorem (Fact 1.5 ) implies
that there exists a vector @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath , yet
@xmath . (To apply Fact 1.5 , consider a small open ball that is
disjoint from @xmath and contains @xmath .) Let @xmath be the linear
functional given by @xmath . It is clear that @xmath is positive on
@xmath , yet @xmath . ∎

###### Corollary 9.1.1 (Characterization of LOSR operations).

A quantum operation @xmath is an @xmath -party LOSR operation if and
only if @xmath for every linear functional @xmath that is positive on
the cone of @xmath -separable operators.

###### Proof.

In order to apply Proposition 9.1 , it suffices to note the following:

-   The space @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath for @xmath .

-   The @xmath -separable operators form a closed convex cone within the
    space @xmath .

While Proposition 9.1 only gives the desired result for real linear
functionals @xmath , it is trivial to construct a complex extension
functional @xmath that agrees with @xmath on @xmath . ∎

#### 9.2 Characterization of local operations with shared entanglement

In order to state our characterization of LOSE operations, it is
convenient to parameterize the shorthand notation @xmath of Definition
6.2 , which denotes the subspace of Hermitian operators @xmath with
@xmath for some trace-preserving super-operator @xmath , or a scalar
multiple thereof.

###### Definition 9.2 (Parameterization @xmath of the shorthand notation
@xmath).

For each @xmath and each complex Euclidean space @xmath , let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

denote the subspace of operators @xmath for which

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a trace-preserving super-operator, or a scalar multiple thereof. In
particular, the parameter space @xmath is always tensored with the input
space of @xmath , as opposed to the output space. ∎

###### Theorem 9.3 (Characterization of LOSE operations).

A quantum operation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an @xmath -party LOSE operation if and only if @xmath for every
linear functional

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with the property that the super-operator @xmath is positive on the cone
of @xmath -separable operators for all choices of complex Euclidean
spaces @xmath .

###### Remark 9.3.1.

The positivity condition of Theorem 9.3 bears striking resemblance to
the familiar notion of complete positivity of a super-operator. With
this resemblance in mind, a linear functional @xmath obeying the
positivity condition of Theorem 9.3 is said to be completely positive on
the @xmath -separable family of cones . In this sense, Theorem 9.3
represents what seems, to the knowledge of the author, to be the first
application of the notion of complete positivity to a family of cones
other than the positive semidefinite family.

Moreover, for any fixed choice of complex Euclidean spaces @xmath there
exists a linear functional @xmath for which the super-operator @xmath is
positive on the cone of @xmath -separable operators, and yet @xmath is
not completely positive on this family of cones. This curious property
is a consequence of the fact the set of LOSE operations with finite
entanglement is not a closed set. By contrast, complete positivity (in
the traditional sense) of a super-operator @xmath is assured whenever
@xmath is positive for a space @xmath with dimension at least that of
@xmath . (See, for example, Bhatia [ Bha07 ] for a proof of this fact.)

The proof of Theorem 9.3 employs the following helpful identity
involving the Choi-Jamiołkowski representation for super-operators. This
identity is proven by straightforward calculation.

###### Proposition 9.4.

Let @xmath and let @xmath . Then the super-operator @xmath defined by
@xmath for all @xmath satisfies @xmath

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and @xmath denote the standard bases of @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively, and let @xmath be the coefficients of @xmath in the basis
@xmath of @xmath . We have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

∎

The following technical lemma is also employed in the proof of Theorem
9.3 .

###### Lemma 9.5.

Let @xmath , let @xmath , and let @xmath . Then the super-operator
@xmath defined by @xmath for all @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the unique operator satisfying @xmath for all @xmath and
note that the adjoint @xmath satisfies @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

∎

###### Proof of Theorem 9.3.

For the “only if” part of the theorem, let @xmath be any LOSE operation
with finite entanglement and let @xmath be such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be any linear functional on @xmath that satisfies the stated
positivity condition. Lemma 9.5 implies

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

A standard continuity argument establishes the desired implication when
@xmath is a finitely approximable LOSE operation.

For the “if” part of the theorem, suppose that @xmath is a quantum
operation that is not a LOSE operation. The Separation Theorem (Fact 1.6
) implies that there is a Hermitian operator @xmath such that @xmath for
all LOSE operations @xmath , yet @xmath . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the linear functional given by @xmath .

It remains to verify that @xmath satisfies the desired positivity
condition. Toward that end, let @xmath be arbitrary complex Euclidean
spaces. By convexity, it suffices to consider only those @xmath
-separable operators that are product operators. Choose any such
operator and note that, up to a scalar multiple, it has the form @xmath
where each @xmath is a quantum operation. The operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is positive semidefinite if and only if it has a nonnegative inner
product with every density operator in @xmath . As @xmath ranges over
all such operators, so does @xmath . Moreover, every such @xmath
—together with @xmath —induces a LOSE operation @xmath defined by @xmath
. Lemma 9.5 and the choice of @xmath imply

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so @xmath satisfies the desired positivity condition. ∎

### Chapter 10 No-Signaling Operations

At the end of Chapter 7 it was claimed that the product space @xmath is
spanned by Choi-Jamiołkowski representations of no-signaling operations.
It appears as though this fact has yet to be noted explicitly in the
literature, so a proof is offered in this chapter.

More accurately, two characterizations of no-signaling operations are
presented in Section 10.2 , each of which is expressed as a condition on
Choi-Jamiołkowski representations of super-operators. It then follows
immediately that @xmath is spanned by Choi-Jamiołkowski representations
of no-signaling operations.

Finally, Section 10.3 provides an example of a so-called separable
no-signaling operation that is not a LOSE operation, thus ruling out an
easy “short cut” to the ball of LOSR operations revealed in Theorem 7.4
.

#### 10.1 Formal definition of a no-signaling operation

Intuitively, a quantum operation @xmath is no-signaling if it cannot be
used by spatially separated parties to violate relativistic causality.
Put another way, an operation @xmath jointly implemented by several
parties is no-signaling if those parties cannot use @xmath as a “black
box” to communicate with one another.

In order to facilitate a formal definition for no-signaling operations,
the shorthand notation for Kronecker products from Chapter 1 must be
extended: if @xmath is an arbitrary index set with @xmath then we write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with the convention that @xmath . As with the original shorthand, a
similar notation also applies to operators, sets of operators, and
super-operators. The notation @xmath refers to the set of indices not in
@xmath , so that @xmath , @xmath is a partition of @xmath .

###### Definition 10.1 (No-signaling operation).

A quantum operation @xmath is an @xmath -party no-signaling operation if
for each index set @xmath we have

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

whenever

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

What follows is a brief argument that Definition 10.1 captures the
meaning of a no-signaling operation—a more detailed discussion of this
condition can be found in Beckman et al. [ BGNP01 ] . If @xmath is
no-signaling and @xmath are locally indistinguishable to a coalition
@xmath of parties (for example, when @xmath ) then clearly the members
of @xmath cannot perform a measurement on their portion of the output
that might allow them to distinguish @xmath from @xmath (that is, @xmath
). For otherwise, the coalition @xmath would have extracted
information—a signal—from the other parties that would allow it to
distinguish @xmath from @xmath .

Conversely, if there exist input states @xmath such that @xmath and yet
@xmath then there exists a measurement that allows the coalition @xmath
to distinguish these two output states with nonzero bias, which implies
that signaling must have occurred.

It is not hard to see that every LOSE operation is also a no-signaling
operation. Conversely, much has been made of the fact that there exist
no-signaling operations that are not LOSE operations—this is so-called
“super-strong” nonlocality, exemplified by the popular “nonlocal box”
discussed in Section 10.3 .

#### 10.2 Two characterizations of no-signaling operations

In this section it is shown that the product space @xmath is spanned by
Choi-Jamiołkowski representations of no-signaling operations. (Recall
from Definition 6.2 that each @xmath denotes the subspace of Hermitian
operators @xmath for which @xmath is a trace-preserving super-operator,
or a scalar multiple thereof.) Indeed, that fact is a corollary of the
following characterizations of no-signaling operations.

###### Theorem 10.2 (Two characterizations of no-signaling operations).

Let @xmath be a quantum operation. The following are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is a no-signaling operation.

2.  @xmath is an element of @xmath .

3.   For each index set @xmath there exists an operator @xmath with
    @xmath

###### Remark 10.2.1.

Membership in the set of no-signaling operations may be verified in
polynomial time by checking the linear constraints in Item 3 of Theorem
10.2 . While the number of such constraints grows exponentially with
@xmath , this exponential growth is not a problem because the number of
parties @xmath is always @xmath for @xmath . (This logarithmic bound
follows from the fact that each space @xmath has dimension at least two
and the total dimension @xmath is the product of the dimensions of each
of the @xmath different spaces.)

The partial trace condition of Item 3 of Theorem 10.2 is quite plainly
suggested by Theorem 3.2 (Characterization of strategies). Moreover,
essential components of the proofs presented for two of the three
implications claimed in Theorem 10.2 appear in a 2001 paper of Beckman
et al. [ BGNP01 ] . The following theorem, however, establishes the
third implication and appears to be new.

###### Theorem 10.3.

A Hermitian operator @xmath is in @xmath if and only if for each index
set @xmath there exists a Hermitian operator @xmath with @xmath

###### Proof.

The “only if” portion of the theorem is straightforward—only the “if”
portion is proven here. The proof proceeds by induction on @xmath . The
base case @xmath is trivial. Proceeding directly to the general case,
let @xmath and let @xmath be a basis of @xmath . Let @xmath be the
unique operators satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It shall be proven that @xmath . The intuitive idea is to exploit the
linear independence of @xmath in order to “peel off” individual product
terms in the decomposition of @xmath .

Toward that end, for each fixed index @xmath let @xmath be a Hermitian
operator for which the real number @xmath is nonzero only when @xmath .
Define a linear functional @xmath and note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Fix an arbitrary partition @xmath of the index set @xmath . By
assumption, @xmath for some Hermitian operator @xmath . Apply @xmath to
both sides of the above identity, then use the fact that @xmath and
@xmath act upon different spaces to obtain

  -- -------- -------- --
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

from which it follows that @xmath is a product operator of the form
@xmath for some Hermitian operator @xmath . As this identity holds for
all index sets @xmath , it follows from the induction hypothesis that
@xmath as desired.

Now, choose a maximal linearly independent subset @xmath of @xmath and
let @xmath be the unique Hermitian operators satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A similar argument shows @xmath , which completes the induction. ∎

###### Proof of Theorem 10.2.

  Item  3  implies item  2  .  

    This implication follows immediately from Theorem 10.3 .

  Item  2  implies item  1  .  

    The proof of this implication borrows heavily from the proof of
    Theorem 2 in Beckman et al. [ BGNP01 ] .

    Fix any partition @xmath of the index set @xmath . Let @xmath and
    @xmath and let @xmath and @xmath be bases of @xmath and @xmath ,
    respectively, that consist entirely of density operators. Given any
    two operators @xmath let @xmath be the unique coefficients of @xmath
    and @xmath respectively in the product basis @xmath . Then @xmath
    implies

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for each fixed index @xmath .

    As @xmath , it is possible to write

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath is a positive integer and @xmath satisfies @xmath for
    each of the indices @xmath and @xmath . In particular, as each
    @xmath is (a scalar multiple of) a trace-preserving super-operator,
    it holds that for each index @xmath there exists @xmath with @xmath
    for all density operators @xmath . Then

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

    as desired.

  Item  1  implies item  3  .  

    This implication is essentially a multi-party generalization of
    Theorem 8 in Beckman et al. [ BGNP01 ] . The proof presented here
    differs from theirs in some interesting but non-critical details.

    Fix any partition @xmath of the index set @xmath . To begin, observe
    that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for all operators @xmath —not just density operators. (This
    observation follows from the fact that @xmath is spanned by the
    density operators—a fact used in the above proof that item 2 implies
    item 1 .)

    Now, let @xmath and @xmath and let @xmath and @xmath be the standard
    bases of @xmath and @xmath respectively. If @xmath and @xmath are
    distinct indices in @xmath and @xmath is any operator then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and hence

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

    (Here a natural notation for the zero operator was used implicitly.)
    Similarly, if @xmath is any density operator then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for each fixed index @xmath . Employing these two identities, one
    obtains

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

    where the quantum operation @xmath is defined by @xmath . As @xmath
    is a product operator of the desired form, the proof that item 1
    implies item 3 is complete.

∎

#### 10.3 A separable no-signaling operation that is not a LOSE
operation

Theorem 7.4 establishes a ball of LOSR operations around the completely
noisy channel. Was the work of Chapter 7 necessary, or might there be a
simpler way to establish the same thing? For example, suppose @xmath is
a quantum operation for which the operator @xmath is @xmath -separable.
Quantum operations with separable Choi-Jamiołkowski representations such
as this are called separable operations [ Rai97 ] . If an operation is
both separable and no-signaling then must it always be a LOSE operation,
or even a LOSR operation? An affirmative answer to this question would
yield a trivial proof of Theorem 7.4 that leverages existing knowledge
of separable balls around the identity operator.

Alas, such a short cut is not to be had: there exist no-signaling
operations @xmath that are not LOSE operations, yet @xmath is separable.
One example of such an operation is the so-called “nonlocal box”
discovered in 1994 by Popescu and Rohrlich [ PR94 ] . This nonlocal box
is easily formalized as a two-party no-signaling quantum operation
@xmath , as in Ref. [ BGNP01 , Section V.B] . That formalization is
reproduced here.

Let @xmath , let @xmath denote the standard bases of both @xmath and
@xmath , and let @xmath denote the standard bases of both @xmath and
@xmath . Write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . The nonlocal box @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Operators not in @xmath are annihilated by @xmath . It is routine to
verify that @xmath is a no-signaling operation, and this operation
@xmath is known not to be a LOSE operation [ PR94 ] . To see that @xmath
is separable, write

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

for @xmath . Then for all @xmath it holds that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

from which the @xmath -separability of @xmath follows. It is interesting
to note that the nonlocal box is the smallest possible nontrivial
example of such an operation—the number of parties @xmath and the input
spaces @xmath and output spaces @xmath all have dimension two.

### Chapter 11 Conclusion

In this thesis we discussed two distinct topics. In Part I we initiated
the study of quantum strategies, which are complete descriptions of one
party’s actions in an interaction involving the exchange of multiple
quantum messages among multiple parties. We saw proofs of three
important properties of strategies, and we saw applications of these
properties to zero-sum quantum games, complexity theory, and quantum
coin-flipping. We also introduced a new norm for super-operators and
argued that this norm, which generalizes the familiar diamond norm,
captures the operational distinguishability of two quantum strategies in
the same sense that the trace norm captures the distinguishability of
two quantum states, or the diamond norm captures the distinguishability
of two quantum operations.

In Part II we established several properties of local quantum
operations, the implementation of which might be assisted by shared
entanglement. Specifically, we showed that every quantum operation
sufficiently close to the completely noisy operation can be implemented
locally using only shared randomness. This fact was used to prove strong
@xmath -hardness of the weak membership problem for local operations
with shared entanglement. We then provided algebraic characterizations
of the sets of local operations with shared randomness and entanglement
in terms of linear functionals that are positive and “completely”
positive, respectively, on a certain cone of separable Hermitian
operators. Finally, we made explicit for the first time two fundamental
characterizations of no-signaling operations, establishing that the
spaces spanned by the local operations and by the larger class of
no-signaling operations are in fact equal.

We conclude the thesis with some pointers for future research and open
problems pertaining to the topics covered.

#### 11.1 Quantum strategies

  New properties.  

    Three important properties of quantum strategies were established in
    Theorems 3.1 (Interaction output probabilities), 3.2
    (Characterization of strategies), and 3.3 (Maximum output
    probability). Other simpler and more basic properties were noted in
    Propositions 2.7 , 3.15 , 3.16 , and 3.17 . We also saw several
    properties of a new distance measure for quantum strategies in
    Chapter 5 . What other properties are held by our representation for
    quantum strategies?

  Simplifying proofs.  

    In Section 4.3 we employed the properties of quantum strategies to
    provide a simplified proof of Kitaev’s bound for strong quantum
    coin-flipping. We also noted in Section 1.1.1 that Chiribella et al.
    have provided a short proof by quantum strategies of the
    impossibility of quantum bit commitment [ CDP @xmath 09c ] .

    Given these examples, one is tempted to believe that the properties
    of quantum strategies encapsulate many of the critical elements of
    various proofs involving the exchange of quantum information. It is
    reasonable to expect, for example, that our formalism could lead to
    new or alternate security proofs for various quantum cryptographic
    protocols, or possibly even to proofs that certain classical
    protocols are secure against quantum attacks.

    For an unsolved example, consider the protocol for weak quantum
    coin-flipping with arbitrarily small bias given in Ref. [ Moc07 ] .
    The proof that the exhibited protocol has arbitrarily small bias is
    very complicated. Could this proof be simplified by quantum
    strategies?

  New applications.  

    Of course, the formalism of quantum strategies is by no means
    limited to simplifications of existing proofs, as illustrated by the
    new results established in Sections 4.1 , 4.2 , and 8.2 , and by
    Chiribella, D’Ariano, Perinotti, and other authors as discussed in
    Section 1.1.1 . Surely, there is more to add to this list of new
    applications.

#### 11.2 Local operations with shared entanglement

  Bigger ball of LOSE or LOSR operations.  

    The size of the ball of (unnormalized) LOSR operations established
    in Theorem 7.4 scales as @xmath . Given that this quantity already
    includes a factor of the dimension @xmath , is it possible to
    eliminate the explicit dependence on the number of parties @xmath ?
    (By contrast, for the case of multipartite separable quantum states
    the dependence on @xmath seems unavoidable [ GB03 ] .) Can the
    exponent on the dimension @xmath be improved?

    As mentioned in Section 7.2 , it is not clear that there is a ball
    of LOSE operations that strictly contains any ball of LOSR
    operations. Does such a larger ball exist?

  Completely positive super-operators.  

    As noted in Remark 9.3.1 , the characterization of LOSE operations
    is interesting because it involves linear functionals that are not
    just positive, but “completely” positive on the family of @xmath
    -separable cones.

    Apparently, the study of completely positive super-operators has
    until now been strictly limited to the context of positive
    semidefinite input cones. Any question that may be asked of
    conventional completely positive super-operators might also be asked
    of this new class of completely positive super-operators.

  Entanglement required for approximating LOSE operations.  

    It was mentioned in Chapters 1 and 6 that there exist LOSE
    operations that cannot be implemented with any finite amount of
    shared entanglement [ LTW08 ] . The natural question, then, is how
    much entanglement is necessary to achieve an arbitrarily close
    approximation to such an operation?

    The present author conjectures that for every two-party LOSE
    operation @xmath there exists an @xmath -approximation @xmath of
    @xmath in which the dimension of the shared entangled state scales
    as @xmath for some positive constants @xmath and @xmath and some
    appropriate notion of @xmath -approximation. Here @xmath is the
    dimension of the space in which @xmath lies.

    Evidence pertaining to this conjecture can be found in Refs. [
    CHTW04 , KRT08 , LTW08 ] . Moreover, the example in Ref. [ LTW08 ]
    strongly suggests that the exponential dependence on @xmath is
    unavoidable; the pressing open question pertains to the dependence
    upon @xmath . At the moment, no upper bound at all is known for this
    general class of two-party LOSE operations.