This thesis discusses the young fields of quantum pseudo-randomness and
quantum learning algorithms. We present techniques for derandomising
algorithms to decrease randomness resource requirements and improve
efficiency. One key object in doing this is a @xmath -design, which is a
distribution on the unitary group whose @xmath moments match those of
the unitarily invariant Haar measure. We show that for a natural model
of a random quantum circuit, the distribution of random circuits quickly
converges to a 2-design. We then present an efficient unitary @xmath
-design construction for any @xmath , provided the number of qubits
@xmath satisfies @xmath . In doing this, we provide an efficient
construction of a quantum tensor product expander, which is a
generalisation of a quantum expander which in turn generalises classical
expanders. We then discuss applications of @xmath -designs. We show that
they can be used to improve the efficiency of many existing algorithms
and protocols and also find new applications to derandomising large
deviation bounds. In particular, we show that many large deviation bound
results for Haar random unitaries carry over to @xmath -designs for
@xmath .

In the second part of the thesis, we present some learning and testing
algorithms for the Clifford group. We find an optimal algorithm for
identifying an unknown Clifford operation. We also give an algorithm to
test if an unknown operation is close to a Clifford or far from every
Clifford.

\thesisdec

A dissertation submitted to the University of Bristol in accordance with
the requirements for award of the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in the
Faculty of Engineering, Department of Computer Science, September 2009
\wordcount 40,000
