#### Part II

In this part, we prove the entropy sensitivity of languages associated
in a natural way with infinite labelled graphs @xmath . The proof is
based on considering Markov chains with forbidden transitions on @xmath
, and on investigating the spectral radius of such chains.

If @xmath is a finite alphabet and @xmath the set of all finite words
over @xmath , then a language @xmath over @xmath is a subset of @xmath .
The growth or entropy of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The quantity @xmath measures the parameter of exponential decay of
@xmath . For a finite, non-empty set @xmath denote

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the empty word.

Question: For which class of languages associated with infinite graphs,
is @xmath ? If this holds for any set @xmath of forbidden subwords ,
then the language @xmath is called growth sensitive (or entropy
sensitive ).

Let @xmath be an infinite graph with vertex set @xmath , edge set @xmath
and @xmath a function which associates to each edge @xmath its label
@xmath . With @xmath we associate the following languages

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . We write @xmath and call this the entropy of our oriented,
labelled graph. Under general assumptions, we can prove the following
results.

###### Theorem 20.5.

Suppose that @xmath is uniformly connected and deterministic with label
alphabet @xmath . Let @xmath be a finite, non-empty set which is
relatively dense in @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Corollary 20.6.

If @xmath is uniformly connected and fully deterministic, then @xmath is
growth sensitive for all @xmath .

What is interesting here is that the proof of the previous results is
based on Markov chains. We consider a Markov chain with state space
@xmath and transition matrix @xmath , whose entries are induced by the
labelled edges of @xmath . We then remark that the entropy @xmath is in
direct correspondence with the spectral radius @xmath of the respective
Markov chain. Moreover, to the restricted language @xmath one can also
associate a “restricted” Markov chain, that is, a Markov chain which is
not allowed to cross edges with labels in @xmath . Then the question of
growth sensitivity can be interpreted in terms of Markov chains and its
respective spectral radii on @xmath .

Part II is completed with an example where one can apply the results
developed previously: applications to pairs of groups and their Schreier
graphs.

### Chapter \thechapter Basic Facts and Preliminaries

This chapter is devoted to basic definitions and facts connected with
the theory of Markov chains and random walks on graphs and groups.
Moreover, we present here some basic tools which are useful for a better
understanding of the results we are going to present throughout this
work. We shall follow the notations from Woess [ Woe00 ] .

A Markov chain on a state space @xmath , which is adapted to the
geometry of @xmath , will be called a random walk throughout this
thesis.

#### 1 Markov Chains

A Markov chain is defined by a finite or countable state space @xmath
and a transition matrix (or transition operator ) @xmath . In addition,
one has to specify an initial position, that is, the position at time
@xmath . The entry @xmath of @xmath represents the probability to move
from @xmath to @xmath in one step. This defines a sequence of @xmath
-valued random variables @xmath , called Markov chain , where @xmath
represents the random position in @xmath at time @xmath . One can
imagine a Markov chain as a walker moving randomly in the state space
@xmath , according to the probabilities given by the transition matrix
@xmath .

In order to model the random variables @xmath , one has to find a
suitable probability space on which the random position after @xmath
steps can be described as the @xmath -th random variable of a Markov
chain. The usual choice of the probability space is the trajectory space
@xmath , equipped with the product @xmath -algebra arising from the
discrete one on @xmath . An element @xmath of @xmath represents a
possible evolution (trajectory), that is, a possible sequence of points
visited one after the other by the Markov chain. Then, @xmath is the
@xmath -th projection from @xmath to @xmath . This describes the Markov
chain starting at @xmath , when @xmath is equipped with the probability
measure given via the Kolmogorov extension theorem by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The associated expectation is denoted by @xmath . Depending on the
context, we shall call a Markov chain the pair @xmath or the sequence of
random variables @xmath . We write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which represents, on one hand the @xmath -entry of the matrix power
@xmath , with @xmath ( @xmath is the identity matrix over @xmath ), and
on the other hand the @xmath -step transition probability, that is, the
probability the get from @xmath to @xmath in @xmath steps.

###### Definition 1.1.

A Markov chain @xmath is called irreducible , if for every @xmath ,
there is some @xmath such that @xmath .

This means that every state @xmath can be reached from every other state
@xmath with positive probability. Throughout this thesis, we shall
always require that the state space is infinite and all states
communicate, i.e., the Markov chain is irreducible.

#### 2 Random Walks on Graphs

###### Graphs.

A graph consists of a finite or countable set of vertices (points)
@xmath , equipped with a symmetric adjacency relation @xmath , which
defines the set of edges @xmath (as a subset of @xmath ). We write
@xmath for the edge between the pair of neighbours @xmath . For the sake
of simplicity, we exclude loops, that is @xmath , for all @xmath .

In order to simplify the notation, instead of writing @xmath for a
graph, we shall write only @xmath . It will be clear from the context
whether we are considering vertices or edges.

A path from @xmath to @xmath in @xmath is a sequence @xmath of vertices,
such that @xmath , for all @xmath . The number @xmath is the length of
the path. The graph @xmath is called connected if every pair of vertices
can be joined by a path. The usual graph distance @xmath is the minimum
among the lenghts of all paths from @xmath to @xmath . A path is called
simple if it has no repeated vertex, and geodesic if its length is
@xmath . The degree @xmath of a vertex @xmath is the number of its
neighbours.

The graph @xmath is called locally finite if every vertex has finite
degree. We say that @xmath has bounded geometry if it is connected with
bounded vertex degrees.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two graphs, and @xmath and @xmath the discrete
graph metric on them, respectively. We say that @xmath and @xmath are
quasi-isometric if there exists a mapping @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath .

###### Graph Automorphisms.

An automorphism of a graph @xmath is a self-isometry of @xmath with
respect to the graph distance @xmath , that is, a bijection @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The set of all automorphisms of a graph @xmath forms a group denoted by
@xmath .

The graph @xmath is called (vertex)-transitive if for every pair @xmath
of vertices in @xmath , there exists a graph automorphism @xmath with
@xmath . If @xmath is transitive, then all vertices have the same
degree. If there is a subgroup @xmath of @xmath , such that, for every
@xmath , there exists @xmath , with @xmath , then we say that @xmath
acts transitively on @xmath . Throughout this thesis, we shall only
consider transitive graphs.

###### The Graph of a Markov Chain.

Every Markov chain @xmath with state space @xmath and transition matrix
@xmath defines a graph whose vertex set is the state space @xmath and
the (oriented) set of edges is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

When the transition matrix @xmath is adapted to the structure of the
underlying graph @xmath , then we shall speak of a random walk on @xmath
(instead of a Markov chain).

The simple random walk (SRW) on a locally finite graph @xmath is the
Markov chain whose state space is @xmath and the transition
probabilities are given by

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

This is the basic example of a Markov chain adapted to the underlying
graph @xmath . Throughout this thesis, we shall consider more general
types of adaptedness properties of the transition matrix @xmath to the
underlying structure, and we shall speak of random walks (instead of
Markov chains). We define here some of these properties, which will be
frequently used.

###### Definition 2.1.

The random walk @xmath is of nearest neighbour type , if @xmath occurs
only when @xmath .

###### Definition 2.2.

The random walk @xmath is said to have @xmath -th finite moment with
respect to the usual graph distance @xmath on the graph @xmath , if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some fixed vertex @xmath in @xmath .

Further adaptedness conditions of geometric type will be introduced
later on.

###### Green Function and Spectral Radius.

Assume that the random walk @xmath is irreducible. The Green function
associated with @xmath is given by the power series

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We write @xmath for @xmath . This is the expected number of visits of
@xmath to @xmath when @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.3.

For all @xmath the power series @xmath has the same finite radius of
convergence @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The fact that the power series defining the functions @xmath have all
the same radius of convergence follows from a system of Harnack-type
inequalities. Because of the irreducibility of @xmath , for all @xmath
there exist some @xmath such that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, for every @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consequently, for every positive argument of the Green function,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows that the radius of convergence of @xmath is at least as big
as that of @xmath . The fact that @xmath follows from the irreducibility
of @xmath : let @xmath such that @xmath , then @xmath for every @xmath .
∎

Hence, the Green function has the following important property: if the
random walk on @xmath is irreducible and @xmath is a real number greater
than zero, then the power series @xmath either converges or diverges
simultaneously for all @xmath . For more details, see Woess [ Woe00 ] .

###### Definition 2.4.

The spectral radius of the random walk @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 2.5.

The random walk @xmath is called recurrent if @xmath for some ( @xmath
every) @xmath . Otherwise, is called transient .

###### Proposition 2.6.

Further characterizations of recurrence and transience:

1.   If @xmath , then @xmath is transient. The converse is not true.

2.   If @xmath is recurrent then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.   If @xmath is transient, then for every finite @xmath ,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

In other words, a random walk @xmath is recurrent if every element of
the state space @xmath is visited infinitely often with probability
@xmath . Equivalently, in the transient case, each element is visited
only finitely many times with probability @xmath . This is the same as
saying that @xmath leaves finite subset of @xmath almost surely after a
finite time.

###### Example 2.7.

The SRW on @xmath is the Markov chain with state space @xmath and
transition probabilities

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The random walk on @xmath with drift to the right is the Markov chain on
@xmath with

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The SRW on @xmath is recurrent and the random walk with drift is
transient.

[]

Simple random walk on @xmath

[]

Random walk on @xmath with drift

###### Rate of Escape

###### Proposition 2.8 (Rate of Escape, Drift).

If the random walk @xmath has finite first moment with respect to @xmath
, then there exists a finite number @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The number @xmath is called rate of escape or drift of the random walk
@xmath with transition matrix @xmath .

The rate of escape is only of interest for transient random walks, since
for the recurrent ones it is always zero. The existence of the rate of
escape is a consequence of Kingman’s subadditive ergodic theorem which
we formulate now. See Kingman [ Kin68 ] for details.

###### Theorem 2.9.

Consider the probability space @xmath and let @xmath be the time shift
on @xmath with @xmath . If @xmath is a subadditive sequence of
non-negative real-valued random variables, that is, for all @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

holds, and if @xmath is integrable, then there is a @xmath -invariant
real-valued integrable random variable @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Reversible Markov Chains

###### Definition 2.10.

A Markov chain @xmath is called reversible if there exists a measure
@xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also, @xmath is called the reversible measure for @xmath . If @xmath is
the simple random walk on @xmath , then @xmath .

###### Definition 2.11.

A function @xmath is called @xmath -harmonic if @xmath pointwise, where
the Markov operator @xmath acts on functions @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We say that @xmath is @xmath -superharmonic if @xmath pointwise.

Reversibility is the same as saying that the transition matrix @xmath
acts on @xmath as a self-adjoint operator, that is, @xmath , for all
@xmath , where the Hilbert space @xmath consists of functions @xmath
with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The inner product on @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There is another useful characterization of the recurrence of a random
walk in terms of superharmonic functions, which we state now.

###### Theorem 2.12.

@xmath is recurrent if and only if all non-negative superharmonic
functions are constant.

###### Markov Chains and Reversed Markov Chains.

If the Markov chain @xmath is reversible with respect to the measure
@xmath , then one can construct the reversed Markov chain @xmath on
@xmath , whose transition probabilities are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The reversed Markov chain inherits the properties of the original one.

If @xmath is a transitive graph, @xmath a transition matrix on @xmath
and @xmath is a group which acts transitively on @xmath , then one can
construct a reversible measure @xmath for the Markov chain @xmath . For
doing this, let @xmath be a fixed reference vertex, whose choice is
irrelevant by the transitivity assumption. Denote by @xmath the
stabilizer of @xmath in @xmath , that is,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and by @xmath the orbit of @xmath under the action of @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then it is easy to check that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a reversible measure for @xmath . By @xmath we denote the cardinality
of the respective set. Note that if the group @xmath is discrete, then
the measure @xmath is just the counting measure.

###### Homogeneous Markov Chains.

Let @xmath be an irreducible Markov chain on @xmath . We denote by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the group of automorphisms (isometries) of @xmath which leaves invariant
the transition probabilities of @xmath .

###### Definition 2.13.

A Markov chain is called homogeneous or transitive if the group @xmath
acts on @xmath transitively.

Throughout this thesis we shall consider transient Markov chains which
are irreducible and homogeneous.

#### 3 Random Walks on Finitely Generated Groups

Let @xmath be a discrete group with unit element @xmath , with the group
operation written multiplicatively, unless @xmath is abelian. Let also
@xmath be a probability measure on @xmath . The (right) random walk on
@xmath with law @xmath , denoted by @xmath , is the Markov chain with
state space @xmath and transition probabilities given by

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

In order to obtain an equivalent model of the random walk @xmath as a
sequence of random variables @xmath , we use the product space @xmath .
For @xmath , the @xmath -th projections @xmath of @xmath onto @xmath
constitute a sequence of independent @xmath -valued random variables
with common distribution @xmath , and the right random walk starting at
@xmath is given as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is a generalization of the scheme of sums of i.i.d. random
variables on the integers or on the reals. The @xmath -step transition
probabilities are obtained by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the @xmath -fold convolution of @xmath with itself, with
@xmath , the point mass at the group identity. We denote by @xmath the
measure of the random walk and omit the subscript if the random walk
starts at the identity @xmath .

In order to relate random walks on groups with random walks on graphs,
let us introduce the notion of Cayley graphs , that is, graphs that
encode the structure of discrete groups. Suppose that the group @xmath
is finitely generated, and let @xmath be a symmetric set of generators
of @xmath . The Cayley graph @xmath of @xmath with respect to the
generating set @xmath has vertex set @xmath , and two vertices @xmath
are connected by an edge, if and only if @xmath . This graph is
connected, locally finite, and regular (all vertices have the same
degree @xmath ). Notice that Cayley graphs are transitive in the sense
that they look the same from every vertex. If @xmath , then @xmath has a
loop at each vertex.

###### Example 3.1.

The homogeneous tree @xmath of degree @xmath is the Cayley graph of the
group @xmath with respect to the generators @xmath . This group is the
free product of @xmath copies of the two-element group @xmath . See
Chapter II in Woess [ Woe00 ] for details on free products.

[]

###### Example 3.2.

Euclidean lattices are the most well-known Cayley graphs. In the abelian
group @xmath , we may choose the set of all elements with Euclidean
length @xmath as generating set @xmath . The resulting Cayley graph is
the usual grid. The group @xmath can be written as @xmath .

[]

The simple random walk on @xmath is the right random walk on @xmath
whose law @xmath is the equidistribution on @xmath , i.e., @xmath for
@xmath .

For an arbitrary distribution @xmath , we write @xmath . Then @xmath ,
and the random walk with law @xmath is irreducible if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

i.e., the set @xmath generates @xmath as a group.

###### Reversed Random Walk.

If @xmath is the right random walk on @xmath with distribution law
@xmath , then the reversed random walk @xmath on @xmath has the
distribution law @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

###### Random Walks on @xmath and on @xmath.

Let @xmath be a closed subgroup of @xmath which acts transitively on
@xmath . The graph @xmath should not be necessary a Cayley graph of
@xmath . One can then define random walks on @xmath which are in direct
correspondence with random walks @xmath on @xmath . Such random walks on
@xmath inherit the properties of @xmath .

The group @xmath carries a left Haar measure @xmath , since @xmath . The
measure @xmath has the following properties: every open set has positive
measure, every compact set has finite measure and @xmath is a left
translation invariant measure. Moreover, as a Radon measure with these
properties, @xmath is unique up to multiplication by constants. If
@xmath is discrete, the Haar measure is (a multiple of) the counting
measure. For details concerning integration on locally compact groups
and Haar measures on groups, the reader may have a look at the book of
Hewitt and Ross [ HR63 ] .

Let us choose a left Haar measure @xmath on @xmath , such that @xmath ,
where @xmath is a reference vertex. With the transition probabilities
@xmath of the random walk @xmath on @xmath , one can associate a Borel
measure @xmath on @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (4)
  -- -------- -- -----

The measure @xmath is absolutely continuous with respect to @xmath . One
can check that @xmath defines a probability measure on @xmath , and
induces the right random walk @xmath on @xmath . Then @xmath is a model
of the random walk @xmath on @xmath starting at @xmath . In other words,
@xmath is a homogeneous Markov chain with transition probabilities
@xmath , for @xmath . For more details, see also Kaimanovich and Woess [
KW02 , Section 2] .

Therefore, whenever one has a Markov chain @xmath and a closed subgroup
@xmath of @xmath , then one can construct a measure @xmath on @xmath
which is in direct correspondence with the transition probabilities
@xmath by equation ( 4 ). If @xmath is a Cayley graph of @xmath with
respect to some generating set, then the correspondence between @xmath
and @xmath is given by ( 2 ).

## Part I Behaviour at Infinity of Lamplighter Random Walks

### Chapter \thechapter Lamplighter Random Walks

The aim of this chapter is to introduce a class of random walks on
wreath products of groups and graphs. Wreath products of groups are the
simplest non-trivial case of semi-direct products, because they
essentially arise from the action of a group on itself by translation.
Such groups are called groups with dynamical configuration in [ KV83 ] .

Random walks on wreath products are known in the literature as
lamplighter random walks , because of the intuitive interpretation of
such walks in terms of configuration of lamps. Such walks appear also in
the paper of Varopoulos [ Var83 ] .

We first introduce lamplighter graphs and random walks on them, and
afterwards we consider group actions on lamplighter graphs. Depending on
the group actions, the random walks will inherit different behaviour at
infinity, which will be studied in the sequel. For simplicity of
notation, we shall mostly write LRW for lamplighter random walks.

#### 4 Lamplighter Graphs

Let @xmath be an infinite, locally finite, transitive, connected graph
and let @xmath be some reference vertex in @xmath . Imagine that at each
vertex of @xmath sits a lamp, which can have different states of
intensity, but only finitely many. For sake of simplicity, we shall
consider the case when the lamp has only two states, encoded by the
elements of the set @xmath , where the element @xmath represents the
state off (the lamp is switched off) and the element @xmath represents
the state on (the lamp is switched on). Anyway, instead of @xmath one
can consider any finite set.

One can think of a person starting in @xmath with all lamps switched off
and moving randomly in @xmath , according to some given probability, and
switching randomly lamps on or off. We investigate the following model:
at each step the person may walk to some random vertex (situated in a
bounded neighbourhood of his current position), and may change the state
of some lamps in a bounded neighbourhood of his position. At every
moment of time the lamplighter will leave behind a certain configuration
of lamps. The configurations of lamps are encoded by functions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which give, for every @xmath , the state of the lamp sitting there.
Denote by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the set of all configurations, and let @xmath be the set of all finitely
supported configurations, where a configuration is said to have finite
support if the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is finite. Denote by @xmath the zero or trivial configuration , i.e. the
configuration which corresponds to all lamps switched off, and by @xmath
the configuration where only the lamp at @xmath is on and all other
lamps are off.

###### Definition 4.1.

The wreath product @xmath of graphs @xmath and @xmath is defined as the
graph with vertex set @xmath and adjacency relation given by

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (5)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath represents the subset of @xmath , where the configurations
@xmath and @xmath are different.

The wreath product @xmath will be refered as the lamplighter graph . The
vertices of @xmath are pairs of the form @xmath , where @xmath
represents a finitely supported @xmath -valued configuration of lamps
and @xmath some vertex in @xmath . The graph @xmath will be called the
base graph or the underlying graph for the lamplighter graph @xmath .

###### Example 4.2.

Consider the wreath product @xmath : the base graph and the graph of
lamp states are both @xmath . Denote the vertices of the base graph by
@xmath and the state of lamps by @xmath . Then the lamplighter graph
@xmath has @xmath vertices and it can be represented as in the figure.

[]

The wreath product of graphs of bounded geometry is a graph of bounded
geometry, and the wreath product of regular graphs is also regular.

Let us now define a metric @xmath on the graph @xmath . If we denote by
@xmath the smallest length of a “travelling salesman” tour from @xmath
to @xmath that visits each element of the set @xmath , then

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (6)
  -- -------- -- -----

defines a metric on @xmath . Recall that the travelling salesman tour
between two given points is the shortest possible tour that visits each
point exactly once. Above, @xmath represents the cardinality of the
respective set. This metric will be called the lamplighter metric or
lamplighter distance .

###### Remark 4.3.

One can also consider a generalization of wreath products, which are
called in Erschler [ Ers06 ] wreath producs of graphs with respect to a
family of subsets and, in particular, with respect to partitions.

#### 5 Random Walks on Lamplighter Graphs

Consider the state space @xmath defined as in the previous section and
an irreducible transition matrix @xmath on it, which determines the walk
@xmath . This random walk will be called the lamplighter random walk
(LRW) . The entries

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of the transition matrix @xmath are the one-step transition
probabilities, while the corresponding @xmath -step transition
probabilites of the random walk are denoted by @xmath . Suppose that the
starting point for the LRW is @xmath , where @xmath is a fixed vertex in
@xmath , and is the trivial configuration.

The random walk on @xmath with transition matrix

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

can also be described by a sequence of @xmath -valued random variables
@xmath . More precisely, we write @xmath , where @xmath is the random
configuration of lamps at time @xmath , and @xmath is the random vertex
in @xmath where the lamplighter stands at time @xmath . In the
following, when referring to the lamplighter random walk, we shall use
the sequence of random variables @xmath with @xmath , whose transitions
are given by the matrix @xmath .

Assume that the lamplighter random walk @xmath has finite first moment
with respect to the lamplighter metric @xmath defined in ( 6 ), that is,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The process @xmath on @xmath projects onto random processes @xmath on
@xmath and @xmath on the space of configurations @xmath . Note that the
stochastic process @xmath is a sequence of random configurations of
lamps, but not a Markov chain, since the configuration @xmath at time
@xmath depends on the entire history of the process up to time @xmath .
The projection @xmath is a random walk on the base graph @xmath with
starting point @xmath and one-step transition probabilities given by

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (7)
  -- -------- -- -----

The corresponding @xmath -step transition probabilities are denoted by
@xmath , and the transition matrix of @xmath is @xmath . The process
@xmath will be called the base random walk or projected random walk on
@xmath .

Key assumption : throught this thesis, we shall consider lamplighter
random walks @xmath , such that the projection @xmath on the transitive
base graph @xmath is transient.

This implies that @xmath leaves every finite subset of @xmath with
probability @xmath after a finite time. Transience of the base process
is a key assumption, which leads to the transience of the lamplighter
random walk @xmath . In other words, transience of the random walk
@xmath on @xmath implies that almost every path of the original random
walk @xmath on @xmath will leave behind a certain limit configuration of
lamps @xmath , which will not be necessarily finitely supported.

Question : Does the limit configuration of lamps completely describe the
behaviour of the lamplighter random walk @xmath at “infinity”?

The behaviour of the lamplighter random walk at “infinity” is the main
topic of the first part of the work. This comprises the study of the
convergence and of the Poisson boundary for lamplighter random walks
@xmath .

###### Remark 5.1.

In the study of the behaviour of lamplighter random walks @xmath over
lamplighter graphs @xmath , with @xmath , the properties of the base
random walk @xmath and the geometry of the base graph @xmath play a
crucial role.

##### 5.1 Examples of Transition Matrices

There are different ways one can define transition matrices over @xmath
. One can start with transition matrices over @xmath and @xmath , and
construct a new transition matrix on @xmath like in the sequel.

Consider @xmath and @xmath transition matrices on @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. One can lift @xmath on @xmath to @xmath on @xmath by
setting

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

One can also lift @xmath on @xmath to @xmath on @xmath by setting

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the embeddings of the transition matrices on @xmath and @xmath
into @xmath , one can construct different “types” of lamplighter random
walks (transition matrices) on @xmath .

###### Walk or Switch Random Walk.

Let @xmath be a parameter with @xmath . Define the transition matrix
@xmath on @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The interpretation of @xmath in lamplighter terms is as follows. If the
lamplighter stands at @xmath and the current configuration is @xmath ,
then he first tosses a coin. If ”head” comes up (with probability @xmath
) then he makes a random move according to the probability distribution
@xmath while leaving the lamps unchanged. If ”tail” comes up, then he
makes no move in the graph @xmath , but modifies the state of the lamp
where he stands according to the distribution @xmath .

###### Remark 5.2.

If the graph @xmath is regular (i.e. all vertices have the same degree)
and @xmath and @xmath are the transition matrices of the simple random
walks on @xmath and @xmath respectively, then the simple random walk on
@xmath is given by @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the vertices degree in @xmath .

###### Switch-Walk-Switch Random Walk.

Define a transition matrix @xmath on @xmath by the following matrix
product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The intuitive interpretation is: if the lamplighter stands at @xmath and
the current configuration of lamps is @xmath , then he first changes the
state of the lamp at @xmath according to the probability distribution
@xmath . Then he makes a step to some point @xmath according to the
probability distribution @xmath , and at last, he changes the state of
the lamp at @xmath according to the probability distribution @xmath .

The Switch-Walk-Switch and Walk or Switch lamplighter random walks are
two basic examples of random walks which are well studied in the
literature. Nevertheless, we are not going to use this specific types of
transition matrices, but we shall instead work with general irreducible
transition matrices @xmath over @xmath , such that its projection @xmath
onto @xmath is a transient random walk.

#### 6 Lamplighter Groups and Random Walks

Recall that the set @xmath encodes the intensities of lamps @xmath . If
we endow this set with the operation of addition modulo @xmath , then it
becomes a group. Consider now the group @xmath acting transitively on
itself by left multiplication, and identify the set of intensities of
lamps with the group @xmath , such that the state @xmath corresponds to
the group identity. For simplicity of notation we use @xmath for both
the set of lamp intensities and the group with two elements acting on
it.

The set @xmath of all finitely supported @xmath -valued configurations
on @xmath becomes then a group with the pointwise operation “ @xmath ”

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

taken in the group @xmath . The unit element of @xmath is the zero
configuration , which corresponds to all lamps switched off.

Let @xmath be a closed subgroup of @xmath which acts transitively on
@xmath . We do not require that @xmath is a Cayley graph of @xmath . For
instance, @xmath can also be a non-discrete group like in Section 13.2 .

###### Definition 6.1.

The wreath product of the groups @xmath and @xmath , denoted by @xmath ,
is a semidirect product of @xmath and the direct sum @xmath of copies of
@xmath indexed by @xmath , where every @xmath acts on @xmath by
translation @xmath defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The elements of @xmath are pairs of the form @xmath , where @xmath
represents a finitely supported configuration of lamps and @xmath . A
group operation on @xmath , denoted by “ @xmath ” is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath is the componentwise addition modulo
@xmath .

We shall call @xmath together with this operation the lamplighter group
over @xmath . The group identity is @xmath , where is the zero
configuration and @xmath is the unit element in @xmath . Finally, define
an action of elements @xmath on @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (8)
  -- -------- -- -----

This action preserves the neighbourhood relation defined in ( 5 ).
Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

that is, the lamplighter group @xmath is a subgroup of @xmath . Now we
have both an underlying geometric structure @xmath (the lamplighter
graph) and an action of the group @xmath (the lamplighter group) on it.
When @xmath is a Cayley graph of @xmath with respect to some finite
generating set, then these two structures can be identified, but since
we work with more general groups @xmath , it is important to distinguish
between the lamplighter graph @xmath and the lamplighter group @xmath .

Since @xmath acts transitively on itself and @xmath acts transitively on
@xmath , it is straightforward to see that the wreath product @xmath
acts transitively on @xmath , since it is by construction a subgroup of
@xmath . For more details, see also Woess [ Woe05 ] .

Assumption : suppose that @xmath is chosen such that @xmath is a
subgroup of @xmath , that is, the transition probabilities @xmath of
@xmath are invariant with respect to the action of the group @xmath . In
other words, @xmath is a homogeneous random walk. This means that for
all @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Corollary 6.2.

The factor chain @xmath is also a homogeneous random walk on @xmath ,
i.e @xmath .

###### Proof.

Definition ( 7 ) of the transition probabilities of the random walk
@xmath on @xmath implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath acts transitively on @xmath , it follows that there exists
a configuration @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also, we can write @xmath . Using the action ( 8 ) of the lamplighter
group @xmath on the lamplighter graph @xmath , we can write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

This, together with the invariance of the transition probabilities of
the lamplighter random walk yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which proves the claim. ∎

Recall now a simple fact about the asymptotic configuration size of the
lamplighter random walk, which will be needed later.

###### Lemma 6.3.

Let @xmath be a random walk with finite first moment on @xmath , with
@xmath . Then there exists a constant @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In other words, the number of lamps which are turned on increases
asymptotically at linear speed.

###### Proof.

Kingman’s subadditive ergodic theorem [ Kin68 ] applied to the sequence
@xmath , which is subadditive, yields the desired result. ∎

###### Remark 6.4.

The constant @xmath was studied for a large class of lamplighter random
walks over discrete graphs and groups. It is greater than zero if and
only if the factor chain @xmath is transient.

###### Induced Random Walks on @xmath.

Let @xmath be a probability measure on @xmath , which determines the
right random walk @xmath , and which is uniquely induced by the
transition matrix @xmath of @xmath like in equation ( 4 ).

The measure @xmath on @xmath , which is induced by the transition matrix
@xmath of the random walk @xmath on @xmath , is then given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Indeed, this follows from the fact that the transition probabilities of
@xmath on @xmath are projections of the transition probabilities of
@xmath on @xmath as in equation ( 5 ).

For the correspondence between @xmath and @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath
, we shall use the notation @xmath and @xmath , respectively.

### Chapter \thechapter Convergence to the Boundary

This chapter is devoted to the study of convergence (in a sense to be
specified) of homogeneous lamplighter random walks @xmath on graphs
@xmath , with @xmath , given that the base random walk @xmath is
transient on @xmath . We emphasize that the geometry of @xmath and the
action of @xmath play an important role in the study of the behaviour of
@xmath , as @xmath tends to infinity.

We are interested in transitive, infinite base graphs @xmath endowed
with a “rich” boundary @xmath . Using @xmath , we construct a boundary
@xmath for the lamplighter graph @xmath . We then prove that @xmath
converges to some random variable @xmath with values in the boundary
@xmath almost surely, under some natural assumptions on the base random
walk @xmath . Finally, in the next chapters, the results obtained here
will be applied to specific base graphs @xmath : graphs with infinitely
many ends, hyperbolic graphs, and Euclidean lattices.

For lamplighter random walks over Euclidean lattices, the results proved
here were earlier obtained by Kaimanovich [ Kai91 ] . For the sake of
completeness, we just show how to apply our results in this case.

#### 7 The Boundary of the Lamplighter Graph

###### The Boundary of the Base Graph.

In order to “build” a boundary for the lamplighter graph @xmath , we
start with the base graph @xmath , which is assumed to be infinite,
locally finite, connected and transitive. Let @xmath be the discrete
graph metric on @xmath , and consider

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

an extended space of @xmath , not necessarily compact, with ideal
boundary @xmath (the set of points at infinity), such that @xmath is
compatible with the group action @xmath on @xmath . Here, by
compatibility between @xmath and @xmath we mean that the action of
@xmath on @xmath extends to an action on @xmath by homeomorphisms.
Recall that @xmath .

###### Convergence to the Boundary.

In order to introduce the notion of convergence of a random walk @xmath
on @xmath to the boundary @xmath , recall first the definition of the
trajectory space @xmath of @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

An element @xmath represents a possible evolution, that is, a possible
sequence of points visited one after the other by @xmath . For @xmath
and @xmath , define the projections @xmath .

Suppose that we have the boundary @xmath and the extended space @xmath
of @xmath defined in ( 7 ) and set

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Definition 7.1.

We say that the random walk @xmath on @xmath converges to the boundary
@xmath if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the convergence of @xmath to @xmath , the notation @xmath will be
used.

The random variable @xmath is measurable with respect to the Borel
@xmath -algebra of @xmath . If @xmath converges to the boundary @xmath ,
the hitting distribution is the measure @xmath defined for Borel sets
@xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 7.2.

The boundary @xmath is called projective , if the following holds for
sequences @xmath of vertices in @xmath : if @xmath converges to a
boundary point @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then also @xmath converges to @xmath .

For our results, a somehow weaker property of the boundary @xmath is
needed.

###### Definition 7.3.

The boundary @xmath is called weakly projective if the following holds
for sequences @xmath of vertices in @xmath : if @xmath converges to
@xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath converges also to @xmath .

###### Remark 7.4.

Note that a weakly projective boundary is also projective, but the other
way round does not necessary hold.

Indeed, when the sequence of vertices @xmath accumulates at some
boundary point @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then the requirements for @xmath to be a weakly projective boundary are
satisfied, but not those for a projective boundary. We shall work with
weakly projective boundaries.

###### The Boundary of the Lamplighter Graph @xmath.

The natural compactification of the set of finitely supported
configurations @xmath in the topology of pointwise convergence is the
set @xmath of all, finitely or infinitely supported configurations.

Since the vertex set of the lamplighter graph @xmath is @xmath , the
space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a natural boundary at infinity for @xmath . Let us write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The boundary @xmath contains all pairs @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath
is a finitely or infinitely supported configuration. This boundary is so
“rich” that it gives us plenty of information on the behaviour of the
lamplighter random walks at infinity.

#### 8 Convergence of LRW

Convergence of LRW @xmath on @xmath follows mainly from the convergence
of the base random walk @xmath on @xmath . For the time being, we are
still working with general random walks @xmath on @xmath , where @xmath
is a transitve graph. In order to get some information about the random
walk @xmath on @xmath , we have to know something about @xmath . For
this reason, some assumptions on @xmath and @xmath are needed.

###### Assumption 8.1.

Assume that:

  (A1)  

    @xmath has finite first moment on @xmath .

  (A2)  

    @xmath converges to @xmath , with hitting distribution @xmath .

  (A3)  

    @xmath is weakly projective.

These assumptions are not very restrictive. We shall give several
examples of graphs @xmath and random walks on them where these
assumptions hold.

Given that the base random walk @xmath on @xmath converges to the
boundary @xmath , we prove that the lamplighter random walk @xmath on
@xmath converges to random variables with values on the boundary @xmath
. This boundary is still too big for our purposes, that is, it contains
many points towards @xmath converges with probability @xmath . For this
reason, let us define a “smaller” boundary @xmath for the lamplighter
graph, which is still dense in @xmath , and we shall show that the
random walk @xmath converges with probability @xmath to a random
variable with values in @xmath . Define the subset @xmath of @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (9)
  -- -------- -- -----

where the set @xmath consists of all configurations @xmath , which are
either finitely supported, or infinitely supported with @xmath
accumulating only at @xmath . The set @xmath is dense in @xmath because
@xmath and @xmath is dense in @xmath . Hence, @xmath is also dense in
@xmath .

The action of the group @xmath on the lamplighter graph @xmath extends
to an action on @xmath by homeomorphisms and leaves the Borel subset
@xmath invariant. If we take @xmath and @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath and @xmath is finitely supported or accumulates only at @xmath
, then @xmath can accumulate at most at @xmath . Also the configuration
@xmath accumulates again at most at @xmath because @xmath is finitely
supported, so that adding @xmath modifies @xmath only in finitely many
points.

###### Definition 8.2.

We shall say that a sequence of lamp configurations @xmath converges to
a configuration @xmath , if

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

i.e., for all @xmath the sequence @xmath stabilizes.

For a special case, where the lamplighter changes the lamps
configuration only at the current vertex, it is clear that the
lamplighter random walk converges to a point in @xmath . Indeed, by
Assumption 8.1 (A2), the base random walk @xmath converges to a random
element @xmath . Since only the states of lamps which are visited can be
modified, and by transience every vertex is visited only finitely many
times, after some time every vertex is left forever and the state of the
lamp sitting there remains unchanged. Therefore the random configuration
@xmath must converge pointwise to a random configuration which
accumulates at @xmath .

We shall prove the convergence for general homogeneous random walks on
@xmath , not only restricted to the situation when the configuration can
be changed at the current position. This was also proved by Karlsson and
Woess [ KW07 ] for a class of lamplighter random walks over homogeneous
trees. The following result is a generalization of [ KW07 , Theorem 2.9]
for lamplighter random walks @xmath over general transitive base graphs
@xmath . In Sava [ Sav10 ] this was proved for lamplighter random walks
on discrete groups.

Assume that the random walk @xmath on the transitive base graphs @xmath
satisfies Assumption 8.1 . Then the following holds for homogeneous
lamplighter random walks @xmath .

###### Theorem 8.3.

Let @xmath be an irreducible and homogeneous random walk with finite
first moment on @xmath . Then there exists a @xmath -valued random
variable @xmath , such that @xmath almost surely in the topology of
@xmath , for every starting point @xmath . Moreover, the distribution of
@xmath is a continuous measure on @xmath .

###### Proof.

Without loss of generality, we may suppose that the starting point is
@xmath , where is the trivial (zero) lamps configuration and @xmath some
reference vertex, whose choice is irrelevant by the transitivity of
@xmath .

The random walk @xmath is homogeneous, and by Corollary 6.2 the factor
chain @xmath is also homogeneous. Also, the factor chain @xmath on
@xmath is transient, and it converges almost surely to a random variable
@xmath by Assumption 8.1 .

Now, assume that @xmath has finite first moment on @xmath . Then, the
configuration @xmath of lamps at time @xmath can be obtained by
modifying the previous configuration @xmath in a finite number of
vertices in @xmath . This implies that there exists a finitely supported
configuration @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The configuration @xmath is zero in all points which are not touched by
the random walker. Let now @xmath be an unbounded sequence of elements
in @xmath , with @xmath . Thus, @xmath is a sequence of vertices in
@xmath where the lamp is switched on. Since @xmath has finite first
moment on @xmath , the following holds with probability @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Kingman’s subadditive ergodic theorem 2.9 (see also Kingman [ Kin68 ] )
implies that there exists finite constant @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Making use of the previous two equations and the triangle inequality, we
get

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (10)
  -- -------- -- ------

Recall that by Assumption 8.1 we have @xmath . By the weakly
projectivity of @xmath and from equation ( 10 ), it follows that @xmath
converges to @xmath . Observe that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is a union of finite sets. Since the unbounded sequence @xmath
converges to @xmath , it follows that @xmath must converge to @xmath .
That is, the random configuration @xmath converges pointwise to a limit
configuration @xmath , which accumulates at @xmath and @xmath converges
to a random element @xmath .

When the limit distribution of @xmath is a continuous measure on @xmath
(i.e., it carries no point mass), then the same is true for the limit
distribution of @xmath on @xmath . Indeed, supposing that there exists
some single point in @xmath with non-zero hitting probability measure,
then a contradiction arises since one can find some single point in
@xmath with non-zero measure. This is not possible because of the
continuity of the limit distribution of @xmath .

On the other side, when the limit distribution of @xmath is not
continuous on @xmath , one can use Borel-Cantelli lemma in order to
prove that the limit distribution of @xmath is still continuous. ∎

### Chapter \thechapter Poisson Boundary of LRW

The Poisson boundary of a random walk is a measure space which describes
the stochastically significant behaviour of its paths at infinity. In
this chapter we present a method to identify the Poisson boundary of
lamplighter random walks over graphs @xmath , given that the base walk
@xmath over @xmath is transient and satisfies some suitable assumptions.
This method is called the Half-Space Method . The base graph @xmath will
be then replaced in the following chapters by some specific graphs, and
the method described here will be applied.

The Poisson boundary of lamplighter random walks over groups @xmath ,
with @xmath a discrete group endowed with a rich boundary, was
determined in Sava [ Sav10 ] .

For more information on the Poisson boundary, the reader is invited to
have a look at the introductory and complex papers of Kaimanovich [
Kai91 ] , [ Kai95 ] and [ Kai00 ] . The description of the Poisson
boundary of lamplighter random walks over Euclidean lattices @xmath ,
with @xmath , such that the base walk has zero drift was an open problem
for a long time, and has been recently solved by Erschler [ Ers10 ] .
For the relation between the Poisson boundary and the linear drift of a
random walk, see also Karlsson and Ledrappier [ KL07 ] . For other
problems and methods related to the determination of the Poisson
boundary, see Ballmann and Ledrappier [ BL94 ] , and Ledrappier [ Led85
] .

#### 9 Preliminaries

The Poisson boundary of a Markov chain @xmath is defined as the space of
ergodic components of the time shift in the path space. Under natural
assumptions on the transition matrix @xmath on @xmath , there exists a
measure space @xmath , such that the Poisson formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

states an isometric isomorphism between the Banach space @xmath of
bounded harmonic functions on @xmath with sup-norm and the space @xmath
of @xmath -measurable functions on @xmath . The space @xmath is called
the Poisson boundary of the Markov chain @xmath . Triviality of the
Poisson boundary is equivalent to the absence of non-constant bounded
harmonic functions for the pair @xmath . This is the so-called Liouville
property .

The Poisson formula characterizes the Poisson boundary up to a measure
theoretical isomorphism. It also has a topological interpretation in
terms of the Martin boundary, where it consists of the set of possible
limits of the Markov chain at the boundary together with the family of
corresponding harmonic hitting distributions. Nevertheless, we emphasize
that the Poisson boundary is a measure-theoretical object and all
objects connected with the Poisson boundary are defined modulo subsets
of measure @xmath . For a detailed description, see Kaimanovich [ Kai92
] .

Recall that if @xmath is a group which acts transitively on @xmath and
leaves the transition operator @xmath on @xmath invariant, that is, if
@xmath , then there exists a measure @xmath on @xmath , which determines
the right random walk @xmath . Moreover, the measure @xmath is uniquely
induced by the transition probabilities @xmath of the pair @xmath as in
equation ( 4 ). Recall the notation @xmath for the respective
correspondence.

Homogeneous Markov operators are intermediate between random walks on
countable groups and random walks on general locally compact groups.
Although the state space @xmath is countable, the Poisson boundary of
the Markov chain @xmath is isomorphic with the Poisson boundary of the
induced random walk @xmath on @xmath , which is not necessarily
discrete.

###### Proposition 9.1.

If @xmath , then the Poisson boundary of the random walk @xmath
coincides with the Poisson boundary of the pair @xmath .

For the proof see Kaimanovich and Woess [ KW02 , Proposition 3.1] .

###### Definition 9.2.

A @xmath -boundary for the random walk @xmath is a space @xmath with the
following properties:

1.   every path of the random walk converges to a limit in @xmath with
    hitting distribution @xmath .

2.   the measure @xmath is @xmath -harmonic, i.e. @xmath .

3.  @xmath acts on @xmath by measurable bijections.

Due to the coincidence of the Poisson boundaries of @xmath and @xmath ,
it follows that a @xmath -boundary for @xmath is also a @xmath -boundary
for @xmath .

If @xmath is embedded into a topological space @xmath , and every path
of the Markov chain converges to a limit in @xmath , then the space
@xmath with the hitting measure @xmath on it, is a quotient of the
Poisson boundary . Such quotients are @xmath -boundaries . Moreover, the
topology of @xmath is irrelevant, since any projection from the path
space @xmath onto the space @xmath gives rise to a @xmath -boundary.

The Poisson boundary is the maximal @xmath -boundary . Here, we mean
maximality in a measure theoretic sense, i.e., there is no way (up to
measure @xmath ) of further splitting the boundary points of this
compactification. Therefore, the problem of identifying the Poisson
boundary consists of two parts:

1.  To find a @xmath -boundary @xmath . This space is a priori just a
    quotient of the Poisson boundary.

2.  To show that this boundary is maximal, i.e., is isomorphic to the
    whole Poisson boundary.

The identification of a @xmath -boundary can be done in geometric or
combinatorial terms. Throughout this thesis, we shall consider a
geometric approach in order to prove the maximality of a @xmath
-boundary. In Section 14 , the Poisson boundary is described by a
measure theoretical method, namely the correspondence between the tail
@xmath -algebra of a random walk and its Poisson boundary is used. For
the geometric approach, we shall use one very nice criterion called
Strip Criterion , developed by Kaimanovich in [ Kai00 ] . This “strip”
or “bilateral” approximation is inspired by the use of bilateral
geodesics in cocompact rank @xmath Cartan-Hadamard manifolds by
Ledrappier and Ballmann [ BL94 ] .

There is a second criterion called Ray Criterion , due again to
Kaimanovich [ Kai00 ] , which can also be used in the identification of
the Poisson boundary, and which will be stated below for sake of
completeness. These criteria are based on entropies of conditional
random walks, and require an approximation of the sample paths of the
random walk in terms of their limit behaviour.

These criteria allow to identify the Poisson boundary with natural
boundaries for several classes of graphs and groups with hyperbolic
properties : hyperbolic graphs (or more generally, Cayley graphs of
groups of isometries of Gromov hyperbolic spaces), graphs with
infinitely many ends, and some other semi-direct and wreath products.
All these graphs are endowed with natural and nice rich geometric
boundaries, which will be explained in what follows. Moreover, it is
known that sample paths of the Markov chains on these graphs converge to
natural boundaries.

Even if the determination of the Poisson boundary in this thesis is done
by applying the Strip Criterion , it is instructive to state both
criteria here.

###### Theorem 9.3.

[Ray Criterion] Let @xmath be a homogeneous Markov operator with finite
first moment on @xmath and let @xmath be a @xmath -boundary. If there
exists a sequence of measurable maps @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for almost every path of the random walk @xmath (with transition
operator @xmath ), then @xmath is the whole Poisson boundary of @xmath .

For the second criterion, we shall assume that simultaneously with a
@xmath -boundary @xmath we are also given a @xmath -boundary @xmath of
the reversed Markov operator @xmath . This criterion is symmetric with
respect to the time reversal and leads to a simultaneous identification
of the Poisson boundaries of @xmath and @xmath , respectively. For the
definition of the transition probabilities of @xmath , see ( 3 ).

###### Theorem 9.4.

[Strip Criterion] Let @xmath be a homogeneous Markov operator with
finite first moment on @xmath and let @xmath , @xmath be a @xmath - and
a @xmath - boundary, respectively. If there exists a measurable @xmath
-equivariant map @xmath assigning to almost every pair of points @xmath
a non-empty “strip” @xmath , such that, for the ball @xmath of radius
@xmath in the metric of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (11)
  -- -------- -- ------

for @xmath -almost every @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath are the Poisson
boundaries of the Markov chains @xmath and @xmath , respectively.

Recall that @xmath . Equivariance of the strip @xmath with respect to
the group action @xmath , means that, for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In most of the cases, the equivariance of the strip is very easy to
prove. The “harder” part of the theorem is to prove the subexponential
growth of the chosen strip. The “thinner” the strips @xmath , the larger
the class of Markov operators for which condition ( 11 ) is satisfied.
This means that the sample paths of the random walk @xmath on @xmath go
to infinity “faster”.

In some cases, the existence of such strips is almost evident, whereas
checking the Ray Criterion may be rather complicate, or in some cases it
fails. However, there are also some situations where the Ray Criterion
is more helpful than the Strip Criterion . The ray criterion provides
more information than the strip criterion about the behaviour of sample
paths of the random walk, and can also be useful for other issues than
the identification of the Poisson boundary.

See, for example, Ledrappier [ Led01 ] where it is used for estimating
the Hausdorff dimension of the harmonic measure. On the other hand, for
checking the ray criterion one often needs rather elaborate estimates,
whereas existence of strips is easier.

We state here another result which will be useful in the following, and
can be found in Kaimanovich and Woess [ KW02 ] .

###### Proposition 9.5.

Suppose that @xmath is a homogeneous Markov operator with finite first
moment on @xmath . Then the Poisson boundary of the random walk @xmath
with transition matrix @xmath is trivial if

1.  @xmath has subexponential growth, or

2.   the drift @xmath vanishes.

#### 10 Half-Space Method for LRW

Let us go back to our setting where a transient and irreducible random
walk @xmath with transition matrix @xmath over the transitive graph
@xmath is given. We also require Assumption 8.1 to hold. The
corresponding lamplighter random walk on @xmath is @xmath , with
transition matrix @xmath and @xmath . It converges, by Theorem 8.3 , to
the geometric boundary @xmath defined in ( 9 ).

As before, @xmath is the hitting distribution of the random walk @xmath
starting at @xmath . For Borel sets @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Factorizing with respect to the first step, the Markov property yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Borel probability measures family @xmath , are called harmonic
measures . In view of the irreducibility assumption, all harmonic
measures @xmath are equivalent to the measure @xmath . Moreover, the
space @xmath is a factor space of the Poisson boundary of the random
walk @xmath , and the Poisson formula permits one to identify the space
@xmath with a certain subspace of the space @xmath of bounded harmonic
functions.

We are interested in describing the Poisson boundary of lamplighter
random walks @xmath over @xmath , with the base random walk @xmath on
@xmath being an irreducible, transient random walk which satisfies
Assumption 8.1 .

Under the assumptions of Theorem 8.3 , let @xmath be the distribution of
@xmath on @xmath , given that the position of the random walk @xmath at
time @xmath is @xmath . This is a probability measure on @xmath defined
for Borel sets @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the unique probability measure on @xmath induced by @xmath
( @xmath ) as in equation ( 4 ). Then the measure @xmath is a @xmath
-harmonic measure for @xmath . This means that it satisfies the
convolution equation @xmath .

Since @xmath acts on @xmath by measurable bijections and the measure
@xmath is stationary with respect to @xmath , by Definition 9.2 the
space @xmath is a @xmath -boundary for the random walk @xmath with
transition matrix @xmath . We want to prove that this @xmath -boundary
is indeed the maximal one, that is, the Poisson boundary.

We state a general method to describe the Poisson boundary of LRW @xmath
on @xmath under some reasonable assumptions on the base walk @xmath .

##### 10.1 The Half-Space Method

Assume that:

1.   Assumption 8.1 holds for @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath
    be the respective hitting distributions on @xmath .

2.  For @xmath -almost every pair @xmath , one has a strip @xmath ,
    which satisfies the conditions from Theorem 9.4 : it is a subset of
    @xmath , it is @xmath -equivariant, and it has subexponential
    growth, that is,

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (12)
      -- -------- -- ------

    where @xmath is the ball with center @xmath and radius @xmath in
    @xmath .

3.  For every @xmath , one can assign to the triple @xmath a partition
    of @xmath into half-spaces @xmath , such that @xmath (respectively,
    @xmath ) contains a neighbourhood of @xmath (respectively, @xmath ),
    and the assignments

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    are @xmath -equivariant.

As a matter of fact, one can partition @xmath in more than two subsets
and the method can still be applied. However, the relevant subsets are
the ones containing a neighbourhood of @xmath (respectively, @xmath ).
Indeed, by Theorem 8.3 , the LRW converges to the boundary @xmath ,
which is defined as the set of all pairs @xmath with @xmath and the only
accumulation point of the configuration @xmath is @xmath . Therefore,
only there may be infinitely many lamps switched on (because @xmath and
@xmath are the respective boundary points toward the random walks @xmath
and @xmath converge).

We want to build a finitely supported configuration associated to pairs
@xmath of limit configurations (of the lamplighter random walk and of
the reversed random walk) accumulating at @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. In order to do this, we restrict @xmath and @xmath on
@xmath and @xmath , respectively, and then we “glue together” the
restrictions. Since the new configuration depends on the partition of
@xmath , we cannot choose the same partition for all @xmath , because we
will have a constant configuration which is not equivariant. Therefore,
the partition of @xmath should depend on @xmath .

Let us now state one of the main results on this thesis, regarding the
Poisson boundary of lamplighter random walks over general base graphs
@xmath . For discrete groups @xmath , the result was published in Sava [
Sav10 ] .

###### Theorem 10.1.

Let @xmath be an irreducible, homogeneous random walk with finite first
moment on @xmath . If @xmath is defined as in ( 9 ) and the above
assumptions are satisfied, then the measure space @xmath is the Poisson
boundary of @xmath , where @xmath is the limit distribution on @xmath of
@xmath .

###### Proof.

In order to apply the Strip Criterion (Theorem 9.4 ), we need to find
@xmath - and @xmath -boundaries for the lamplighter random walk @xmath
and the reversed lamplighter random walk @xmath , respectively. By
Theorem 8.3 each of the random walks @xmath and @xmath starting at
@xmath converges almost surely to a @xmath -valued random variable. If
@xmath and @xmath are their respective limit distributions on @xmath ,
then the spaces @xmath and @xmath are @xmath - and @xmath - boundaries
of the respective random walks.

Let us take @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are the limit
configurations of @xmath and @xmath , respectively, and @xmath are their
only respective accumulation points. By the continuity of @xmath and
@xmath , the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has @xmath -measure @xmath , so that, in constructing the strip @xmath
we shall consider only the case @xmath .

Use the third assumption in the Half-Space Method , and for each @xmath
consider a partition of @xmath into @xmath , @xmath , and eventually
@xmath . The set @xmath (respectively, @xmath ) contains a neighbourhood
of @xmath (respectively, @xmath ), and @xmath is the remaining subset
(which may be empty). The set @xmath contains neither @xmath nor @xmath
. The restriction of @xmath on @xmath (respectively, of @xmath on @xmath
) is finitely supported, since its only accumulation point is @xmath
(respectively, @xmath ), which is not in a neighbourhood of @xmath
(respectively, @xmath ). Now “put together” the restriction of @xmath on
@xmath and of @xmath on @xmath in order to get the new configuration

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (13)
  -- -------- -- ------

on @xmath , which is, by construction, finitely supported. For a graphic
visualisation of the above construction, see Figure 1 .

The sought for the “bigger” strip @xmath is the set

  -- -- -- ------
           (14)
  -- -- -- ------

of all pairs @xmath , where @xmath is the configuration defined above
and @xmath runs through the strip @xmath in @xmath . This is a subset of
@xmath . We prove that the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is @xmath -equivariant, i.e., for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , then @xmath , since @xmath is @xmath -equivariant. Also,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This means that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . On the other hand,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

that is, @xmath , and this proves the @xmath -equivariance of the strip
@xmath .

Finally, let us prove that the strip @xmath has subexponential growth.
For this, let @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Definition 6 of the metric @xmath on @xmath implies that @xmath .
Therefore, if

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (15)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath (respectively, @xmath ) is the ball with center @xmath
(respectively, @xmath ) and of radius @xmath in @xmath (respectively,
@xmath ). Since for every @xmath we associate only one configuration
@xmath in @xmath , equation ( 15 ) implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally, the assumption ( 12 ) that the @xmath has subexponential growth
leads to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and this proves the subexponential growth of the strip @xmath .

Since for almost every pair of points @xmath , we have assigned a strip
@xmath , which satisfies the conditions from Theorem 9.4 , it follows
that the measure space @xmath is the Poisson boundary of the lamplighter
random walk @xmath . ∎

As an application of the Half Space Method , we consider several classes
of transitive base graphs @xmath : graphs with infinitely many ends,
hyperbolic graphs in the sense of Gromov and Euclidean lattices. For
random walks @xmath on these types of graphs Assumption 8.1 holds.

###### Remark 10.2.

In principle, one can apply the construction from the previous proof to
“iterated” lamplighter graphs, which are defined as follows. We consider
@xmath as our base graph, and construct the lamplighter graph @xmath
over @xmath , and so on. The “smaller” strip @xmath will be in this case
a subset of @xmath , which has subexponential growth, and using the Half
Space Method, we lift it to a “bigger” strip which satisfies the
conditions in Theorem 9.4 .

### Chapter \thechapter Graphs with Infinitely many Ends

In this chapter we introduce transitive graphs @xmath with rich
geometric boundaries, such as graphs with infinitely many ends, and we
study the behaviour at infinity of random walks @xmath on @xmath and of
lamplighter random walks @xmath on @xmath , given that @xmath is a graph
with infinitely many ends.

The behaviour at infinity of random walks over graphs @xmath with
infinitely many ends depends on the action of the group @xmath . If
@xmath does not fix any element of @xmath , then it is easy to study the
convergence and the Poisson boundary of lamplighter random walks @xmath
on @xmath just using Theorem 8.3 and Theorem 10.1 . On the other hand,
if @xmath fixes one end of @xmath , which then has to be uniques, then
we encounter one interesting situation: when the base random walk @xmath
has zero drift on @xmath , then one cannot describe the Poisson boundary
of @xmath by making use of the Half Space Method . This case will be
treated separately in Section 14 , by considering the correspondence
between the tail-algebra and the Poisson boundary of the respective
walk. The proof makes also use of cutpoints and other results of James
and Peres [ JP97 ] .

#### 11 Ends of Graphs

The basic idea behind the concept of an end is to distinguish between
different ways of going to infinity. Ends carry a natural topology which
is often not mentioned explicitely. Ends of graphs and the end
compactification were originally introduced by Freudenthal [ Fre44 ] ,
who considered only locally finite graphs. Halin [ Hal64 ] was the first
to consider ends of non-locally finite graphs.

Let @xmath be an infinite, locally finite, connected graph. An infinite
path or ray without self-intersections is a sequence @xmath of distinct
vertices, such that @xmath for all @xmath , where @xmath denotes the
neighbourhood relation. In @xmath is a finite set of vertices and/or
edges of @xmath , then the (induced) graph @xmath has finitely many
connected components. Every ray @xmath must have all but finitely many
points in precisely one of them, and we say that @xmath ends up in that
component. Two rays are called equivalent if, for any finite set of
edges @xmath , they end up in the same component of @xmath . An end of
@xmath is an equivalence class of rays.

We write @xmath for the space of ends , and @xmath for the end
compactification of @xmath . If @xmath is a component of @xmath , then
we write @xmath for the set of those ends whose rays end up in @xmath
and @xmath for the resulting completion of @xmath .

Let us now explain the topology of @xmath . If @xmath is a finite set
and @xmath , then there is exactly one component of @xmath whose
completion contains @xmath . We denote the latter by @xmath . If we vary
@xmath (finite, with @xmath ), we obtain a neighbourhood base of @xmath
. If @xmath , we can take for @xmath the finite set of neighbours of
@xmath to see that the topology is discrete on @xmath . It has a
countable base and it is Hausdorff. When @xmath , we can find a standard
neighbourhood base , that is, one of the form @xmath , @xmath , where
the finite sets @xmath are such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As the number of components of @xmath is finite, each @xmath is open and
compact, and @xmath is totally disconnected. The space @xmath is called
the end compactification of @xmath .

###### Definition 11.1.

An end @xmath is called thin , if it has a standard neighbourhood base
with @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the diameter of the set @xmath in the graph metric. The
minimal @xmath with this property is the diameter of @xmath . Otherwise,
@xmath is called thick .

Consider the ball @xmath of center @xmath (some fixed vertex of @xmath )
and radius @xmath in @xmath , with respect to the natural graph metric
@xmath . In order to prove that the space of ends @xmath is a weakly
projective space (see Definition 7.3 ) we shall use the following result
which can be found in Woess [ Woe00 , page 231] .

###### Lemma 11.2.

Let @xmath and @xmath . If

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath and @xmath belongs to the same component of @xmath .

In the results we are going to prove, it is enough for @xmath to be a
weakly projective boundary.

###### Lemma 11.3.

The space of ends @xmath of a locally finite graph @xmath is a weakly
projective boundary.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and @xmath be sequences of vertices in @xmath , such that
@xmath converges to some end @xmath in the topology of @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (16)
  -- -------- -- ------

Assume that the sequence @xmath converges to another end @xmath , with
@xmath . Then there exists a @xmath , such that, for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This means that for @xmath big enough, the sequences @xmath and @xmath
belong to different components of @xmath . From Lemma 11.2 , it follows
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Dividing both sides of the previous equation through @xmath , and using
( 16 ), we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is a contradiction. Therefore, the sequence @xmath converges to
the same end @xmath and @xmath is a weakly projective boundary. ∎

###### Proposition 11.4.

The space of ends @xmath of a locally finite graph @xmath is also
projective space.

For the proof see Woess [ Woe00 , page 233] .

#### 12 The Structure Tree of a Graph

The theory of cuts and structure trees was first developed by Dunwoody;
see the book by Dicks and Dunwoody [ DD89 ] , or for another detailed
description see Woess [ Woe00 ] and Thomassen and Woess [ TW93 ] . A
detailed study of structure theory may be very fruitful for obtaining
information on the behaviour of random walks.

A cut of a connected graph @xmath is a set @xmath of edges whose
deletion disconnects @xmath . If it disconnects @xmath into precisely
two connected components @xmath and @xmath , then we call @xmath tight ,
and @xmath are the sides of @xmath . In [ TW93 ] , Thomassen has proved
the following.

###### Lemma 12.1.

For any @xmath , there are only finitely many tight cuts @xmath with
@xmath that contain a given edge of @xmath .

Two cuts @xmath are said to cross if all four sets

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are nonempty. Dunwoody [ Dun82 ] proved the following important theorem.

###### Theorem 12.2.

Every infinite, connected graph with more than one end has a finite
tight cut @xmath with infinite sides, such that @xmath crosses no @xmath
, where @xmath . A cut with these properties will be called a @xmath
-cut .

Let @xmath be a @xmath -cut of the locally finite, connected graph
@xmath and @xmath be a closed subgroup of @xmath . Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This set has the following properties:

1.  All @xmath are infinite and connected.

2.  If @xmath , then @xmath .

3.  If @xmath and @xmath , then there are only finitely many @xmath ,
    such that @xmath .

4.  If @xmath , then one of @xmath holds.

This properties can now be used to construct a tree @xmath , called the
structure tree of @xmath with respect to @xmath and the @xmath -cut
@xmath . One can think of an unoriented edge of @xmath as a pair of
oriented edges, where the second edge points from the endpoint to the
initial point of the first one. The oriented edge set of @xmath is
@xmath . That is, if @xmath , then @xmath constitutes a pair of
oppositely oriented edges between the same two vertices. If @xmath and
@xmath , then the endpoint of @xmath is the initial point of @xmath if
@xmath , and there is no @xmath , such that @xmath properly.

In this way, we have defined @xmath in terms of its edges and their
incidence, contrary to the usual approach of defining a graph by
starting with its vertices. A vertex of @xmath is an equivalence class
of edges “with the same endpoint”, that is, @xmath are equivalent in
this sense, if @xmath , or else, if @xmath properly and no @xmath
satisfies @xmath properly. One can check that this is indeed an
equivalence relation.

The vertex set is the set of all equivalence classes @xmath , where
@xmath . Neighbourhood in @xmath is described by @xmath . One can show
that @xmath is a tree: it is connected because of the property @xmath ,
it has no cycles, since the neighbourhood relation is defined in terms
of inclusion of sets.

The tree @xmath is countable by Lemma 12.1 , but not necessarily locally
finite. One can still define the set @xmath of ends of @xmath as
equivalence classes of rays, as in Section 11 , and @xmath . The group
@xmath acts by automorphisms on @xmath via @xmath , where @xmath and
@xmath . The action has one or two orbits on @xmath according to
wheather @xmath for some @xmath or not. Consequently, @xmath acts
transitively on @xmath or else acts transitively on each of the two
bipartite classes of @xmath (that is, the sets of vertices at even/odd
distance from a chosen origin).

###### Example 12.3.

If @xmath is the homogeneous tree @xmath of degree @xmath , then any
single edge constitutes a @xmath -cut. Moreover, if @xmath is the whole
automorphism group of @xmath , then the structure tree is again @xmath .
This is not the case, when @xmath ( @xmath times), or @xmath is the free
group.

###### Example 12.4.

As an example with thick ends, consider the standard Cayley graph @xmath
of the free product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

acting by @xmath on itself. Each copy @xmath of the square grid within
@xmath , where @xmath , gives rise to a thick end (as an equivalence
class of rays that end up in such a copy). The other ends are all thin,
they have zero diameter. Let @xmath consist of the single edge @xmath .
This is a @xmath -cut, and the structure tree has infinite vertex
degrees.

Next, let us introduce the structure map @xmath . In order to understand
it, let @xmath . Then there is some @xmath which contains @xmath . If
there is a minimal @xmath with this property, then we define @xmath as
the end vertex of @xmath as an edge of @xmath . If there is no minimal
@xmath with this property, then there must be a maximal strictly
descending sequence @xmath in @xmath , such that @xmath , for all @xmath
. As edges of @xmath , the @xmath constitute a path which defines an end
in @xmath . This end is @xmath . The image of @xmath does not depend on
the particular choice of the initial @xmath containing @xmath . Via
@xmath for @xmath , the group @xmath acts on @xmath and @xmath commutes
with the actions of @xmath on @xmath and on @xmath .

If @xmath is a vertex of @xmath , then @xmath is a vertex of @xmath .
Given an end of @xmath , its preimage under @xmath consists of a single
end of @xmath . However, there are ends of @xmath that are mapped to
vertices of @xmath under @xmath . We write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These are thin ends of @xmath , i.e., ends with finite diameter.

###### Group Actions.

If @xmath is an infinite, locally finite, connected and transitive graph
(i.e. there exists @xmath subgroup of @xmath , which acts transitively
on @xmath ), then @xmath has one, two or infinitely many ends . For
details, see Woess [ Woe89b ] .

If @xmath has one end, then the end compactification is not suitable for
a good description of the structure of @xmath at infinity.

If @xmath has two ends, then it is isometric with the two-way-infinite
path. Moreover, the behaviour at infinity of lamplighter random walks
over the integer line (two-way-infinite path) is well-studied.

For the rest of this chapter we suppose that @xmath has infinitely many
ends, since we want a base structure (as a base graph for the
lamplighter graph) which is endowed with a rich boundary. The space
@xmath is the end compactification and the boundary @xmath is the space
of ends of @xmath , with @xmath .

The simplest examples of graphs with infinitely many ends are free
products of graphs (with the exception of the Cayley graph of @xmath ,
which has two ends). More generally, the free product of two (or
finitely many) rooted graphs has infinitely many ends, unless both have
only two elements. The tree is the nicest example of a graph with
infinitely many ends. Anyway, there are graphs with infinitely many ends
which have a very complicated structure. For a detailed exposition, the
reader is invited to have a look at the book of Dicks and Dunwoody [
DD89 ] .

###### Ends and Fixed Sets.

Let @xmath be a graph with infinitely many ends and @xmath which acts
transitively on @xmath , and @xmath the set of thin ends, i.e., those
ends with finite diameter. From Woess [ Woe89b ] it is known that the
set of thin ends @xmath is dense in @xmath .

###### Definition 12.5.

A subset @xmath is fixed by the action of @xmath , if @xmath (pointwise
action) for every @xmath .

We also recall the following result, which will be relevant in the
sequel. For a proof, see Soardi and Woess [ SW90 ] .

###### Theorem 12.6.

The group @xmath cannot fix a finite subset of @xmath other than a
singleton. This happens if and only if @xmath is amenable.

Therefore, when studying random walks on graphs with infinitely many
ends, one has to distinguish two substantially different cases: when
@xmath doesn’t fix any end in @xmath and when one end in @xmath is fixed
under the action of @xmath .

#### 13 LRW over Graphs with Infinitely many Ends

The goal of this section is to apply the results developed in Chapter
\thechapter and Chapter \thechapter for lamplighter random walks @xmath
on @xmath , where @xmath is a transitive graph with infinitely many
ends, i.e., @xmath .

Let us now recall the setting we are working on: we are interested in
the behaviour at infinity of homogeneous random walks @xmath on @xmath ,
with @xmath . The factor chain @xmath is a random walk over a transitive
graph @xmath with infinitely many ends. Note that when @xmath has
infinitely many ends, the lamplighter graph @xmath over @xmath has only
one end. The group @xmath acts transitively on @xmath (with or without
fixed end) and the wreath product @xmath (the lamplighter group) acts
transitively on the lamplighter graph @xmath .

##### 13.1 No Fixed End

When @xmath acts transitively on @xmath and does not fix any end in
@xmath , it is known from Woess [ Woe89a ] that @xmath is nonamenable.

The following holds for random walks @xmath on transitive graphs @xmath
with infinitely many ends. For the proof, see Woess [ Woe89b ] .

###### Theorem 13.1.

The random walk @xmath over @xmath converges almost surely in the end
topology to a random end @xmath . Denoting by @xmath the hitting
distribution on @xmath we have:

1.   The support of @xmath is the whole @xmath .

2.  @xmath is continuous on @xmath , that is @xmath .

3.   The mass of thick ends is zero, i.e., @xmath .

Recall that @xmath is the probability distribution defined for Borel
subsets @xmath by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (17)
  -- -------- -- ------

For convergence of @xmath to @xmath the finite first moment assumption
is not needed. Suppose now that @xmath has finite first moment on @xmath
and recall that the space of ends @xmath is a weakly projective
boundary. Then Assumption 8.1 holds.

Let us now state the result regarding the convergence of lamplighter
random walks @xmath over @xmath , whose projection is the random walk
@xmath over the graph with infinitely many ends @xmath . The boundary
@xmath is the space of ends and the boundary @xmath of @xmath is defined
in ( 9 ) as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the set of configurations which are either finitely
supported or accumulate at @xmath .

###### Theorem 13.2.

Let @xmath be an irreducible, homogeneous random walk with finite first
moment on @xmath , where @xmath is a graph with infinitely many ends and
@xmath does not fix any end in @xmath . Then there exists a @xmath
-valued random variable @xmath , such that @xmath almost surely, in the
topology of @xmath for every starting point. Moreover the distribution
of @xmath is a continuous measure on @xmath .

###### Proof.

The proof of this result follows basically the proof of Theorem 8.3 ,
which holds for general base graphs @xmath endowed with a rich boundary
and such that Assumption 8.1 holds.

The general boundary @xmath of the base graph is here the space of ends
and the boundary of the lamplighter graph @xmath is @xmath defined like
in equation ( 9 ).

Since, by Theorem 13.1 , the limit distribution @xmath is a continuous
measure on @xmath , the same is true (using a Borel-Cantelli argument)
for the limit distribution of @xmath on @xmath . ∎

###### The Poisson Boundary.

First of all, let us apply the Strip criterion due to Kaimanovich [
Kai00 , Thm. @xmath on p. 677] in order to determine the Poisson
boundary of random walks @xmath over graphs with infinitely many ends
@xmath . This was done in Kaimanovich and Woess [ KW02 , Thm. @xmath ] .
Nevertheless, we give a complete proof here, since the geometric
construction will be of interest for further results.

###### Theorem 13.3.

If @xmath does not fix any end in @xmath and the random walk @xmath has
finite first moment on @xmath , then the Poisson boundary of @xmath is
the measure space @xmath , where @xmath is the limit distribution of
@xmath on @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Theorem 13.1 and Definition 9.2 , the space @xmath is a @xmath
-boundary for the random walk @xmath with transition matrix @xmath ,
where @xmath is associated with @xmath as in ( 4 ). Theorem 13.1 applies
also to the reversed random walk @xmath , which is the random walk on
@xmath with transition matrix @xmath . If the corresponding limit
distribution on @xmath is @xmath , then @xmath is a @xmath -boundary for
@xmath .

Apply the Strip Criterion 9.4 . By Theorem 12.2 , there exists a @xmath
-cut @xmath , whose removal disconnects @xmath into finitely many
infinite connected components. The @xmath -cut was used for the
construction of the structure tree @xmath of @xmath . Denote by @xmath
the set of end vertices of @xmath .

Let now @xmath be ends of @xmath . By continuity of @xmath and @xmath ,
we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, we have to construct the strip @xmath only in the case @xmath
. Define the “small” strip

  -- -- -- ------
           (18)
  -- -- -- ------

The set @xmath is the connected component of @xmath which represents the
end @xmath when we remove the finite set @xmath from @xmath , and @xmath
its completion (which contains @xmath ) in @xmath . The strip @xmath is
a subset of @xmath .

In other words, the strip @xmath is the union of all translates @xmath ,
with the property that the components, which contain the ends @xmath and
@xmath after removing the finite set @xmath are different. See Figure 4
for the construction.

We have to check that the strip is @xmath -equivariant and it is “thin”
enough, i.e., it has subexponential growth.

Since @xmath acts transitively on @xmath , it is clear that @xmath , for
every @xmath . The strip @xmath is the union of all @xmath , such that
the sides of @xmath , seen as edges of the structure tree @xmath , lie
on the geodesic between @xmath and @xmath . Recall that @xmath is the
function (the structure map) which maps @xmath onto @xmath .

From Theorem 13.1 , the random walk @xmath on @xmath converges to a thin
end in @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath are thin ends in @xmath , then
@xmath and @xmath are ends in the structure tree @xmath and the strip
@xmath is a two way infinite geodesic in @xmath . It can be empty in the
case @xmath , but we already excluded this case.

From Lemma 12.1 and the fact that @xmath is a @xmath -cut, there is an
integer @xmath , such that the following holds: if @xmath are egdes in
@xmath and @xmath properly, then @xmath . In other words, if @xmath is
one of the sides of @xmath , with @xmath , then @xmath is entirely
contained in @xmath . The finiteness of @xmath implies the existence of
a constant @xmath , such that, for the ball @xmath of center @xmath and
radius @xmath in the graph metric of @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all n and distinct @xmath . Applying the logarithm and dividing
through @xmath we get,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and this proves the subexponential growth of the strip. Therefore, by
Strip Criterion 9.4 , the space @xmath is the Poisson boundary of the
random walk @xmath on @xmath . ∎

Now we are able to apply the Half Space Method explained in Section 10
in order to describe the Poisson boundary of lamplighter random walks
@xmath over @xmath , where @xmath is a transitive graph with infinitely
many ends. Assumption 8.1 holds for random walks @xmath on @xmath by
Theorem 13.1 .

Similar results on the Poisson boundary of lamplighter random walks on
groups with infinitely many ends were considered in Sava [ Sav10 ] .

###### Theorem 13.4.

Let @xmath be an irreducible, homogeneous random walk with finite first
moment on @xmath , where @xmath is a transitive graph with infinitely
many ends. If @xmath does not fix any end in @xmath , then @xmath is the
Poisson boundary of @xmath , starting at @xmath , where @xmath is
defined in ( 9 ), and @xmath is the limit distribution on @xmath .

###### Proof.

In order for Theorem 10.1 to be applicable, we need the conditions
required in the Half Space Method to be satisfied for the base graph
@xmath and random walks @xmath and @xmath on it.

By assumption, @xmath has finite first moment on @xmath , and Theorem
13.1 and Lemma 11.3 imply that Assumption 8.1 hold for @xmath and also
for @xmath . As usual, @xmath and @xmath are the respective limit
distributions on @xmath .

Next, assign a strip @xmath to almost every pair of ends @xmath .
Consider the strip @xmath defined in the proof of Theorem 13.4 , by
equation ( 18 ), which satisfies the Strip Criterion conditions in
Theorem 9.4 .

The next step is to partition @xmath into half-spaces. By construction
of the “small” strip @xmath , every @xmath is contained in some cut
@xmath , for some @xmath . Nevertheless, there are finitely many @xmath
, such that, for @xmath , we have @xmath , since @xmath is finite.

The partition of @xmath is done as follows: for each @xmath , look at
the @xmath -cuts @xmath containing @xmath , pick one of them and remove
it from @xmath . Then the set @xmath contains finitely many connected
components. This follows from the definition of a @xmath -cut, and from
the finiteness of the removed set @xmath . Moreover, the connected
components containing @xmath and @xmath are different, by the definition
of the strip @xmath . Let @xmath be the connected component of @xmath ,
which contains @xmath , and @xmath be its complement in @xmath , which
contains @xmath . One can see here that the partition of @xmath into the
half-spaces @xmath and @xmath depends on the cut @xmath containing
@xmath , that is, depends on @xmath . The sets @xmath and @xmath are
@xmath -equivariant.

From the above, it follows that all the assumptions needed in the Half
Space Method hold in the case of a graph with infinitely many ends
@xmath . Apply now Theorem 10.1 .

By Theorem 8.3 each of the random walks @xmath and @xmath starting at
@xmath converges almost surely to a @xmath -valued random variable. If
@xmath and @xmath are their respective limit distributions on @xmath ,
then the spaces @xmath and @xmath are @xmath - and @xmath - boundaries
of the respective walks. Take

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are the limit configurations of @xmath and
@xmath , respectively, and @xmath are their only respective accumulation
points. Define the configuration @xmath like in ( 13 ), that is,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the empty set. Consider the strip @xmath exactly like in
( 14 ), i.e.,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

By Theorem 10.1 , @xmath satisfies the conditions from Strip Criterion
9.4 , and this implies that the space @xmath is the Poisson boundary of
the lamplighter random walk @xmath over @xmath . ∎

##### 13.2 One Fixed End

Let @xmath be an end of @xmath , which is fixed under the action of the
group @xmath , and @xmath the set of the remaining ends. Recall a result
which can be found in Möller [ Mö92 ] and Woess [ Woe89a ] , [ Woe89b ]
.

###### Theorem 13.5.

The following hold.

1.  @xmath is amenable and acts transitively on @xmath .

2.   The structure tree @xmath of @xmath is a homogeneous tree with
    finite degree @xmath .

3.   The structure map @xmath is onto, and its restriction to @xmath is
    a homeomorphism @xmath . There is an integer @xmath , such that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Therefore, @xmath and @xmath are quasi-isometric graphs, whose ends
    are in bijection.

The interpretation of this result is that @xmath is described - up to
small modifications encoded by the structure map @xmath - by its
structure tree which looks like in Figure 5 , with @xmath .

Let @xmath be the homogeneous tree with a fixed end @xmath , like in
Figure 5 , with @xmath its space of ends and @xmath . Random walks on
homogeneous trees with a fixed end are well studied by Cartwright,
Kaimanovich and Woess [ CKW94 ] . In this section we want to extend
their results for lamplighter random walks on such graphs: we study the
convergence and the Poisson boundary of homogeneous random walks @xmath
on @xmath .

Due to the quasi-isometry between @xmath and its structure tree @xmath ,
and also to the fact that @xmath can be represented as a homogeneous
tree with a fixed end, like in Figure 5 , one can replace @xmath with
@xmath in @xmath . The geometry of @xmath is quite simple and the
behaviour of random walks on such trees is completely understood.

Throughout this section, @xmath represents the base graph for the
lamplighter graph @xmath , and the goal is the study of random walks on
@xmath . We reconsider briefly the homogeneous tree and its affine group
and recall the main known results.

###### Geometry of the Oriented tree.

If @xmath is the fixed reference end in @xmath , set for all @xmath in
@xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the geodesic ray starting at @xmath and ending at the
fixed end @xmath . See once again Figure 5 for a graphic visualization.

Let @xmath be a reference vertex in @xmath called origin . Define the
height function @xmath by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (19)
  -- -------- -- ------

This function is known in the literature as the Busemann function , and
represents the generation number of @xmath . For @xmath , the horocycle
at level @xmath is the infinite set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One can imagine the oriented tree @xmath in Figure 5 as an infinite
genealogical tree, where @xmath represents the “mythical ancestor” and
every vertex @xmath has an unique “father” @xmath in @xmath and @xmath
“sons” @xmath , for @xmath in @xmath . Using the height function, one
can express the distance between @xmath and @xmath in @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally, define a bounded metric @xmath on @xmath , which is an
ultrametric (that is, @xmath , for all @xmath ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then a sequence @xmath converges to @xmath in @xmath if @xmath tends to
zero as @xmath tends to infinity.

###### The Affine Group @xmath of a Tree.

The affine group of a tree @xmath is the group @xmath of all isometries
@xmath which fix @xmath . Changing the reference end @xmath means
passing to a conjugate of this group. The name is chosen because of the
analogy with the Poincaré upper half plane, where the group of all
isometries which fix the point at infinity coincides with the affine
group of the real line. The affine group of an oriented tree and random
walks on it was also studied by Brofferio [ Bro04 ] .

###### Random Walks on @xmath and on its Affine Group @xmath.

Random walks on the oriented tree and on its affine group are well
studied by Cartwright, Kaimanovich and Woess [ CKW94 ] . For random
walks on these type of trees, they have obtained the following results:

-   Convergence to the boundary @xmath , and hence, existence of a
    harmonic measure on @xmath .

-   The solution of the Dirichlet problem at infinity.

-   Law of large numbers and central limit theorem, formulated with
    respect to two natural length functions on the affine group of
    @xmath .

-   Identification of the Poisson boundary, that is, a description of
    bounded harmonic functions for random walks on @xmath .

In order to state the results on convergence and Poisson boundary of
lamplighter random walks @xmath on @xmath , with @xmath , similar
results for random walks @xmath on @xmath are needed. For complete
proofs and more details see once again Cartwright, Kaimanovich and Woess
[ CKW94 ] .

Consider an irreducible random walk @xmath with transition matrix @xmath
on @xmath , and @xmath which fixes the end @xmath . Like before, let
@xmath be the probability measure on @xmath , which is uniquely induced
(recall the notation @xmath ) by the transition probabilities @xmath of
@xmath , like in ( 4 ). The measure @xmath determines the right random
walk @xmath on @xmath .

Note that if @xmath is a random walk on the oriented tree @xmath , then
@xmath is a random walk on the integer line @xmath , where @xmath is the
height function defined in ( 19 ). Indeed, the mapping

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

induces a projection of any random walk on @xmath onto a walk on @xmath
.

Define the modular drift of the random walk @xmath on @xmath with
transition matrix @xmath , as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The reversed random walk @xmath on @xmath has the transition matrix
@xmath , whose entries are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that if @xmath , than @xmath and the other way round. The following
is known from Cartwright et. al [ CKW94 ] and for the case @xmath from
Brofferio [ Bro04 ] .

###### Theorem 13.6.

If @xmath is irreducible and has finite first moment on @xmath , then:

1.   If @xmath , then @xmath converges almost surely to a random end
    @xmath . If @xmath is the distribution of @xmath on @xmath , we have
    that @xmath and @xmath is the Poisson boundary of @xmath .

2.   If @xmath , then @xmath converges to the fixed end @xmath almost
    surely, and the Poisson boundary of @xmath is trivial.

The case @xmath is a special one, since the projection @xmath of @xmath
is the simple random walk on @xmath , which is reccurent. Nevertheless,
the random walk @xmath is transient and it converges to the fixed end
@xmath , but its Poisson boundary is trivial.

The Poisson boundary in the previous result can be described by using
the Strip Criterion 9.4 , in the case of positive (negative,
respectively) drift. For completeness, we shall give here the idea of
the realization of the Poisson boundary for random walks on trees @xmath
with a fixed end @xmath . For more details, see once again Cartwright,
Kaimanovich and Woess [ CKW94 ] .

###### Idea of the proof of Theorem 13.6..

If the modular drift @xmath , then also the drift (rate of escape)
@xmath , and the triviality of the Poisson boundary follows from
Proposition 9.5 .

1.  If @xmath , then @xmath . Also @xmath and @xmath , almost surely.
    Then @xmath is a @xmath -boundary, where, as usual @xmath is
    associated with @xmath like in 4 , and @xmath is a @xmath -boundary.

    Thus, we can apply the Strip Criterion 9.4 , and choose the geodesic
    lines between @xmath and @xmath as the strips @xmath . Measurability
    of the map @xmath is obvious, and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for every @xmath and @xmath . Therefore the strips @xmath satisfy
    the conditions required in Theorem 9.4 , and the measure space
    @xmath is the Poissson boundary of the random walk @xmath with
    transition matrix @xmath over @xmath .

2.  If @xmath , we exchange the roles of @xmath and @xmath in the first
    case and we get the triviality of the Poisson boundary of @xmath .

∎

###### Lamplighter Random Walks on @xmath.

Consider lamplighter random walks @xmath on @xmath , with @xmath and
@xmath is the tree with the fixed end @xmath represented in Figure 5 .
Assume that @xmath has finite first moment on @xmath . The convergence
of @xmath is a simple consequence of Theorem 8.3 .

Recall the Definition 9 of the geometric boundary @xmath of the
lamplighter graph @xmath . We replace in this section the graph @xmath
with the tree @xmath with a fixed end @xmath , and the boundary @xmath
with @xmath . We can then rewrite @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the set of all pairs @xmath , that is,

  -- -- -- ------
           (20)
  -- -- -- ------

and @xmath is the set of all configurations @xmath which are either
finitely supported, or infinitely supported with @xmath accumulating
only at @xmath . Also

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (21)
  -- -------- -- ------

###### Theorem 13.7.

Let @xmath be an irreducible, homogeneous random walk with finite first
moment on @xmath , where @xmath is an homogeneous tree and @xmath .

1.   If @xmath , then there exists a @xmath -valued random variable
    @xmath , such that @xmath almost surely, in the topology of @xmath .

2.   If @xmath , then @xmath converges almost surely to some @xmath
    -valued random variable, in the topology of @xmath .

The distribution of @xmath on @xmath (on @xmath respectively) is a
continuous measure.

###### Proof.

(a) The result is an application of Theorem 8.3 , which holds for
general transitive base graphs @xmath endowed with a rich boundary and
such that Assumption 8.1 holds. From Theorem 13.6 it follows that @xmath
satisfies Assumption 8.1 , with the boundary @xmath . Then @xmath is the
boundary for the lamplighter random walk and @xmath converges to @xmath
almost surely.

The limit distribution of @xmath is a continuous measure on @xmath , and
this implies the continuity of the limit distribution of @xmath on
@xmath .

(b) This is again an application of Theorem 8.3 when @xmath , with
@xmath in the place of @xmath and @xmath defined in ( 21 ) in the place
of @xmath . Assumption 8.1 holds once again for @xmath and the
requirements of Theorem 8.3 are fulfilled. This proves the desired.

For @xmath , also the drift of the base random walk is zero, and Theorem
8.3 can be easily adapted to prove the convergence of the LRW @xmath to
a random variable in @xmath .

When the base random walk @xmath converges to @xmath almost surely, then
the limit distribution is the point mass @xmath at @xmath .
Nevertheless, using Borel-Cantelli lemma, one can prove that the limit
distribution @xmath of @xmath on @xmath is a continuous measure. ∎

###### The Poisson Boundary.

The main goal of this subsection is to describe the Poisson boundary of
lamplighter random walks @xmath on @xmath , where @xmath is a
homogeneous tree with a fixed end @xmath , like in Figure 5 . This will
be done by making use of Half Space Method in the case when the base
random walk @xmath has non-zero modular drift.

The case @xmath is slightly different and is also the most difficult
one, and it will be treated separately in the following section. We
emphasize that the proof is completely different from all previous ones
and is based on the existence of cutpoints for random walks. I am very
grateful to Vadim Kaimanovich for useful disscutions on this problem,
and for the main idea of Section 14 .

The correspondence between the tail @xmath - algebra of a random walk
and its Poisson boundary will be used. Nevertheless, we are able to
solve this problem only when the base random walk @xmath is of nearest
neighbour type. The general case of random walks over @xmath such that
the projected random walk @xmath on @xmath has zero drift and bounded
range (not only range @xmath like in our approach) is awaiting future
work.

###### Remark 13.8.

Erschler [ Ers10 ] proved recently that the Poisson boundary of
lamplighter random walks over Euclidean lattices @xmath , with @xmath ,
such that the projection on @xmath has zero drift, is isomorphic with
the space of infinite limit configurations of lamps. She uses a modified
version of the Ray Criterion 9.3 .

Her methods does not apply in our case, when the underlying tree @xmath
has a fixed end, and the base walk has zero drift.

For the Poisson boundary of lamplighter random walks over homogeneous
trees with the action of a transitive group without any fixed ends, see
the paper of Karlsson and Woess [ KW07 ] . They proved that the Poisson
boundary is the space of infinite limit configurations accumulating at
boundary points (ends) of the tree.

Recall that @xmath is the transition matrix of the base random walk
@xmath on @xmath , and @xmath its modular drift.

###### Theorem 13.9.

Let @xmath be an irreducible, homogeneous random walk with finite first
moment on @xmath , and @xmath .

1.   If @xmath , then @xmath is the Poisson boundary of @xmath , where
    @xmath is given as in ( 20 ) and @xmath is the limit distribution of
    @xmath on @xmath .

2.   If @xmath , then @xmath is the Poisson boundary of @xmath , where
    @xmath is given as in ( 21 ) and @xmath is the limit distribution of
    @xmath on @xmath .

The case @xmath is excluded here, and considered separately in Section
14 .

Note that this result gives both the Poisson boundary of @xmath (with
transition matrix @xmath ) and of the reversed random walk @xmath (with
transition matrix @xmath ). The finite first moment condition, the
irreducibility and the homogeneity hold for both @xmath and @xmath ,
simultaneously.

###### Proof of Theorem 13.9.

Apply Half Space Method 10 and Theorem 10.1 .

(a) Case @xmath : In order to apply Theorem 10.1 , we check again that
the conditions required in Half Space Method 10 are satisfied for the
oriented tree @xmath and random walks @xmath and @xmath on it.

From the finite first moment assumption and Theorem 13.6 it follows that
Assumption 8.1 hold for @xmath , @xmath respectively. By Theorem 13.6 ,
@xmath converges to a random end in @xmath and @xmath converges to the
fixed end @xmath . Denote by @xmath the limit distribution of @xmath on
@xmath . The limit distribution of @xmath is the point mass @xmath at
@xmath .

Next, assign a strip @xmath to almost every end @xmath . Consider the
strip @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the unique two-sided infinite geodesic between @xmath
and @xmath , which has linear growth and is equivariant with respect to
the action of @xmath on @xmath . Therefore it satisfies the conditions
required in Strip Criterion 9.4 .

The partition of @xmath in half-spaces is done like this: for every
@xmath let @xmath be the unique connected component which contains the
end @xmath after the removal of @xmath from @xmath , and @xmath be its
complement in @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are @xmath -equivariant sets. Thus, all requirements for the Half Space
Method 10 hold and we can apply Theorem 10.1 .

By Theorem 13.7 the random walk @xmath ( @xmath , respectively)
converges to a random element in @xmath ( @xmath , respectively) with
limit distributions @xmath ( @xmath , respectively). Then @xmath and
@xmath are @xmath - and @xmath -boundaries of the respective random
walks. Take

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are the limit configurations of @xmath and
@xmath , respectively, and @xmath are their only respective accumulation
points. Define the configuration @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the strip @xmath like in equation ( 14 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Theorem 10.1 , @xmath satisfies the conditions from Theorem 9.4 , and
it follows that the space @xmath is the Poisson boundary of @xmath and
@xmath is the Poisson boundary of @xmath over @xmath .

(b) Case @xmath : The proof is like before with the roles of @xmath
(respectively @xmath ) and @xmath (respectively @xmath ) exchanged. ∎

#### 14 Zero-Drift Random Walks on the Oriented Tree

In this section we describe the Poisson boundary of lamplighter random
walks @xmath on @xmath , where @xmath is the oriented tree of degree
@xmath given in Figure 5 (with @xmath in the picture), such that the
base random walk @xmath on @xmath has modular drift @xmath .

Suppose that @xmath is a nearest neighbour random walk on @xmath with
transition probabilities @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (22)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is one of the q “sons” of @xmath , and @xmath is the father
of @xmath . Then the horocyclic projection @xmath of @xmath on the
integer line @xmath is the simple random walk on @xmath , which is
recurrent. Nevertheless, the random walk @xmath on @xmath is transient
and converges to @xmath by Theorem 13.6 . Also, the random walk @xmath
on @xmath converges to @xmath by Theorem 13.7 , where @xmath is the
limit configuration (not necessary with finite support) of the LRW.

We shall prove that the Poisson boundary of LRW @xmath , with @xmath ,
such that the base random walk @xmath has transition probabilities given
by ( 22 ), is described by the space of limit configurations @xmath
accumulating at @xmath . For doing this, the Strip and Ray Criterion
(which use in some sense the entropy of the conditional random walk) are
not suitable and another approach is needed.

The proof will be done in several steps, and the first one is to give to
the oriented tree in Figure 5 another geometric interpretation, which
will make things easier.

Let us consider the reference point @xmath and the one-sided infinite
geodesic @xmath joining @xmath with the fixed end @xmath . Then one can
interpret the tree @xmath in Figure 5 as the infinite geodesic @xmath ,
which is isomorphic with @xmath , with a tree @xmath attached at each
point @xmath , so that @xmath is the origin of @xmath . For a graphic
visualization, see Figure 6 .

Consider now the following stopping times (exit times)

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -- ------

If @xmath , this means that for @xmath , the random walk @xmath will
move only in the tree @xmath , and @xmath . In other words, the exit
time @xmath represents the first time when the random walk @xmath leaves
the attached tree @xmath , with @xmath .

The random walk @xmath restricted to the stopping times @xmath is again
a nearest neighbour random walk (Markov chain) on the positive integer
line @xmath . For simplicity of notation, let us denote by @xmath and by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the transition matrix of @xmath . Then the entries of @xmath are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have @xmath and @xmath , and the transition probabilities of @xmath
can be easily computed as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (24)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the degree of @xmath , with @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

All the other entries @xmath with @xmath are zero, since @xmath is a
nearest neighbour random walk. This random walk is transient and almost
every path of @xmath converges almost surely to @xmath . This gives also
another explanation of the transience of the random walk @xmath on
@xmath and of the convergence to the fixed end @xmath .

Next, we introduce some definitions and facts, which can be found in
James and Peres [ JP97 ] .

###### Cut Points.

Let @xmath be a Markov chain on a countable state space @xmath . A cut
time for the Markov chain @xmath is an integer @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , and in this case the random variable @xmath is called a
cut point . A cutpoint is a point in the state space @xmath which is
visited exactly once by the random walk. If @xmath is a cut point, then
deleting @xmath from the trajectory cuts the trajectory into two
disjoint components, @xmath and @xmath , with no possible transition
from the first to the second.

The following result will be needed. For details, see James and Peres [
JP97 , Theorem 1.2 (a)] .

###### Theorem 14.1.

Any transient random walk with bounded increments on the lattice @xmath
has infinitely many cut points with probability @xmath .

For the random walk @xmath on @xmath with transition probabilities
@xmath given in ( 24 ), consider the random time

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then one can show that with probability one @xmath is a cut time for
infinitely many @xmath . Thus, the random walk @xmath on @xmath has
infinitely many cut times, and implicitely also infinitely many cut
points.

For the random walk @xmath , let @xmath be the indicator function of the
event @xmath and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the number of cut times encountered up to time @xmath . Then @xmath
is a stationary process and Birkhoff Ergodic Theorem implies that there
exists a constant @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The constant @xmath can be explicitely computed as @xmath . The number
@xmath is called the density of the cut points for the random walk
@xmath on @xmath .

###### Remark 14.2.

The set of cut points of @xmath has strictly positive density @xmath and
this implies that for any integer @xmath , one can choose a set of
trajectories, such that, in any collection of @xmath trajectories, at
least @xmath have infinitely many common cut points.

###### The Poisson Boundary.

Assume that the lamplighter random walk @xmath is of nearest neighbour
type on @xmath , that is, the following local condition is satisfied:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (25)
  -- -------- -- ------

only if @xmath and @xmath are neighbours in @xmath and the
configurations @xmath may only differ at the point @xmath .

Let us now state the main result on the description of the Poisson
boundary of LRW @xmath , with @xmath , when the base random walk @xmath
on the tree @xmath with a fixed end @xmath has zero modular drift @xmath
.

###### Theorem 14.3.

Let @xmath be an irreducible, nearest neighbour random walk on @xmath ,
such that the base walk @xmath on @xmath is of nearest neighbour type
with @xmath . Then the Poisson boundary of @xmath is given by the space
of limit configurations endowed with the corresponding hitting
distribution @xmath .

The first step in the proof of this theorem is to construct another
“lamplighter type” random walk @xmath - on a modified state space - with
the same Poisson boundary as @xmath . Then, Theorem 14.3 is just a
consequence of three other results which we will state and prove in what
follows.

###### Extended “Lamplighter Type” Random Walk.

Using the stopping times @xmath defined in ( 23 ), we construct another
“lamplighter type ” random walk @xmath , similar to @xmath .

For all @xmath , denote by @xmath the set of all @xmath -valued lamp
configurations on the tree @xmath , rooted at @xmath . Let also @xmath
be the space of all finitely supported “generalized” configurations
@xmath over @xmath , where @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This means that the value @xmath of the configuration @xmath at a point
@xmath is a configuration on the whole tree @xmath rooted at @xmath ,
i.e., a configuration in @xmath .

Let the “new” state space @xmath be the product of the space @xmath of
“generalized” configurations @xmath with @xmath , that is,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consider now the random walk @xmath on @xmath , with @xmath , such that
@xmath is a generalized configuration over @xmath , and the projection
of @xmath on @xmath is the random walk @xmath on @xmath , with
transition probabilities given as in ( 24 ). This description of the
chain @xmath follows from the fact that in between of two consecutive
stopping times @xmath , the random walk @xmath moves only in the tree
@xmath , with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, because of the local condition we have assumed in ( 25 ), the
lamplighter configuration may change only in points of @xmath .

The walk @xmath , with @xmath , can be viewed as an “extended random
walk” of @xmath . In other words, we add to the states of the chain
@xmath the lamp configuration @xmath . The lamp configurations @xmath
are similar to the occupation numbers defined in James and Peres [ JP97
] .

We denote by @xmath the transition matrix of @xmath . Its entries are of
the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath , the entries are zero. Let @xmath and @xmath be such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the transtion probabilities of @xmath are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark 14.4.

With this construction in hand, the identification problem for the
Poisson boundary of @xmath on @xmath reduces to the identification
problem for the Poisson boundary of the new walk @xmath on @xmath .

Recall that @xmath is a random walk with drift to the right on @xmath ,
and from Theorem 14.1 , it has infinitely many cutpoints, with
probability @xmath .

###### Another Description of the Poisson Boundary.

For the random walk @xmath on the state space @xmath , let like before
@xmath be its path space. The shift @xmath in the path space is defined
as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall that the Poisson boundary is the space of ergodic components of
the time shift in the path space @xmath , endowed with the probability
measure @xmath . In a more detailed way, denote by @xmath the orbit
equivalence relation of the shift @xmath in the path space:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and by @xmath the @xmath -algebra of all measurable unions of @xmath
-classes (mod @xmath ) in the space @xmath .

Then the Poisson boundary of @xmath is the quotient of the path space
@xmath with respect to the equivalence relation @xmath .

###### Tail @xmath-Algebra.

The tail boundary is analogous to the definition of the Poisson
boundary, with the equivalence relation @xmath being now replaced with
the tail equivalence relation @xmath , which is defined as

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

An important difference is that unlike the @xmath -algebra @xmath from
the definition of the Poisson boundary, the tail @xmath -algebra @xmath
of all measurable unions of @xmath -classes can be presented as the
limit of the decreasing sequence of @xmath -algebras @xmath determined
by the positions of sample paths of the random walk @xmath at times
@xmath . In other words,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are the coordinate @xmath -algebras generated by the random
variables @xmath .

The Poisson and the tail boundaries are sometimes confused, and indeed
they do coincide for “most common” random walks. Their coincidence for
random walks on groups is a key ingredient of the entropy theory of
random walks. See Kaimanovich [ Kai92 ] for more details and for
criteria of triviality of these boundaries and of their coincidence
provided by @xmath laws.

Consider the extended random walk @xmath defined above on the state
space @xmath . Then the tail @xmath -algebra of @xmath can be described
as the @xmath -algebra generated by the tail equivalence relation @xmath
:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (26)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath are two trajectories of the random walk @xmath .
The tail boundary of @xmath is the quotient of the path space with
respect to the tail equivalence relation @xmath .

Recall that @xmath is a transient random walk on @xmath , with
transition probabilities given in ( 24 ), and @xmath is the extended
“lamplighter type” random walk on @xmath , which is also transient.

If @xmath is the random configuration of lamps at time @xmath on the
tree @xmath rooted at @xmath , let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The existence of the limit follows from the fact that a transient
process visits every state infinitely often.

###### Lemma 14.5.

For @xmath consider the event @xmath . For @xmath this event is in the
@xmath -algebra @xmath , and for trajectories in @xmath the value of
@xmath can be approximated in terms of the limit configuration @xmath
only.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a trajectory of the walk @xmath and @xmath the limit
configuration of lamps for this trajectory. If @xmath is a cut point of
the trajectory @xmath attained at time @xmath (so that @xmath ), then
@xmath is the restriction @xmath of the limit configuration @xmath to
the random subset @xmath , because the random cut point @xmath will be
visited only once by @xmath . That is, on the trees @xmath the
configuration will not change anymore after time @xmath and on the tree
@xmath the configuration will not be touched at all during the entire
process. Therefore @xmath and

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (27)
  -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is the initial configuration (all lamps are off) on the tree
@xmath rooted at @xmath , and @xmath is the configuration of lamps on
the set @xmath , which can still change at times @xmath .

This proves that, under the condition that @xmath is a cut point for the
trajectory @xmath , the lamp configuration is finalized on the random
interval @xmath . Moreover, its value is determined by the limit
configuration @xmath , and a decomposition of the form ( 27 ) is given.

Let @xmath be another trajectory of the “lamplighter type” random walk
@xmath such that the limit configurations @xmath and @xmath coincide,
and such that @xmath and @xmath have infinitely many common cut points.
The existence of such paths follows from Remark 14.2 . If @xmath is such
a common cut point (which occurs at different cut time @xmath with
@xmath ), then at time @xmath the lamp configuration @xmath is finalized
and is again given by the restriction of the limit configuration @xmath
on the random interval @xmath . Moreover @xmath and for @xmath a
decomposition of the form ( 27 ) is given. This holds for all common cut
points.

Thus @xmath may be partitioned into subevents @xmath (with @xmath a cut
point of @xmath ) which are in the @xmath -algebra generated by @xmath
and @xmath , and the lemma is proved. ∎

###### Proposition 14.6.

Let @xmath , with @xmath , be the extended “lamplighter type” random
walk on @xmath . Then the tail @xmath -algebra of @xmath is generated by
the limit configurations of lamps @xmath .

###### Proof.

We first describe the tail @xmath -algebra of the process @xmath
conditioned on the limit configuration @xmath and on @xmath . By Theorem
14.1 , the process @xmath has infinitely many cut points, and
implicitely also an infinite sequence @xmath of cut times . From Lemma
14.5 , at these cut times the values of @xmath are determined, and the
limit configuration is finalized, that is, it will not change anymore
from now on. Let @xmath , @xmath be the respective cut points for two
consecutive cut times @xmath , i.e., @xmath .

Between times @xmath the configuration of lamps can only be modified on
the set @xmath , that is, only on the trees @xmath . For different
@xmath , these sequences of modified configurations are mutually
independent (conditionally on @xmath ), and hence the tail @xmath
-algebra of the process @xmath , conditioned on @xmath is trivial by
Kolmogorov @xmath law. Conditional triviality of a @xmath -algebra given
@xmath means that the @xmath -algebra is generated by @xmath up to
completion. That is, the tail @xmath -algebra of @xmath is generated by
the limit configurations of lamps @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 14.7.

Note that if for two sample trajectories @xmath and @xmath , the
respective limit configurarions coincide, and the paths @xmath and
@xmath have infinitely many common cut points, then they correspond to
the same point of the Poisson boundary of @xmath .

###### Proposition 14.8.

For the extended “lamplighter type” random walk @xmath on the state
space @xmath , with @xmath , its tail boundary coincides with its
Poisson boundary, up to sets of measure zero, for any starting point
@xmath .

###### Proof.

Remark 14.2 (the density of the cut times) implies that the Poisson
boundary of @xmath covers the space of limit configurations with finite
fibers, that is, the tail boundary (the tail @xmath -algebra), which is,
in view of Proposition 14.6 , generated by the space of limit
configurations @xmath . This is possible, using the theory of covering
Markov operators in Kaimanovich [ Kai95 ] (see Theorem @xmath and
Example in @xmath ), only when the cover is trivial. Thus, the Poisson
boundary coincides with the tail boundary of @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 14.9.

The arguments in the previous two proofs are similar to the description
of the exchangeable sigma-algebra of bounded range random walks on
transient groups due to James and Peres [ JP97 ] . In both cases the
argument is based on the existence of cut points at which a certain part
of the limit configuration is finalized.

In James and Peres [ JP97 ] , coincidence of the limit configurations
for two trajectories implies that they have the same sequence of cut
points and cut times. This is not the case in our setup, because of
which we have to use a special argument dealing with different sequences
of cut times associated to the same limit configuration.

###### Proof of Theorem 14.3.

From the construction of the “lamplighter-type” random walk @xmath , it
follows that the Poisson boundary of @xmath is reduced to the
identification of the Poisson boundary for @xmath .

From Proposition 14.8 it follows that the Poisson boundary of @xmath
coincides with its tail @xmath -algebra, which is by Proposition 14.6
generated by the space of limit configurations @xmath . Consequently
also the Poisson boundary of @xmath is isomorphic with the space of
limit configurations with the respective hitting distribution @xmath . ∎

The proof of the Theorem 14.3 is done only when the base random walk
@xmath is of nearest neighbour type and its associated LRW @xmath
satisfies the local condition ( 25 ). A next step is to generalize this
results to bounded range random walks @xmath on @xmath .

### Chapter \thechapter Hyperbolic Graphs

In this chapter we study once more the behaviour at infinity of
lamplighter random walks @xmath on @xmath , when the transitive base
graph @xmath is a hyperbolic graph in the sense of Gromov. The method
developed in Section 10 is again applied here. Hyperbolicity of @xmath
and its geometric properties will be of important use.

We first lay out the basic definitions and properties of the hyperbolic
graphs and groups, and then briefly reconsider random walks @xmath on
such structures. Using the results known for random walks @xmath on
hyperbolic graphs @xmath , we prove similar results for lamplighter
random walks @xmath , with @xmath on @xmath .

#### 15 Preliminaries

We recall here the most important definitions of hyperbolic graphs and
their hyperbolic boundary and compactification. There is a vast
literature on hyperbolic spaces, in particular on hyperbolic groups
(i.e., groups which have a hyperbolic Cayley graph). For details, the
reader is invited to consult the texts by Gromov [ Gro ] , Ghys and de
la Harpe [ GDLH90 ] , Coornaert, Delzant and Papadopoulus [ CDP90 ] ,
or, for a presentation in the context of random walks on graphs, Woess [
Woe00 , Section 22] .

Let @xmath be a proper metric space , that is, a space in which every
closed ball @xmath is compact. For @xmath , a geodesic arc @xmath in
@xmath is the image of an isometric embedding of the real interval
@xmath into @xmath which sends @xmath to @xmath and @xmath to @xmath .
The geodesic arc may not be unique.

Suppose that @xmath is also geodesic : for every pair of points @xmath ,
there is a geodesic arc @xmath in @xmath . A geodesic triangle consists
of three points @xmath together with the geodesic arcs @xmath , which
are called the sides of the triangle.

###### Definition 15.1.

A geodesic triangle is called @xmath -thin , with @xmath , if every
point on any one of the sides is at distance at most @xmath from some
point on one of the other two sides.

###### Definition 15.2.

One says that the space @xmath is hyperbolic , if there is @xmath such
that every geodesic triangle in @xmath is @xmath -thin.

[]

The most typical examples of a hyperbolic spaces are trees (where @xmath
), the hyperbolic upper half-plane @xmath (where @xmath ), and the
Poincaré unit disc.

###### Gromov Metric.

Let us choose a reference point @xmath in @xmath and define, for @xmath
, the Gromov inner product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . If @xmath is a tree (which is @xmath -hyperbolic), then
this is the usual graph distance between @xmath and the geodesic @xmath
. A good way to think of this is as follows. Using the thin triangles
property of hyperbolic metric spaces, we see that two walkers moving
from @xmath to @xmath and @xmath respectively along suitable geodesics
will remain close together (less than @xmath apart) for a certain
distance, before beginning to diverge rapidly. The Gromov inner product
measures approximately the length of time that the two walkers remain
close together.

###### Hyperbolic Boundary and Compactification.

Assume that @xmath is a locally finite, transitive @xmath -hyperbolic
graph, with the natural metric (discrete graph metric) @xmath on it. In
order to describe the hyperbolic boundary @xmath and the hyperbolic
compactification @xmath , we define a new metric on @xmath which can be
extended on the “boundary”.

Choose a constant @xmath , such that @xmath , and define for @xmath and
the fixed vertex @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is not a metric unless @xmath is a tree. We now define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is a metric on @xmath , and the graph @xmath is discrete in
this metric. We define @xmath as the completion of @xmath in the metric
@xmath . For the hyperbolic graph @xmath , the space @xmath is compact.
The space @xmath is called the hyperbolic compactification of the graph
@xmath . Each isometry from @xmath extends to a homeomorphism of @xmath
. A sequence @xmath with @xmath is Cauchy, if and only if

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (28)
  -- -------- -- ------

and another Cauchy sequence @xmath will define the same boundary point,
if and only if

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (29)
  -- -------- -- ------

Thus, one can also construct the hyperbolic boundary @xmath by factoring
the set of all sequences in @xmath , which satisfy ( 28 ), with respect
to the equivalence relation given by ( 29 ). The topology of @xmath does
not depend on the choice of @xmath , and it is also independent of the
choice of the base point @xmath .

Similary to trees, a third, equivalent way is to describe the hyperbolic
boundary @xmath via equivalence of geodesic rays. Two rays @xmath and
@xmath are equivalent if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Hyperbolic and End Compactification.

For a hyperbolic graph @xmath , it is easy to understand how its
hyperbolic boundary @xmath is related to the space of ends @xmath . The
hyperbolic boundary is finer, that is, the identity on @xmath extends to
a continuos surjection from the hyperbolic to the end compactification
which maps @xmath onto @xmath . For trees, the two compactifications are
the same.

The hyperbolic compactification of a hyperbolic graph is a contractive
compactification with respect to @xmath . For a proof, see Woess [ Woe00
, Theorem 22.14] . Moreover, we can also prove even the weaker property
of the hyperbolic boundary, namely the weak projectivity.

Recall the Definition 7.3 of the weak projectivity.

###### Lemma 15.3.

The hyperbolic boundary @xmath of a hyperbolic graph @xmath is a weakly
projective space.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be sequences of vertices in @xmath such that @xmath converges
to a hyperbolic boundary point @xmath and

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (30)
  -- -------- -- ------

In order to prove that @xmath converges to the same boundary point
@xmath , we show that equation ( 29 ) holds. Using the Gromov inner
product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now equation ( 30 ) and @xmath implies that @xmath as @xmath . Therefore
the sequence @xmath converges to the same boundary point @xmath . ∎

We shall also use the fact that for every two distinct hyperbolic
boundary points @xmath , there is an infinite geodesic @xmath between
them, which may not be unique. For the proof see again Woess [ Woe00 ] .

The boundary @xmath of an infinite transitive hyperbolic graph @xmath is
either infinite or has cardinality @xmath . In the latter case, it is a
graph with two ends that is quasi-isometric with the two-way infinite
path @xmath , and the Poisson boundary of any homogeneous random walk
with finite first moment is trivial. In the sequel, we consider
hyperbolic graphs @xmath , which have infinite boundary.

#### 16 LRW over Hyperbolic Graphs

Let @xmath be a transitive hyperbolic graph with infinite hyperbolic
boundary @xmath and @xmath . Like in the previous sections, @xmath is a
homogeneous lamplighter random walk with transition matrix @xmath on
@xmath , such that the projection of @xmath on @xmath is the random walk
@xmath with transition matrix @xmath on @xmath .

Recall that the boundary @xmath of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the dense subset @xmath of it defined in ( 9 ) is now replaced by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (31)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the set @xmath consists of all configurations @xmath which are
either finitely supported, or infinitely supported with @xmath
accumulating only at @xmath .

Taking into account the connection between the hyperbolic boundary
@xmath and the space of ends @xmath of a transitive graph @xmath , we
have to distinguish two different cases:

1.   Infinite hyperbolic boundary and infinitely many ends.

2.   Infinite hyperbolic boundary and only one end.

##### 16.1 Infinite Hyperbolic Boundary and Infinitely Many Ends

From the fact that the identity on @xmath extends to a continuous
surjection from the hyperbolic to the end compactification, which maps
@xmath onto @xmath , it follows that we are in the case of Chapter
\thechapter , i.e., of a graph with infinitely many ends. The ends are
the connected components of the hyperbolic boundary.

The convergence of @xmath is given by Theorem 13.2 and Theorem 13.7
respectively (with the hyperbolic boundary @xmath instead of the space
of ends @xmath ), depending on whether an element of @xmath is fixed
under the action of @xmath or not.

The Poisson boundary of the lamplighter random walk @xmath is given by:

-   Theorem 13.4 , with @xmath instead of @xmath , in the nondegenerate
    case when no hyperbolic element of @xmath is fixed by @xmath .

-   In the “degenerate case”, when @xmath fixes one point in @xmath
    (which has to be unique, given that @xmath is assumed to be
    infinite), then @xmath “looks” like in Figure 5 , since the ends are
    the connected components of the hyperbolic boundary by Pavone [
    Pav89 ] . The convergence of @xmath is given by Theorem 13.7 and the
    Poisson boundary is described in Theorem 13.9 for the non-zero
    modular drift case, and for zero modular drift in Theorem 14.3 .

##### 16.2 Infinite Hyperbolic Boundary and One End

The problem of the existence of an one-ended hyperbolic graph @xmath
with a transitive group @xmath that fixes a boundary point in @xmath is
still unsolved. Experts belive that the answer is negative. See the
remarks at the end of the paper Kaimanovich and Woess [ KW02 ] . Since
this situation is only hypothetical, we shall consider in this section
the case when the graph @xmath has infinite hyperbolic boundary @xmath
and only one end, and no element of @xmath is fixed under the action of
@xmath .

For homogeneous random walks @xmath on @xmath with @xmath the following
holds. See Woess [ Woe93 ] for the proof.

###### Theorem 16.1.

If @xmath is a hyperbolic graph and @xmath does not fix any element of
@xmath , then the random walk @xmath converges almost surely in the
hyperbolic topology to a random point @xmath . If @xmath is the limit
distribution of @xmath , then

1.   The support of @xmath is the whole @xmath .

2.   The measure @xmath is continuous on @xmath , that is @xmath ,
    @xmath .

The convergence to the boundary of homogeneous random walks @xmath on
hyperbolic graphs @xmath holds without any need of the first moment
assumption. In order to have similar convergence results for lamplighter
random walks @xmath , we need this assumption on the base random walk
@xmath . From now on, we suppose that @xmath has finite first moment on
the transitive base graph @xmath . Recall also that the hyperbolic
boundary @xmath is weakly projective, by Lemma 15.3 .

Convergence of lamplighter random walks @xmath on @xmath , with @xmath a
hyperbolic graph, follows easily from Theorem 8.3 , since Assumption 8.1
is satisfied. Recall the definition ( 31 ) of the boundary @xmath of the
graph @xmath .

###### Theorem 16.2.

Let @xmath be an irreducible, homogeneous random walk with finite first
moment on @xmath , where @xmath is a hyperbolic graph and @xmath does
not fix any element of @xmath . Then there exists a @xmath -valued
random variable @xmath such that @xmath almost surely, in the topology
of @xmath , for every starting point. The distribution of @xmath is a
continuous measure on @xmath .

###### Proof.

The proof of this result follows basically the proof of Theorem 8.3 and
Theorem 13.2 , with the hyperbolic boundary @xmath instead of the space
of ends @xmath . ∎

###### 16.2.1 Poisson Boundary

Let us first recall the description of the Poisson boundary of random
walks @xmath over transitive hyperbolic graphs @xmath , which will be
used for the Poisson boundary of lamplighter random walks @xmath . For
sake of completeness, we also give here the idea of the proof. For a
detailed proof, see also Kaimanovich [ Kai00 ] .

###### Theorem 16.3.

Let @xmath be a hyperbolic graph with @xmath , and @xmath does not fix
any element of @xmath . If @xmath is an homogeneous random walk with
finite first moment on @xmath , then its Poisson boundary is @xmath .

###### Proof.

The proof is very similar with the proof of Theorem 13.3 . By Theorem
16.1 and Definition 9.2 , the space @xmath is a @xmath -boundary for the
random walk @xmath . Theorem 16.1 applies also to the reversed random
walk @xmath , with the limit distribution @xmath , and @xmath is a
@xmath -boundary for @xmath . Recall that @xmath is the probability
measure on @xmath which is uniquely induced by the transition matrix
@xmath of @xmath as in ( 4 ).

Apply the Strip Criterion 9.4 and define the strip @xmath , for @xmath .
By continuity of @xmath and @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, we have to construct the strip @xmath only in the case @xmath
. Let

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (32)
  -- -------- -- ------

The strip @xmath is set of all points @xmath from all geodesics in
@xmath joining @xmath and @xmath . This is a subset of @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every @xmath . In a @xmath -hyperbolic graph any two geodesics with
the same endpoints are within uniformly bounded distance at most @xmath
one from another (see [ GDLH90 ] for details), and the geodesics have
linear growth. This implies that there exists a constant @xmath , such
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath and distinct @xmath . This proves the subexponential
growth of @xmath , which completes the proof. ∎

In order to describe the Poisson boundary of lamplighter random walks
@xmath over @xmath , when @xmath is a @xmath -hyperbolic graph with
infinite hyperbolic boundary and only one end, we need some additional
facts.

Consider the hyperbolic graph @xmath and its hyperbolic boundary @xmath
as being described by equivalence of geodesic rays. For @xmath and
@xmath let @xmath be a geodesic ray joining @xmath with @xmath . For
every @xmath , let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Define the Busemann function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The horosphere with the centre in @xmath and passing through @xmath ,
denoted @xmath is the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For every @xmath and @xmath the distances @xmath and @xmath are not
defined, but the Busemann function @xmath gives sense to the expression
@xmath , which is of the type @xmath . One can think of @xmath as being
the distance between the horospheres @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath if
@xmath is at the exterior of the horoball limited by @xmath . For
properties of the Busemann function, see [ GDLH90 , Chapter 8] .

###### Theorem 16.4.

Let @xmath be an irreducible, homogeneous random walk with finite first
moment on @xmath , where @xmath is a hyperbolic transitive graph with
@xmath and @xmath . If @xmath acts transitively on @xmath and does not
fix any element in @xmath , and @xmath is the limit distribution on
@xmath , with @xmath defined in ( 31 ), then @xmath is the Poisson
boundary of @xmath .

###### Proof.

We apply Theorem 10.1 . First of all, we check that the conditions
required in the Half Space Method are satisfied for @xmath and @xmath on
@xmath , which have finite first moments. From Theorem 16.1 and Lemma
15.3 it follows that the Assumption 8.1 holds.

For the second requirement in the Half Space Method consider the strip
@xmath defined in ( 32 ), which has sub-exponential growth.

Finally, let us partition @xmath into half-spaces. Actually, this is one
of the examples where the partition is made into two half-spaces and
another “degenerate” set on which the lamplighter configuration will be
set up to be @xmath . For every @xmath , let @xmath (respectively,
@xmath ) be the horosphere with center @xmath (respectively, @xmath )
and passing through @xmath . Remark that the two horospheres may have
non empty intersection. Consider the partition of @xmath into the
subsets @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

contains a neighbourhood of @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

contains a neighbourhood of @xmath . This partition is @xmath
-equivariant.

Up to now, we have checked that the assumptions required in the
Half-Space Method 10 are fulfilled, when @xmath is a hyperbolic graph.
Apply now Theorem 10.1 .

By Theorem 16.2 each of the random walks @xmath and @xmath starting at
@xmath converges almost surely to a @xmath -valued random variable, with
@xmath given in ( 31 ), with limit distributions @xmath and @xmath
respectively. Then @xmath and @xmath are @xmath - and @xmath -
boundaries of the respective random walks. Take

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are the limit configurations of @xmath and
@xmath , respectively, and @xmath are their only respective accumulation
points.

Define the configuration @xmath like in ( 13 ), that is,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the strip @xmath exactly like in ( 14 ), i.e.,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

For a graphic visualization of the above construction of the strip and
lamps configuration @xmath , see Figure 7 .

From Theorem 10.1 , @xmath satisfies the conditions from Theorem 9.4 ,
and it follows that the space @xmath is the Poisson boundary of the
lamplighter random walk @xmath over @xmath . ∎

### Chapter \thechapter LRW over Euclidean Lattices

The wreath product @xmath was first considered in Kaimanovich and
Vershik [ KV83 ] as a source of several examples and counterexamples
illustrating the relationship between growth, amenability and the
Poisson boundary for random walks on groups.

In this chapter we consider lamplighter random walks over Euclidean
lattices @xmath . The associated lamplighter graph is @xmath . We show
how to apply the Half Space Method 10 in order to describe the Poisson
boundary of lamplighter random walks @xmath , in the case when the
random walk @xmath of @xmath has non-zero drift.

We emphasize that the results in this section were earlier obtained by
Kaimanovich Kaimanovich [ Kai01 ] in the non-zero drift case.
Nevertheless, we still recall them, as another application of our
methods. For the zero drift case, the description of the Poisson
boundary was recently done in Erschler [ Ers10 ] , by using a modified
version of the Ray Criterion.

#### 17 Random Walks on @xmath

Let now @xmath , @xmath , be the @xmath -dimensional lattice, with the
Euclidean metric @xmath on it. For @xmath , there are also natural
boundaries and compactifications. A nice example of compactification is
obtained by embedding @xmath into the @xmath -dimensional unit disc via
the map @xmath , and taking the closure. In this compactification, the
boundary @xmath is the unit sphere @xmath in @xmath , and a sequence
@xmath in @xmath converges to @xmath if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall first the Definition 7.3 of a weakly projective boundary.

###### Lemma 17.1.

The boundary @xmath is a weakly projective boundary.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a sequence which converges to @xmath , and @xmath be
another sequence in @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it follows that @xmath . Now

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the sequence @xmath of real numbers converges to @xmath , since we
can bound it from above and from below by two sequences both converging
to 1. Therefore @xmath , and this proves the desired. ∎

Consider the random walk @xmath with law @xmath on @xmath and the
lamplighter random walk @xmath with law @xmath on @xmath . If the law
@xmath of @xmath has non-zero first moment (drift)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then the law of large numbers implies that @xmath converges to the
boundary @xmath in this compactification with deterministic limit @xmath
. In particular, the limit distribution @xmath is the Dirac mass at this
point.

Let us now state the result on the Poisson boundary of lamplighter
random walks @xmath on @xmath in the case of non-zero drift.

###### Theorem 17.2.

Let @xmath , with @xmath , be a random walk with law @xmath on @xmath ,
@xmath , such that @xmath generates @xmath , and @xmath has non-zero
drift on @xmath . If @xmath has finite first moment, and @xmath is
defined as in ( 9 ) with the unit sphere @xmath instead of @xmath , then
@xmath is the Poisson boundary of @xmath , where @xmath is the limit
distribution of @xmath on @xmath .

Thus, the Poisson boundary of lamplighter random walks is described by
the space of infinite limit configurations of lamps.

###### Proof.

Here it is easy to check the requirements in the Half Space Method .

The random walk @xmath (respectively @xmath ) converges to the boundary
@xmath with deterministic limit @xmath (respectively, @xmath ), in the
case of non-zero drift @xmath . The limit distributions @xmath and
@xmath are the Dirac-masses at the respective limit points.

Define the strip @xmath . It does not depend on the limit points, it is
@xmath -equivariant, and it has polynomial growth of order @xmath , that
is, also subexponential growth.

Next, let us partition @xmath into half-spaces. Denote by @xmath the
geodesic of @xmath joining the two deterministic boundary points @xmath
. This is exactly the diameter of the ball, since the points @xmath and
@xmath are antipodal points, i.e., they are opposite through the centre.
For every @xmath , consider the hyperplane which passes through @xmath
and is orthogonal to @xmath . This hyperplane cuts @xmath into two
disjoint spaces @xmath and @xmath , containing @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. The half-spaces @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -equivariant.
Apply now Theorem 10.1 .

By Theorem 8.3 each of the random walks @xmath and @xmath converges
almost surely to a @xmath -valued random variable, where @xmath is
defined as in ( 9 ), with @xmath instead of @xmath . Nevertheless, the
only “active” points of non-zero @xmath - and @xmath -measure on @xmath
are @xmath and @xmath , respectively. More precisely, @xmath can be
written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath (respectively, @xmath ) is the set of all configurations
accumulating only at @xmath (respectively, @xmath ).

If @xmath and @xmath are the limit distributions of @xmath and @xmath on
@xmath , then the spaces @xmath and @xmath are @xmath - and @xmath -
boundaries of the respective random walks. Take

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are the limit configurations of @xmath and
@xmath , respectively, and @xmath are their only respective accumulation
points. Define the configuration @xmath like in ( 13 ), and the strip
@xmath exactly like in ( 14 ). From Theorem 10.1 , @xmath satisfies the
conditions from Theorem 9.4 , and it follows that the space @xmath is
the Poisson boundary of the lamplighter random walk @xmath over @xmath .
∎

### Chapter \thechapter Open Problems on LRW

The goal of this chapter is to give a brief overview on some problems
that are related to the first part of the thesis. This is only a small
personal selection of the vast questionings concerning Lamplighter
Random Walks.

#### 18 Poisson Boundary of LRW

Let @xmath be the oriented tree in Figure 6 with a fixed end @xmath ,
and @xmath be a random walk with zero modular drift @xmath on @xmath .
Consider the associated lamplighter random walk @xmath on @xmath . In
Theorem 14.3 , we have proved that the Poisson boundary of @xmath is the
space of limit configurations of lamps together with the respective
hitting distribution, only when @xmath and @xmath are both of nearest
neighbour type. This means that the configuration of the lamp can be
changed only at the current position. This assumption cannot be avoided
in our proof.

It will be interesting to generalize this result when the base random
walk @xmath has bounded range (not range @xmath like in our case) and
the lamp configuration can be changed in a bounded neighbourhood of the
current position (not only at the current position like in our
settings).

###### Conjecture 18.1.

For any random walk @xmath with bounded range on @xmath , such that the
projection @xmath on @xmath has zero drift, its Poisson boundary is
isomorphic with the space of infinite limit configurations of lamps,
endowed with the respective hitting distribution.

#### 19 Return Probability Asymptotics of LRW

Let @xmath be an infinite graph, @xmath the finite set of lamp states,
and @xmath the associated lamplighter graph. Consider the lamplighter
random walk @xmath on @xmath . Recall first a known result due to
Varopoulos [ Var83 ] and Pittet and Saloff-Coste [ PSC01 ] on the return
probabilities of random walks on @xmath .

###### Theorem 19.1.

If @xmath , with @xmath , is the Switch-Walk-Switch random walk on
@xmath and the transition matrix on @xmath is uniform, i.e., @xmath ,
then the @xmath -step return probabilities are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the expectation on the trajectory space of @xmath
starting at @xmath , and @xmath represents the range of the random walk
@xmath on @xmath .

The range @xmath of a random walk @xmath is defined as the number of
distinct visited points up to time @xmath by the random walk, that is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So, in order to derive asymptotics for the return probabilites @xmath of
@xmath on @xmath , as @xmath goes to infinity, it is enough to study the
asymptotics for the range @xmath of its underlying walk @xmath on @xmath
.

###### Asymptotics for @xmath.

There are several results on asymptotics of return probabilites of LRW
over base groups which have polynomial growth, for instance on @xmath ,
for all @xmath . We state here some of them.

For random walks on @xmath , Donsker and Varadhan [ DV79 ] studied the
asymptotic behaviour of the Laplace transform of the range @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . This behaviour depends on what is assumed about the
one-step transition probabilities. They proved the following important
theorem.

###### Theorem 19.2.

For simple random walks on @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath is the lowest eigenvalue of the Laplacian with Dirichlet
boundary condition in the Euclidean ball of radius @xmath , and @xmath
its volume.

Here, for sequences @xmath and @xmath of real numbers, we indicate by
@xmath that their quotient tends to @xmath . We say that @xmath if there
are @xmath , such that for all sufficiently large @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If also @xmath , then we write @xmath . An equivalence class of
sequences under this relation is called an asymptotic type . Note that
the asymptotic type of a sequence is not as sharp as asymptotic
equivalence. For example, sequences of the form @xmath (where @xmath and
@xmath is a polynomial) are all of asymptotic type @xmath .

Using the previous Theorem, one gets asymptotic equivalence for the
return probabilities @xmath of the LRW on @xmath .

Revelle [ Rev03 ] , computed precise asymptotics for Switch-Walk-Switch
lamplighter walks on @xmath . He obtained that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

using the relation with the one-dimensional trapping problem.

###### Asymptotics for @xmath.

Consider now the underlying graph as being an oriented tree with a fixed
end @xmath like in Figure 6 and @xmath the random walk with transition
probabilities @xmath given in ( 22 ), which has zero modular drift
@xmath .

We are interested in asymptotics (asymptotic type or asymptotic
equivalence) of the return probabilities @xmath for SWS lamplighter
random walks @xmath on @xmath , such that the base random walk @xmath
has zero drift on @xmath . Such a situation was not considered until
now. The precise asymptotics for the range @xmath are hard to determine.

An easy upper estimate can be obtained if we look at the horocyclic
projection @xmath of @xmath on the integers, which is a simple random
walk on @xmath . Moreover, the range @xmath of the horocyclic projection
is much smaller than the range of @xmath on @xmath . Using the large
deviation estimate of Theorem 19.2 for @xmath on @xmath , one has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , we get the following upper estimate for the return
probabilities of LRW on @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the transition matrix of the Switch-Walk-Switch random
walk on @xmath , and @xmath its spectral radius. Recall that @xmath is
the trivial configuration, where all lamps are off.

Question 1: How can one find a good lower bound for @xmath ? If a lower
estimate of the same order @xmath can be found, then one would have the
asymptotic type for the return probabilities, which is weaker than the
precise asymptotics.

Question 2: How can one find asymptotics for the range @xmath of random
walks on graphs with exponential growth, say trees? This problem was not
considered up to now. Such estimates are well studied for random walks
on groups and graphs with polynomial growth, where gaussian estimates
are available.

## Part II Entropy-Sensitivity of Languages via Markov Chains

### Chapter \thechapter Languages on Labelled Graphs

This part of the thesis is based on the paper by Huss, Sava and Woess [
HSW10 ] .

A language @xmath over a finite alphabet @xmath is called growth
sensitive (or entropy sensitive ) if forbidding any finite set of
factors @xmath yields a sublanguage @xmath whose exponential growth rate
(entropy) is smaller than that of @xmath . Let @xmath be an infinite,
oriented, edge-labelled graph with label alphabet @xmath . Considering
the edge-labelled graph as an (infinite) automaton, we associate with
any pair of vertices @xmath the language @xmath consisting of all words
that can be read as labels along some path from @xmath to @xmath . Under
suitable general assumptions we prove that these languages are growth
sensitive. This is based on using Markov chains with forbidden
transitions.

#### 20 Introduction

Let @xmath be a finite alphabet and @xmath the set of all finite words
over @xmath , including the empty word @xmath . A language @xmath over
@xmath is a subset of @xmath . All our languages will be infinite. We
denote by @xmath the length of the word @xmath . A factor of a word
@xmath is a word of the form @xmath , with @xmath . The growth or
entropy of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For a finite, non-empty set @xmath consisting of factors of elements of
@xmath , we let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The issue addressed here is to provide conditions under which, for a
class of languages associated with infinite graphs, @xmath . If this
holds for any set @xmath of forbidden factors , then the language @xmath
is called growth sensitive (or entropy sensitive ).

Questions related to growth sensitivity have been considered in
different contexts.

In group theory in relation to regular normal forms of finitely
generated groups, the study of growth-sensitivity has been proposed by
Grigorchuk and de la Harpe [ GdlH97 ] as a tool for proving the
Hopfianity of a given group or class of groups; see also Arzhantseva and
Lysenok [ AL02 ] and Ceccherini-Silberstein and Scarabotti [ CSS04 ] . A
group is called Hopfian if it is not isomorphic with a proper quotient
of itself. The basic example were this tool applies is the free group.

In symbolic dynamics , the number @xmath associated with a regular
language accepted by a finite automaton with suitable properties appears
as the topological entropy of a sofic system ; see Lind and Marcus [
LM95 , Chapters 3 & 4] . Entropy sensitivity appears as the strict
inequality between the entropies of an irreducible sofic shift and a
proper subshift [ LM95 , Cor. 4.4.9] .

Motivated by these bodies of work, Ceccherini-Silberstein and Woess [
CSW02 ] , [ CS07 ] have elaborated practicable criteria that guarantee
the growth sensitivity of context-free languages.

The main result of this chapter can be seen as a direct extension of [
LM95 , Cor. 4.4.9] to the entropies of infinite sofic systems; see below
for further comments and references. This will be done using a
probabilistic approach, namely considering Markov chains with forbidden
transitions.

Our basic object is an infinite directed graph @xmath whose edges are
labelled by elements of a finite alphabet @xmath . Each edge has the
form @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are the initial and the terminal
vertices of @xmath , and @xmath is its label. We will also write @xmath
for the edge @xmath , or just @xmath in situations where we do not care
about the label. Multiple edges and loops are allowed, but two edges
with the same end vertices must have distinct labels.

A path of length @xmath in @xmath is a sequence @xmath of edges such
that @xmath , for @xmath . We say that it is a path from @xmath to
@xmath , if @xmath and @xmath . The label @xmath of @xmath is the word
@xmath that we read along the path. We also allow the empty path from
@xmath to @xmath , whose label is the empty word @xmath . For @xmath ,
denote by @xmath the set of all paths @xmath from @xmath to @xmath in
@xmath .

The languages which we consider here are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

That is, we consider the edge-labelled graph @xmath as an infinite
automaton (labelled digraph) with initial state @xmath and terminal
state @xmath , so that @xmath is the language accepted by the automaton.

The languages under study will be infinite. Also, we shall require that
the growth is very fast (exponential), since in the subexponential
growth case the entropy @xmath is zero.

###### Example 20.1.

Let us consider the following finite labelled graph @xmath given in the
Figure. For @xmath , the language @xmath is the set of all labeles of
paths from @xmath to @xmath , that is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

[]

###### Definition 20.2.

We say that @xmath is deterministic if, for every vertex @xmath and
every @xmath , there is at most one edge with initial point @xmath and
label @xmath .

Any automaton (finite or infinite) can be transformed into a
deterministic one that accepts the same language, by the well-known
powerset construction. See, for example [ BPR10 , Prop. 1.4.1] .

As in the finite case, we need an irreducibility assumption. The graph
@xmath is called strongly connected if, for every pair of vertices
@xmath , @xmath , there is an (oriented) path from @xmath to @xmath .

###### Definition 20.3.

The graph @xmath is called uniformly connected if it is strongly
connected and the following holds: there is a constant @xmath , such
that for every edge @xmath there is a path from @xmath to @xmath with
length at most @xmath .

In the finite case, the two notions coincide as one can take @xmath .
The forward distance @xmath of @xmath is the minimum length of a path
from @xmath to @xmath . We write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and call this the entropy of our oriented, labelled graph. It is a
well-known and easy to prove fact, that for a strongly connected graph,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We also need a reasonable assumption on the set of forbidden factors.

###### Definition 20.4.

We say that a finite set @xmath is relatively dense in the graph @xmath
if there is a constant @xmath such that, for every @xmath , there are
@xmath and @xmath , such that @xmath and there is a path starting at
@xmath which has label @xmath .

Note that the assumptions of uniformly connectedness and relatively
denseness cannot be avoided, since they play an important role in the
proof of the main result. This fails withous these assumptions.

###### Theorem 20.5.

Suppose that @xmath is uniformly connected and deterministic with label
alphabet @xmath . Let @xmath be a finite, non-empty set which is
relatively dense in @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We say that @xmath is fully deterministic if, for every @xmath and
@xmath , there is precisely one edge with initial point @xmath and label
@xmath . We remark that, in automata theory, the classical terminology
is deterministic and complete, instead of fully deterministic. Since in
graph theory a complete graph is one in which every pair a distinct
vertices is connected by an unique edge, we shall use the notion of
fully deterministic throughout this work.

As a consequence of Theorem 20.5 one can easily prove the following.

###### Corollary 20.6.

If @xmath is uniformly connected and fully deterministic then @xmath is
growth sensitive for all @xmath .

Indeed, in this case, for every @xmath and every @xmath , there is
precisely one path with label @xmath starting at @xmath .

With our edge-labelled graph @xmath , we can consider the full shift
space which consists of all bi-infinite words over @xmath that can be
read along the edges of some bi-infinite path in @xmath . When @xmath is
strongly connected, the entropy @xmath is independent of @xmath and
@xmath and equals the topological entropy of the full shift space of the
graph. See, for example, Gurevič [ Gur69 ] , Petersen [ Pet86 ] or
Boyle, Guzzi and Gómez [ BBG06 ] for a selection of related work and
references, and also the discussion in [ LM95 , §13.9] .

If we consider the shift space consisting of all those bi-infinite words
as above that do not contain any factor in @xmath , then the
interpretation of Corollary 20.6 is that the associated entropy is
strictly smaller than @xmath .

Theorem 20.5 , once approached in the right way, is not hard to prove.
It is based on a classical tool, a version of the Perron-Frobenius
theorem for infinite non-negative matrices; see, for example, Seneta [
Sen06 ] . We shall first reformulate things in terms of Markov chains
(random walks) and forbidden transitions.

#### 21 Markov Chains and Forbidden Transitions

We now equip the oriented, edge-labelled graph @xmath with additional
data: with each edge @xmath , we associate a probability

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a fixed constant, such that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (33)
  -- -------- -- ------

Our assumption to have the uniform lower bound @xmath for each edge
implies that the outdegree (number of outgoing edges) of each vertex is
bounded by @xmath . We interpret @xmath as the probability that a
particle with current position @xmath moves in one (discrete) time unit
along @xmath to its end vertex @xmath . Observing the successive random
positions of the particle at the time instants @xmath , we obtain a
Markov chain with state space @xmath whose one-step transition
probabilities are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We shall also want to record the edges and their labeles used in each
step, which means considering a Markov chain on a somewhat larger state
space, but we will not need to formalize it in detail. In ( 33 ), we
admit the possibility that @xmath for some @xmath . This number is then
interpreted as the probability that a particle positioned at @xmath dies
at the next step.

We write @xmath for the probability that the particle starting at @xmath
is at position @xmath after @xmath steps. This is the @xmath -element of
the @xmath -power @xmath of the transition matrix @xmath . If @xmath is
strongly connected, then @xmath is irreducible, and it is well-known
that the number

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is independent of @xmath and @xmath . See once more [ Sen06 ] . The
quantity @xmath is called the spectral radius of @xmath . It is the
parameter of exponential decay of the transition probabilities.

Let once more @xmath be finite. We interpret the elements of @xmath as
sequences of forbidden transitions . That is, we restrict the motion of
the particle: at no time is it allowed to traverse any path @xmath with
@xmath in @xmath successive steps, where @xmath is the length of @xmath
. The words in @xmath are forbidden for the Markov chain. We write
@xmath for the probability that the particle starting at @xmath is at
position @xmath after @xmath steps, without having made any such
sequence of forbidden transitions. Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These numbers are not necessarily independent of @xmath and @xmath , and
they are not the elements of the @xmath -matrix power of some
substochastic matrix.

###### Definition 21.1.

A transition matrix @xmath on the state space @xmath is called
substochastic if there exists a constant @xmath such that, for all
@xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

That is, all row sums are bounded by @xmath .

The restricted matrix @xmath does not represent the transition matrix of
a Markov chain. In order to give an upper bound for the restricted
transition probabilities @xmath , we first show the following.

###### Theorem 21.2.

Suppose that @xmath is strongly connected with label alphabet @xmath and
equipped with transition probabilities @xmath , @xmath . Let @xmath be a
finite, non-empty set which is relatively dense in @xmath . Then there
are @xmath and @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In other words, the transition matrix @xmath is strictly substochastic,
with all row sums bounded by @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath , and let @xmath be the constant from the definition of
relative denseness of @xmath . Set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For each @xmath , we can find a path @xmath from @xmath to some @xmath
with length @xmath and a path @xmath starting at @xmath which has label
@xmath . Let @xmath be the endpoint of @xmath , and choose any path
@xmath that starts at @xmath and has length @xmath . Such a path exists
by strong connectedness. Then let @xmath be the path obtained by
concatenating @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

The probability that the Markov chain starting at @xmath makes its first
@xmath steps along the edges of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and this upper bound holds for every @xmath . ∎

Given that the transition matrix @xmath is substochastic, it is an easy
exercise to prove that also its @xmath -matrix power @xmath is also
substochastic and the row sums of @xmath are bounded from above by
@xmath .

The matrix @xmath acts on functions @xmath by @xmath . Next, we state
two key results due to Pruitt [ Pru64 , Lemma 1] and [ Pru64 , Corollary
to Theorem 2] , which will be used in the proof of the main result.

###### Lemma 21.3.

If the transition matrix @xmath is irreducible and @xmath for some
@xmath and @xmath , then @xmath .

###### Lemma 21.4.

If the transition matrix @xmath is such that for every @xmath the
entries @xmath for all @xmath except finitely many, then the equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has a solution for all @xmath .

Based on these lemmatas, we prove the following result on sensitivity of
the Markov chain with respect to forbidding the transitions in @xmath .

###### Theorem 21.5.

Suppose that @xmath is uniformly connected with label alphabet @xmath
and equipped with transition probabilities @xmath , @xmath . Let @xmath
be a finite, non-empty set which is relatively dense in @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We shall proceed in two steps.

Step 1. We assume that @xmath is stochastic and that @xmath .

Consider the matrix @xmath of Lemma 21.2 . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be its @xmath -th matrix power. The quantity @xmath is the probability
that the Markov chain starting at @xmath is in @xmath at time @xmath and
does not make any forbidden sequence of transitions in each of the
discrete time intervals

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and also, by the same reasoning, for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Therefore, for every @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since Lemma 21.2 implies that the row sums of the matrix power @xmath
are bounded above by @xmath . We conclude that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so @xmath , where @xmath .

Step 2. General case. We reduce this case to the previous one.

Since @xmath is irreducible and every row of @xmath has only finitely
many non-zero entries, Lemma 21.3 and Lemma 21.4 guarantee the existence
of a strictly positive solution @xmath for the equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

that is, @xmath is @xmath -harmonic. Consider now the @xmath -transform
of the transition probabilities @xmath of @xmath , @xmath , given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the associated transition matrix @xmath with entries

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Markov chain associated with @xmath is called the @xmath -process.

Then @xmath . Using uniform connectedness, we show that there is a
constant @xmath such that @xmath for each @xmath . Indeed, for such an
edge, there is @xmath such that @xmath , whence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall that @xmath is the constant used in the definition of the uniform
connectedness. We can now choose

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We see that with @xmath we are now in the situation of Step 1 . Thus,
forbidding the transitions of @xmath for the Markov chain with
transition matrix @xmath , we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . We now show that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which will conclude the proof.

For a path @xmath from @xmath to @xmath , let (as above) @xmath be the
probability that the original Markov chain traverses the edges of @xmath
in @xmath successive steps, and let @xmath be the analogous probability
with respect to the @xmath -process. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us write @xmath for the set of all paths @xmath from @xmath to
@xmath with length @xmath for which @xmath does not contain a factor in
@xmath . Then the @xmath -step transition probabilities of the @xmath
-process with the transitions in @xmath forbidden are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Taking @xmath -th roots and passing to the upper limit, we obtain the
required identity. ∎

With this result, it is now easy to deduce Theorem 20.5 .

###### Proof of Theorem 20.5.

Since @xmath is deterministic with label alphabet @xmath , the outdegree
of every @xmath is at most @xmath . Equip the edges of @xmath with the
transition probabilities

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then the @xmath -step transition probabilities of the resulting Markov
chain are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore (because @xmath is uniformly connected)

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Analogously,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Theorem 21.5

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and this implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

strictly. ∎

#### 22 Application to Schreier Graphs

Let @xmath be a finitely generated group and @xmath a (not necessary
finitely generated) subgroup. Also, let @xmath be a finite alphabet and
let @xmath be such that the set @xmath generates @xmath as a semigroup.
We extend @xmath to a monoid homomorphism from @xmath to @xmath by
@xmath if @xmath with @xmath (and @xmath ). The mapping @xmath is called
a semigroup presentation of @xmath in [ CSW ] .

The Schreier graph @xmath has vertex set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the set of all right @xmath -cosets in @xmath , and the set of all
labelled, directed edges @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that the graph @xmath is fully deterministic and uniformly
connected.

The word problem of @xmath with respect to @xmath is the language

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The word problem for a recursively presented group @xmath is the
algorithmic problem of deciding whether two words represent the same
element. Also, this terminology is used in the context of formal
language theory and goes back at least to the seminal paper of Muller
and Schupp [ MS83 ] . For additional information, see also Muller and
Schupp [ MS85 ] . In their work, for a finitely generated group @xmath
the word problem @xmath is the set of all words on the generators and
their inverses which represent the identity element of @xmath .

If we consider the “root” vertex @xmath of the Schreier graph, then in
the notation of the introduction, we have @xmath ; compare with [ CSW ,
Lemma 2.4] .

We can therefore apply Theorem 20.5 and Corollary 20.6 to the graph
@xmath in order to deduce the following.

###### Corollary 22.1.

The word problem of the pair @xmath with respect to any semigroup
presentation @xmath is growth sensitive (with respect to forbidding an
arbitrary non-empty finite subset @xmath ).

###### Example 22.2.

Let @xmath be the group of order two and @xmath the trivial subgroup.
Let @xmath and consider the presentations @xmath such that @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

[] [] []

In the figure above are represented in order, the Schreier graph @xmath
(which is the Cayley graph of @xmath with respect to @xmath ), and two
automata @xmath and @xmath . As usual @xmath denoted the origin, while
the set of final states are @xmath and @xmath respectively. We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For detailed information on properties of pairs of groups and their
Schreier graphs, the reader may have a look at Ceccherini and Woess [
CSW ] .

### Acknowledgements

This work would not have been possible without the support of my
advisor, Wolfgang Woess. I am very grateful to him for the numerous
fruitful disscusions on topics of this thesis and on mathematics in
general. Acknowledgements go also to Wilfried Huss and all collegues
from the Department of Mathematical Structure Theory, at Graz University
of Technology for several disscusions on different mathematical problems
and not only.

My thanks go also to Vadim Kaimanovich, who gave me a lot of hints and
insights on this work. The main result and the idea of the proof in
Section 14 would have not been possible without his help.

I also thank to NAWI Graz research program for supporting me with a
Graduate Research Fellowship during much of the time when this work was
carried out. I want to thank to Prof. Bernd Thaller for accepting to act
as a co-advisor of my thesis.

Finally, I would like to thank to my family and my friends for
supporting me and believing in me through the best and the worst of
time.