Let @xmath be an irreducible and homogeneous random walk with finite
first moment on @xmath , where @xmath is an homogeneous tree and @xmath
a subgroup of @xmath , which acts transitively on @xmath and fixes one
end @xmath . Then

1.   If @xmath , then there exists a @xmath -valued random variable
    @xmath , such that @xmath , almost surely. If @xmath is the limit
    distribution on @xmath , then @xmath is the Poisson boundary of
    @xmath .

2.   If @xmath , then @xmath converges almost surely to some random
    variable with values in @xmath , and @xmath is the Poisson boundary
    of @xmath , where @xmath is the limit distribution on @xmath .

3.   If @xmath , then @xmath converges almost surely to some random
    variable in @xmath . Moreover, if @xmath is a nearest neighbour
    random walk on @xmath then @xmath is again the Poisson boundary of
    @xmath .

The convergence part follows basically from Theorem 8.3 , and the
description of the Poisson boundary in the case @xmath (and @xmath ,
respectively) is an application of Theorem 10.1 .

When @xmath , i.e., when the base walk @xmath has zero modular drift on
@xmath , the Poisson boundary of LRW @xmath on @xmath is described in a
completely different manner, and uses the existence of cutpoints for the
random walk @xmath on @xmath . Moreover, the correspondence between the
tail @xmath -algebra of a random walk and its Poisson boundary, which in
most cases coincide, will be used. This is the content of Section 14 .

In Chapter 6 , the base graph @xmath will be replaced by a hyperbolic
graph (in the sense of Gromov), and its boundary is the hyperbolic
boundary @xmath . We are interested only in the case when the boundary
is infinite. Then we can prove again the convergence of LRW to the
boundary @xmath in Theorem 16.1 and describe the Poisson boundary in
Theorem 16.4 .

Finally, for the sake of completeness, in Chapter 7 we show how to apply
Theorem 8.3 and Theorem 10.1 to LRW over Euclidean lattices, that is,
over base graphs @xmath , with @xmath . The results in this chapter were
earlier obtained by Kaimanovich [ Kai01 ] (for non-zero drift on @xmath
) and for the zero-drift case, recently by Erschler [ Ers10 ] .

In the last chapter of the first part several open problems and
conjectures regarding lamplighter random walks are stated.

Concluding the overview of the first part of the thesis, let us remark
that Kaimanovich and Vershik [ KV83 ] were the first to show that
lamplighter groups and graphs are fascinating objects in the study of
random walks. By now, there is a considerable amount of literature on
this topis. The paper of Kaimanovich [ Kai91 ] may serve as a major
source for earlier literature. Lyons, Pemantle and Peres [ LPP96 ]
investigated the rate of escape of inward-biased random walks on
lamplighter groups. The lamplighter group @xmath is one of the examples
for which the entire spectrum for some random walks is known. Grigorchuk
and Zuk [ GZ01 ] computed the complete spectrum for the random walk,
corresponding to a specific generating set of the lamplighter group.
Erschler [ Ers03 ] proved that the rate of escape of symmetric random
walks on the wreath product @xmath , where @xmath is a finitely
generated group, is zero if and only if the random walkâ€™s projection
onto @xmath is recurrent. Erschler [ Ers10 ] investigated also the
Poisson boundary of lamplighter random walks on @xmath , with @xmath ,
such that the projection on @xmath has zero drift, and she proved that
the Poisson boundary is isomorphic with the space of limit
configurations.
