Recent advances in high-throughput measurement technologies and
efficient sharing of biomedical data through community databases have
made it possible to investigate the complete collection of genetic
material, the genome, which encodes the heritable genetic program of an
organism. This has opened up new views to the study of living organisms
with a profound impact on biological research.

Functional genomics is a subdiscipline of molecular biology that
investigates the functional organization of genetic information. This
thesis develops computational strategies to investigate a key functional
layer of the genome, the transcriptome. The time- and context-specific
transcriptional activity of the genes regulates the function of living
cells through protein synthesis. Efficient computational techniques are
needed in order to extract useful information from high-dimensional
genomic observations that are associated with high levels of complex
variation. Statistical learning and probabilistic models provide the
theoretical framework for combining statistical evidence across multiple
observations and the wealth of background information in genomic data
repositories.

This thesis addresses three key challenges in transcriptome analysis.
First, new preprocessing techniques that utilize side information in
genomic sequence databases and microarray collections are developed to
improve the accuracy of high-throughput microarray measurements. Second,
a novel exploratory approach is proposed in order to construct a global
view of cell-biological network activation patterns and functional
relatedness between tissues across normal human body. Information in
genomic interaction databases is used to derive constraints that help to
focus the modeling in those parts of the data that are supported by
known or potential interactions between the genes, and to scale up the
analysis. The third contribution is to develop novel approaches to model
dependency between co-occurring measurement sources. The methods are
used to study cancer mechanisms and transcriptome evolution; integrative
analysis of the human transcriptome and other layers of genomic
information allows the identification of functional mechanisms and
interactions that could not be detected based on the individual
measurement sources. Open source implementations of the key
methodological contributions have been released to facilitate their
further adoption by the research community.
