##### Contents

-    Introduction
-    1 CDT model of quantum gravity
    -    1.1 Path integral for gravitation
    -    1.2 Method of dynamical triangulations
    -    1.3 EDT and their failure
    -    1.4 Imposing causality on DT
-    2 Monte Carlo simulations and the semiclassical solution
    -    2.1 Numerical setup of CDT
    -    2.2 The semiclassical limit
-    3 The single slice structure
    -    3.1 Expansion of the semiclassical action
    -    3.2 Form of the discrete action
-    4 The double slice structure
    -    4.1 Evidence for the double structure
    -    4.2 The double discrete action
    -    4.3 Reduction to the single slice structure
-    Summary
-    A The triple slice structure

## Introduction

In spite of numerous efforts, based on the most diverse assumptions,
quantisation of gravitational field remains an elusive task. Regarding
our standard approach to quantum field theory, perturbative
nonrenormalisability is considered the fundamental obstacle here.
Therefore attempts to formulate a nonperturbative theory of quantum
gravity have gained a lot of interest. Probably the most intuitive path
in this direction is founded on Feynman path integral defined for the
geometry of spacetime (see Sec. 1.1).
One of the approaches to quantum gravity with such a starting point is
known by the name of causal dynamical triangulations (CDT). It is a
modification (Sec. 1.4) of earlier Euclidean dynamical triangulations
(EDT) (Sec. 1.2, 1.3) and consists in replacing the gravitational path
integral with a weighted sum over piecewise linear manifolds assembled
from simplices (i.e. triangulations), every of which must preserve
causality and admit a global proper time foliation. Such an approach is
background independent, as it does not favour any particular geometry.
CDT can be naturally Wick rotated and becomes then a statistical system
of random geometry. As a result, it is suited to be investigated
numerically using Monte Carlo methods, in particular in @xmath
dimensions (Sec. 2.1). The corresponding program has been written by J.
Jurkiewicz and A. Görlich and improved only recently by J.
Gizbert-Studnicki, who also set up the latest simulations. Hence one
should refer to [ 19 ] for more details concerning numerics. The
following thesis is an analysis of the obtained data and its point of
departure is confirmation of the existence of a physically relevant
semiclassical limit of CDT, being the discretised mini-superspace model
(Sec. 2.2).
In subsequent chapters I examine this effective, semiclassical solution
of CDT employing two kinds of observables: average distributions of the
number of simplices and the analogical (inverse) covariance matrices.
Particularly, I seek in the form of the discrete effective action. In
Chapter 3 I consider only so-called @xmath simplices, extend the
description to @xmath simplices in Chapter 4 and sketch out the
possibility of separate inclusion of @xmath and @xmath simplices in
Appendix A. The whole analysis has been conducted with Mathematica and
all graphs have been plotted with gnuplot.

## Chapter 1 CDT model of quantum gravity

### 1.1 Path integral for gravitation

Classical field theory of gravitation, known as general relativity is
specified by the Einstein-Hilbert action, which for a differentiable
manifold @xmath of @xmath dimensions has the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a metric @xmath -form field, @xmath a Ricci scalar,
@xmath denotes the gravitational constant and @xmath the cosmological
constant while the integral in brackets, appearing only when @xmath has
boundary, is the Gibbons-Hawking-York term with an induced metric @xmath
and trace of an extrinsic curvature @xmath .
Formally, one defines Feynman path integral for gravitational field,
which actually is a grand canonical partition function for quantum
gravity, as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the equivalence class of metrics with respect to
diffeomorphisms – a geometry. In particular, the partition function for
manifold with spatial boundaries at proper times @xmath , @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath are induced boundary geometries, is called the
propagator by analogy with Feynman path integral for a single particle
and can be regarded as a transition amplitude between an initial and
final spatial geometry. (Which is illustrated in Fig. 1.1 .)

Unfortunately, there is a number of mathematical problems associated
with ( 1.2 ), ( 1.3 ), let alone the physical interpretation (cf. [ 1 ]
, [ 2 ] ). First and foremost, as always in quantum field theory one has
to take care of convergence of a functional integral. This can not be
circumvented here by applying a perturbative expansion, therefore a
suitable (non-violating diffeomorphism invariance) regularisation and
renormalisation of the path integral itself is necessary. Secondly,
since there is no absolute parametrisation of the space of geometries
@xmath we do not know what we are integrating over. Especially, how the
diffeomorphism-covariant (because of the integral having to be
diffeomorphism-invariant) measure @xmath should be defined. As a result,
one has to start with gauge-covariant (i.e. diffeomorphism-covariant in
this case) fields and fix the gauge afterwards but this gives rise to
Faddeev-Popov determinants, which are exceptionally difficult to be
computed nonperturbatively. Another issue is the very existence of the
measure. Thirdly, for any choice of variables the action ( 1.1 ) is
quadratic in fields, which hinders evaluation of integrals in ( 1.2 ), (
1.3 ). Furthermore, integrands of those are complex and therefore, a
kind of Wick rotation i.e. an analytic continuation such that @xmath is
required. Due to the dependence of all metric components on time as well
as non gauge-invariant nature of the above straightforward Wick rotation
it is not so obvious what it should look, however. Were all these
problems tackled, for @xmath there is yet another, known as the
conformal factor problem. Briefly speaking, it consists in unboundness
(from below) of the action ( 1.1 ), triggered by the conformal mode of
metric. This makes the Wick-rotated path integral still potentially
divergent. Going beyond this section, in the context of causal dynamical
triangulations the issue was addressed and probably resolved [ 1 ] (see
also [ 2 ] ).
Last but not least, in the partition function ( 1.2 ) (as well as in (
1.3 )) the topology of spacetime @xmath is fixed . In principle, one
might consider an extension of ( 1.2 ) including a sum over topologies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Although this makes the situation even more complicated, it is argued by
some (see for instance [ 3 ] ) to be necessary from a point of view of
the theory of quantum gravity. Nevertheless, there is still no
experimental/observational evidence for the possibility of topology
fluctuations which would arise then. In any case, this issue will be
left out here.

### 1.2 Method of dynamical triangulations

There are several approaches [ 4 ] to fix the first of the above
mentioned problems with the gravitational path integral i.e. finding a
suitable regularisation and renormalisation. (Which – hopefully – should
also help to resolve the other issues.) Inspiration has been coming
especially from lattice gauge theory and its successes in quantum
chromodynamics. In this way so-called quantum Regge calculus appeared [
6 ] , originating from Regge calculus [ 5 ] – a method of approximating
solutions of classical gravitational theory with piecewise linear
manifolds. It is characterised by the fact that one introduces a lattice
regularisation in the form of a discretisation of geometries and the
path integral is over discretised geometries only. It ought to be noted
that in contrast with (classical) Regge calculus it is not an arbitrary
continuous manifold that is to be approximated here but the integral
over all such manifolds. Hence, discretisation of geometries does not
need to be arbitrarily fine. For example, a quite limited number of
lattice plaquettes can be considered. Nevertheless, it should be taken
to infinity along with a plaquette size taken to zero in the limit of a
presumable renormalised – i.e. continuum – theory.
Dynamical triangulations (DT) constitute a distinct variant of such a
scheme (see [ 4 ] ). They are characterised by the integration over
piecewise linear manifolds assembled from polytopes (a generalisation of
polyhedra) which have fixed lengths of the edges, functioning as a
gauge-invariant ultraviolet cutoff. Polytopes are traditionally regarded
as being intrisically Minkowskian (i.e. in a sense flat – which makes
manifolds piecewise linear ), although this assumption may require a
change for causal dynamical triangulations. (Generally, there is no
extrinsic geometry, since manifolds assembled from polytopes are not
embedded anywhere – the same as in the case of continuous ones.)
More explicitly, in the method of dynamical triangulations the
continuous partition function ( 1.2 ) is replaced with the discrete

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath denote coupling constants of the regularised
theory, corresponding to the inverse of gravitational constant @xmath
and cosmological constant @xmath (divided by @xmath , to be precise),
respectively (cf. ( 1.9 ) here below); the sum, to which the integral
reduces, goes over all ”polytopialisations” (e.g. triangulations,
cubulations) @xmath of a fixed topology, weighted by the exponential of
the regularised action @xmath and normalised by the factor @xmath (rank
of the automorphism group of @xmath ). The latter replaces the measure
@xmath and does not allow for overcounting of geometries, which would
violate diffeomorphism invariance. Such a description of geometry is
stripped of the use of coordinates, though in principle a coordinate
system might be assigned to each polytope. This is absolutely
unnecessary, however, because all geometric properties are contained in
the connectivity of a polytopialisation (the set of neighbouring
relations between polytopes), as it will be discussed below.
Furthermore, thus we obtain a gauge-invariant parametrisation of the
regularised @xmath , a desire for which was expressed in the previous
section.

Since ( 1.5 ) should be (and – as it was e.g. explicitly shown [ 7 ] for
@xmath – is indeed) independent of a polytopialisation usually the
simplest and most convient choice is made by taking only simplicial
manifolds (i.e. built from simplices), called triangulations, into
consideration. Moreover, the simplices are assumed to be equilateral (in
Minkowskian sense). This is exactly what will be done in all the
following. Hence the symbol @xmath above as well as @xmath , denoting
the Regge action (see ( 1.9 ) here below), and the very name of
dynamical triangulations.
The detailed way of encoding of geometry in a simplicial manifold is as
follows (cf. [ 2 ] , [ 8 ] ). Actually, it is enough to consider
curvature alone. In general, for @xmath sectional curvature on a
manifold coincides with so-called Gaussian curvature and Ricci scalar is
equal @xmath times the latter. The Gaussian curvature can be determined
from the parallel transport of a vector around a closed loop. On a
simplicial manifold such a loop has to circle a vertex, otherwise no
effect will be ever observed (since simplices are flat). A vector will
then change its orientation if and only if a sum of the adjacent angles
@xmath . A difference is called the deficit angle @xmath . This is
exemplified in Fig 1.2 . For @xmath one has to sum over all @xmath
-dimensional submanifolds dual to a certain @xmath -dimensional
subsimplex to obtain the nontrivial Ricci scalar, localised at this
subsimplex. Hence, curvature is associated with @xmath -subsimplices and
expressed by deficit angles @xmath around them, which – by generalising
a notion for @xmath – are defined through sums

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are ditopial (a generalisation of dihedral) angles adjacent
to a given @xmath -subsimplex @xmath . Deficit angles, as can be
observed, are determined by the manner in which simplices are glued
together – their connectivity.
From the above discussion, there is the following correspondence between
terms of the non-regularised (formula ( 1.1 )) and regularised
Einstein-Hilbert action

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the volume of a simplex/subsimplex (cf.
Section 1.4). Consequently, the Regge action amounts to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Its precise form for @xmath will be given in Section 1.4 (in the
Wick-rotated version, yet for the modified regularisation, as will
become clear soon).

### 1.3 EDT and their failure

The model whose regularisation scheme was outlined in the previous
section is called Euclidean dynamical triangulations (EDT).
Unfortunately, there are severe problems (cf. [ 2 ] , [ 8 ] ) with
moving further in EDT, towards a certain nontrivial and physically
relevant continuum limit, which is the ultimate aim of the framework.
Everything starts with the absence of a prescription for Wick rotation
of the partition function ( 1.5 ),

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.10)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath is the Euclidean (Wick-rotated) action. Therefore, the ad
hoc Wick rotation is applied, in which Lorentzian geometries are
replaced with Euclidean ones just by hand. As a result, the summation
has to go over simplicial manifolds devoid of the notion of time and
causal structure. It is not known how to retrieve the latter afterwards.
Almost certainly, it can not be done by straightforward inverse of the
Wick rotation, also because of the occurrence of Euclidean geometries
anomalous from the perspective of causality. Namely, the problem
consists in changing of the topology [ 3 ] between @xmath -dimensional
submanifolds, especially by events of splitting of such a submanifold
into at least two disconnected ones, as it is exemplified in Fig. 1.3 .
For a Lorentzian manifold this amounts to disintegrating of space during
its time evolution, in other words, branching of spacetime into
so-called baby universes. (Obviously, the time inverse of the process in
the form of joining of the disconnected space components should be
identically likely yet it is excluded by the requirement of the fixed
spacetime topology.) A consequence is the degeneration of light cones;
causality is violated because at a branching point there is more than
one possibility for further course of a test particle’s world line.
Moreover, the above phenomenon turns out to be generic and highly
degenerate geometries are dominating in the Wick-rotated (formula ( 1.10
)) counterpart of the sum ( 1.5 ).
Hence, we are stuck in the Euclidean theory and this is where the very
name of EDT derives from. Bad news has been confirmed by results (see [
4 ] , [ 2 ] ) from numerical simulations. Namely, there is no relevant
continuum limit for @xmath . Rather than that, the space of coupling
constants @xmath , @xmath for the model of @xmath (and probably any
@xmath ) contains a critical line @xmath (where the continuum limit
exists), at which there are two extreme, unphysical phases, separated by
a bicritical point. A useful tool to study them is a standard notion of
(effective – in the continuum limit sense) dimensionality, called
Hausdorff dimension, which works well also on discretised manifolds. In
the phase of small @xmath ’s, called the crumpled phase, simplicial
spacetimes (or rather Euclidean spaces) of a tiny size are produced.
Moreover, there exist several vertices to which almost all simplices are
connected. Therefore distances between the latter are small and in the
continuum Hausdorff dimension of space is going to @xmath . On the
contrary, in the phase of large @xmath ’s, known as the branched polymer
phase, generation of baby universes is the dominating process. Therefore
every simplex has only a limited number of neighbours and in the
continuum Hausdorff dimension approaches @xmath , which enhances
interpretation of spaces in this phase as a particular kind of fractals
– namely branched polymers. Neither of the phases yields Hausdorff
dimension equal or at least close to the expected @xmath .

### 1.4 Imposing causality on DT

Causal (or Lorentzian) dynamical triangulations (CDT) were invented [ 9
] as a response to the failure of EDT and constitute their modification
[ 10 ] , [ 11 ] . The essential idea behind this approach is to consider
from the outset only causally well-behaving simplicial manifolds. More
precisely, a triangulation must admit a global proper-time foliation. It
is only when it is built from layers of simplices to which a proper time
variable can be assigned – hence space globally evolves in time
(spacetime is globally hiperbolic). Consequently, the topology of space
is conserved, which means the exclusion of spacetimes branching into
baby universes. However, it ought to be stressed that changes of spatial
topology are not excluded from consideration in principle . Individual
geometries in the integral ( 1.2 )/sum ( 1.5 ) are in general highly
nonclassical, as it is always in quantum physics, and possibly could
also include fluctuations of spatial topology. Causality which would be
lost in such a case might as well be restored for a superposition of
quantum spacetimes, corresponding to a classical solution of
gravitational theory. On the other hand, we do not even know whether the
restriction on topology survives in the continuum limit of the CDT
model. Nevertheless, the failure of EDT has shown that in the method of
dynamical triangulations variability of spatial topology has to be
treated exceptionally (see [ 8 ] ) if at all (and its total rejection is
worth trying). The same concerns variability of topology of the entire
spacetime, discussed at the end of Section 1.1, which leads to the
super-exponential growth of the number of geometries in ( 1.5 ).

Due to the layered structure of simplicial manifolds in CDT there is a
limited number of allowed building blocks from which they are
constructed – simplices placed differently with respect to the time
direction. Specifying the statement from the previous paragraph, a
proper time variable is assigned to simplicial vertices and @xmath
-dimensional surfaces spanned between such at a given time (which
obviously are forbidden to intersect). As can be seen, time is discrete.
As a result, we have @xmath types of simplicial building blocks, denoted
by numbers of their vertices lying at times @xmath and @xmath (where
@xmath is arbitrary). In the most interesting, lowest dimensions we have
the following ones. For @xmath there are simplices of types @xmath (
@xmath vertices at a time @xmath , joined by a spatial link and one at
@xmath ; the other two links are timelike) and @xmath , which is just
time inverse of @xmath (I call them dual to each other). Types for
@xmath are depicted in Fig. 1.4 . For @xmath there is a pair of dual
types of simplices, @xmath , @xmath (with a spatial triangle) and type
@xmath (with two spatial links only). For @xmath there are two dual
pairs: @xmath , @xmath (with a spatial tetrahedron) and @xmath , @xmath
(with a spatial triangle and a spatial link). In all the following I
will be denoting collectively the latter as @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively.
The next step in construction of the CDT model (discussed extensively in
[ 12 ] ) is the introduction of anisotropy between time and space.
Squared lengths of timelike and spacelike simplicial links are set as,
respectively,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the cutoff size and @xmath the anisotropy parameter.
Hence simplices are generally no longer equilateral in the sense of the
Wick-rotated model (in EDT we had @xmath ). Now according to the
correspondence ( 1.7 ), ( 1.8 ) one has to calculate volumes of timelike
and spacelike simplices and subsimplices as well as values of ditopial
angles – all as functions of @xmath . (Different conventions may be
used.) Irrespective of what might seem, all Lorentzian volumes are real
and @xmath but angles in general are complex. Yet it is not a problem,
as we eventually obtain a real regularised action. Its form without
substituted volumes and angles (for simplicity) – an incarnation of (
1.9 ) – for @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where by @xmath I denoted spacelike triangles and by @xmath timelike
ones. What is essential is that the action ( 1.4 ) can be naturally
Wick-rotated. The analytic continuation, such that @xmath , goes through
the lower half of the complex plane and in the lowest dimensions can be
defined: for @xmath always, for @xmath if @xmath , for @xmath if @xmath
. The bounds on @xmath originate from the form of ditopial angles. Next,
we perform sums in ( 1.4 ) and use topological identities (by Dehn and
Sommerville), such as the Euler identity, for the numbers of simplices
and subsimplices of all types. Finally, for @xmath and the assumed
spacetime topology @xmath (the periodic boundary condition in proper
time) where @xmath is @xmath -dimensional and compact we get the Regge
action which has the Euclidean form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the number of @xmath -simplices (vertices), @xmath
, @xmath the numbers of @xmath -simplices of the corresponding type and
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath are coupling constants and quite complicated
functions of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . However, their dominating
behaviour is determined by single variables – @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
, respectively, and in particular @xmath . Consequently, the overall
form of the (Wick-rotated here) partition function ( 1.5 ) is slightly
altered into

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Phase structure of the CDT model for @xmath , which can be inferred from
numerical simulations (whose technique will be brought up in Chapter 2),
differs widely from that of EDT. Actually, there is a disparate
continuum limit already for @xmath [ 9 ] but I will not discuss this
fact here. Three coupling constants instead of two amount to the @xmath
-dimensional space, containing a critical surface @xmath (where the
continuum can be approached) i.e. the phase space of the model. As Fig.
1.5 indicates, we observe [ 13 ] , [ 14 ] three phases: A, B and C. They
have the following characteristics. Spacetimes in phase A (of large
@xmath ’s) consist of numerous small, disconnected universes, lying
along the time direction and as such they are physically irrelevant.
This phase is considered a remnant of the branched polymer phase from
EDT. Spacetimes in phase B (of small @xmath ’s) are no more useful,
being very short in time and having at each temporal end a vertex of a
very large order – the same as in the crumpled phase from EDT. Therefore
phase B can be regarded as a remnant of the latter. Fortunately, there
is an additional phase C, in which relevant spacetimes – extending both
in time and space – are observed. Its existence has been a promising
result of the CDT model. It was shown [ 15 ] that a universe from phase
C has indeed Hausdorff dimension @xmath . Furthermore, recently it
turned out [ 14 ] the above phase structure is related to so-called
Hořava-Lifshitz gravity.

One remark has to be added. All along, from the very beginning we are
dealing with gravitational field in vacuum i.e. without any matter
fields. This is the work on pure quantum gravity (or quantum geometry).
However, the inclusion of other fields in the gravitational path
integral has always been considered and also in CDT is subject to
ongoing research.

## Chapter 2 Monte Carlo simulations and the semiclassical solution

### 2.1 Numerical setup of CDT

To solve the model of causal dynamical triangulations, as it is
formulated in the previous chapter, one has to compute the sum ( 1.14 ).
Thus far, it was carried out analytically only for @xmath [ 9 ] (see
also [ 11 ] ) and there is little hope for moving towards higher
dimensions. However, like every lattice gauge theory CDT (as well as
EDT) is well-suited to be investigated numerically , provided one can
ensure the regularised version of space @xmath is sampled thoroughly in
simulations. Hence in this context the problem with the regularisation
may be described as twofold: not only has the space of all possible
triangulations to be appropriately dense in the @xmath but also
numerical simulations enable us to approach every element (in the
certain class) of the latter. The first issue is so far assumed, the
same as the fact that @xmath in ( 1.14 ) is the measure. To address the
second one, Monte Carlo methods are applied [ 12 ] . More specifically,
to approximate ( 1.14 ) we generate some number of simplicial manifolds,
which are obtained consecutively from the previous ones – starting from
a certain ad hoc constructed, very simple triangulation – by local
transformations called moves. Factor @xmath is automatically included
there. Now, the moves are hoped to be ergodic in the sense of the
possibility of reaching every triangulation from any other – in a
certain class – by the successive application of them. What I mean by
the ”certain class” will become clear below. Concerning Monte Carlo
moves, they consist in replacing of a complex built from some number of
simplices with another complex, in general constructed from a different
number of building blocks yet respecting the topological and causal
structure of a triangulation, in conformity with the assumptions of CDT.
For @xmath there is a set of @xmath such moves, for @xmath there are
@xmath of them and for @xmath there are @xmath – their detailed
description (omitting @xmath ) is contained in [ 12 ] .
From now on the discussion will be restricted to @xmath , which I
actually studied. Regarding the argument from Section 1.4, the topology
in the regularised path integral ( 1.14 ) is fixed. For convenience one
may consider a topology with a periodic boundary condition in proper
time, @xmath where @xmath is @xmath -dimensional and compact, as it is
in the case of the action ( 1.4 ). This is exactly what we do in the
discussed Monte Carlo simulations, choosing @xmath (thus far – as the
simplest case). Hence the topology is @xmath , which is the first
constraint characterising the class of triangulations which I
investigated, refering to what was said in the previous paragraph.
Another possible condition is the fixed number of simplicial temporal
layers, in other words, the number of discrete proper times @xmath ,
which in the discussed Monte Carlo simulations is set as @xmath . The
parametrisation of time I will be using here is such that @xmath and
@xmath (the periodic boundary condition). Furthermore, with the aim of
keeping the number of @xmath -simplices in a triangulation roughly
within a certain range, in the case considered here we modify the action
( 1.4 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the average total number of @xmath -simplices of type
@xmath (see the next section), @xmath is a small constant and @xmath
(some other values were also studied – as one can check in [ 15 ] , [ 16
] , [ 17 ] , [ 18 ] – yet for the modification of the action different
from ( 2.1 )). It ought to be noted that in the considered topology the
@xmath is exactly the same as the @xmath , because only those types of
@xmath -simplices contain spatial tetrahedra (cf. Fig. 1.4 ) and hence
every @xmath simplex has its counterpart @xmath , sharing a spatial
tetrahedron with it. On the other hand, the @xmath is by construction
related to the @xmath . Thus the number of all @xmath -simplices
fluctuates in a certain range of values. Last but not least, concerning
the discussion of the phase structure of CDT presented in Section 1.4,
in order to find ourselves at the critical surface we have to fine-tune
@xmath . This is done here using the requirement @xmath i.e. the average
number of @xmath (as well as @xmath ) simplices is kept fixed.
Consequently, @xmath characterises fluctuations of @xmath around @xmath
.
All what follows concerns numerical results from the Monte Carlo
simulations carried out in the physically relevant phase C. I conducted
the most extensive analysis for values of the coupling constants @xmath
, @xmath but all what will be said in this and subsequent chapters is
true at least for a certain range of @xmath and @xmath in phase C. All
of the presented graphs will be given for @xmath yet @xmath alter them
only slightly. Furthermore, the results are practically the same also
for the variant of ( 2.1 ) with @xmath (i.e. all simplices) instead of
@xmath , with @xmath . The number of statistically independent (which
means separated by a sufficient number of moves) Monte Carlo
configurations (i.e. triangulations) generated in each of the above
cases was about @xmath .

### 2.2 The semiclassical limit

From now on I will be using the notation @xmath (and blank indices will
mean an undefined type of simplices). The most fundamental observable in
numerical simulations of CDT is the average number of simplices of a
given type at a given time

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the number of configurations we average over. For the
already mentioned total number of @xmath simplices @xmath one simply has
to sum over all times @xmath . The above expression is an estimate of a
grand canonical observable for the system fluctuating around @xmath ,
provided all configurations are typical i.e. of large probability.
Actually, calculating ( 2.2 ) one has to take one more thing into
account. (I restrict myself to @xmath simplices at the moment – which is
the same as restricting to @xmath – but cf. Section 3.1 and Appendix A.)
Namely, looking at an arbitrary temporal distribution @xmath in phase C
we observe two regions: one where a universe is well extended in spatial
directions and one where it is almost not at all (since @xmath simplices
correspond to spatial tetrahedra). In other words, the extended universe
is localised in a certain range of discrete times @xmath . Since CDT is
a priori symmetric with respect to translation in the time direction, we
reparametrise time for every triangulation in such a way that the
so-called center of volume of @xmath lies at @xmath . (However, as it
will be seen below, the effective center of volume is between @xmath and
@xmath , at @xmath .) More precisely, the center of volume @xmath is
defined here as @xmath for which

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

reaches a minimum; if there is more than one, @xmath must be the
greatest among them. (There are alternatives to ( 2.3 ) but they all
yield the same results up to a difference of @xmath .) Now we may
calculate the average distribution @xmath . The result is shown in Fig.
2.1 , along with the average fluctuations of @xmath (see Section 3.1).
One can distinguish three regions in time evolution: the ”stalk”, where
the spatial extension of the universe is very small, consisting of only
several spatial tetrahedra (but not less than @xmath , which is the
minimal number for a simplicial @xmath ), the ”blob”, where the universe
is well spatially-extended (with the double maximum at @xmath ) and the
intermediate ”tail” (see below). Moreover, the calculated @xmath up to a
very small deviation. It has yet to be added that @xmath should be
invariant under time inversion. Therefore, it is additionally
symmetrised with respect to the effective maximum @xmath , which
corresponds just to doubling of the number of configurations we average
over (and this is justified by the fact @xmath is very symmetric even
without that).

It turns out [ 17 ] that the blob region of our spacetime can be fitted
surprisingly well with a function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath , @xmath are certain constants. This is
illustrated in Fig. 2.1 . As one can see, at least in magnification, the
fit starts to deteriorate close to the stalk and this is one of the
symptoms of being in the transition region called the tail above.
Furthermore, taking the dependence on @xmath into consideration, ( 2.4 )
has the form with explicit scaling

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath are certain constants. Hence it is a limit of the
CDT model, an effective solution. What is crucial in this statement is
that eventually the limit may be called semiclassical [ 16 ] – the
semiclassical solution of CDT – because it is [ 17 ] , [ 18 ] the
(classical) solution of the Wick-rotated mini-superspace model, whose
action

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath (where @xmath denotes the scale factor of a homogeneous,
isotropic universe) is the spatial @xmath -volume, @xmath and @xmath is
a Lagrange multiplier fixing

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a certain @xmath -volume of spacetime. The solution of (
2.6 ) is a geometrical @xmath -sphere, which amounts to the Euclidean de
Sitter universe, the maximally symmetric spacetime in the case of a
positive cosmological constant. This comes as a great surprise, since
individual triangulations – as it was stressed before – are highly
nonclassical and a priori devoid of any symmetry, except the one with
respect to a time translation. What is even more important is that also
dynamics of the model i.e. in particular (quantum) fluctuations of
@xmath can be described in that framework – by the effective,
semiclassical action ( 2.6 ) itself [ 16 ] . This is what I will deal
with – to some extent – in the remaining chapters.

## Chapter 3 The single slice structure

### 3.1 Expansion of the semiclassical action

By construction, simplicial building blocks in temporal layers of a
triangulation have to be connected in an appropriate order. Namely, in
the simplest case, between a @xmath simplex at a time @xmath and another
one at @xmath one has to put consecutively a @xmath , a @xmath and a
@xmath , with successive simplices sharing a face (i.e. a tetrahedron),
as it was already said for the case of @xmath and @xmath simplices,
which share a spatial tetrahedron. (Generally, each of the above
mentioned five simplices may occur multiple times there.) Hence the
layer has some internal structure. However, in this chapter I will
restrict the discussion to spatial hypersurfaces formed by common faces
of @xmath and @xmath building blocks – forgetting for a while about the
other types of simplices – in accordance with Section 2.2. This is what
I call the single slice structure: the structure in which a temporal
layer is contained between two spatial slices (hypersurfaces) at times
@xmath and @xmath , the second of which belongs already to the next
layer and there is nothing else, @xmath (alternatively @xmath and @xmath
) simplices are in some sense integrated out. As it will be shown in the
next chapter and sketched out in Appendix A, actually there is a
nontrivial structure emerging from @xmath simplices, as well as @xmath
and @xmath considered separately, compatible with that of @xmath .
According to Section 2.2, the average distribution @xmath is well
described in the blob by the semiclassical solution ( 2.5 ), resulting
from the classical, continuous action ( 2.6 ). Since time @xmath is
discrete @xmath actually corresponds to a discrete version of ( 2.5 ).
Therefore we expect that in the analysed semiclassical limit CDT can be
described (at least in the blob) by the discretised mini-superspace
action @xmath , whose explicit form will be discussed in the next
section. More specifically, to take the quantum effects – fluctuactions
around the effective, semiclassical geometry – into account we make the
expansion of @xmath around the distribution @xmath , which should
extremise the action, with an increment @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

which in particular implies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

vanishing of first derivative of the action.
The second most fundamental observable in our Monte Carlo simulations of
CDT is the covariance matrix of the number of simplices of a given type,
whose element – the correlation between given times @xmath and @xmath –
is defined as

  -- -- -- -------
           (3.3)
  -- -- -- -------

(cf. 2.2 ). Quantities @xmath , included in Fig. 2.1 for @xmath , are
the average fluctuations around the expectation values @xmath . Now, let
us again restrict ourselves to @xmath simplices. Analogically with
@xmath , @xmath are centered at @xmath ’s and @xmath is additionally –
but on the justified basis – symmetrised with respect to @xmath , which
corresponds to doubling of the number of configurations. In our
numerical setup matrix @xmath is invertible and hence the inverse (of
the) covariance matrix

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

can be found. What is essential is that there is the relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where I introduce the notation @xmath for matrix elements (since time
@xmath ). As a result, from analysis of matrix @xmath one can infere, at
least to some extent, the exact form of the action @xmath . It turns out
the inverse covariance matrix has only simple, tridiagonal structure

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

with two additional elements at the antidiagonal resulting from the
periodic boundary condition in time (neglecting numerical noise, denoted
by the asterisks) and @xmath , @xmath . It is also by construction
symmetric with respect to both the diagonal and antidiagonal ( @xmath ,
@xmath ).

### 3.2 Form of the discrete action

The discretised action, with the modification ( 2.1 ) taken into
account, has the general form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath are respectively its kinetic and potential part,
corresponding to the terms @xmath and @xmath in the continuous action (
2.6 ) and @xmath denotes a coupling constant proportional to the inverse
of @xmath . In all the following I call @xmath , @xmath the kinetic and
potential term, respectively. I assume that the potential term @xmath
and has the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath are coupling constants proportional to @xmath and
@xmath , respectively. The kinetic term is more involved. However, from
( 3.5 ), ( 3.6 ) one immediately infers that @xmath . Consequently, the
diagonal of @xmath depends on both the kinetic and potential part of the
action @xmath , whereas its super-/subdiagonal on the kinetic one alone.
I assume that the kinetic term

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

and satisfies the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

which obviously happens at least for every @xmath that is a quotient of
combinations of power functions. According to ( 3.5 ) I may define the
analogue of ( 3.2 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

which – keeping in mind the form of ( 3.8 ) and ( 3.9 ) – in the
relevant region i.e. at least in the blob, should be equivalent to the
non-eliminated @xmath . Hence I can check the potential term ( 3.8 )
independently of the explicit form of @xmath i.e. form of the function
@xmath (Fig. 3.1 ). (In figures I use the abbreviated notation @xmath ,
@xmath .) The obtained @xmath exhibits in the blob the considerable
numerical noise. As it will become more evident below, the underlying
reason is a small magnitude of the potential term.

The simplest form of the kinetic term ( 3.9 ) one can consider is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, regarding the form of the semiclassical action ( 3.7 ), the
extremum condition ( 3.2 ) in the expansion ( 3.1 ) yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

and I may examine the validity of ( 3.1 ), ( 3.2 ) by fitting first
derivative of the potential term ( 3.8 ) to first derivative of the
kinetic one ( 3.12 ) (Fig. 3.2 ). This clearly does not work in the
stalk. In the blob and perhaps the tail, making the use of ( 3.5 ), for
the superdiagonal of @xmath it should be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

(a choice of the subdiagonal would obviously imply the same). However,
the kinetic term ( 3.12 ) starts to fail there. I analysed different
functions @xmath and something like @xmath turns out to behave much
better. Alternatively, one may consider a modification of ( 3.12 ) in
the form of a series with coefficients @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus far, our numerical precision is sufficient to find only @xmath and
hence constraints @xmath are assumed. ( @xmath corresponds then to an
approximation of @xmath and @xmath is obviously equivalent to ( 3.12 ).)
I have examined ( 3.14 ) with the above kinetic term fitting
simultaneously @xmath and @xmath (Fig. 3.3 ) and obtained a value of the
latter @xmath , closer to @xmath than to @xmath . Concerning the
relation ( 3.13 ), presented in Fig. 3.2 , its behaviour is practically
unchanged by the modified kinetic term ( 3.2 ). Therefore, I do not show
the corresponding version of the graph. At last, taking the values of
@xmath and @xmath from Fig. 3.3 I can investigate the potential term (
3.8 ) at the diagonal of @xmath , since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

which results from ( 3.5 ) (Fig. 3.4 ). Now, I may compare the values of
the constant @xmath obtained in Fig. 3.1 and Fig. 3.4 . They amount
respectively to @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore, I may compare the value
of @xmath from Fig. 3.2 (or rather its variant with the modified kinetic
term) with the one that I can calculate from Fig. 3.4 . They amount
respectively to @xmath and @xmath . The presented uncertainties include
only the accuracy of fits and do not contain estimates of the systematic
errors.

## Chapter 4 The double slice structure

### 4.1 Evidence for the double structure

According to Section 3.1, @xmath simplices bond together the adjacent
temporal layers of @xmath building blocks. Furthermore, refering to Fig.
1.4 , one can observe that @xmath simplices contain – apart from a
spatial tetrahedron – only @xmath timelike tetrahedra, while @xmath
simplices possess both @xmath (two) and @xmath (three) tetrahedra. Hence
every @xmath simplex has to share a face with three others. Numerical
simulations confirm that this type of building blocks forms closed
hypersurfaces in the sense of the dual lattice and thus we may speak
about layers of @xmath simplices. Therefore I extend my description to
what I call the double slice structure – characterised by the inclusion
of remaining @xmath simplicial building blocks, which implies additional
spatial slices between those of the @xmath i.e. an effective second
slice in every temporal layer, being a spatial section of the @xmath .
Nevertheless, either @xmath or @xmath building blocks are still in some
sense integrated out, as both types are considered collectively. As it
was already mentioned, Appendix A makes the outline of their separate
treatment.
I begin with a computation of the average temporal distribution of the
number of @xmath simplices, using formula ( 2.2 ). In agreement with
what one might expect, an arbitrary distribution @xmath turns out to
have two regions: the spatialy extended and spatialy unextended.
Therefore, according to the case of @xmath simplices, it requires a
translation in time of the ”center of volume”. However, since I
investigate the double structure , distributions @xmath are to be
reparametrised also and obviously with respect to the same centers of
volume. I have found that @xmath ’s (defined in Section 2.2) for @xmath
and @xmath building blocks are identical or at most different by @xmath
and hence decided to consider @xmath ’s found for @xmath simplices
alone. I obtain the average distribution @xmath having the same three
regions as @xmath : the stalk (with @xmath simplices at least, which
results from the minimal number of @xmath @xmath building blocks), the
blob (with the single maximum at @xmath ) and the tail. Hence I assume
@xmath and fulfilling the condition of invariance under time inversion I
symmetrise the distribution with respect to @xmath , which corresponds
to doubling of the number of configurations. Now, it turns out in the
blob @xmath is proportional to @xmath in the interpolated sense i.e. I
can find a scaling factor @xmath such that @xmath , where @xmath denotes
the interpolating distribution i.e. @xmath symmetrised with respect to
@xmath . The joint distribution of @xmath and @xmath is shown in Fig.
4.1 , along with the average fluctuations, also appropriately rescaled
in the case of @xmath simplices. Furthermore, the smoothed distribution
can automatically be fitted with the semiclassical solution ( 2.5 ) and
this is done indeed in Fig. 4.1 , up to even smaller deviation than in
Fig. 2.1 . The average total number of @xmath simplices @xmath .
Consequently, the average total number of all simplices (both @xmath and
@xmath ) @xmath (cf. Section 2.1).

Using formula ( 3.3 ) one may also calculate the covariance matrix of
@xmath simplices number @xmath and in particular obtain the average
fluctuations around @xmath , which are included above in Fig. 4.1 .
Further, I find the inverse covariance matrix @xmath and it turns out to
have the same simple structure as @xmath (cf. ( 3.6 )), enhancing the
notion of the double slice structure. However, the analysis such as in
Section 3.2 will not be carried out here. Rather than that, in the next
section I will focus on the joint, double structure of @xmath and @xmath
simplices.

### 4.2 The double discrete action

Since the semiclassical solution ( 2.5 ) works well in the blob also in
the case of the double slice structure I expect that the expansion ( 3.1
) (as well as the condition ( 3.2 )) remains valid for the extended
discretised action @xmath , which includes the dynamics of @xmath
simplices. More specifically,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath go over the set @xmath i.e. in
particular there are four combinations of derivatives @xmath in the
second term of the expansion.
The corresponding ”double” covariance matrix is defined as the joint
covariance matrix of both types of simplices i.e. ( 3.3 ) is extended to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Hence @xmath may be arranged into four blocks, two of which are the
(”single”) covariance matrices @xmath , @xmath and two mix both types of
simplices and which will be denoted by superscripts @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , respectively. (Obviously @xmath .) Each of them is
appropriately symmetrised with respect to @xmath . Matrix @xmath is
invertible and the double inverse covariance matrix @xmath . Now, ( 3.5
) generalises to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where blocks of @xmath , denoted by superscripts, correspond to those of
@xmath . Like @xmath (cf. ( 3.6 )), the double inverse covariance matrix
is very simple

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

with blocks having band structure (neglecting numerical noise, denoted
by the asterisks) – except additional elements at their antidiagonals,
resulting from the periodic boundary condition in time – and @xmath ,
@xmath . Blocks @xmath , @xmath are also by construction symmetric with
respect to both the diagonal and antidiagonal and the entire @xmath is
symmetric with respect to the diagonal ( @xmath , @xmath but @xmath
merely).

Generalising ( 3.7 ), the double discrete action has the general form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

In accordance with ( 4.4 ) and the structure of @xmath , I consider the
following (probably the simplest possible) kinetic term

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the potential one

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath (as well as
@xmath ) are the ”double” coupling constants and a value of @xmath is
taken from the previous section. Consequently, all elements of @xmath
depend on the kinetic part of the action @xmath while the potential part
influences merely the diagonal (of the blocks @xmath , @xmath ).

The extremum condition ( 4.2 ) in the expansion ( 4.2 ) yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Hence, similarly as in the case of Fig. 3.2 , I may fit first derivative
of the potential term ( 4.2 ) to first derivative of the kinetic one (
4.2 ) – for @xmath (Fig. 4.2 ) and @xmath (Fig. 4.3 ). (The abbreviated
notation in figures is the same as in the previous chapter.) It is worth
to be noted that the agreement between them (and hence validity of ( 4.2
)) is good in the whole relevant region of the universe, almost right up
to the stalk and hence much better than it was for the single slice
structure. As a result, it is well justified to examine, making the use
of ( 4.4 ) (analogically with Section 3.2), the substitution of the
assumed kinetic and potential term into the second term of the expansion
( 4.2 ). In particular, the suitability of the kinetic term and values
of its coupling constants can be directly inferred from

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, the potential term can be obtained through

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, fitting LHS’s of ( 4.2 ) to their RHS’s does not yield
completely reliable results. Therefore I use another method and
determine coupling constants one by one. I will not describe that in
detail but the scheme is as follows. At the beginning I find @xmath from
@xmath . Next – knowing the preceding – @xmath from the diagonal @xmath
. At last, I find @xmath from the superdiagonal @xmath . Hence I get
@xmath while @xmath , @xmath can be trivially calculated. Afterwards,
the obtained LHS’s of ( 4.2 ) may be compared to RHS’s (Fig. 4.4 , Fig.
4.5 ), with which they should agree. (The quite poor result for Fig. 4.4
may indicate the modified @xmath .) Furthermore, LHS’s of ( 4.2 ) with
@xmath , @xmath exchanged may be compared to RHS’s yet with second
derivatives of @xmath neglected (Fig. 4.6 , Fig. 4.7 ). However, keeping
in mind small magnitude of the latter, such a comparison as well gives
an insight into the suitability of the kinetic term. At last, one may
investigate the potential term ( 4.2 ) using ( 4.2 ) and obtaining the
concurrent results but, for conciseness, I will not show this here.

### 4.3 Reduction to the single slice structure

Having two different descriptions of the CDT universe, the latter of
which is intended to be an extension of the former, we would like to be
able to go in the opposite direction and to reduce the broader framework
to the narrower one. In other words, after ”integrating out” @xmath
simplices we should obtain the single slice structure of @xmath
simplices alone. For the average distribution of the number of simplices
this is trivial – one just removes the second component from the joint
distribution of @xmath and @xmath . The situation is the same in the
case of the covariance matrix, where simply @xmath , as it was described
in the previous section. However, for the inverse covariance matrix such
a reduction is inevitably not so trivial and its existence is by no
means obvious. Fortunately, it turns out that for an invertible
rectangular matrix composed of four square blocks satisfying certain
basic conditions there are useful algebraic relations between those
blocks and blocks of the inverse matrix, which we may apply to @xmath
and @xmath . The so-called Boltz-Banachiewicz inversion formula has
version I,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

and version II,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

comparison of which yields additionally four algebraic equations.
However, I will restrict myself to the statement that transforming ( 4.3
) one can retrieve @xmath from @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the transposition results from the symmetry of @xmath .
The next and crucial step is a reduction of the double discrete action
@xmath to the ”single” one @xmath . In the double slice structure I
consider the kinetic term ( 4.2 ) and the potential one ( 4.2 ), the
only ones which I have discussed in the previous section. Looking at
their form one may suspect that in the single slice structure they
correspond to the (simplest possible) kinetic term ( 3.12 ) and the
potential one ( 3.8 ). In order to make the desired transition to @xmath
I apply a Gaussian approximation to ( 4.2 ) i.e. I literally integrate
out @xmath simplices, although in a specific way,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and the denominators @xmath , @xmath
(i.e. the approximation is made before the integration). For the
potential term ( 4.2 ) I assume @xmath and take the rescaling of @xmath
implied by ( 4.3 ) into account. As a result, the ”single” coupling
constants are expressed through the double ones,

  -- -------- -- --------
                 (4.16)
     @xmath      (4.17)
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The actual investigation produce the following results. Values of the
single coupling constants obtained directly from the single slice
structure (embodied in Fig. 3.2 but not Fig. 3.3 , Fig. 3.4 , where the
kinetic term is ( 3.2 )) are @xmath , @xmath and @xmath while values
from the double slice structure, calculated using ( 4.16 ), ( 4.17 ), (
4.18 ), amount to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The presented
uncertainities include only the accuracy of fits and do not contain
estimates of the systematic errors.

## Summary

I have verified the existence of the semiclassical limit of CDT in
@xmath dimensions for spatial hypersurfaces formed by @xmath simplicial
building blocks of spacetime. The blob region of the universe generated
by the triangulated path integral turns out to behave effectively like a
discrete mini-superspace model. This manifests not only in the average
distribution of the number of @xmath simplices but also in the (quantum)
dynamics of the system, governed by the discretised mini-superspace
action, which is extremised by the average distribution. The latter can
be investigated using the inverse covariance matrix of the number of
@xmath simplices. Analysis of its exceptionally simple structure
indicates an intuitive form of the potential part of the action and more
complicated of the kinetic one.
Furthermore, I have shown that there is an extension of the above
semiclassical description – which I called the single slice structure –
to the double slice structure, including spatial slices of both @xmath
and @xmath simplices. After the rescaling of the number of @xmath
simplices, the joint average distribution of the number of both types of
simplices in the blob again corresponds to the discrete mini-superspace
solution. Next, the ”double” discretised semiclassical action,
extremised by the average distributions, can be examined using the
inverse joint covariance matrix, which consists of four simple blocks.
The only discussed form of the action turns out to work reasonably well.
Last but not least, the double slice structure can be reduced to the
single slice structure.
The next step to make is splitting layers of @xmath building blocks into
those of @xmath and @xmath simplices, which amounts to the triple slice
structure. I argue for that in Appendix A yet this is a matter of
further research, the same as e.g. consideration of other forms of the
double action.

## Appendix A The triple slice structure

Below, I present some evidence that the description of the CDT universe
from Chapters 3, 4 can be extended even more by replacing layers of
@xmath building blocks with the separate treatment of @xmath and @xmath
simplices. Such a framework would be the ultimate one because of the
eventual inclusion of all types of simplices – since @xmath building
blocks yield the single slice structure together with the @xmath and
@xmath , which means @xmath simplices contain no additional information.
I call it the triple slice structure, expecting @xmath and @xmath
simplices to form their own effective spatial slices by splitting those
of the @xmath , in such a way we will obtain three spatial slices in
every temporal layer, beginning with spatial tetrahedra which belong to
the @xmath . Such a split will be in agreement with construction of a
causal triangulation i.e. the order of gluing of simplicial building
blocks presented at the beginning of Section 3.1.
In the first place, let us consider the average temporal distributions
of the number of @xmath and @xmath simplices, using formula ( 2.2 ).
Since by definition @xmath individual distributions @xmath , @xmath are
reparametrised in the same manner as it was in the case of @xmath
building blocks (see Section 4.1). This is justified by the fact that
@xmath ’s for @xmath and @xmath simplices differ from those for the
@xmath to the same degree as the @xmath . Unsurprisingly, I obtain the
average distributions @xmath , @xmath having the already known three
regions: the stalk (both with @xmath simplices at least), the blob (with
single maxima at @xmath and @xmath , respectively) and the tail. Now,
looking at their profiles, I assume @xmath and @xmath . Moreover,
fulfilling the condition of invariance under time inversion (cf.
Sections 2.2, 4.1), I carry out the appropriate procedures of
symmetrisation of the distributions with respect to @xmath , which
actually do not make them strictly symmetric for the obvious reason that
sets @xmath and @xmath are asymmetric with respect to @xmath .
Nevertheless, @xmath , @xmath are altered only slightly. The invariance
under time inversion also implies @xmath and it is these
almost-equalities that explain the obtained shape of the distributions.
Consequently, in the blob @xmath , @xmath should be proportional to
@xmath in the interpolated sense (see Section 4.1), with the scaling
factor @xmath . They turn out to be indeed. The joint distribution of
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath is shown in Fig. A.1 , along with the average
fluctuations, rescaled in the case of @xmath and @xmath simplices.
Furthermore, it is fitted with the semiclassical solution ( 2.5 ) up to
yet smaller deviation than in Fig. 4.1 . The average total number of
simplices @xmath .
Secondly, very briefly, using formula ( 3.3 ) I calculate the covariance
matrices @xmath , @xmath and their inverses @xmath , @xmath , which
obviously turn out to have the same properties as @xmath and @xmath , up
to a smaller symmetry. Thirdly, also very briefly, naturally extending
the definition ( 4.3 ) I calculate the ”triple” covariance matrix @xmath
and its inverse @xmath . The triple inverse covariance matrix @xmath has
simple form analogical with @xmath (cf. ( 4.5 )) i.e. it consists of
nine blocks having band structure. Thus we may expect that it will not
be difficult to find the corresponding triple discrete action.