## Zueignung

The results presented in chapters 2-5 were developed in collaboration
with John Barrett, Richard Dowdall, Winston Fairbairn, Henrique Gomes
and Roberto Pereira. They were published in [ BDF @xmath 09 , BDF @xmath
10 , BFH10 ] . The presentation herein is my own, and new except where
indicated. The direct derivation of geometricity for the Ooguri model is
new. The derivation of the geometricity results in Chapter 4 and Chapter
5 presented here is either new or significantly reorganised and
simplified with respect to the papers.

### Acknowledgements

My thanks go out to my parents Ruth and Alfons, my two sisters Anja and
Verena and especially to Karen who have supported me throughout my PhD
in too many ways to count. I am deeply indebted to all my wonderful
friends, in Nottingham and elsewhere. You have made my thesis years not
just worthwhile but as enjoyable as any I have had. I am thankful to my
friends and colleagues in the community; the discussions over the past
years have been an invaluable part of my research and my life. I would
like to specifically thank Carlo Rovelli, Jurek Lewandowski and Bianca
Dittrich for hosting me during my PhD and for the many inspiring
disussions that have resulted from these visits. I would like to thank
my collaborators. It has been a joy to work with them over the past
years. Finally, special thanks go to John Barrett who has been an
outstanding advisor, and whom it has been a great pleasure and
inspiration to work with and learn from.

######

Thank you all.

Ever tried. Ever failed. No matter.

Try again. Fail again. Fail better.

– Samuel Beckett

###### Contents

-    1 Topological Quantum Field Theories
    -    1.1 Atiyahs Axioms
    -    1.2 Boundary Spaces
-    2 Triangulations, State Sums and Coloured Networks
    -    2.1 Triangulations
    -    2.2 Colourings of Triangulations and State Sums
    -    2.3 The Dual Networks in 3d and their Evaluation
    -    2.4 The Partition Function as a Dual Network
-    3 @xmath and Spin Networks
    -    3.1 A Brief Review of @xmath Representation Theory
    -    3.2 Spin Networks and Graphical Calculus
        -    3.2.1 The Ponzano-Regge Model
        -    3.2.2 4 Dimensional Amplitudes from Spin Networks
    -    3.3 Spin Foam Models
-    4 The Geometry of @xmath
    -    4.1 Coherent States
    -    4.2 Coherent Triangles
    -    4.3 Coherent Tetrahedra
    -    4.4 Coherent Boundary Manifolds
        -    4.4.1 2-Dimensional
        -    4.4.2 3-Dimensional
-    5 The Geometry of @xmath
    -    5.1 Bivectors
        -    5.1.1 (Anti-)Self Dual Decomposition and Representations
    -    5.2 Geometric Bivectors
-    6 The Geometry of @xmath
    -    6.1 Bivectors
    -    6.2 Spinors
-    7 Definition of the State Sum
    -    7.1 Exponential Form of the State Sum
        -    7.1.1 Symmetries of the Action
-    8 Asymptotic Geometry of the State Sum
    -    8.1 Asymptotic Equations of Motion
        -    8.1.1 Critical Points
        -    8.1.2 Stationary points
    -    8.2 Geometricity
        -    8.2.1 Symmetries of the Solutions
        -    8.2.2 Immersible Geometries and the Generalised Regge
            Action
    -    8.3 The Regge Action of an Immersed Surface
    -    8.4 The Action
    -    8.5 The Asymptotic Formula
-    9 Definition of the @xmath Amplitude
    -    9.0.1 Symmetries of the Action
-    10 Asymptotic Geometry of the @xmath Amplitude
    -    10.1 Asymptotic Equations of Motion
    -    10.2 Geometric Interpretation, General State
    -    10.3 Geometric Interpretation, Regge state
        -    10.3.1 Solutions from Geometry
        -    10.3.2 Geometry from Solutions
        -    10.3.3 Action of the Symmetries on the Solutions
    -    10.4 Classification of Solutions
    -    10.5 Regge State, Boundary Connection and Action
    -    10.6 The Asymptotic Formula
-    11 The Asymptotics of EPRL-FK Type Amplitudes
    -    11.1 The Exponential Form of EPRL-FK Type Amplitudes
        -    11.1.1 Coherent Boundary States
        -    11.1.2 Regge States
-    12 Definition of the Lorentzian Amplitude
    -    12.1 Symmetries of the Action
-    13 Asymptotic Geometry of the Lorentzian Amplitude
    -    13.1 Asymptotic Equations of Motion
        -    13.1.1 Critical points
        -    13.1.2 Stationary points
    -    13.2 Geometric Interpretation, Bivector Equations
    -    13.3 Geometric Interpretation, @xmath Solutions.
    -    13.4 Geometric Interpretation, Lorentzian Solutions
    -    13.5 The Action
    -    13.6 Asymptotic Formula
-    A Discrete Connections
-    B Stationary Phase
-    C Table of Symbols

## Chapter \thechapter State Sums

We will begin with reviewing topological quantum field theories (TQFTs)
as defined by the Atiyah-Segal axioms, and describe how a theory of
quantum gravity can fit into this framework. We will then show how to
define state sums on triangulated manifolds. We will give a set of
algebraic relations that are sufficient to ensure that a state sum
defines a TQFT and translate them into a diagrammatic calculus. We show
that the representation theory of @xmath can be used to define a
diagrammatic calculus that satisfies these relations, except a
finiteness condition, and thus defines a TQFT up to regularisation.

### 1 Topological Quantum Field Theories

TQFT is at the intersection of various developments in theoretical
physics and mathematics over the last decades. Standard quantum field
theory (QFT) can currently not be rigorously defined for the cases of
interest. Because of this, Atiyah, following Segal’s axiomatisation of
conformal field theories in [ Seg ] , suggested a set of axioms to
capture the essential structures of TQFT that make them of interest to
mathematicians [ Ati89 ] . These axioms in turn have spurred the
development of a large set of theories that satisfy them, as well as
attempts at extending the axiomatisations in natural ways [ BD95 ] .

#### 1.1 Atiyahs Axioms

We will start by reviewing Atiyah’s axioms of TQFT. This section is not
self contained and we refer to the original (very readable) paper for
further technical details [ Ati89 ] . Atiyah’s axioms make TQFT an
extension or “categorification” of algebraic topology. Algebraic
topology understood most generally is the study of functors from some
category of topological spaces to an algebraic category. A TQFT, on the
other hand, is defined as a functor from a category in which we
interpret manifolds as morphisms between their boundaries to an
algebraic category. In our case we will specify the algebraic category
to be @xmath , the category with objects given by vector spaces and
morphisms given by linear maps. Topological manifolds of dimension
@xmath with @xmath -dimensional boundary are made into a category by
taking as objects the @xmath -dimensional topological spaces and as
morphisms the @xmath -dimensional manifolds with boundary equal to the
spaces in question. We call this category @xmath :

###### Definition 1.1 (n-Cobordisms).

The set of objects of @xmath is given by the oriented topological @xmath
-dimensional closed manifolds which we denote @xmath . The morphisms
between two objects are given by the @xmath -dimensional oriented
manifolds @xmath with boundary the disjoint union of the source and
target objects: @xmath if and only if @xmath , equipped with the
boundary orientation, is @xmath , where @xmath is the manifold with
opposite orientation. @xmath is a monoidal category with the tensor
product @xmath given by the disjoint union of spaces.

If the target of cobordism is the source of another they can be composed
by identifying the spaces @xmath and @xmath . The opposite orientations
on the identified parts of the boundary ensure that the orientations on
the cobordisms glue correctly, thus we obtain an oriented manifold with
source that of the first cobordism and target that of the second.

Note that the components of the boundary @xmath are allowed to be empty,
and the empty set is the unit of the tensor product. The use of
topological spaces is not essential, we could just as well use smooth
spaces or spaces equipped with a PL structure, and define a “T”QFT on
@xmath or @xmath . Indeed, Atiyah’s original definition was given in
terms of smooth manifolds. A TQFT is then defined in the following way:

###### Definition 1.2 (Tqft).

A TQFT is a monoidal functor @xmath from a cobordism category @xmath to
@xmath subject to the condition that @xmath , where @xmath is the dual
vector space. It is required to be non-trivial in the sense of Atiyah (
[ Ati89 ] ).

Functoriality in particular entails the following properties:

-   @xmath

-   @xmath where @xmath and @xmath . @xmath refers to gluing the
    manifolds by identifying the (components of the) boundary on @xmath
    and @xmath and @xmath is contraction of the indices living in @xmath
    and @xmath

-   @xmath with @xmath . The non-triviality assumption implies that
    @xmath .

@xmath is usually called the partition function. Using an inner product
for composition of morphisms on the @xmath side a similar construction
for the unoriented case can also be given.

These axioms formally capture the essence of the path-integral for
quantum gravity. Though gravity is not a topological theory its
background independent character implies that the path integral depends
only on the smooth structure on the manifold. Heuristically we can think
of @xmath , where @xmath is a 3d metric on the @xmath component on the
boundary, and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 1.2 Boundary Spaces

The composition identity of @xmath across boundary spaces implies a kind
of locality in the sense that the amplitude of a complicated cobordism
can be calculated by chopping it up into smaller pieces. In the case of
2-dimensional cobordisms the partition function for all manifolds can be
obtained simply from knowing the pair of trousers diagram (see diagram 1
) and the disc. In three dimensions the Heegaard splitting decomposes
any manifold into socalled handlebodies and it is sufficient to know the
partition function of these handlebodies. This is therefore a remarkably
powerful axiom. In the case of the TQFTs which we might hope have
relevance to gravity we need as a further condition that we can glue
parts of boundaries to produce spaces with new boundary topology. In
particular the path integral shown above can formally be composed not
just on entire boundaries but on subspaces of boundaries as well.

As an example consider a 3-ball. By identifying two disks on its surface
we obtain a solid torus. In fact handlebodies in 3d are exactly the
spaces obtained by sequences of such identifications. Thus if we have
the ability to glue parts of boundary spaces the 3d theory is defined in
terms of only the amplitude of the 3-ball. Cutting up the boundary
manifolds along boundaries is an extension to TQFT already suggested in
[ Ati89 ] . It leads to the notion of extended TQFTs considered in [
BD95 ] which has not been fully axiomatized. The theories we will define
in this chapter will achieve this gluing in a specific way. We will not
consider the general picture further and instead refer the reader to [
BD95 ] .

### 2 Triangulations, State Sums and Coloured Networks

The specific TQFTs we will describe are defined in terms of extra
structure on the manifold, in particular triangulations. In a further
step they are then shown to not depend on these extra structures. A
triangulation on a manifold induces a triangulation on its boundary and
the vector space will depend on this boundary triangulation. We will
describe triangulations and how to relate two triangulations of the same
manifold as well as their boundary spaces. We will then define state
sums on triangulations and a set of conditions under which they become
independent of the triangulation and define TQFTs. We will then give a
diagrammatic way of presenting triangulations and state sums on them. We
will express the triangulation independence in terms of a diagrammatic
calculus. Finally, we will show how to use @xmath to define such a
diagrammatic calculus explicitly. This will formally define a TQFT, the
Ponzano-Regge model.

#### 2.1 Triangulations

A triangulation @xmath of an @xmath -dimensional manifold @xmath is
given by a set of maps from the abstract @xmath -simplex @xmath to the
manifold such that the union of the images of the maps is @xmath and the
intersection of the image of two maps defines a map from a lower
dimensional simplex to @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 Note that this differs from a @xmath
-complex in that two @xmath -simplices can only be glued on a single
@xmath -simplex. . A triangulation defines a @xmath -structure on the
manifold [ RS72 ] . The images of these maps and their intersections
define a set of submanifolds of @xmath called the @xmath -simplices,
@xmath , of the triangulation. We call the set of @xmath -simplices
@xmath . The sub-simplices of a simplex @xmath are the simplices
completely contained in it.

Triangulations are convenient for us as we have at our disposal a
powerful theorem due to Alexander and Newman (described for example in [
RS72 ] ) and simplified by Pachner [ Pac91 ] (see also [ BW96 ] ):

###### Theorem 2.1 (Pachner Moves).

Any two finite triangulations @xmath of an @xmath -manifold @xmath
defining the same PL structure can be related by a finite number of
moves called Pachner moves. These moves are obtained by taking an @xmath
-simplex and splitting its surface, which is an @xmath -sphere
triangulated with @xmath @xmath -simplices into two @xmath -balls. These
will be triangulated with @xmath and @xmath @xmath -simplices ( @xmath
). The @xmath Pachner move is given by replacing a region of the
triangulation @xmath isomorphic to the @xmath triangulated @xmath -ball
with the @xmath triangulated @xmath -ball.

The @xmath Pachner move is the inverse of the @xmath Pachner move. For
an example of the Pachner moves in 2 and 3 dimensions see Figure 3

#### 2.2 Colourings of Triangulations and State Sums

In the theories we will consider we will colour the simplices of the
triangulation and assign amplitudes to each colouring. That is, we will
have functions @xmath from the simplices @xmath to finite sets of
colours @xmath and amplitudes @xmath associated to the @xmath -simplices
that will depend on the colourings of the simplices contained in them as
well as, in principle, on the orientations of the simplices though this
will not be the case in the theories considered here. We will write
@xmath for a complete set of colourings of all types of simplices and
@xmath for a complete colouring of a @xmath -simplex @xmath and its
sub-simplices ² ² 2 In the examples we will consider it will actually be
convenient to build up the colourings from the lowest dimensional
simplices up and let the higher dimensional colouring sets depend on the
lower dimensional colours. This structure is naturally captured by
thinking of the colourings in a categorical way which we will not pursue
here. . The state sum will then be defined by summing over these
colourings. It will then naturally define an element in the linear space
@xmath , that is, the span of colourings of the triangulation @xmath of
the boundary @xmath . We will then define a state sum @xmath depending
on the manifolds as well as their triangulations.

###### Definition 2.2 (State sums).

An @xmath -dimensional state sum is defined by a set of colours @xmath
associated to @xmath -simplices for @xmath , and a set of finite
amplitudes @xmath from the colourings of a @xmath -simplex and its
sub-simplices to the complex numbers. A state sum gives a partition
function @xmath on triangulated manifolds by:

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

An inner product, in the sense of a bilinear form, on @xmath is given by
the @xmath -weighted sum over colourings:

-   @xmath for @xmath .

Note that any colouring on the @xmath -simplices could be absorbed into
the @xmath weight. With this inner product distinct colourings are
orthogonal. The inner product on a particular colouring is simply the
state sum prescription @xmath on the boundary @xmath . Using this inner
product there is a natural gluing of state sums. If @xmath and @xmath
are two identically glued sets of @xmath -simplices we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath and @xmath are the triangulation and manifold obtained by
identifying the simplices in @xmath and @xmath and the inner product is
given by the @xmath -weighted sum over the colourings of those simplices
that are now no longer on the boundary. Thus the inner product simply
matches the gluing and supplies the missing internal weights where
simplices are identified. Using this inner product we can identify dual
spaces with those components of the boundary we have designated as
targets, the gluing is then just index contraction again.

As the set of colourings and the amplitudes are finite there is no
question of convergence in the sum, at least for finite triangulations.
If two components of the boundaries of two manifolds have the same
triangulation this immediately defines a gluing in the TQFT sense. Note
that this gluing condition is stronger than the one in the TQFT
Definition 1.2 as we have distinguished localized regions. The boundary
vector spaces split in a natural way, that is they are local in the
sense of Section 1.2 , and we can glue them locally.

This data does not define a TQFT for two reasons. Due to the dependence
of the boundary vector space on the triangulation of the boundary of the
manifold it is not possible to glue the partition functions defined on
manifolds with the same boundary but different triangulations.
Furthermore the partition function @xmath itself depends on the
triangulation of @xmath . Both issues can be overcome if the partition
functions are compatible with the Pachner moves in a natural way. Call
the triangulation of @xmath -balls in terms of @xmath @xmath -simplices
arising in the Pachner moves @xmath . We then can require the following
equivalence of partition functions:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

This is well defined as the boundary state spaces on both sides are the
same. From Theorem 2.1 and the gluing in Definition 2.2 it now
immediately follows that @xmath does not depend on the interior
triangulation. On the other hand observe that any two triangulations of
a particular boundary manifold @xmath can be related by a sequence of
@xmath -dimensional Pachner moves. Remember from the definition that
these are generated by replacing half of an @xmath -simplex with its
other half. Thus these moves can be generated on the boundary
triangulation by gluing the partition function of a full @xmath -simplex
@xmath onto the surface on a set of @xmath -simplices (see e.g. Figure 4
). In principle such a move might produce a degenerate triangulation;
this can always be avoided by choosing an appropriate interior
triangulation of @xmath . A sequence of such gluings gives rise to a
manifold of topology @xmath .

On the other hand if we have a triangulated manifold of the form @xmath
with the same triangulation on both parts of the boundary the invariance
of the partition function under triangulation changes on the interior
implies that its partition function is a projector:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The inner product on the left is the state sum inner product on @xmath .
We now have a natural isomorphism between the images of this projector
on every possible boundary triangulation given by constructing a
triangulation of @xmath taking the one to the other. By the argument
above such a triangulation always exists due to Theorem 2.1 .

Identifying these spaces under this isomorphism associates a boundary
vector space to every boundary irrespective of its triangulation, and
using this isomorphism any two triangulations can be glued. In this way
a state sum satisfying equation ( 1 ) defines a TQFT.

#### 2.3 The Dual Networks in 3d and their Evaluation

In order to get a better handle on the kind of amplitudes that satisfy (
1 ) we will introduce a notation of dual networks for the 3d case. In
particular we will obtain a representation of the triangulation and its
colouring in terms of 2-dimensional diagrams ³ ³ 3 The construction we
will consider is not the only way to obtain a state sum invariant by
decomposing 3-manifolds and using links and networks to present them,
see for example [ Fox95 ] for a construction similar to ours and [ Rob95
] for a construction that clarifies the relationship to other 3-manifold
invariants, as well as the references therein. .

These diagrams are obtained by mapping the 2-dimensional Poincaré dual
of the surface of every tetrahedron to the plane in an orientation
preserving way. This means triangles ( @xmath ) get mapped to vertices
in the diagram, edges ( @xmath ) to links, and vertices of the
triangulation ( @xmath ) to triangles. If the triangles of two
tetrahedra are glued in the manifold we denote this by a dotted line
connecting the vertices dual to them in such a way that going clockwise
around the one vertex and anticlockwise around the other vertex we will
encounter the links associated to the same edges in the same order. This
is always possible due to the requirement that the manifold be oriented
and the map to the plane preserve the inherited orientation. Therefore
the order in which the links go around a vertex will necessarily be
opposite for glued triangles.

In this diagram many links will be dual to the same edge. As the
ordering at the ends of a dotted line is choosen such that links dual to
the same edge are encountered in the same order, the information which
links are associated to the same edge is implicit in the unlabeled
diagram already. In fact, there is a closed loop of alternating links
and dotted lines associated to every edge. However it will be convenient
for us to mark the presence of an edge by picking a fiducial link among
those dual to it and placing a dot on it. Quantities associated to the
edges can then be associated to the dot without having to keep track of
many links.

An example of such a dual network is given in Figure 5 .

We now colour this diagram in the natural way. The colours on triangles
go to vertices of the diagram and edges go to links. In the theories we
will consider vertices of the triangulation are not coloured so we
ignore them here. We can then further treat each individual coloured
diagram as the numerical value of the amplitudes @xmath evaluated at the
given colouring. These amplitudes will then also be associated to the
elements of the diagram, the triangle amplitude to dotted lines, the
edge amplitude to the dot on a link, and the tetrahedral amplitude to
the tetrahedral net. Of course this means that two diagrams
corresponding to the same triangulation must correspond to the same
number. The amplitudes cannot depend on the additional choices made in
going to the 2-dimensional diagrams. Much of this and the next section
will deal with making this condition precise.

The partition function is then given by simply summing the diagrams
interpreted as amplitudes over all their colourings. Note that the
diagram does not contain information on the vertices of the
triangulation in any straightforward manner. This needs to be added by
hand. In the cases we want to consider the vertices are not coloured and
their weight is a constant. The gluing of partition functions is
immediate.

The Pachner moves in terms of these dual nets are presented in Figure 6
.

A particular way to define amplitudes satisfying the Pachner identities
( 1 ) is given by taking the diagrammatic representation of the
triangulation and the partition function seriously. That is, we define
various graphical manipulations on the diagrams that are sufficient to
establish the equality of the diagrams in Figure 6 . If we then have a
consistent way to associate amplitudes with not just the diagrams that
arise in Figure 5 , but also those obtained through the graphical
manipulation, these graphical manipulations can be translated back
directly into equations. We will encapsulate a diagram in triangular
brackets @xmath to denote its evaluation. That is @xmath . As we want to
identify the evaluation of the diagram with the amplitudes in the state
sum, and the amplitudes are associated to particular parts of the
diagrams, we require the evaluation to be local in the sense that each
disconnected network of links, each dotted line and each dot on a link
can be evaluated individually and multiplied together, e.g. see Figure 7
. We will usually suppress the colourings in the evaluation, in which
case a sum over colourings is implied.

The condition that the amplitudes should not depend on the particular
diagrams chosen to represent the triangulation can be expressed as its
invariance under deformations relating all different diagrams arising
from the same triangulation. In particular we want to identify different
ways of projecting the tetrahedra onto the plane. This means we need
invariance under diffeomorphisms in the plane as well as the ability to
move lines “past the point at infinity”. Furthermore we want to allow
crossing lines, dotted lines and vertices under and above each other.
This can be done by allowing the Reidemeister moves extended by
operations including the vertices of the diagrams of Figure 8 . Taken
together the Reidemeister moves and the diffeomorphisms on the sphere
are called 3-dimensional ambient isotopy. The diffeomorphisms themself
are the ambient isotopy of the sphere, invariance under these would be
sufficient to construct state sums and led to the definition of
spherical categories [ BW99 , BW96 ] . The condition of invariance under
3-dimensional ambient isotopy can be translated into specific equalities
on the map @xmath which we will study in greater detail in the next
section. As an immediate consequence, this implies that @xmath defines a
knot invariant (e.g. [ Kau ] ).

Using ambient isotopy the dual Pachner moves in Figure 6 can be
recovered from the first three identities given in Figure 9 that act
locally in the diagrams evaluated. We call them two- and three-valent
invariance and semi-simplicity for reasons that will become apparent.
The fourth identity in Figure 9 is called orthogonality. Invariance
applies when two or three links or a dotted line connect two separate
networks of links, semi-simplicity applies always. As per the convention
above we have marked the presence of an edge factor for the closed loop
by placing a thick dot along one of its links. Note further that we are
implicitly summing over labels in the diagrams. In particular for
semi-simplicity we are summing over the edge colouring of the closed
loop and the triangle colouring at the ends of the dotted line. In the
case of three-valent invariance we sum over the triangle colouring.
There is no sum in two-valent invariance. The colourings summed over are
local in the part of the diagram we are changing. They do not appear
anywhere else in the state sum and are removed by the moves. The fourth
equality in Figure 9 , orthogonality, does not involve a sum but simply
relates two labels on different vertices of the network.

The sequence of manipulations that allows one to recover the Pachner
moves from invariance and semi-simplicity is given in Figure 10 for the
2-3 (3-2) move and in Figure 11 for the 1-4 (4-1) move. As mentioned it
does not require orthogonality.

Note that the 1-4 move is only implemented up to a factor given by the
completely disconnected diagram. This is a reflection of the fact that
we did not include the vertices @xmath of the triangulation in the
diagrams and the 1-4 move creates or destroys a @xmath . Conversely we
can take this calculation to determine the constant weight of a vertex
in terms of link diagrams. Thus if the state sum is normalized by the
factor @xmath it is invariant under the 1-4 move.

In fact if orthogonality holds, not only the factors @xmath can be
expressed as networks of links through these moves, but also @xmath and
@xmath . To see this consider the equality of diagram evaluations in
Figure 12 . On the left hand side of the first equality we have two
dotted lines and one network called the @xmath network, on the right
hand side we have one @xmath network. As by definition we defined a
dotted line to evaluate to the weight @xmath , we conclude that @xmath
must equal the value assigned to the @xmath network. Using this we can
compare sides on the other equality to conclude that the thick dot
representing the weight @xmath has to equal the value associated to the
circle. Using this we can then conclude that @xmath is the sum over all
colourings of the evaluation of a circle squared. We could thus remove
all dotted lines and thick dots from the diagram replacing them purely
with networks of links and placing the triangle labels on the vertices.
Denoting the tetrahedral network as @xmath , the theta network as @xmath
and the circle network as @xmath we can thus inversely define the
partition function in terms of network evaluations:

###### Definition 2.3 (State Sum of a Network Evaluation).

Given a bracket evaluation @xmath on coloured networks invariant under
ambient isotopy of the sphere we have an associated state sum defined
by:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

If the evaluation @xmath furthermore satisfies the four moves of Diagram
6 this defines a TQFT on @xmath .

#### 2.4 The Partition Function as a Dual Network

In fact for a TQFT of the type defined in 2.3 we can use the graphical
calculus to evaluate the partition function of any triangulation of the
ball @xmath in terms of the dual network of its boundary triangulation.
As per our discussion above we can construct a triangulation of @xmath
interpolating between the triangulation of the sphere induced by the
triangulation of the 3-ball and the triangulation of the sphere given by
the boundary of a single tetrahedron. We do this by gluing tetrahedra
onto the 3-ball iteratively on one, two or three faces, generating the
2-dimensional Pachner moves. Now observe that the network obtained by
eliminating the internal simplices created by the gluing is again the
network of links dual to a planar projection of the surface of the new
triangulation. Iterating this procedure we obtain that in general the
basis element of @xmath in a particular colouring @xmath of the boundary
is given by the number associated to the coloured network of links dual
to boundary of @xmath . That is, we have the following theorem:

###### Theorem 2.4 (Dual Network Evaluation of the Partition Function).

The partition function @xmath of a TQFT given by Definition 2.3 can be
expressed as

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath is the coloured network obtained as the Poincaré dual of a
mapping of @xmath to the plane.

This algorithm was first developed by Moussouris in [ Mou83 ] and an
extension to handle bodies for the case of the Ponzano-Regge model was
introduced in [ DGH10 ] .

### 3 @xmath and Spin Networks

We will now show how to construct a diagrammatic calculus satisfying all
the above conditions from the representation theory of @xmath . This is
only a concrete example. The conditions discussed above have been
translated completely into algebraic language and many categories
satisfying them are known. The theory based on @xmath is particularly
interesting for physics in that we can find strong relations with
geometry, as we will make explicit using coherent states in the next
chapter.

The construction of a finite TQFT in terms of the @xmath theory is
difficult as the colouring set is not finite and the theory requires
regularisation. We will not consider these problems here and refer the
reader to the literature [ BNG06 , BNG09 , FL04a , FL04b ] .

#### 3.1 A Brief Review of @xmath Representation Theory

The group is @xmath , the group of complex 2-dimensional unitary
matrices @xmath of unit determinant. It is a 3-dimensional group
generated by the Lie algebra @xmath with three generators @xmath and
commutation relations @xmath . The generators are a basis of the
traceless anti-Hermitian 2-dimensional matrices. The fundamental
representation on @xmath is called the spin @xmath representation and we
denote states in @xmath by @xmath with @xmath running over @xmath . We
will at times find it convenient to use the Hermitian Pauli matrices
@xmath which are related to the @xmath by @xmath .

The unitary irreducible representation are labelled by half integers
@xmath and are given by the symmetric subspaces of the tensor product of
@xmath fundamentals. They are then @xmath -dimensional and we write
their states as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the @xmath and @xmath now runs from @xmath to @xmath . The Lie
algebra elements act as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will drop the index @xmath when it is clear from context which
representation we are talking about. By definition the Hermitian inner
product on these representations is invariant under the group action:
@xmath . Explicitly we write @xmath where the overline denotes complex
conjugation and @xmath is the diagonal Kronecker tensor which is @xmath
if @xmath and @xmath otherwise. Its inverse is the same and they
contract to the Kronecker delta: @xmath .

Furthermore, there is a bilinear inner product on the representations.
In the fundamental representation it is given by the antisymmetric
tensor @xmath . We also define its antisymmetric inverse through @xmath
. This is invariant as @xmath is antisymmetric and thus @xmath . This is
in fact an equality as contracting both sides with @xmath gives @xmath .
Thus we have @xmath . We write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This can be defined on any representation by symmetrizing indices, that
is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that this is now graded anti-symmetric, that is, @xmath . We
therefore have the graded trace @xmath

The bilinear inner product can be related to the Hermitian inner product
through an anti-linear operator that commutes with the group action
@xmath . It is defined as @xmath . We then have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as @xmath . It follows that @xmath has to commute with the group action.
This can be checked explicitly as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The action of @xmath immediately extends to all representations. In
particular note that @xmath and that using the graded antisymmetry of
@xmath we have that @xmath .

Furthermore we will need the invariant subspaces of tensor products of
representations: @xmath . Its elements @xmath satisfy @xmath and are
called intertwiners. @xmath is empty unless @xmath in which case it is
1-dimensional with a basis given by @xmath . @xmath is empty unless
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath satisfy the triangle inequalities and @xmath
is integer. In this case we say @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
admissible. We define the function @xmath to be @xmath if its arguments
are admissible and @xmath otherwise.

Using the epsilon tensor we can construct the invariant maps between
tensor products of Hilbert spaces @xmath by contracting the first @xmath
indices of an element in @xmath . As epsilon has an inverse this is a
natural isomorphism of vector spaces. In this way the statement about
@xmath is equivalent to Schur’s Lemma for @xmath .

Using the maps @xmath for admissible spins we can decompose @xmath into
representations @xmath . Semi-simplicity of the group tells us that this
gives the whole representation space and in the case of @xmath each
@xmath occurs only once in the decomposition. We can use the invariant
tensors to project onto the subspace of @xmath isomorphic to @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the normalisation can be calculated using Schur’s Lemma and is
given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Semi-simplicity is then the statement that the tensor product of
representations can be decomposed into a direct sum of representations:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (4)
  -- -------- -- -----

#### 3.2 Spin Networks and Graphical Calculus

We will now turn to the question of how to use the representation theory
of @xmath to construct a graphical evaluation @xmath of the type
described in Section 2.3 . The graphical calculus will correspond to the
one described in [ KL94 ] for parameter @xmath and with generalised
intertwiner normalisations.

The construction we will use is in fact much more general than needed
here. However, it is illustrative as it covers several other state sum
TQFTs like the Turaev-Viro model [ TV92 ] that are based on the
graphical calculus for generic @xmath . As we saw above it is actually
sufficient to consider only the evaluation of links. We can then chop
the link diagrams up into elementary blocks which can be combined in
natural ways. That is, we draw a box around a particular part of the
diagram in such a way that only the top and bottom of the box intersect
with links. This defines a diagrammatic category where objects are
points on the boundary of the square and morphisms are given by ways of
connecting them up. These boxes can then be composed in a natural way.
These kind of diagrammatic categories have been well studied in the
literature [ FY89 , JS91 , BW99 ] . We can arrange the diagram in the
box in such a way that all vertices are either at the top or the bottom
of the box. The composition of morphisms is then given by stacking boxes
vertically and there is a natural tensor product given by lining boxes
up horizontally and erasing the boundary between them, for an examples
see Figure 13 . Composition in this diagram can be thought of as erasing
dotted lines.

If we want this calculus to be invariant under different ways of cutting
the diagram into boxes, it follows that a box with no incoming or
outgoing lines has to be a map from the identity of the tensor product
of spaces to itself. If the set of such maps is abelian, such a category
immediately defines an evaluation @xmath .

In our case we want to associate boxes with linear operators between
representation spaces of @xmath . The colouring set for links and
therefore on the boundary of the boxes will be the set of irreducible
representations @xmath of @xmath . Furthermore we will colour vertices
with a basis of @xmath with an arbitrary but fixed ordering of spins. We
require this basis to be orthogonal in the epsilon inner product. As
@xmath is 1 or 0-dimensional this is simply given by a normalisation and
phase in the former case. We will interpret the former case as setting
the contribution of any non-admissible colouring to be identically zero.
Thus the intertwiner colouring restricts the colouring of the edges of
the network. The admissibility conditions and the ordering we have to
choose will be crucial. The ordering is required as the different
possible orderings will be related by nontrivial isomorphisms.

As argued above we will have to show that the different way of cutting
up the diagrams are equivalent and the assignment is invariant under
ambient isotopy of the sphere. We do this by chopping up every diagram
into six elementary diagrams using a simple form of Morse theory. Then
we associate particular @xmath invariant operators to the elementary
diagrams. We then give a set of relations that relate any two ways of
chopping up any two regular isotopic diagrams and show that the
elementary operators satisfy corresponding equations.

To decompose an arbitrary diagram into boxes we use the standard height
function on the plane of the diagram. We will require the diagram to
have finitely many minima, maxima, intersections and vertices with
respect to this height function. We choose a set of equipotential
surfaces such that the interval between two consecutive surfaces
contains at most one minimum, maximum, vertex or intersection. This can
always be done by perturbing the height function slightly. Within each
of these strips we will now have several vertical lines and exactly one
of the other 5 types of diagrams in Figure 14 . As per above we can thus
consider this the tensor product between the operators associated to the
vertical line and the elementary operators.

Now reading the diagrams from bottom to top, and associating lower
indices with incoming representations, and upper indices with outgoing
representations we make the following identifications:

-   vertical line: @xmath

-   cup: @xmath

-   cap: @xmath

-   overcrossing: @xmath

-   undercrossing: @xmath

-   vertex with all legs up and in order of the colouring: The basis
    element of @xmath it is coloured with.

We will return to the definition of the other forms of the vertex in a
moment. Note that the over and under crossing need to carry these minus
signs for consistency as the epsilon inner product is graded
anti-symmetric. For example see the first Reidemeister move which would
only be true up to sign with the trivial crossing.

The conditions of ambient isotopy on the sphere now translate into
various equations satisfied by these operators. Diffeomorphisms that
don’t introduce new minima or maxima can only translate operators in the
diagram. They can only translate horizontally if there is no outgoing
line on the boxes. In this case the fact that the Hilbert space
associated to the box side without lines is @xmath , the identity of
@xmath , ensures that these shifts don’t change the overall operator. If
they change the vertical ordering they change the order in which
operators are multiplied, but since the operators will by necessity be
acting on different spaces and be tensored with the identity on the
others space this does not change the overall operator. It is clear then
that diffeomorphisms of the graph away from the vertices and
intersections do not change the associated operator unless they induce
new maxima and minima or move a line past the point at infinity. This
corresponds to the first two deformations in Figure 15 .

The corresponding equations for the first equation in Figure 15 are
simply the inverse relations for @xmath . Moving a line past the point
at infinity follows from the graded anti-symmetry of the cup and the
cap. Note that this diagram evaluates to the graded trace of the
unspecified section of the diagram. Next we consider how operators
interact. The equations of the Reidemeister moves, including the one
using the vertex, that were given in Figure 8 deal with the situation
where we move intersections and lines past each other. It is a
straightforward calculation that they are satisfied. As we are not
distinguishing between under and overcrossings here the calculus is
actually more constrained as no braiding can occur. Moving the vertex
past a line only adds a set of minus signs which cancel due to the
integrality condition of spins at an intertwiner.

At the vertices and intersections diffeomorphisms can also act by a
twist. This will introduce new minima and maxima. The twists that relate
the elementary operators defined above are given in Figure 16 . The ones
involving the crossings are easily verified.

To fully understand the twists acting at the vertices we need to define
the operators associated to vertices which are not of the form for which
we defined the elementary operator above but have links going down.
Notice that as in the examples in Figure 17 we can use twists in the
vertex and caps to generate all the possible vertices with all
orderings. This corresponds to the natural isomorphism between @xmath
and @xmath defined above and the isomorphism between @xmath and @xmath
defined by the crossing. We will then define a vertex coloured by an
intertwiner to be the operator obtained by twisting the diagram until
the vertex has all upward facing legs in order @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
or @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and using the crossing map in the latter
case.

It remains to show that all ways of twisting the vertex lead to the same
result. We can twist a vertex either left or right or more than once.
However, it follows from the second set of equalities of diagrams in
Figure 16 that any two ways to do so actually are the same. To see this
note that a consecutive partial left and partial right twist cancel each
other out. If we obtain a particular ordering of outgoing legs by
twisting to the right we can thus replace the central vertex with its
fully left twisted version and cancel twists to obtain the required
ordering through left twists. The equalities of Figure 16 are
straightforward to show. Every full twist is @xmath times the identity,
thus we simply have a sign factor of @xmath which due to the integrality
of spins at an intertwiner is equal to @xmath . As we have used the
twists to define the general vertices it follows in particular that the
operators associated to a diagram are invariant under twisting the
vertices.

##### 3.2.1 The Ponzano-Regge Model

This concludes the definition of the graphical calculus. We have
established its invariance under regular isotopy. We can now associate a
complex number to every closed diagram that is invariant under the way
the diagram is presented. This in turn defines a state sum model @xmath
by Definition 2.3 . Evaluating the diagrams for a particular colouring
in which the intertwiners are ordered from left to right as they appear
in the diagram we obtain the following numerical values in terms of
@xmath operators:

-   @xmath

    @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

To arrive at the formula for the @xmath net we represent it in a
particular way and use the associations defined above. It follows from
our discussion that while this formula depends on the way we have
proceeded, the result doesn’t and in particular has all the symmetries
of an actual tetrahedron. Note however that the signs here do depend on
the ordering chosen at each vertex. The overall state sum does not
depend on the orderings chosen at each vertex as the changes to signs
induced by a change of choice of ordering in @xmath would compensate the
change of signs in @xmath .

In the case of @xmath there are actually canonical intertwiners for each
ordering which can be used to eliminate the need for choosing an
ordering and a particular normalisation. As our analysis in the
following chapters will not use this canonical normalisation we will not
discussed it here.

To show that these weights actually define a topological quantum field
theory we need to establish the four additional moves, semi-simplicity,
the two invariances, and orthogonality. These are simply graphical
restatements of various group theoretic relations stated in Section 3.1
. Semi-simplicity is just the sum over projector decomposition of the
identity on the tensor product of representations given in equation ( 4
). Three-valent invariance is the observation that the pair of identical
intertwiners projects onto the invariant subspace of the three
representations but the state coming in is already invariant, being a
contraction of invariant operators, thus it can be replaced by the
identitiy. Two-valent invariance is equivalent to Schur’s lemma, and
orthogonality is a consequence of the orthogonality of basis elements
chosen to colour vertices and is trivial in our case as there is only
one such basis element. Thus we have the following definition:

###### Definition 3.1 (The Ponzano-Regge State Sum).

The Ponzano-Regge state sum @xmath is the state sum defined by formally
applying the graphical calculus defined in Section 3.2 to the Definition
2.3 .

This state sum satisfies the requirements to define a TQFT up to
finiteness and was first considered in [ PR68 ] . This definition is
only formal as in contrast to the requirements in the preceding sections
the colouring set is not finite. In particular note that the
normalisation factor is divergent and it is necessary to regularize the
state sum [ FL04a , BNG09 ] .

##### 3.2.2 4 Dimensional Amplitudes from Spin Networks

We will not discuss the construction of 4-dimensional state sums and
TQFTs in detail here but refer the reader to the literature [ Oog92 ,
CY93 ] . We will merely point out that the same construction of a
tetrahedral amplitude from the dual spin network of the surface of the
tetrahedron can be carried out in 4d. In this case we obtain a
four-valent spin network based on four-valent intertwiners dual to
tetrahedra and links dual to triangles. The evaluation of this spin
network is well known in recoupling theory of @xmath as the @xmath
-symbol. Its name stems from the fact that ten spins label the edges and
five spins label the intertwiners. The graphical representation of such
a spin network is given in Figure 18 .

#### 3.3 Spin Foam Models

As in the Ponzano-Regge model the data can be entirely given in terms of
the 2-skeleton of the dual of the triangulation and due to the use of
spin networks as a basis of cylindrical functions in Loop Quantum
Gravity that, evaluated on the 0-connection evaluate up to sign to the
graphical calculus defined above, these models are also known as spin
foam models [ Bae00 , Bae98 ] , and several alternative approaches to
their definition have been proposed. In particular for the case of the
graphical calculus defined by the representations of semi-simple Lie
groups they can be understood heuristically as quantisations of
so-called @xmath -theories. We refer the interested reader to the review
articles [ Bae00 , Bae98 , Oec03 ] .

## Chapter \thechapter The Geometry of Representations

In Chapter State Sums and Geometry we showed how to construct a state
sum invariant using the representation theory of @xmath . A similar
construction can be given for @xmath , the covering group of @xmath ,
and @xmath , the covering group of @xmath the identity connected
component of @xmath . In four dimensions the analogue construction is
called the Ooguri model [ Oog92 ] . In order to understand the geometry
of these models we will begin by reviewing the geometric states arising
in the representation theory of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

### 4 The Geometry of @xmath

One way to the representation theory of @xmath is by the quantization of
the sphere, or alternatively of coadjoint orbits in the Lie algebra (see
for example [ GS77 ] ). In an inverse “correspondence principle”-type
logic the large quantum number behaviour should thus recover spherical
geometry. This is in fact the case and can be seen easily by using
Perelomov coherent states [ Per86 ] .

#### 4.1 Coherent States

Coherent states are defined as the eigenstates of Lie algebra elements.
Given a 3-dimensional unit vector @xmath the associated coherent states
@xmath are defined by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----

This fixes the states @xmath up to a phase. As a matter of fact we can
show that every state in the fundamental representation is proportional
to a coherent state. Writing @xmath and using the Pauli matrices @xmath
the first line of ( 4.1 ) reads @xmath . Now note that the Pauli
matrices together with the identity @xmath form a basis of the two by
two dimensional Hermitian matrices. The matrix @xmath has eigenvalues
equal to @xmath . Thus in particular the matrices @xmath are the
Hermitian matrices with eigenvalues @xmath and @xmath . Thus they are of
the form @xmath . Conversely every normalized state @xmath defines such
a Hermitian matrix, which can therefore be written as @xmath . It
follows immediately that @xmath is an eigenstate of @xmath . The fact
that it is the @xmath and not the @xmath eigenstate implies the second
line of the coherent state definition. Thus every normalized state
@xmath is a coherent state @xmath . In particular we have that

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (6)
  -- -------- -- -----

Note that the anti-linear map @xmath transforms a coherent state to one
associated to the opposite direction:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (7)
  -- -------- -- -----

From the definition of @xmath it is immediate to see that the coherent
states satisfy an exponential property. We have that for every @xmath
there is an @xmath in the fundamental representation such that

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (8)
  -- -------- -- -----

Lie algebra elements transform under the vector representation of @xmath
. We denote the vector representation of a group element @xmath by
@xmath . This is the standard double cover of @xmath by @xmath , @xmath
define the same @xmath . From the fact that @xmath we then have that
@xmath for some @xmath . From the fact that the @xmath are eigenstates
of the Lie algebra elements that are parallel to @xmath we obtain their
transformation behaviour under rotations that stabilize @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using 6 we can easily calculate the modulus square of the inner product
between two coherent states by noting that in the fundamental
representation we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -----

The last can be calculated easily using that @xmath and the fact that
the @xmath are traceless. We obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The modulus square of the inner product between two coherent states in
arbitrary representations is then immediate thanks to the exponential
property:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (10)
  -- -------- -- ------

This shows in particular that in the large quantum number limit @xmath
coherent states become orthogonal. In this way they capture the
“correspondence principle”-type geometry of representations in which we
are interested. Away from the asymptotic regime coherent states still
form an over-complete basis of representation spaces. A resolution of
the identity is given by integrating over the sphere:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (11)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the normalized measure on the sphere.

It will furthermore be interesting to calculate the expectation value of
@xmath between different coherent states. In order to avoid having to
deal with the arbitrary phases we will calculate @xmath . To do so we
again use equation ( 6 ) and @xmath and we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

#### 4.2 Coherent Triangles

Coherent states give us the geometry of a sphere associated to
particular representations @xmath . Extending this we can give a
geometric interpretation to the invariant subspace of the tensor product
of representations @xmath . In this section we will discuss the case of
the three-valent intertwiners which we will associate to triangles and
in the next section we will discuss four-valent intertwiners and their
relationship with tetrahedra.

To see this relationship first note that the shape space of triangles
can be described as a constrained space of three spheres of radius
@xmath . This space has the product symplectic structure of that of the
sphere used in the geometric quantisation [ GS77 ] . Given three vectors
@xmath of length @xmath that are on the spheres the constraint

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (12)
  -- -------- -- ------

forces them to describe the edge vectors of a triangle with edge lengths
@xmath . Furthermore, with the given symplectic form this constraint
generates rotations on these spheres. Thus the space obtained by
symplectic reduction of the space of three spheres by the constraint (
12 ) is the shape space of triangles of edge length @xmath . Of course
this space is just a single point.

To quantize this state space we take the quantized unconstrained state
space, that is the representation space @xmath , and project on the
gauge invariant subspace by averaging over the gauge orbit, that is, the
rotation acting diagonally on all three state spaces:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (13)
  -- -------- -- ------

The state @xmath depends on the arbitrary phases of the coherent states
used to construct it. As we mentioned above the space @xmath is actually
1-dimensional which is in keeping with the observation that the
classical reduced phase space is just a point. It is in fact guaranteed
by an abstract theorem of Guillemin and Sternberg called “quantisation
commutes with reduction” [ GS82 ] that by quantizing first and
constraining after we end up in the same reduced Hilbert space. The
over-parametrisation of this state space through the intertwiners
associated to three vectors @xmath will nevertheless be extremely useful
in what is to follow. Note that @xmath is not in @xmath even if the
classical labels here close in the sense of ( 12 ). However the geometry
of the classical phase space can again be seen explicitly
asymptotically. If we introduce a scaling @xmath and look at the
elements @xmath in @xmath we find they are exponentially suppressed for
large @xmath unless ( 12 ) is satisfied [ LS07 ] .

#### 4.3 Coherent Tetrahedra

Just as three-valent intertwiners can be interpreted as quantized
triangles we can interpret four-valent intertwiners as quantized
tetrahedra [ BB99 , Bar98 ] . The use of coherent states for their study
was introduced in the context of state sum models in [ LS07 ] . Consider
a set of four vectors in directions @xmath of lengths @xmath satisfying
closure

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (14)
  -- -------- -- ------

The space of such closing vectors that are non-degenerate is the shape
space of non-degenerate tetrahedra.

###### Lemma 4.1 (Tetrahedra from Closing Vectors).

Four vectors @xmath of length @xmath that span 3-dimensional space and
satisfy ( 14 ) are the outward normals of a non-degenerate tetrahedron
with areas @xmath embedded in @xmath which is unique up to translation.

###### Proof.

If they span 3-dimensional space and satisfy closure, any subset of them
is linearly independent. It is immediate that every non-degenerate
tetrahedron defines such a set of normals satisfying closure due to
Gauss’ theorem. Conversely, interpreting the @xmath as normal vectors is
sufficient to determine the shape of the tetrahedron. Then the normal
vectors satisfy closure with the areas determined up to scale. This
closure condition cannot be independent of ( 14 ) as we otherwise could
scale the geometric closure condition such that one area matches a
@xmath , subtract one equation from the other and obtain linear
dependence between some set of @xmath , which is in contradiction to our
assumption. Thus the areas of the tetrahedron have to be proportional to
@xmath . By scaling the tetrahedron we obtain two tetrahedra with areas
matching @xmath , one with the @xmath as inward normals and the other
with the @xmath as outward normals. ∎

Again the constraint ( 14 ) generates rotations of the tetrahedron in
question, and the non-degenerate sector of the reduced phase space is
the shape space of tetrahedra. Implementing the constraint quantum
mechanically again we obtain the over-parametrisation of the space of
four-valent intertwiners by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Again the phase of @xmath is not fixed by the labels @xmath . Now this
space is not 1-dimensional any more and it follows by the theorem of
Guillemin and Sternberg mentioned above that this construction does
indeed cover all of @xmath . Again a state with classical data that
closes does not immediately live in the invariant subspace but the
length of the projection of states that don’t close is exponentially
suppressed asymptotically. Note that any two intertwiners @xmath ,
@xmath corresponding to sets of vectors @xmath related by a rotation are
related by a phase. Furthermore the overlap between intertwiners
corresponding to different tetrahedra is also suppressed exponentially
asymptotically, showing that in the asymptotic regime we recover the
shape space of tetrahedra in the same “correspondence principle” way as
we obtain the sphere from the individual representations [ LS07 ] .

#### 4.4 Coherent Boundary Manifolds

To use the coherent intertwiners defined in the preceding sections for
the analysis of state sums we need to extend the construction from
triangles and tetrahedra to closed triangulated 2 and 3-dimensional
manifolds. The states we will define will then be in the boundary state
spaces of the state sums. In the 3-dimensional state sum @xmath
constructed above, the boundary state space was given by the span of
colourings of edges of the boundary triangulation with spins and its
triangles with intertwiners. In the 4-dimensional state sums we will
consider, the difference will be only that the spins will colour
triangles, and the intertwiners will colour tetrahedra. In this section
we will give coherent states in these spaces. If the data in these
states furthermore defines a consistent geometry on the boundary
manifold we will give a canonical phase choice for these states.

##### 4.4.1 2-Dimensional

Consider a closed oriented 2-dimensional manifold @xmath with a
triangulation @xmath . We define a flat geometry on the 2-simplices of
the manifold by defining a linear and orientation preserving map from
each simplex into @xmath : @xmath where @xmath is a label on the set of
2-simplices @xmath . Linear in this context will always mean affine
linear, but we will mostly not be interested in the translational part
of the maps, and will use the same symbol @xmath to mean the rotational
parts of the affine linear maps.

The pullback of the standard metric on @xmath then provides a metric on
the simplex; the pullback of a basis defines a frame. The triangles
@xmath get mapped to triangles @xmath in @xmath .

The set of maps @xmath defines a simplex-wise linear metric on @xmath if
the metric induced on edges of the triangulation @xmath by the two
triangles that contain them agrees. In the 2-dimensional case this
simply means that the edge lengths have to agree. In this case we call
@xmath with this triangulation and metric a Regge manifold [ Reg61 ] .
We will assume this is the case from here on.

It will actually be convenient for us to consider the trivial extension
of the maps @xmath to @xmath , that is, consider @xmath as a map to the
subspace @xmath with @xmath and orientation induced by considering
@xmath as outward. With this convention the @xmath define a set of three
3-dimensional edge vectors associated to each triangle. Every edge of
the triangulation can be labelled by the two triangles that it borders
and we will denote the oriented edges @xmath . We think of @xmath as
belonging to the boundary of @xmath with the boundary orientation. We
then have that the maps @xmath determine two vectors per edge called
@xmath and @xmath . @xmath is the unit vector in the direction of the
edge @xmath in the triangle @xmath , and @xmath is its counterpart in
the triangle @xmath . There now exists a set of @xmath maps @xmath that
map the edge vectors that are identified to each other:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

These are given by the rotational part of @xmath . It also follows that
@xmath is the parallel transport when going from the frame on @xmath to
@xmath . The frame transforms by @xmath , thus the same vector expressed
in this frame is transformed by @xmath . Thus the @xmath are actually
the discrete connection compatible with the simplex-wise flat geometry.
A discrete connection is defined in Appendix A by Definition A.1 . Given
a spin structure on the boundary manifold we can then pick an @xmath
connection @xmath that is a covering lift of @xmath according to
Definition A.2 .

For a Regge boundary manifold with half-integer edge lengths that are
admissible per triangle we can now define a state in @xmath by choosing
the representations @xmath colouring the edges @xmath to be the edge
lengths and the intertwiners colouring the triangles @xmath to be given
by @xmath of equation ( 13 ). As we pointed out in Section 4.2 the
intertwiner thus chosen actually depends only on the geometry of the
triangle, not on the particular vectors. In this context this implies
that the boundary state is independent of the particular maps @xmath and
only depends on the induced geometry. We can furthermore use the
boundary connection @xmath to fix a particular phase for this state by
choosing the coherent states entering the @xmath to satisfy

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (17)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is a, so far, arbitrary ordering of the @xmath , for @xmath
the equation holds with opposite sign as @xmath . As @xmath is
anti-linear this fixes the phase of @xmath . We will denote states
satisfying this phase choice @xmath , and their image under the complex
structure @xmath by @xmath . The overall boundary state, which we will
call the Regge state can then be defined as follows:

###### Definition 4.2 (2d Regge State).

Given an oriented 2-dimensional manifold @xmath with a triangulation
@xmath with triangles @xmath and oriented edges @xmath and a collection
of simplex-wise linear maps @xmath that are orientation preserving with
respect to the orientation on @xmath inherited from the standard
orientation from @xmath by considering @xmath as outward normal, we
obtain a set of edge lengths @xmath and normalized edge vectors @xmath .
If @xmath the @xmath define a simplex-wise flat metric as well as frames
on @xmath . Then we can chose a covering lift of the metric compatible
discrete connection @xmath parallel transporting @xmath between these
frames to an @xmath connection @xmath compatible with the spin
structure. If @xmath are half integer we define the associated Regge
state to be

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (18)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath are coherent states satisfying the phase choice ( 17 )
defined in terms of the covering lift @xmath .

This state is in @xmath . Furthermore we can see that the state we
obtain depends only on the metric and the spin structure ⁴ ⁴ 4 Note that
while the spin structure induces an orientation on the @xmath bundle,
this can induce different orientations on the base manifold. This can be
seen, for example, from the different ways to map the tangent bundle
into the principal @xmath bundle. This induced orientation plays no role
in our analysis and we have a seperately specified orientation on the
manifold. Our edge vectors are based on this orientation, not that of
the bundle. :

###### Lemma 4.3 (2d Regge State Symmetries).

The state @xmath of ( 18 ) is independent of the orientation of the
manifold, the frames and the choice of the @xmath connection. It only
depends on the spin structure on the @xmath bundle and the metric on
@xmath .

###### Proof.

This follows from the symmetries of the intertwiners. In particular if
we change the maps @xmath to @xmath , this would induce the following
transformation on the data we have defined:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is a gauge transformation on the discrete connection @xmath which
can be lifted to a gauge transformation @xmath on the spin connection
@xmath by Lemma A.3 . If the set @xmath satisfies the Regge phase choice
with respect to @xmath then the set @xmath satisfies the Regge phase
choice with respect to the gauge transformed connection @xmath . However
the state @xmath defined with @xmath is the same as the state defined
with @xmath as the group elements @xmath can be absorbed into the
integration over @xmath . The gauge transformation includes the map
@xmath which is orientation reversing on @xmath . Finally the choices of
lift of the @xmath connection differ by @xmath . The group elements
@xmath acting on the representations @xmath change by @xmath . Thus
@xmath changes by @xmath . By the admissibility condition that the sum
of spins at an intertwiner has to be an integer this is equal to @xmath
and again the state is left unchanged.∎

In fact @xmath is spanned by states of this form. This follows from the
fact that states in @xmath have to satisfy the admissibility conditions.
These implement the triangle inequalities on the colours @xmath . Thus
we immediately have a piecewise flat metric on @xmath . Furthermore
every intertwiner in @xmath is proportional to the coherent triangle
made with fitting closing data. The choice of spin structure only
changes the overall state by a sign, thus the Regge states are indeed an
over-complete basis of @xmath .

Finally note that the action of @xmath on @xmath is to change all @xmath
to @xmath . Note that as @xmath satisfy the phase condition in equation
( 17 ), so do the states @xmath . Thus @xmath is a Regge state again.
This is again merely a gauge transformation that does not change the
metric as the @xmath element @xmath also changes all @xmath to @xmath .
It follows that @xmath .

##### 4.4.2 3-Dimensional

The construction for 3-dimensional Regge states operates very similarly.
The key difference is that we interpret the @xmath as the outward
normals of tetrahedra as by Lemma 4.1 . Thus given a 3-dimensional
manifold @xmath with triangulation @xmath we again obtain a metric and
frame on the simplices by a set of maps @xmath .

If the geometry of the triangles @xmath and @xmath does not agree, the
rotational parts of the connecting maps @xmath are not in @xmath and do
not have a straightforward geometric interpretation. We still obtain
four normals @xmath and four areas @xmath per tetrahedron @xmath that,
taken together, satisfy closure. If the @xmath are half integer we can
again take coherent states in the appropriate representations. We then
have coherent boundary states without a specified phase given by:

###### Definition 4.4 (3d Coherent Manifold States).

Let @xmath be an oriented, 3-dimensional manifold with a triangulation
@xmath with tetrahedra @xmath and oriented triangles @xmath and a
collection of simplex-wise linear maps @xmath that are orientation
preserving we obtain a set of areas @xmath and face normals @xmath . If
@xmath is half integer we have coherent manifold states of the form

  -- -- -- ------
           (19)
  -- -- -- ------

This state is again invariant under the gauge transformations @xmath
acting by @xmath . Thus all states arising from @xmath defining the same
simplex-wise geometry differ only by a phase. However, this symmetry now
no longer undoes the orientation choice.

If our maps @xmath satisfy the Regge condition that @xmath and @xmath
have the same geometry, then our connecting maps @xmath are the discrete
metric compatible @xmath connection again. They are again given by the
rotational parts of @xmath and satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This follows as the @xmath are outward facing and the @xmath are
orientation preserving. We again have a lift of the metric compatible
connection to @xmath by @xmath and we can define a geometric phase
choice by ( 17 ) and thus a Regge state:

###### Definition 4.5 (3d Regge States).

Given an oriented 3-dimensional manifold @xmath with a spin structure
and a triangulation @xmath with tetrahedra @xmath and oriented triangles
@xmath and a collection of simplex-wise linear maps @xmath that are
orientation preserving we obtain a set of areas @xmath and face normals
@xmath . If @xmath and the geometry of @xmath and @xmath agree we have a
metric compatible discrete connection. We can choose a lift of this
discrete connection compatible with the spin structure. Then we can
define the 3-dimensional Regge state as

  -- -- -- ------
           (20)
  -- -- -- ------

where @xmath are coherent states satisfying the phase choice ( 17 ) with
respect to the covering lift @xmath .

This state depends only on the metric, the spin-structure and the
orientation:

###### Lemma 4.6 (3d Regge State Symmetries).

The state @xmath of ( 20 ) is independent of the frames and the choice
of the @xmath connection. It only depends on the orientation, spin
structure and metric on @xmath , @xmath .

###### Proof.

This follows from similar arguments as in the 2-dimensional case above.∎

Note that in the 3-dimensional case the action of @xmath on these states
is again to reverse all @xmath . However, in the 3-dimensional case the
@xmath are interpreted as outward normals, thus this action has the same
effect as inverting the orientation of the 3 manifold. Thus @xmath is
the Regge state for the same spin structure and metric but opposite
orientation as @xmath .

The formulation of constraints on @xmath and @xmath , or equivalent
data, which force the geometries of @xmath and @xmath to agree, has
received considerable attention recently (e.g. [ DR10 , DR08 ] ).
Alternatively it has been proposed to directly interpret the
simplex-wise geometries of the states defined in Definition (e.g. [ FS10
] ).

### 5 The Geometry of @xmath

For the 4-dimensional models we will consider, we will need to
understand the geometry of the representation theory of @xmath . To do
so we will consider the Lie algebra @xmath which is isomorphic to @xmath
, the Lie algebra of 4-dimensional rotations. We can understand this Lie
algebra as arising from bivectors. We will then show how it decomposes
into a left and right sector under the action of the Hodge star. This
will allow us to give the representation theory of @xmath in terms of
@xmath representations and define coherent bivectors. Finally we will
give a necessary and sufficient set of conditions for a set of bivectors
to define a geometric 4-simplex @xmath .

#### 5.1 Bivectors

Bivectors in @xmath are elements of @xmath , that is, 2-dimensional
antisymmetric tensors @xmath , @xmath . @xmath is 6-dimensional. We
define the norm of a bivector by @xmath . Bivectors can be written as
linear combinations of so-called simple bivectors, that is, bivectors of
the form @xmath . These have norm @xmath . The Lie algebra @xmath is the
algebra of antisymmetric matrices with Lie product given by the
commutator. The space of bivectors is isomorphic to @xmath by lowering
one of the indices: @xmath . We can give a basis of the Lie algebra
through a basis of bivectors @xmath satisfying @xmath . We then have the
basis @xmath for @xmath , @xmath . It is then easy to calculate the Lie
algebra structure constants:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (21)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

##### 5.1.1 (Anti-)Self Dual Decomposition and Representations

The Hodge star acts naturally on @xmath by @xmath . Its square is @xmath
. It decomposes the space of bivectors into two 3-dimensional subspaces
corresponding to its eigenvalues @xmath . In terms of the basis elements
@xmath it is now immediate that @xmath .

To understand the commutation relations in this space we will first
calculate the commutation relations for @xmath and @xmath . The key
identity is that @xmath where @xmath is the 3-dimensional @xmath and
@xmath . It follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can then immediately read of that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A small calculation shows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This means the @xmath generate an @xmath subgroup. Denoting the north
pole as @xmath we have @xmath , and thus this is the subgroup that
stabilises the pole @xmath . It also shows that with this norm the
length of the bivector is indeed the angle of rotation generated by it.
We introduce the shorthand notation @xmath and @xmath in terms of which
we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Hodge star is invariant under the action of @xmath , thus it allows
us to decompose the lie algebra into two copies. We write @xmath . The
operator @xmath is of course @xmath the projector on the @xmath
eigenbivectors of @xmath and thus should give a seperation of the @xmath
Lie algebra. The commutation relations are indeed simply

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is the decomposition of @xmath into @xmath . We can then in general
write a bivector or Lie algebra element in this basis as @xmath . We
then have @xmath . Note that a simple bivector of the form @xmath we
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A simple bivector orthogonal to @xmath is of the form @xmath . Thus we
also have that for simple bivectors @xmath , and as @xmath is
normalized, we have in general that @xmath . In particular this again
shows that @xmath is the angle of rotation generated by a simple
bivector. The group element generated by a general bivector @xmath in
@xmath is written as @xmath and it covers a group element in @xmath . As
@xmath the @xmath elements stabilising the North pole are of the form
@xmath .

This decomposition also shows that the universal covering group of
@xmath is @xmath . We immediately have the representation theory of
@xmath as a direct product of @xmath representations. A unitary
irreducible representation of @xmath can be labelled by two spins @xmath
, @xmath and is given as the tensor product of the two @xmath irreps.
Given two coherent states we can then define a coherent bivector in the
@xmath representation by @xmath . These are then still eigenstates of
@xmath Lie algebra generators and inherit all the properties of @xmath
coherent states.

The covering of @xmath can be seen explicitly by use of a convenient
diffeomorphism from the sphere @xmath to @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (22)
  -- -------- -- ------

A group element @xmath acts as @xmath . Thus it is for example immediate
that @xmath leaves the north pole invariant.

Note that the parity operation @xmath , which is in @xmath ,
anti-commutes with the Hodge star, that is,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It can then be checked that @xmath .

#### 5.2 Geometric Bivectors

This subsection will pertain to metrics of signature @xmath and @xmath .
In the latter case we will require the bivectors to be spacelike in the
sense that they are orthogonal to timelike normal vectors @xmath , this
will cover all cases occuring in this thesis. We call a set of bivectors
geometric if they are the bivectors of the faces of a geometric
4-simplex @xmath in @xmath . Using @xmath to denote the tetrahedral
faces @xmath of the 4-simplex we denote its outward facing normal
vectors by @xmath . The bivectors can then be written as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -- ------

With @xmath . The bivector @xmath is simple and orthogonal to @xmath and
@xmath and therefore describes the plane of @xmath . By its explicit
normalisation it has the area of the triangular face @xmath . Therefore
it is indeed the geometric bivector associated to this face. This
definition encodes the standard orientation of @xmath in the Hodge star.

Now consider a set of bivectors @xmath satisfying the following list of
geometricity conditions:

-   Simplicity: @xmath such that @xmath .

-   Orientation: @xmath .

-   Closure: @xmath .

-   4d Non-degeneracy: The @xmath with @xmath span @xmath @xmath

Note that simplicity implies that @xmath is indeed simple according to
our definition above and closure together with the simplicity condition
imply that the @xmath , if they span the orthogonal subspace, are the
normals of a geometric tetrahedron orthogonal to @xmath . We then have
the following theorem.

###### Theorem 5.1 (Bivector Reconstruction).

The bivectors @xmath associated to the triangles of a non-degenerate
geometric 4-simplex @xmath satisfy the geometricity conditions.
Conversely a set of bivectors @xmath satisfying the geometricity
conditions define a geometric 4-simplex @xmath , unique up to inversion
and translation, and with @xmath , @xmath

###### Proof.

Due to 4d non-degeneracy, @xmath and @xmath cannot be proportional.
Otherwise @xmath , @xmath and @xmath with @xmath would all lie in the
same 3-dimensional hyperplane and could not span @xmath together with
@xmath .

By the simplicity and orientation conditions the bivectors @xmath are
orthogonal to the normals @xmath , @xmath . Therefore they are of the
form @xmath . Thus they are proportional to the bivectors of a
non-degenerate 4-simplex with outward normals @xmath . As they satisfy a
set of linear relations in closure the proportionality in fact has to be
the same for all bivectors. Thus we can scale the geometric 4-simplex to
match the areas. As the areas are quadratic in the scaling a freedom of
sign remains which is accounted for in @xmath .∎

A stronger version of this theorem, in the sense that the
characterisation of geometricity was done entirely in terms of the
bivectors without referring to the normals, was given in [ BC98 , BC00 ]
. The formulation here is similar to [ FK08 ] . We will furthermore use
the following lemma which characterises the possible departure from
geometricity if we replace the 4d non-degeneracy condition with a weaker
3-dimensional non-degeneracy condition that @xmath span the space
orthogonal to @xmath . The proof given here is identical to that of [
BDF @xmath 09 ] .

###### Lemma 5.2 (Non-degeneracy of the Bivectors).

Given a set of bivectors satisfying simplicity orientation and closure
as well as 3-dimensional non-degeneracy in any non-degenerate metric,
the normals @xmath are either all parallel or three of them are linearly
independent. In the latter case the bivectors satisfy the 4-dimensional
non-degeneracy condition.

###### Proof.

First note that if three of the normals @xmath are proportional to
@xmath then the bivectors @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are orthogonal to
@xmath and by closure so is @xmath . Due to 3-dimensional non-degeneracy
they define a tetrahedron in the plane orthogonal to @xmath . The vector
@xmath is orthogonal to this tetrahedron and thus parallel to @xmath .

In all other cases three of the normals @xmath must be pairwise linearly
independent. The intersection of the hyperplanes @xmath and @xmath and
the intersection of @xmath and @xmath can then not be parallel due to
the 3-dimensional non-degeneracy condition, and thus the set @xmath must
be linearly independent.

Now given these we will construct six linearly independent bivectors
from the @xmath . Take two vectors @xmath and @xmath spanning the plane
of @xmath as well as a vector @xmath , @xmath independent of them in
@xmath and @xmath respectively. Furthermore choose @xmath such that it
lies in @xmath . We then have the five linearly independent bivectors

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As each of these is in a hyperplanes orthogonal to some @xmath ,
3-dimensional non-degeneracy implies that they are all linear
combinations of some @xmath . Together with @xmath they span the entire
space of bivectors.

To show that @xmath can be generated by the @xmath take vectors @xmath
generating the intersection @xmath and an independent vector @xmath in
@xmath . Writing @xmath we have @xmath as otherwise @xmath and @xmath
would coincide. Finally @xmath can always be chosen in such a way that
@xmath .

Then bivector @xmath contains the nonzero term @xmath and the other 5
basis bivectors given above and can again be written in terms of the
@xmath . Thus the @xmath do indeed satisfy the non-degeneracy condition.
∎

### 6 The Geometry of @xmath

In order to work with theories with Lorentz symmetry we need to consider
representations of @xmath . More specifically we will consider the
identity connected component @xmath and its double cover @xmath . That
is, the part of @xmath that takes future pointing normals to future
pointing normals. We will begin again by showing how to obtain the Lie
algebra @xmath from bivectors and then consider a few representations
and their properties. Our presentation here is less complete than in the
other chapters as we don’t want to go into the subtleties related to the
non-compactness of the group. For more background we refer to [ BDF
@xmath 10 ] .

#### 6.1 Bivectors

Whereas the Euclidean metric @xmath provided an isomorphism from the
bivectors to the generators of the Euclidean rotation group @xmath , the
Minkowski metric @xmath (signature @xmath ) provides us with an
isomorphism to the generators of the rotations in Minkowski space @xmath
. We can again give a specific basis for this space through the
bivectors @xmath defined above. The corresponding Lorentzian generators
are then @xmath and the structure constants are given by the same
calculation as in the @xmath case:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (24)
  -- -------- -- ------

While we have a @xmath operator given by @xmath again, it now satisfies
@xmath , and has eigenvalues @xmath . Thus we no longer have the
convenient decomposition of the Lie algebra into left and right parts
unless we complexify the algebra. However, we still have the
decomposition into boosts and rotations. As the spatial indices are
unchanged from the Euclidean case this will again give us the rotation
subgroup:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By the same computation as above we have the following Lie brackets from
( 24 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that the only change to the Euclidean case is the sign for the
boosts, this is the only place where the @xmath component of the metric
enters. Thus the @xmath again generate an @xmath subgroup. It follows
that any unitary representation of the Lorentz group will split into a
tower of irreducibles of @xmath . However, as the Lorentz group is not
compact its unitary representations are infinite dimensional and we will
obtain infinitely many @xmath irreps. We will not work with the unitary
representations but instead refer the reader to [ BDF @xmath 09 ] and
references therein for details.

#### 6.2 Spinors

From the commutation relations above it also follows that we can obtain
a non-unitary representation by setting @xmath . In particular for the
fundamental representation of @xmath this leads to the complex group
generated by all traceless matrices. This is just the group of linear
matrices of determinant 1, @xmath . Thus we have shown that the Lie
algebra associated to bivectors in Minkowski space is indeed that of
@xmath . We can define an action of @xmath on @xmath by using an
isomorphism between @xmath and the space of Hermitian matrices given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This has the property that for @xmath , and @xmath the corresponding
element of the vector representation, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This clearly takes Hermitian matrices to Hermitian matrices. We can now
give a new interpretation to our coherent state vectors @xmath .
Consider the Hermitian matrix @xmath . As we used in the proof of
equation ( 4.1 ) this can be written in the form @xmath . Thus we have
immediately that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

maps spinors to null vectors. In a slight abuse of notation we will
write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows immediately that we also have @xmath . From these two vectors
we can now build a set of bivectors again @xmath

This is in fact consistent as the Hermitian matrix

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

actually generates the @xmath element that covers the @xmath element
generated by @xmath . In fact all boosts are of this form.

Note that the invariance of the epsilon inner product @xmath only relied
on the unit determinant of the matrices, therefore this is also @xmath
invariant. On the other hand @xmath is clearly not. As they are related
by the anti-linear structure @xmath it follows that for @xmath we have
@xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

## Chapter \thechapter The Geometry of 3-Dimensional State Sums

In this chapter we will analyse the geometry of the 3-dimensional state
sum @xmath defined in Definition 3.1 . In particular we will evaluate
@xmath with the geometric boundary states @xmath defined in 4.2 . To
avoid the problems associated with the regularisation of the formal
Definition 3.1 , we will use the evaluation of the state sum as the
evaluation of its boundary spin network given by Theorem 2.4 which is
finite. We will then analyse the large spin behaviour of this evaluation
using stationary phase and show that it has a geometric interpretation
in terms of immersions of the boundary manifold into @xmath .

### 7 Definition of the State Sum

Recall that Theorem 2.4 gave the evaluation of @xmath with a certain
colouring @xmath of the boundary @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is the dual of the boundary triangulation mapped onto the
plane and @xmath is the network evaluation that defines @xmath . We take
the right hand side to define the regularised state sum @xmath . This
implies that we need to take the spin network evaluation defined in
Section 3.2 of the dual of the boundary coloured by the state @xmath .
To give this we will need to give a certain convention for the ordering
at the vertices. This can be obtained by considering the dual network of
a particular mapping of the dual of @xmath onto the plane. We then can
straighten out the network such that every edge is a straight line. If
necessary we can move the vertices slightly to ensure that no vertex is
directly above or below another one. Then we can pull down the vertices
slightly so they all have three legs facing upwards and use the ordering
from left to right at the vertices in the definition of the state @xmath
. The network evaluation is then simply given by contracting the
intertwiners in @xmath according to the network using the epsilon inner
product @xmath . To keep track of the contractions we will label the
vertices with numbers @xmath , such that @xmath if and only if the
vertex dual to @xmath is left of the vertex dual to @xmath . We write
@xmath for the value of @xmath evaluated at the colouring @xmath and
have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (25)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

Where we have introduced the convention

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath satisfy the Regge phase condition ( 17 ) with respect to the
ordering chosen here. We have used the convention @xmath . Note that
@xmath has only one spin structure, so taking into account the
symmetries of the state @xmath given in Lemma 4.3 , the amplitude @xmath
is really defined up to sign in terms of the spins @xmath . The sign is
fixed by the ordering convention.

An immediate consequence of these symmetries is that as @xmath and
@xmath the amplitude @xmath is real.

#### 7.1 Exponential Form of the State Sum

The exponential property of coherent states ( 8 ) allows us to write the
amplitude ( 25 ) in exponential form. Note that the phase condition ( 17
) holds for every factor of the exponential decomposition. Writing
@xmath we thus have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using this in the amplitude @xmath we obtain its exponential form:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (26)
  -- -------- -- ------

with

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (27)
  -- -------- -- ------

@xmath and the logarithms in its definition are only defined up to
factors of @xmath . This is now linear in the spins @xmath , that is
@xmath . Thus the amplitude is now in a form where we can apply
stationary phase analysis to analyse its asymptotic behaviour for large
@xmath . As we are analysing the behaviour of the integral over the
@xmath variables we consider @xmath and @xmath to be fixed boundary
data.

##### 7.1.1 Symmetries of the Action

Keeping @xmath and @xmath fixed, the @xmath dependence of the action (
27 ) allows for two kinds of symmetries:

-   Continuous: The transformation @xmath for all @xmath leaves the
    action invariant.

-   Discrete: The transformation @xmath for @xmath leaves the action
    invariant due to the integrality condition on the spins @xmath .

### 8 Asymptotic Geometry of the State Sum

Given a coherent boundary state @xmath we can write @xmath for the same
state with rescaled spins @xmath . We then want to use stationary phase
analysis on the integral ( 26 ) to analyse the leading order behaviour
of @xmath in @xmath . A brief review of stationary phase methods is
given in Appendix B . To find the leading order contribution we need to
find the critical and stationary points of the action @xmath , that is,
the group elements @xmath such that @xmath is maximal and @xmath . We
will give a geometric characterisation of these points and evaluate the
action @xmath at them.

#### 8.1 Asymptotic Equations of Motion

##### 8.1.1 Critical Points

We begin with analysing the condition that @xmath is maximal. Note first
that as the modulus square of the inner product between two coherent
states,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      ( 10 )
  -- -------- -- --------

is smaller than or equal to @xmath we have that @xmath . We are thus
interested in the cases where it attains this maximum @xmath . If the
boundary data is such that the maximum is smaller than @xmath the
amplitude is exponentially suppressed. It is more convenient to work
with the exponentiated condition. We then obtain that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This implies that @xmath for all @xmath . Noting that @xmath is a
coherent state and using equation ( 10 ) we obtain the following
critical point equations:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (28)
  -- -------- -- ------

In the following we will find it convenient to introduce the shorthand
notation @xmath .

##### 8.1.2 Stationary points

We next give the equations for the variation of the action @xmath . To
do so we will use the fact that the variation of the matrix elements of
the group are given by the Lie algebra. That is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The variation of the action is then

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Using ( 28 ) and the definition of coherent states, together with the
observation that the denominator cancels the phase of the coherent
states, we can easily evaluate these matrix elements:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Alternatively we could also use equation ( 4.1 ) to give the full answer
but we will not need this here.

Now combining these equations we obtain the stationary phase conditions:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore the condition @xmath is simply closure:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (29)
  -- -------- -- ------

#### 8.2 Geometricity

We now can give a geometric interpretation for the solutions @xmath to
equations ( 28 ) and ( 29 ). Note that ( 29 ) is actually a condition on
the @xmath and @xmath only. It is automatically satisfied as the @xmath
and @xmath are defined in terms of the geometry underlying @xmath . Thus
they automatically close. However, this equation is also sufficient to
force the @xmath and @xmath to define a boundary geometry. This shows
that if we had chosen to allow non-geometric boundary data the boundary
geometricity would be forced by the equations of motion.

The interpretation of ( 28 ) is given by the following lemma.

###### Lemma 8.1 (3d Geometricity).

A set of vectors @xmath associated to the edges @xmath of a
triangulation @xmath of the oriented sphere @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

defines a simplex-wise affine linear, continuous and orientation
preserving immersion @xmath of the sphere @xmath up to translations.

###### Proof.

The idea is to define @xmath as the vector associated to the boundary
edge of the immersed triangle @xmath . As @xmath , the restriction
@xmath to @xmath , is required to be affine linear, this fixes @xmath up
to translation. It remains to be shown that the translation parts of
@xmath can be chosen to make @xmath continuous.

To see this first note that as the @xmath are oriented the triangles
@xmath inherit an orientation and @xmath can be seen as the vector
associated to the edge @xmath with orientation inherited from @xmath ,
while @xmath is the same edge vector with orientation inherited from
@xmath , @xmath .

We now chose an arbitrary reference vertex @xmath of the triangulation
and place it at the origin of @xmath : @xmath . Then for any other
vertex @xmath pick an arbitrary collection of edges @xmath that form a
continuous oriented path @xmath between the vertex mapped to the origin
and @xmath . Then define the position of the other vertices by @xmath
with @xmath the vector associated with the appropriately oriented edges.
Any two paths @xmath and @xmath differ by a closed path, and on the
sphere all closed paths are the sum of boundaries of disks. Closure is
just the condition that the sum of @xmath along the boundary of a disk
is @xmath , and therefore @xmath is independent of the paths chosen.

The map @xmath then immediately extends to the edges and triangles of
@xmath . It is unique up to translation of the reference vertex @xmath .
A change of reference vertex merely induces a further translation.∎

This lemma applied to @xmath immediately gives us an immersion @xmath of
the boundary geometry encoded in our state @xmath . On the other hand
every immersion @xmath defining the same geometry on @xmath gives us a
solution to the equations ( 28 ). To see this note that @xmath of the
Definition 4.2 of @xmath is defined to be simplex-wise linear. The
rotation part of the map @xmath then maps the vectors @xmath to the
@xmath of the immersion. Thus if the geometries of @xmath and @xmath
agree, the rotation part of @xmath defines an @xmath element @xmath .
This now solves ( 28 ) as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus we have the following corollary:

###### Corollary 8.2 (Classification of the Solutions).

The simplex-wise linear, orientation preserving immersions up to
translation of the triangulated sphere @xmath with geometry that defined
by @xmath , @xmath satisfying closure are in one to one correspondence
with the solutions to equation ( 28 ).

Note that the requirement that @xmath be in @xmath fixes a normal
“outward” direction on the immersed surface @xmath in terms of the
fiducial normal direction to @xmath used in Definition 4.2 . This is
given explicitly by @xmath .

To fully understand the geometry of our solutions we need to connect it
to the geometry of our state. In particular we can see that @xmath
relates the boundary connection @xmath to the dihedral connection @xmath
of the immersion @xmath . We define the dihedral connection as @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

That is, it is the connection that maps the tangent spaces of the
immersed surface @xmath into each other. We then have the following
commuting diagram:

  -- -- -- ------
           (31)
  -- -- -- ------

This follows from the various definitions and can be checked explicitly,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This tells us that we can consider @xmath as a gauge transformation that
takes the boundary geometry connection associated to @xmath to the
dihedral connection associated to the immersion @xmath . To complete the
geometric characterisation of the solutions @xmath we have to lift this
analysis to @xmath . Note first that using the spin structure on @xmath
we can lift @xmath to an @xmath connection @xmath in the same way as we
lifted @xmath up to the sign ambiguity @xmath .

This means using Lemma A.3 we immediately have the commuting diagram:

  -- -- -- ------
           (32)
  -- -- -- ------

##### 8.2.1 Symmetries of the Solutions

As the action ( 27 ), giving rise to the equations ( 28 ) and ( 29 ),
has the symmetries discussed in Section 7.1.1 , we will describe how
these symmetries act on the solutions. Note first that by corollary 8.2
the solutions are in one-to-one correspondence with immersions @xmath
with the same boundary geometry as that induced by the @xmath and are
then given by @xmath . The continuous symmetries act by @xmath for
@xmath and it follows immediately that the symmetry acts on the
associated immersion by @xmath .

Note that given @xmath we can obtain a new solution @xmath with the same
boundary geometry not just through @xmath rotations but through @xmath
as well. In particular if @xmath defines a solution then so does @xmath
. This is not a symmetry of the action, thus we obtain a genuinely new
solution this way.

Finally the discrete symmetries simply change the signs @xmath in ( 32
).

##### 8.2.2 Immersible Geometries and the Generalised Regge Action

Without giving proofs we will briefly consider the type of geometries
and actions consistent with the geometricity condition derived above.
Consider an arbitrary interior triangulation @xmath of @xmath inducing
the boundary triangulation @xmath of @xmath . We call a simplex-wise
flat metric on @xmath immersible in @xmath if there is a simplex-wise
isometric, continuous immersion of @xmath into @xmath . Clearly all flat
metrics are immersible, however there is a much wider class of
immersible surfaces. Given an immersion of the surface triangulation we
can extend it to an immersion of the interior triangulation simply by
placing the vertices of the interior triangulation anywhere in @xmath .
The pullback of the metric to the interior under this immersion will
then obviously be immersible. Whereas flat metrics can be characterised
by the fact that the sum of dihedral angles around an edge equals @xmath
,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the immersible surfaces can be characterised by the fact that there is a
set of signs @xmath associated to the 3-simplices such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the case of the immersible metric defined by the pullback of the
standard metric along an immersion, the signs are given by the pullback
of the orientation relative to a fiducial standard orientation on @xmath
.

As an immersion of the manifold induces an immersion of the boundary
geometry our geometricity theorem tells us that the boundary geometry
encoded in @xmath has to be the boundary of an immersible geometry for
critical points to exist.

The Regge Action is the action of discretised GR on a triangulated
manifold. Its solutions are the flat metrics. It is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On solutions it is zero except at the boundary. We then define the
generalised Regge actions as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath and @xmath . Every immersible metric is a solution to one of
the generalised Regge actions. On solutions its only non-zero
contribution is again given by the boundary terms and thus depends only
on the immersed boundary geometry.

#### 8.3 The Regge Action of an Immersed Surface

Taking the discusion of the preceding subsection as motivation we will
define the Regge action for an oriented, immersed surface @xmath
described by a set of vectors @xmath directly. We will call the
normalized vector @xmath . For a convex polyhedron the boundary Regge
action is defined as @xmath where @xmath is the dihedral angle defined
by @xmath and @xmath . As we don’t have convexity we cannot confine the
range of dihedral angles. To fix the sign of the dihedral angle we will
instead use the orientation on the surface and the dihedral connection
@xmath . This has to be of the form @xmath where @xmath are the
generators of @xmath , and the spin @xmath generators of @xmath . We
take this as the definition of the dihedral angles. As @xmath this
definition satisfies @xmath . The Regge action is then again simply

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If the polyhedron is convex and the orientation on the surface is that
induced through the outward facing normals @xmath , it furthermore
follows that @xmath . Thus this definition agrees with the standard one
in this case.

Note that the oriented surface obtained through parity @xmath has the
opposite dihedral angles as the definition of @xmath in equation ( 8.2 )
is invariant under parity @xmath . Thus we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and thus that @xmath , and the boundary Regge action changes sign under
parity.

#### 8.4 The Action

We can now evaluate the action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      ( 27 )
  -- -------- -- --------

on the solutions in terms of their geometry. We will show in particular
that it is simply equal to the Regge action of the immersed surface.

To do so first note that for any covering lift @xmath of the dihedral
connection have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with the signs those of the commuting diagram ( 32 ).

Now note that @xmath is a coherent state @xmath , and therefore it is a
@xmath eigenstate of @xmath . Now @xmath is a covering lift of @xmath
compatible with the spin structure. As the discrete symmetries of the
action range over the full set of signs @xmath we can then evaluate the
matrix elements appearing in the action at the point where @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we have used the Regge phase choice in the first line, the
commuting diagram in the second line and the explicit form of the
dihedral connection in the last. Thus we finally obtain that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (33)
  -- -------- -- ------

#### 8.5 The Asymptotic Formula

We can now combine the analysis of the preceding sections to give the
leading order behaviour of @xmath . We write @xmath at each critical
point. To apply the asymptotic analysis of Section B it is necessary to
factor out the symmetries of the action. We can easily do so by fixing
one of the group elements @xmath to be @xmath . We are then left with
@xmath points related by the discrete symmetries. As these are isolated
from each other we do not need to fix them. However, it is possible for
the immersion of a surface to allow flexing, that is, continuous
deformations that do not change the boundary geometry. If we have such a
case and the space of flexing solutions is a submanifold of the
configuration space we call it @xmath and call it a flexifold. Note that
the Regge action is constant on these flexifolds. In this case we have
to apply the generalized theorem of Appendix B . We call @xmath the
scaling induced by the @xmath integrations we have after fixing the
continuous symmetry, and @xmath the dimension of the maximal dimension
flexifold. We thus have:

###### Theorem 8.3 (Asymptotic Behaviour of the Ponzano Regge
Amplitude).

If the boundary geometry induced by @xmath on the @xmath triangulated
sphere @xmath allows no flexible immersions we have that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (34)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the Hessian of @xmath evaluated at the critical point
associated to @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If there are no immersions of the boundary geometry and the sum is empty
the amplitude is exponentially suppressed and we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If the boundary geometry induced by @xmath on the @xmath triangulated
sphere @xmath allows flexible immersions, and the immersions form a
manifold @xmath we have that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (35)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the sum runs only over manifolds @xmath with dimension @xmath ,
and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here the integration measure and @xmath are defined as in Appendix B .

## Chapter \thechapter The Geometry of Euclidean 4-Dimensional State Sum
Amplitudes

In this chapter we will analyse the amplitudes for the 4-dimensional
Ooguri model. As a corollary we can then easily give the asymptotics of
the models of [ ELPR08 , EPR08 , FK08 , LS08 , LS07 ] mentioned at the
end of Section 3.2 . The Ooguri model is the state sum corresponding to
@xmath -theory. As for @xmath , its amplitude is given by the graphical
evaluation of a spin network dual to the surface triangulation, in this
case that of a 4-simplex. The evaluation of this spin network is known
in recoupling theory as the @xmath symbol as we have ten edges that can
be coloured by spins @xmath and five intertwiners, a basis of which can
also be coloured by spins. We will colour the @xmath symbol with a
coherent boundary state @xmath and analyse its large spin behaviour. The
key complication compared to the last chapter will be the significantly
more tricky analysis of geometricty.

This will allow us to give a straightforward evaluation of the geometry
arising in various new spin foam models proposed recently.

### 9 Definition of the @xmath Amplitude

The 4-simplex amplitude of the Ooguri model is, up to sign, the @xmath
symbol which is, again up to sign, the contraction of intertwiners
according to the combinatorics of a 4-simplex, see e.g. Figure 19 .

If the colouring of the spin network is given by a coherent boundary
state @xmath of Definition 4.4 we call its evaluation @xmath . This can
then be given explicitly again by contracting @xmath with the epsilon
inner product @xmath . We use an arbitrary labelling of the five
vertices of the network @xmath and we obtain:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (36)
  -- -------- -- ------

Here @xmath is a function of @xmath , and its form depends on the
particular representation of the diagram chosen, as well as on the
arbitrary ordering of the vertices. We will again abbreviate

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the exponential properties of coherent states this immediately
takes on exponential form:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (37)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

In the case of a Regge state @xmath of Definition 4.5 using the same
ordering @xmath , we again can use the coherent states @xmath , @xmath
with phase fixed by the boundary connection @xmath and we have:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (38)
  -- -------- -- ------

with

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (39)
  -- -------- -- ------

The action is again only defined up to @xmath . We can also define an
action for the more general case of a coherent boundary state:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (40)
  -- -------- -- ------

This has the disadvantage of not only depending on the direction @xmath
associated to the coherent state but also on its phase. Nevertheless we
will call @xmath and @xmath the boundary data for both actions. Both of
these actions are again linear under rescaling of the spins @xmath and
we can use stationary phase techniques in the same way as in the last
chapter.

##### 9.0.1 Symmetries of the Action

The symmetries of the actions are again the same discrete and continuous
symmetries as in the 3-dimensional case:

-   Continuous: The transformation @xmath for all @xmath leaves the
    actions invariant.

-   Discrete: The transformation @xmath for @xmath leaves the actions
    invariant due to the integrality condition on the spins @xmath .

### 10 Asymptotic Geometry of the @xmath Amplitude

Going forward we will assume throughout that the tetrahedra in our
boundary states @xmath are non-degenerate. The calculation of the
asymptotic equations proceeds completely analogously to the last
chapter.

#### 10.1 Asymptotic Equations of Motion

By the same calculation as in Section 8.1 we obtain the critical point
equations

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (41)
  -- -------- -- ------

and the stationary point equations evaluated when the critical point
equations hold

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (42)
  -- -------- -- ------

Note that this calculation does not depend on the arbitrary phase of the
coherent states @xmath .

#### 10.2 Geometric Interpretation, General State

Even though the critical and stationary point equations have remained
the same the combinatorics of the data is now given by a genuinely
4-dimensional object, the 4-simplex, instead of a triangulated
2-surface. Interpreting the equations as a 3-dimensional geometry can be
done but is unenlightening. Rather we will look for interpretations that
are specific to the 4-simplex. In the most general case of the coherent
boundary state @xmath this is done by the following lemma:

###### Lemma 10.1 (Moduli Space of Constant b-fields on a 4-simplex).

The space of constant @xmath Lie algebra-valued 2-forms @xmath on an
oriented 4-simplex is parametrized by their surface integrals on the
oriented faces @xmath of the 4-simplex,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These surface integrals satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Conversely every set of vectors satisfying these conditions occurs as
the surface integrals of a Lie algebra-valued 2-form.

###### Proof.

For the proof simple counting shows that both, the space of Lie
algebra-valued 2-forms and the space of vectors satisfying the equations
of the lemma are 18-dimensional linear spaces. The integrals @xmath form
a linear map from the space of Lie algebra-valued two forms to the space
of such vectors. Its kernel is equal to the 2-form that is identically
@xmath . Thus the map is a vector space isomorphism and the lemma
follows.∎

By setting @xmath this immediately gives us an interpretation consistent
with the idea that the amplitude under consideration is a quantisation
of @xmath theory. The continuous symmetry acts as a rotation of the “
@xmath -frame” on the 4-simplex and reduces the the configuration spaces
to 15 dimensions. However we cannot easily classify how many such @xmath
-fields are compatible with a given set of boundary data @xmath , @xmath
. To do so we will now consider the special case when the boundary state
is Regge.

#### 10.3 Geometric Interpretation, Regge state

##### 10.3.1 Solutions from Geometry

As the geometry of a Regge state is that of a closed metric 3-manifold
triangulated as the surface of a 4-simplex we can classify the states
according to these geometries:

###### Lemma 10.2 (4-Simplex Boundary Geometries).

Every 3-sphere triangulated with the boundary triangulation of the
4-simplex and equipped with a simplex-wise flat non-degenerate Euclidean
3-geometry occurs as the boundary of a 4-simplex with flat 4d Euclidean,
4d Minkowski, or degenerate 3d Euclidean metric.

###### Proof.

To see this take some fiducial 4-simplex with edge vectors @xmath . Note
that given a 4-simplex with constant metric @xmath on it, @xmath can be
evaluated using only the pullback of the metric to the boundary. Thus
the boundary geometry determines the 10 numbers @xmath and the map
@xmath is linear and has zero kernel and is thus a vector space
isomorphism. Finally note that the @xmath uniquely determine the
boundary geometry as they determine all the edge lengths.

As the metric on the boundary simplices is obtained by projecting onto
the boundary tetrahedra and these have an Euclidean metric we can have
at most one timelike or null direction in the metric. Thus we have the
lemma. ∎

We can then obtain solutions for the critical point equations from the
linear immersions of these metric geometries into flat space. We again
call such an immersion @xmath . It is an affine linear map from the
abstract 4-simplex to @xmath , and it induces a metric and orientation
by pulling back either the Minkowski or the Euclidean metric and the
standard orientation. By Lemma 10.2 every Regge state corresponds to a
flat geometric 4-simplex. Now note that every geometry on @xmath with at
most one timelike direction can be obtained from the pullback of the
Euclidean or Minkowski metric. Thus there always exists an immersion
@xmath that induces the same geometry on the boundary as the @xmath
defining the Regge state. From now on we will consider the case where
the boundary data is that of a Euclidean 4-simplex and the immersion is
into Euclidean space. It will turn out that this is sufficient to fully
classify the solutions.

We will find it convenient to again extend the @xmath to maps @xmath
into @xmath . We do so by identifying the plane orthogonal to @xmath ,
@xmath , and equipped with the orientation inherited by considering
@xmath outward, with @xmath and its standard orientation, and using
@xmath to map into this subspace, that is, @xmath . Thus @xmath is a
tetrahedron orthogonal to @xmath with outward normals in @xmath given by
@xmath and bivectors

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (43)
  -- -------- -- ------

where we have used that @xmath as shown in Section 5 . Note that the
stationary and critical point equations are again only equations for the
@xmath elements covered by the @xmath variables.

Note that as described in Section 5 , two @xmath elements @xmath combine
into a @xmath element @xmath . We write @xmath for the @xmath element
covered by them and @xmath for the corresponding element in @xmath . As
the @xmath action happens by adjoint we have that @xmath . Note that
bivectors are actually only sensitive to the @xmath action. We then have
the following lemma.

###### Lemma 10.3 (Solutions from Immersed 4-Simplices).

A 4-simplex @xmath immersed into Euclidean @xmath with boundary geometry
that of the Regge state gives two solutions to the critical and
stationary point equations ( 41 ) and ( 42 ) @xmath . If the orientation
induced on the boundary of @xmath by @xmath is the same as the one used
in the Regge state, the rotational part of @xmath is orientation
preserving and we have

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (44)
  -- -------- -- ------

Otherwise @xmath , where @xmath is parity, is orientation preserving and
we have

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (45)
  -- -------- -- ------

In both cases the right-hand side means the rotational part of the
affine map. The bivectors of @xmath are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath in the first case and @xmath in the second. The outward
normals of the immersed 4-simplex are given by @xmath

###### Proof.

By Theorem 5.1 the bivectors @xmath satisfy closure and orientation. If
the orientations agree, the map ( 44 ) maps the geometric tetrahedron of
the boundary state onto the geometric tetrahedron of the 4-simplex and
thus maps its bivectors ( 43 ) to the geometric ones. If they disagree
they map the tetrahedron with @xmath inward normals to the boundary
tetrahedra of the 4-simplex, accounting for the factor @xmath . Putting
the form of the @xmath into the orientation equation of Theorem 5.1
immediately shows that the @xmath solve ( 41 ) and ( 42 ). As @xmath and
the orientations were chosen with @xmath as outwards to @xmath the form
of the outward normals @xmath also immediately follows.∎

It is possible that these solutions can be related by the symmetries.
Say @xmath . In this case we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus if the two solutions are related by symmetries all normal vectors
are parallel to each other. Conversely if the @xmath are all parallel
then there is a @xmath that has @xmath and @xmath . This implies that
this group element is in the diagonal subgroup and thus that @xmath ,
that is they are related by symmetry.

We will now further discuss the 3-dimensional geometry one obtains in
this case. Without loss of generality we will assume that the solution
has @xmath . Then the solution Lemma 10.3 gives us is of the form @xmath
. Consider the rotated tetrahedra @xmath . Note that the outward normals
of these tetrahedra do not satisfy orientation but instead @xmath . This
follows as the bivectors satisfy orientation and these are built with
the “outward” normals @xmath . That is, in this immersion of the
4-simplex into a 3-dimensional hyperplane we have some of the tetrahedra
facing “downward” and the rest “upward”. Note that the downward facing
one are not 3-dimensional rotations of the tetrahedra @xmath as the
4-dimensional rotation in the solution turns them “upside down”. Instead
they are related by rotation to the tetrahedra @xmath which have @xmath
as inward normals. This can be seen geometrically by looking at the 1-4
Pachner move in diagram 11 . There is one large tetrahedron and four
small tetrahedra inside it. Where the small and the large tetrahedra are
glued their outward normals are parallel rather than antiparallel.
Taking the small tetrahedra as downward, rotating them up in four
dimensions around the face on which they are glued to the large
terahedron creates a four pointed star. This is equivalent to flipping
them along the triangle on which they are glued.

##### 10.3.2 Geometry from Solutions

Crucially we can now go the other way and reconstruct a geometry given
solutions. In particular Theorem 5.1 tells us that given two solutions
@xmath , @xmath not related by any of the continuous symmetries, we
obtain an embedded 4-simplex @xmath as the bivectors defined by @xmath
satisfy all the conditions on geometric bivectors. This is immediate for
simplicity, as they are orthogonal to @xmath , orientation, which is our
critical point equations and closure. In Lemma 5.2 it was furthermore
shown that either all normals are parallel, in which case by the
discussion in the preceding chapter the solutions @xmath , @xmath have
to be related by symmetry, or we have to have full non-degeneracy. Thus
two solutions reconstruct an embedded 4-simplex up to inversion.

We will see later that three solutions cannot occur. This leaves the
case where we only have one solution. We already saw in the last section
that one solution occurs when the boundary data is that of a 3d
Euclidean 4-simplex. We thus need to show that it doesn’t occur
otherwise, that is, that no solutions exist for Lorentzian boundary
data. We do this by giving a duality transformation that takes any
solution into a second one and show that if the second solution is
related to the first by symmetry we are in the case of the 3-dimensional
Euclidean 4-simplex.

###### Lemma 10.4 (Second Solution from Involution).

Given a solution @xmath of ( 41 ) and the boundary connection @xmath
there always exists a solution @xmath with

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (46)
  -- -------- -- ------

If @xmath and @xmath are related by symmetries we have the case of a
3-dimensional Euclidean 4-simplex.

###### Proof.

Without loss of generality consider the case @xmath . This can always be
done using the symmetries of the 3d Regge state given in Lemma 4.6 . The
tetrahedra @xmath are now glued around @xmath in a star shape. Now given
a solution @xmath use the continuous symmetries to set @xmath . Now
equation ( 46 ) reads:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that from @xmath we have @xmath . It follows that @xmath , that is,
@xmath are rotations around @xmath such that @xmath . Now note further
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are all orthogonal to the edge
@xmath of tetrahedron @xmath . This is because we have chosen a
configuration for which the Regge gluing is already satisfied and thus
@xmath is parallel to @xmath which is orthogonal to @xmath . Now using
the shorthand @xmath we write the critical equation @xmath . Clearly the
vectors @xmath obtained by reflecting @xmath along @xmath still satisfy
this equation. As @xmath is obtained from @xmath by rotating it out of
the plane @xmath by a rotation around another vector in that plane,
@xmath can be obtained by rotating around the same vector with a
negative angle, that is, by the inverse of the rotation. It follows that
@xmath is indeed an alternative solution to the critical equations. The
full form of the involution in the lemma reduces to this in a particular
gauge and is gauge invariant and therefore has to hold as stated ⁵ ⁵ 5
For a fully gauge invariant and thoroughly incomprehensible proof see [
BFH10 ] . .

We then need to show that if the resulting second solution is gauge
related to the first we have the case of a 4-simplex immersed in @xmath
.

Taking the gauge fixed form of the equations we can see that in this
case we have to have @xmath and thus @xmath or the rotation by @xmath
around @xmath . In the latter case define @xmath as @xmath . Then use
the symmetries of the action with @xmath and consider the solution
@xmath for some lift @xmath . This rotation now has the property that it
leaves @xmath invariant and maps the outward normals of the tetrahedra
to @xmath and @xmath . This is exactly the structure of normals of a
4-simplex immersed in 3d Euclidean space.∎

##### 10.3.3 Action of the Symmetries on the Solutions

Recall that for any solution @xmath the symmetries act as @xmath . Given
a pair of solutions @xmath , @xmath not related by the symmetries we
thus have @xmath . Given the associated non-degenerate immersion @xmath
it is immediate that this symmetry gives a solution associated to the
immersion

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Conversely we can act with any element of @xmath to obtain a new
solution @xmath . This way we obtain all pairs of solutions related by
the continuous symmetries.

Additionally, we will obtain solutions not related by the symmetries of
the action if we act with an element of the non-identity connected
component of @xmath , e.g. parity @xmath . As the pullback of the
orientation under @xmath is the inverse of the orientation pulled back
by @xmath this induces the transformation @xmath . Remember that the
bivectors of @xmath were given by @xmath , and @xmath switches the
self-dual and anti-self-dual parts of the bivector. Thus the solution
associated to @xmath has @xmath and @xmath .

#### 10.4 Classification of Solutions

We can now classify the solutions to the equations ( 41 ) and ( 42 ):

###### Theorem 10.5 (Classification of Solutions Euclidean 4d).

The equations ( 41 ) and ( 42 ) with data @xmath , @xmath arising from a
coherent boundary state @xmath with non-degenerate tetrahedra allow
zero, one or two solutions up to symmetries. If they allow one solution
only this solution corresponds to a constant @xmath -valued 2-form on
the 4-simplex. If they allow two solutions @xmath is necessarily
proportional to a Regge state @xmath . The equations arising from a
Regge state allow two solutions up to symmetries if its boundary
geometry is that of a Euclidean 4-simplex, one solution up to symmetries
if it is the boundary geometry of a 4-simplex immersed in 3d, and none
if it is the boundary geometry of a Lorentzian 4-simplex.

In the first case the space of ordered pairs of @xmath solutions is in
1-1 correspondence to the space of immersions @xmath of the 4-simplex
@xmath into @xmath that induce the same boundary geometry on the
4-simplex as @xmath , up to translation and inversion. In the second
case it is in correspondence to the immersions into @xmath .

The ordered pair of @xmath solutions is, up to a spin lift sign, in one
to one correspondence with 4-simplex immersions up to translation.

The correspondence is given by taking @xmath as defined by equations (
44 ) and ( 45 ).

###### Proof.

The interpretation of the single solution is established by Lemma 10.1 .
Lemma 5.2 shows that two solutions not related by the symmetry satisfy
non-degeneracy and thus reconstruct a 4-simplex. Therefore two solutions
exist if and only if the boundary data is that of a Regge manifold, then
the coherent boundary state is proportional to a Regge state.

For a Regge state, given any solution @xmath , Lemma 10.4 gives us a
second solution @xmath not related by the symmetries to @xmath or
implies that @xmath arises from an immersion @xmath of the 4-simplex
into @xmath .

In the former case, Lemma 5.2 tells us that we have full non-degeneracy
and Theorem 5.1 give us an embedding @xmath of the 4-simplex.

Given a third solution @xmath we could obtain further immersions @xmath
, but as it has the same geometry as @xmath , it is related to @xmath by
an @xmath rotation and thus to @xmath or @xmath by an @xmath rotation.
This induces an @xmath symmetry relating @xmath to one of the existing
solutions. Thus there can be no more than two solutions not related by
the symmetries. There are two exactly if the boundary data is that of a
non-degenerate 4-simplex, one if it is the boundary geometry of a
4-simplex immersed in 3 dimensions, and none otherwise.

Now given an immersion @xmath inducing the same boundary data, Lemma
10.3 gives us an ordered pair of solutions @xmath and @xmath . It
follows by the discussion of the symmetries that by acting with @xmath
we obtain @xmath providing all solutions @xmath related to @xmath by
symmetry, and by acting with the non-identity connected component of
@xmath we obtain all solutions @xmath related to the ordered pair @xmath
by the symmetries. On the other hand @xmath also gives us all immersions
@xmath defining the same boundary geometry. Thus the space of immersions
is isomorphic to the space of solutions to ( 41 ) and ( 42 ) up to
inversions and translations. Given @xmath solutions the requirement that
@xmath be outward fixes the inversion, too. The @xmath solutions
correspond to two @xmath solutions up to a spin lifting sign. ∎

#### 10.5 Regge State, Boundary Connection and Action

To fully understand the geometric interpretation of the solutions @xmath
we will again show that they occur as the gauge transformations of a
boundary geometry. For a 4-simplex @xmath in @xmath we can again define
a dihedral connection @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus we have in particular

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and writing @xmath for the vector outward to @xmath in the 3-dimensional
plane @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This implies that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (47)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the dihedral angle. This follows as @xmath generates the
rotations leaving the plane of @xmath invariant and @xmath is the angle
of rotation between @xmath and @xmath . We can then check by explicit
calculation that the rotation angle with the choices made is between
@xmath and @xmath rather than between @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Thus with the definitions as given @xmath is indeed positive.

Note that Lemma 10.3 gives us not just an @xmath element but actually a
full @xmath element @xmath , and that the covering lift @xmath of @xmath
gives us a full @xmath element @xmath . Being diagonal this satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By definition it also satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

. We then obtain the following @xmath commuting diagram:

  -- -- -- ------
           (49)
  -- -- -- ------

Fixing the lift of either the self-dual or the anti-self-dual part of an
@xmath element fixes the lift to @xmath . Next note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a covering lift of @xmath compatible with the spin structure and we
again have by Lemma A.3 that any @xmath covering @xmath is related by a
sign @xmath to the gauge transformation taking the discrete @xmath
connection @xmath to the discrete @xmath connection @xmath . Thus we
have:

  -- -- -- ------
           (50)
  -- -- -- ------

This again allows us to immediately evaluate the action @xmath for a
solution associated to a particular immersion. We consider the first
element @xmath of the ordered pair that corresponds to an immersion to
be associated to it. We then again look at the solution where @xmath in
diagram 50 , all other solutions being related to this one by symmetry.
Then we can evaluate the matrix elements entering the action:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (51)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where we have used the commuting diagram in the first step, equation (
4.4.1 ) in the second, and the fact that the coherent states @xmath are
eigenvectors of the Lie algebra elements @xmath defining the lift of
@xmath with eigenvalues @xmath , and @xmath in the last.

Thus we obtain

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (52)
  -- -------- -- ------

Note that as the action @xmath depends on the arbitrary phases for the
state @xmath , we do not give an asymptotic form for it here.

If the boundary geometry is that of a 3-dimensional 4-simplex we only
have one solution related by the symmetries. In that case the @xmath are
@xmath or @xmath as the case @xmath only occurs at the boundary of a set
of 4-simplices the sum of @xmath at this boundary has to sum to an
integer and the action is equal to a multiple of @xmath .

#### 10.6 The Asymptotic Formula

Combining all the preceding discussion we can again give the full
asymptotic formula now by fixing the continuous symmetry. We write
@xmath evaluated for a critical point. We then obtain

###### Theorem 10.6 (Asymptotic Behaviour of the 15j symbol for Regge
states).

Let @xmath be a Regge state with non-degenerate tetrahedra and @xmath be
the same state with spin @xmath . We write @xmath for the Hessian of
@xmath evaluated at an immersion with @xmath . Then if the boundary
geometry induced by @xmath on the @xmath is that of a Euclidean
4-simplex in 4 dimensions we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (53)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

If the geometry induced is 3d Euclidean we have

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (54)
  -- -------- -- ------

If the geometry is 4d Lorentzian we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These are all possible cases.

For general coherent boundary states we have that either the state is
proportional to a Regge state or it allows only one solution. Thus the
amplitude is either exponentially suppressed or proportional to the one
for the 3d Euclidean case.

### 11 The Asymptotics of EPRL-FK Type Amplitudes

The amplitudes of the spin foam models proposed in [ ELPR08 , EPR08 ,
FK08 ] are based on the square of the @xmath symbol. Therefore our
analysis of the @xmath also allows us to describe the geometry and
asymptotics of these models.

There are three types of models. For the first two the 4-simplex
amplitude is given simply by the square of the @xmath with one of the
factors rescaled by a factor @xmath .

The first type of amplitude is given simply by the square of the @xmath
symbol

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (55)
  -- -------- -- ------

Both the EPRL and FK models for parameter @xmath , and the EPR model
which has @xmath (i.e., @xmath ), are of this type.

The second type of model has 4-simplex amplitude given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (56)
  -- -------- -- ------

and includes the FK model with parameter @xmath , and for @xmath , the
FK model without a parameter.

The third model, covering the case of the EPRL model for @xmath is not
given directly in terms of the @xmath but by inserting the state @xmath
into the lowest weight representation of @xmath . This can be
accomplished by an integration over a new set of coherent states as
described below.

Note that in the literature these models are usually written as
functions of @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . The possible values of
@xmath and @xmath , @xmath and thus @xmath are restricted as the state
sum is identically zero unless @xmath takes on half integer values.

This formulation of the models was how the FK model [ FK08 ] was
initially defined, and for the EPRL model this formulation was developed
in [ BDF @xmath 09 ] .

#### 11.1 The Exponential Form of EPRL-FK Type Amplitudes

The exponential form of the 4-simplex amplitudes for the models without
complex conjugation are then given by

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

For the models with complex conjugation, the @xmath -simplex amplitudes
read

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

For the third type of model we have

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (59)
  -- -------- -- ------

The intermediate integrations have the effect of inserting the state
@xmath into the lowest weight subspace of the Clebsch-Gordon
decomposition of the @xmath representation @xmath .

The corresponding actions can be written easily in terms of the @xmath
action ( 40 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The equations governing the stationary phase analysis of the first two
models are identical and are simply closure ( 42 ) and two copies of (
41 ):

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (61)
  -- -------- -- ------

The third type has the equivalent set of:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (62)
  -- -------- -- ------

Therefore the geometric analysis of equations ( 42 ) and ( 41 ) applies
immediately to these models. Furthermore, for the first two models the
asymptotics are simply given by the product of the asymptotics of the
@xmath symbol. Due to the presence of the intermediate integrations the
determinant of the Hessian entering the asymptotics of the third type of
model will not be the product of the determinants of @xmath Hessians.
However the action evaluated at the critical points is just the sum of
two @xmath . This is because at the critical points the @xmath differ
from the @xmath by a phase only, however the amplitude does not depend
on the phase of the @xmath and therefore we can choose @xmath at the
critical points and the extra term in the @xmath drops out, reducing it
to @xmath . Therefore going forward we will only consider the first two
types of models. The Hessian of the third type is given explicitly in [
BDF @xmath 09 ] .

##### 11.1.1 Coherent Boundary States

In general the critical point configurations can again be understood as
constant @xmath -valued 2-forms on the 4-simplex given in Lemma 10.1 .
If two different solutions exist we are in the case of the Regge state
therefore for coherent boundary states that do not admit a Regge state
we have two copies of the same @xmath -valued 2-form, possibly presented
in different gauges in the two different factors.

As we are free to choose the phase in the coherent states the only
interesting part of the asymptotics is the scaling. For the first two
types of models this is obtained by multiplying two copies of the
asymptotics of a single @xmath scaled by @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (63)
  -- -------- -- ------

Here @xmath is the Hessian of @xmath evaluated on the critical points
with unscaled spins given by @xmath . As the Hessian is linear in the
@xmath and 12-dimensional, the determinant evaluated at the critical
point @xmath differs by @xmath from that evaluated at @xmath . This
accounts for the factor @xmath .

For the third type of model the above formula changes only by replacing
the modulus of the Hessian by the square root of the Hessian of the
action @xmath .

##### 11.1.2 Regge States

For Regge states the solutions are again classified by the immersions of
4-simplices with the same boundary geometry. We will look at the cases
of a 4-simplex immersed in 3d and in 4d separately.

###### 4d Euclidean.

Up to symmetries we have two solutions to the critical point equations.
Taking two solutions not related by symmetries and calling them @xmath
according to whether @xmath we have that the bivectors of the immersed
4-simplices corresponding to these solutions can be written in terms of
@xmath as @xmath and @xmath .

As before, given two inequivalent solutions @xmath they necessarily
correspond to the self-dual and anti-self-dual parts of geometric
4-simplex bivectors given by @xmath and @xmath .

These combine to four solutions to the stationary and critical point
equations ( 11.1 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The @xmath and @xmath solutions are in some sense analogous to the
solutions for non-geometric boundary data, as the solution is just the
double of a pure @xmath solution.

The full asymptotics is then given by the sum over these four critical
points. The actions can be evaluated straightforwardly using the result
that @xmath evaluates to @xmath . Then with @xmath and @xmath defined as
above we have

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (64)
  -- -------- -- ------

for the models without complex conjugation and by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (65)
  -- -------- -- ------

for those with complex conjugation. As the amplitudes leading to these
are rescaled squares of the @xmath @xmath symbol this is of course just
the rescaled square of the @xmath asymptotics. @xmath is the Hessian of
@xmath evaluated on the critical points @xmath . For the third type we
would again obtain a different, more complicated, Hessian and different
prefactors in the scaling.

We can rewrite the actions further by expressing them in terms of @xmath
. Writing @xmath for @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (66)
  -- -------- -- ------

Hence, we have in particular

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is the form in which the actions appeared in the literature so far,
where the state sums were expressed in terms of @xmath .

###### Single solution.

As in the @xmath case the action is zero or @xmath and the asymptotics
contain a single term.

###### No solutions.

In this case the boundary geometry is that of a 4-simplex with
Lorentzian metric and we again have that the amplitude is suppressed
exponentially for large spins.

## Chapter \thechapter The Geometry of Lorentzian 4-Dimensional State
Sum Amplitudes

For the Lorentzian state sum proposed in [ ELPR08 , Per08 ] and as
rigorously defined in [ BDF @xmath 10 ] similar geometricity results
hold. While the amplitudes before were all based on @xmath recoupling
theory the @xmath amplitudes require siginificantly more discussion for
which we will refer the reader to the paper [ BDF @xmath 10 ] . Here we
will simply give the form of the exponential amplitude directly and show
how the geometricity results of the last chapter can be generalised to
the @xmath case. The boundary states for this amplitude are the same
coherent boundary states as for the 4-dimensional @xmath based model.
The key difference to the last two chapters is that we will perform most
calculations not in a unitary representation of @xmath but instead in
the spinor representation discussed in Section 6.2 .

### 12 Definition of the Lorentzian Amplitude

The irreducible unitary representations of @xmath are labelled by two
numbers @xmath and @xmath . We will be interested in the main sequence
of irreps where @xmath and @xmath . Every unitary irrep of @xmath is a
unitary representation of its subgroup @xmath , and we therefore have
the Clebsch-Gordon decomposition into infinitely many @xmath irreps:
@xmath . It can be shown that every @xmath irrep appears at most once in
this decomposition. @xmath is the lowest weight @xmath irrep that
appears.

In [ ELPR08 ] it was assumed that @xmath holds for all representations
involved. We will instead add the real numbers @xmath and show that this
relation must hold for stationary points to exist. Given a coherent
boundary state @xmath on the boundary triangulation of a 4-simplex and
ten real numbers @xmath associated to the triangles @xmath the
Lorentzian amplitude is defined as an integration over @xmath and @xmath
:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (67)
  -- -------- -- ------

with @xmath , @xmath the @xmath dimension of the irrep @xmath and

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath      @xmath            (68)
                 @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- ------

Here @xmath are spinors and @xmath act naturally as @xmath matrices on
the spinors @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the @xmath invariant measure on @xmath . Integrand and measure
together are invariant under the transformation @xmath with @xmath .
Therefore we have to project the integration onto @xmath . Note that
this reduces to the formula for the Lorentzian Barret-Crane model of [
BC00 ] for @xmath .

For a derivation of the above formula we refer to the paper [ BDF @xmath
10 ] . It can be understood as the insertion of the @xmath boundary
state with @xmath representation labels @xmath into the lowest weight
subspace of the representation @xmath contracted with the bilinear inner
product on the representation @xmath .

The amplitude can again be written as an action, allowing us to discuss
its symmetries and asymptotic geometry. The presentation here closely
follows section 4 of [ BDF @xmath 10 ] .

First note that there is an internal variable, @xmath , for each
propagator. As it will be necessary to distinguish between these
variables, we will denote the internal variable of the propagator @xmath
, @xmath , by @xmath .

We will further introduce the shorthand notation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for the intermediate variable acted on by the group elements.

The propagator then is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which has the correct homogeneity to immediately project to a measure on
@xmath .

The amplitude is then again written in terms of an action as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with the action @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (69)
  -- -------- -- ------

The first term is complex and defined mod @xmath whereas the second term
is purely imaginery.

#### 12.1 Symmetries of the Action

We again have a number of symmetries of the integrand of the amplitude (
67 ) and the action ( 69 ) (modulo @xmath ):

-   Continuous: A global @xmath transformation acting as @xmath , @xmath
    , @xmath .

-   Discrete: A local (at each tetrahedron) sign symmetry acting as
    @xmath , @xmath .

-   Rescaling: A local (at each triangle) rescaling acting as @xmath
    with @xmath .

We need to fix the continuous symmetry in the integral directly as the
volume of its orbits is infinite and the integral would diverge
otherwise. The same is true for the rescaling symmetry which is taken
care of by projecting the integration to @xmath instead of @xmath .

### 13 Asymptotic Geometry of the Lorentzian Amplitude

The amplitude ( 67 ) is again exponential and we can analyse its
asymptotic behaviour under the scaling @xmath . To do so we will again
look at the asymptotic equations.

#### 13.1 Asymptotic Equations of Motion

The equations of motions are again given by the stationary points of
@xmath for which @xmath is maximal. It is assumed from now on that
@xmath .

##### 13.1.1 Critical points

The real part of the action

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

satisfies @xmath and hence is at a maximum where it vanishes. It
vanishes if and only if, on each triangle @xmath , the following
condition holds

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (70)
  -- -------- -- ------

As @xmath is the projector in the direction of @xmath , this equation
implies that @xmath and @xmath are proportional to the coherent states
@xmath and @xmath respectively. Therefore we have:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (71)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the Hermitian norm of @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath are
phases defined by this equation. Eliminating @xmath , and introducing
the notation @xmath , we obtain the equations for a critical point

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (72)
  -- -------- -- ------

for each @xmath . The action can now be written in terms of @xmath and
@xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

##### 13.1.2 Stationary points

We now look at the variation of the action with respect to the @xmath
and the @xmath . We begin with the former.

###### Spinor Variation

There is a spinor @xmath for each triangle @xmath , @xmath , and the
variation of the action with respect to these complex variables gives
two spinor equations for each triangle. For clarity will first treat the
@xmath and the @xmath as independent variables and then add the
variations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Adding these, and using equations ( 71 ), we see that the terms
proportional to @xmath cancel and we are left with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the assumption that @xmath and using ( 71 ) to express @xmath in
terms of @xmath we finally obtain that @xmath implies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, taking the hermitian conjugate, our first stationarity equation is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (73)
  -- -------- -- ------

###### Group Variation

Finally, we consider the variation with respect to the group variables.
The right variation of an arbitrary @xmath element @xmath and its
Hermitian conjugate are given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (74)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is an arbitrary element of the real Lie algebra @xmath . As
per the discussion of Section 6.2 a basis for the Lie algebra

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath in @xmath and @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath are again the Pauli matrices and @xmath are the generators
in the fundamental representation of @xmath . Thus @xmath generate pure
rotations and @xmath pure boosts.

The variation of the action with respect to the group variable @xmath ,
@xmath , yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for the case where @xmath . In this case @xmath always occurs to the
left in the action. For the other cases similar equations hold.

Using equation ( 71 ), @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Now using that the expectation values of @xmath in the state @xmath are
given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      ( 4.1 )
  -- -------- -- ---------

we immediately obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as the six variational equations. If the tetrahedra defining defining
@xmath , and hence the @xmath are non-degenerate, these two equations
can only hold simultaneously if we have that @xmath for some arbitrary
constant @xmath at the @xmath -th tetrahedron. The equations hold for
each tetrahedron, @xmath and there is a global parameter @xmath relating
the representations:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (75)
  -- -------- -- ------

This is the simplicity constraints given in [ ELPR08 ] . Therefore we
finally again have closure as a stationary point equation:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (76)
  -- -------- -- ------

#### 13.2 Geometric Interpretation, Bivector Equations

We will begin by combining the equations ( 72 ) and ( 73 ) into a single
bivector equation. We do so using the linear isomorphism @xmath of
Section 6.2 to take the Hermitian matrices associated to the spinors to
vectors: @xmath , where @xmath is the @xmath element covered by @xmath .
Applying this to both sides we obtain the equations:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for ( 73 ), and using that @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Wedging these equations together we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the standard action on bivectors, or writing @xmath
again

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (77)
  -- -------- -- ------

Note that as @xmath is orthogonal in the Minkowski metric to @xmath , we
have that @xmath is orthogonal to the future pointing normal @xmath .
Using the isomorphism @xmath we find that @xmath .

Therefore we also have

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (78)
  -- -------- -- ------

#### 13.3 Geometric Interpretation, @xmath Solutions.

As the bivectors @xmath satisfy simplicity ( 78 ), orientation ( 77 )
and closure ( 76 ), we have by Lemma 5.2 that they either also satisfy
non-degeneracy or they all lie in the same 3-dimensional plane and thus
@xmath . In this case we can choose a gauge in which @xmath , that is,
@xmath , and the @xmath are in @xmath . Then the above equations reduce
again to the @xmath equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      ( 41 )
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      ( 42 )
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore the classification Theorem 10.5 immediately applies to these
solutions.

#### 13.4 Geometric Interpretation, Lorentzian Solutions

We now consider the case where the bivectors furthermore satisy
4-dimensional non-degeneracy. Then there is a Lorentzian 4-simplex with
the tetrahedra of the boundary state as boundary tetrahedra and we can
take the boundary state to be a Regge state. We will use the same
extension of the boundary geometry maps @xmath of the Regge state to
maps @xmath into @xmath as introduced in Section 10.3 . We again have
the bivectors of the tetrahedra @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (79)
  -- -------- -- ------

with the only difference to equation ( 43 ) being that the Hodge
operator here is the Minkowski version. We then immediately have the
analogue of Lemma 10.3 , that is any embedding of the 4-simplex into
Minkowski space that has as boundary geometry the geometry of the Regge
state provides us with solutions.

###### Lemma 13.1 (Solutions from Immersed 4-Simplices).

A 4-simplex @xmath immersed into Minkowski space @xmath with boundary
geometry that of the Regge state gives a solution to the critical and
stationary point equations ( 77 ) and ( 76 ) @xmath . If the orientation
induced on the boundary of @xmath by @xmath is the same as the one used
in the Regge state, the rotational part of @xmath is orientation
preserving and thus in @xmath . Thus either @xmath or @xmath are in
@xmath and we define the sign @xmath such that @xmath . Then the
solutions @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (80)
  -- -------- -- ------

Otherwise @xmath , where @xmath is parity, is orientation preserving and
we have

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (81)
  -- -------- -- ------

In both cases the right-hand side means the rotational part of the
affine map. The bivectors are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath in for the first case and @xmath for the second one
including parity. The future pointing normals of the immersed 4-simplex
are given by @xmath and the outward pointing normals by @xmath . Note
that the immersion @xmath leads to the same solution @xmath but signs
@xmath .

###### Proof.

By Theorem 5.1 the bivectors @xmath satisfy closure and orientation. As
bivectors don’t register inversions @xmath drops out. If the
orientations agree the map ( 80 ) maps the geometric tetrahedron of the
boundary state onto the geometric tetrahedron of the 4-simplex and thus
maps its bivectors ( 43 ) to the geometric ones. If they disagree they
map the tetrahedron with @xmath inward normals to the bivectors of the
4-simplex, accounting for the factor @xmath . Putting the form of the
@xmath into the orientation equation of Theorem 5.1 immediately shows
that the @xmath solve ( 77 ) and ( 78 ). As @xmath and the orientations
were chosen with @xmath as outwards to @xmath the form of the future and
outward normals @xmath , @xmath also immediately follows.∎

Conversely, the bivectors @xmath satisfy simplicity, orientation,
closure and non-degeneracy and therefore by theorem define a pair of
inversion related 4-simplices @xmath immersed in @xmath and a sign
@xmath . For a particular @xmath we also have the signs @xmath from
@xmath . The inversion related 4-simplex clearly has @xmath . We can
also see that the solution reconstructed from either of these
4-simplices is in fact the the solution @xmath with which we began.

Together with the previous section this completely classifies the
solutions. Furthermore it is also immediate that the discrete and
scaling symmetries do not act on the solution and the @xmath symmetry
@xmath acts via @xmath on the immersion @xmath .

From the geometry we again can induce symmetries via all of @xmath .
This means in particular that we have inversion which leaves the
solution invariant but switches the signs @xmath and parity @xmath . By
the orientation definition @xmath again has the opposite parameter
@xmath , that is, @xmath .

#### 13.5 The Action

We now again evaluate the action @xmath on the critical points. To do so
we will begin by discussing the geometry and Regge action of a
Lorentzian 4-simplex. The key difficulty here will be that whereas in
the Euclidean there always is a rotation that takes any outward pointing
normal of the 4-simplex to any other outward pointing normal, this is
not the case in Minkowski space. This is due to the fact that we are
working with @xmath and thus future pointing normals can only be rotated
to future pointing normals, but at least some of the normals must be
past pointing.

As in the case for immersed surface in 3d, we will define the dihedral
angle through the dihedral connection @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is then of the form

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (82)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is defined as the dihedral angle. It is positive if @xmath
and @xmath are both future or both past pointing, and negative if one is
future and one is past pointing. The former case is called a thick
wedge, the latter a thin wedge. We will again work with a covering lift
of this connection in @xmath .

We would now like to establish a commuting diagram of the type ( 50 ) in
order to again evaluate the action, given a solution associated to the
immersion @xmath . However, the straightforward diagram based on @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath fails, as can be seen from the definition of @xmath
in ( 80 ) and ( 81 ). The problem is the presence of the signs @xmath
that ensure our solution is in @xmath . Thus while we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

That is, the naive diagram would commute for thick wedges but not for
thin wedges. To fix this we introduce a rotation by @xmath in the plane
of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

That is, for thick wedges @xmath and for thin wedges @xmath is a
rotation by @xmath in the plane of the triangle. Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore we have @xmath . We then obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus we again have the commuting diagram

  -- -- -- ------
           (83)
  -- -- -- ------

and by Lemma A.3 we have again that at one of the solutions related by
the discrete symmetries the lifting to @xmath with @xmath , with @xmath
the normalised generator of @xmath asosciated to the bivector @xmath in
the spinor representation, holds:

  -- -- -- ------
           (84)
  -- -- -- ------

To evaluate the action on the critical points we use equation ( 73 ) and
the Regge state condition to obtain

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (85)
  -- -------- -- ------

This is an eigenvalue equation for @xmath . Since @xmath is the lift of
a pure boost and @xmath a pure rotation it follows that @xmath is the
eigenvalue of @xmath and thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath is the eigenvalue of @xmath associated to the eigenstate
state @xmath . However from the explicit form of the dihedral connection
@xmath and the discussion in Section 6.2 we know that this eigenvalue is
@xmath . On the other hand, as mentioned above, using the critical point
equations the action can be written in terms of these eigenvalues
directly:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Where we have ignored the signs @xmath which will appear in the total
asymptotics. Now @xmath is either @xmath or @xmath defining @xmath we
can see that the integrality conditions of the boundary states force
@xmath to be an integer. Thus the sign in front of the second term
doesn’t actually matter and it merely multiplies the overall asymptotics
by a sign. The term @xmath is the Regge action @xmath of the 4-simplex
with areas @xmath and we finally have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the @xmath cases the boosts are all zero and the eigenvalue @xmath
is identified with the self-dual or anti-self-dual part of the dihedral
rotation. In the case of a 4-simplex immersed into 3d both perspectives
coincide as the dihedral rotations are all @xmath or zero.

#### 13.6 Asymptotic Formula

Throughout we write @xmath evaluated for a critical point. Summarising
and combining these results we can again give the asymptotic behaviour
for @xmath . We have assumed that the tetrahedra entering @xmath are
non-degenerate:

-   Unless there exists a parameter @xmath the amplitude is
    exponentially suppressed:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    We will assume @xmath from here on.

-   If the boundary state @xmath is a coherent boundary state that does
    not have a Regge geometry and does not define a constant @xmath
    -valued 2-form on a 4-simplex it is exponentially suppressed:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   If the boundary state @xmath is a coherent boundary state that does
    not have a Regge geometry but arises as the boundary of a constant
    @xmath -valued 2-form on a 4-simplex there is exactly one solution
    @xmath to the critical and stationary phase equations up to
    symmetries and we have:

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (86)
      -- -------- -- ------

    where @xmath is a constant independent of @xmath evaluated below.

-   If the boundary state @xmath is a coherent boundary state that does
    have the boundary geometry of a geometric 4-simplex immersed in 3d
    Euclidean space we have exactly one solution @xmath to the critical
    and stationary phase equations up to symmetries. If it is the
    associated Regge state we have

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (87)
      -- -------- -- ------

    where @xmath as in the preceding section.

-   If the boundary state @xmath is a coherent boundary state that does
    have the boundary geometry of a geometric 4-simplex embedded in 4d
    Euclidean space we have exactly two solution @xmath to the critical
    and stationary phase equations, associated to the embeddings @xmath
    and @xmath into @xmath , up to symmetries. If it is the associated
    Regge state we have

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (88)
                                    @xmath   
                                    @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

    where @xmath is the Euclidean Regge action associated to the
    embedding @xmath .

-   If the boundary state @xmath is a coherent boundary state that does
    have the boundary geometry of a geometric 4-simplex embedded in 4d
    Lorentzian space we have exactly two solutions @xmath , @xmath to
    the critical and stationary phase equations, associated to the
    embeddings @xmath and @xmath into @xmath , up to symmetries. If it
    is the associated Regge state we have

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (89)
                                    @xmath   
                                    @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

    where @xmath is the Lorentzian Regge action associated to the
    embedding @xmath .

-   There are no other cases.

The numerical factors @xmath of the stationary phase formula have to be
evaluated at the critical points and are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (90)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

The factor @xmath arises from the stationary phase formula. We have a
@xmath -dimensional integration over @xmath and a 20-dimensional
integration over @xmath . Asymptotically, we have @xmath which cancels
some of the @xmath of the stationary phase formula. The factor @xmath
counts the volume of the orbit of the discrete symmetry that is not
fixed in the integral. @xmath is the Hessian matrix of the action ( 69 )
evaluated at the critical points; its explicit form is given in the
appendix of [ BDF @xmath 10 ] . The measure @xmath is the measure term
evaluated at the critical points. The ratio of @xmath and @xmath is
independent of coordinates even though each individually must of course
be evaluated with respect to some coordinates. The constant @xmath is
equal to @xmath when @xmath , which is a pure phase.

## Chapter \thechapter Conclusions

In this thesis we connected two themes, the construction of topological
quantum field theories from a graphical calculus and the definition of
the same through the representation theory of @xmath , and the
geometricity of the representation theory of @xmath . The latter allowed
the leading order behaviour of some of the amplitudes of the former in
geometric terms.

To this end, the first chapter gave a detailed sketch of the
construction of TQFTs (Definition 1.2 ) from state sums (Definition 2.2
), that is, the sum of local amplitudes associated to states on
triangulations. Pachner’s theorem (Theorem 2.1 ) gave us a way to
construct TQFTs as state sums. A graphical calculus (Section 2.3 ) was
used as a convenient intermediate step to algebratise the Pachner moves
and solve them in terms of graphical equalities. Such a solution was
then given through @xmath representation theory, leading to the
definition of the Ponzano-Regge state sum (Definition 3.1 ). A key
consequence of the graphical calculus that allowed us to ignore the
problem of regularising the model was a dual expression for state sum
amplitudes (Theorem 2.4 ) that is manifestly finite for the
Ponzano-Regge model and was the basis of the analysis of geometricity in
Chapter 3.

In Chapter 2 we reviewed a host of geometricity results for @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . The key tool for understanding the geometry of the
representations of @xmath were the coherent states of Equation 4.1 .
Starting from these and using symplectic reduction we defined coherent
triangles, tetrahedra and from these coherent two- and three-manifolds
(Definitions 4.2 , 4.4 and 4.5 ). For @xmath we showed how to interpret
the bivectors on @xmath as its generators and how to use Hodge duality
to decompose them into two copies of @xmath . We also showed how to
characterise those bivectors corresponding to the faces of a 4-simplex
embedded in @xmath (Theorem 5.1 ). Similarly we showed how bivectors in
@xmath have the structure of a complexified @xmath , and in Section 6.2
how the spinor equations and geometricity arises as a result.

Chapter 3 set about to combine the first two chapters for the
Ponzano-Regge amplitude. Using an exponential form of the dual
expression for the state sum 26 the overlap between a coherent boundary
manifold and the Ponzano-Regge amplitude was calculated to first order
in the large spin expansion (Theorem 8.3 ). The key geometricity result
enabling this was Lemma 8.1 which gave the solutions to the stationary
and critical point equations that provide the leading order in the
expansion in terms of immersions of the geometry underlying the coherent
boundary manifold into @xmath . We furthermore could evaluate the phase
of the asymptotics as a type of Regge action of the geometry in
question.

The Euclidean 4-dimensional case was consider in Chapter 4. While the
4-dimensional state sum was not defined in Chapter 1, its 4-simplex
weight in terms of the dual evaluation (Theorem 2.4 ) is essentially the
same as for the Ponzano-Regge model. Thus we could again calculate the
overlap of the state sum weight with coherent boundary states in Theorem
10.6 . Theorem 10.5 gave a full classification of the possible type of
solutions in terms of @xmath valued bivectors on the 4-simplex for
general boundary states and, as a special case, geometric embeddings of
the boundary manifold in @xmath for Regge states. In the latter case we
again find the Regge action of the embedded geometry. As a corollary we
could immediately give the leading order behaviour of the EPRL-FK type
amplitudes.

We gave the full leading order behaviour of the Lorentzian EPRL
amplitude in Section 13.6 . The boundary states were again the coherent
boundary states of Chapter 2. The two key inputs here were the spinor
geometricity considerations of Chapter 2 and the full classification of
@xmath solutions in Chapter 4. In the geometric sectors of the theory we
again could derive the Regge action as the phase of the leading order
terms.

The work of this thesis covers geometricity for @xmath state sum
amplitudes and the recent theories based on them, that is, the squaring
of the @xmath amplitude for the Euclidean EPRL-FK type amplitudes and
the embedding of @xmath into the unitaries of its complexification in
the Lorentzian EPRL amplitude. A key deficit in the analysis is the
failure to understand the Hessians appearing in the asymptotics in
geometric terms. Nevertheless the results here allowed for example the
calculation of the so called “graviton propagator” in the Euclidean
models [ BMRS06 ] .

The two aspects of @xmath this thesis are based on, the algebraic
properties of its representation theory allowing us to define
topological invariants on the one hand and the geometric asymptotics
based on 3-dimensional geometries on the other hand concern vastly
different structures. As a result, any deformations or generalisations
of the theory that attempt to preserve or enhance either the topological
character or the geometric one are likely to perturb the other. The
EPRL-FK type models use the @xmath geometricity results and attempt to
reduce the @xmath theory to its geometric sector. This was originally
motivated by the Plebanski approach to gravity in which a set of
constraints reduces an @xmath field to a geometric one. The result of
this restriction is then, of course, no longer triangulation
independent. On the other hand, the very general spherical categories of
Barrett and Westbury [ BW99 ] give graphical evaluations that are
sufficient for constructing topological quantum field theories but have
almost no geometric flavour left to them. However, note that in three
dimensions the Turaev-Viro model [ TV92 ] retains some geometric
flavours while sharpening the topological sensitivity of the theory.

In four dimensions the situation is more limited. The issue of
constructing sensitive TQFTs using triangulations is still open, and
while proposals for appropriate categories for 4-dimensional theories
exist these seem to be too restrictive and lacking in examples. The
@xmath based boundary states seem too restrictive to capture the full
dynamical content of a theory as complex as GR. It is important to note
that in the 4-dimensional case presented here the appearance of the
Regge action and the calculations based on it do not test the dynamics
of the theory. To do so we would need to perform the sum over
representations and intertwiners, in other words we would need to
understand the asymptotics of larger triangulations. In the same vein it
would be very interesting to understand the behaviour of the
triangulation dependent models under Pachner moves. This can be
considered a sort of coarse graining or renormalisation procedure.

In both the Euclidean EPRL-FK and the Lorentzian EPRL amplitude the
reduction to the geometric subsector is incomplete. Instead a diagonal
unconstrained @xmath type sector remains. This has the potential to
spoil the dynamics. Going forward it will be important to understand
whether it is possible to ignore, factor out or constrain away this
sector. Finally it should be noted that conversely the clear appearance
of the geometric sector in the @xmath symbol of the 4-dimensional @xmath
theory suggests the possibility to mimic the self-dual formulation of
euclidean general relativity and reduce to a geometric sector using much
simpler constraints than those of the EPRL-FK model.

## Chapter \thechapter Appendix

## Appendix A Discrete Connections

###### Definition A.1 (Discrete Connection).

Given an oriented manifold @xmath with a triangulation @xmath with
simplices @xmath , a discrete connection is an assignment of a group
element @xmath to every oriented face @xmath , satisfying @xmath .
@xmath can be interpreted as the parallel transport from @xmath to
@xmath via the face @xmath .

In terms of the Poincaré dual of the triangulation we can think of it as
the parallel transport along the edge from @xmath to @xmath .

We can lift the group elements @xmath of a discrete @xmath connection to
@xmath elements @xmath that cover @xmath thus defining a discrete @xmath
connection. However in doing so we are of course free to choose @xmath .
Thus there is a set of @xmath connections covering @xmath related by
@xmath with @xmath . This can be fixed up to gauge by using a spin
structure on @xmath . The spin structures @xmath are parametrised by the
elements @xmath , however, not canonically. We wil here give a specific
prescription to lift an @xmath connection which will depend on a number
of choices.

Consider first that to fix the signs @xmath up to gauge we need to give
the signs for every loop in the 1-skeleton of the Poincaré dual. The
values around this loops are however not unrelated, but can be expressed
in terms of a basis of the first homology class of the 1-skeleton with
values in @xmath . This decomposes into two parts, the basis elements
contractible on the 2-skeleton and those not. The first correspond to a
set of generators of @xmath of the 2-skeleton of the dual triangulation,
the latter then correspond to a basis of @xmath which is equal to the
first homology on the two skeleton.

We will now use the following prescription:

-   For every loop @xmath that is the boundary of one of the chosen
    generators of @xmath of the 2-skeleton, let the discrete holonomy
    along this loop be the @xmath group element with @xmath , @xmath .

-   For every loop @xmath that is one of the chosen basis elements of
    @xmath , let the discrete holonomy along this loop be the @xmath
    group element with @xmath , @xmath .

This fixes the group elements @xmath up to gauge.

###### Definition A.2 (Covering Lift).

A discrete @xmath connection @xmath on a manifold @xmath with
triangulation @xmath and a spin structure is called a covering lift of a
discrete @xmath connection if it satisfies the above criteria.

We then have the following lemma:

###### Lemma A.3 (Spin Lift of Gauge Transformations).

Let @xmath and @xmath be two discrete @xmath connections on a
triangulation @xmath of @xmath that are related by a gauge
transformation @xmath : @xmath . Then given a spin structure on @xmath
any covering lifts of @xmath and @xmath to @xmath connections @xmath and
@xmath are related by a covering of the gauge transformation @xmath ;
@xmath . That is, @xmath .

###### Proof.

Note that for any lift @xmath , the connection @xmath is a covering lift
of @xmath compatible with the spin structure. This is immediate as the
conditions on being a covering lift are gauge invariant. Therefore it
differs from @xmath at most by signs @xmath , and the lift @xmath
defines the required lift of the gauge transformation @xmath relating
@xmath and @xmath . ∎

The lifting from @xmath to its double cover @xmath proceeds among the
same lines.

## Appendix B Stationary Phase

We briefly give a summary of stationary phase techniques used throughout
this thesis. Our main reference is [ Hor83 ] .

Take a closed manifold @xmath of dimension @xmath and consider smooth,
complex-valued functions @xmath and @xmath on @xmath such that the real
part @xmath . We will then asymptotically evaluate the function

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (91)
  -- -------- -- ------

We will need the Hessian @xmath of @xmath , that is, the @xmath matrix
of second derivatives of @xmath . First consider the case that the
stationary points of @xmath are isolated and thus that the Hessian is
non-degenerate. We will then need those stationary points that are in
addition critical points. That is, those point @xmath such that @xmath
and @xmath .

If @xmath has no critical stationary points the integral ( 91 ) is
exponentially suppressed for large @xmath . That means the function
@xmath decreases faster that any power of @xmath , for all @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (92)
  -- -------- -- ------

If isolated critical stationary points exist, and @xmath is non
vanishing at them, the asymptotics of @xmath is given by a sum over such
points over terms of order @xmath . The expansion of @xmath in @xmath is
given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (93)
  -- -------- -- ------

For a rigorous definition of the square root of the determinant in this
context see [ Hor83 ] .

At a critical stationary point, the matrix @xmath has a
positive-definite real part, and the square root of the determinant of
this matrix is the unique square root which is continuous on matrices
with positive-definite real part, and positive on real ones. For further
details see [ Hor83 ] .

If there are stationary critical points where the determinant vanishes
more care is needed and the degenerate directions need to be modded out.
We call @xmath the set of stationary critical points @xmath . Now if
@xmath is a disjoint union of closed submanifolds of @xmath , @xmath is
called a Morse-Bott function in the literature and a Morse function in
the special case when all manifolds are 0-dimensional. In the latter
case we simply have isolated critical points as discussed above.

In general it is a sum over critical manifolds again where, again
assuming @xmath is non-vanishing on the critical manifolds, each
critical manifold @xmath of dimension @xmath , labelled by some @xmath
on the critical manifold, contributes the term [ Ram09 ]

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (94)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the restriction of the Hessian to the normal directions
to @xmath as defined by some a Riemannian metric on @xmath , and @xmath
is the measure induced on the critical submanifold by the same
Riemannian measure on the domain space. This can be extended to the case
where @xmath is a manifold-with-boundary.

## Appendix C Table of Symbols

-   An evaluation of coloured diagrams.

-   The bilinear inner product on @xmath irreps.

-   The Hermitian inner product on @xmath irreps.

-   The 15j symbol of @xmath recoupling theory.

-   A state in the @xmath irrep @xmath .

-   Coherent @xmath state in the direction @xmath and the representation
    @xmath .

-   The admissibility condition on a tripplet of @xmath irreps.

-   A bivector.

-   A bivector written in terms of its self-dual, anti-self-dual
    decomposition.

-   The circle.

-   A colouring function.

-   @xmath -dimensional cobordisms.

-   The fully antisymmetric tensor in any dimension with @xmath .

-   The symmetrised tensor product of @xmath 2-dimensional @xmath
    tensors.

-   A state sum amplitude, a function from a coloured @xmath -simplex to
    @xmath .

-   An @xmath group element.

-   An @xmath group element.

-   The space of linear group homomorphisms between two representation
    spaces.

-   Invariant subspace of the tensor product of representations.

-   State in the invariant subspace of the tensor product of
    representations.

-   Immersion of a surface or a standard simplex into flat @xmath ,
    @xmath or @xmath .

-   The anti-linear @xmath group homomorphism relating the bilinear and
    the Hermitian inner products.

-   The standard basis of the Lie algebra @xmath in the irrep @xmath
    with @xmath .

-   Cobordism.

-   The vector @xmath .

-   3-vector associated to the edge or triangle bordering the triangles
    or tetrahedra @xmath , @xmath defining a coherent boundary state.

-   Normal vector in 4d.

-   Boundary immersion of the simplex @xmath into @xmath .

-   Extension of the boundary immersion of the simplex to a map into
    @xmath .

-   The @xmath -dimensional simplex.

-   The Pauli matrices with @xmath .

-   Boundary manifolds.

-   Triangulation of a manifold.

-   The @xmath -simplices of a triangulation @xmath .

-   The tetrahedral network.

-   The theta network.

-   Category of Vector spaces.

-   Edge vector of an immersed surface in @xmath .

-   An @xmath , @xmath or @xmath group element associated to the
    triangle or tetrahedron @xmath .

-   An @xmath , @xmath or @xmath group element associated to the
    triangle or tetrahedron @xmath .

-   A state in the boundary state space of a particular model.

-   Partition function or amplitude of a particular model.