On the dynamical evolution of globular clusters

Michel Hénon @xmath , translated by Florent Renaud @xmath

@xmath Institut d’Astrophysique, Paris (now at the Observatoire de Nice)
@xmath Observatoire Astronomique and CNRS UMR 7550, Université de
Strasbourg, 11 rue de l’Université, F-67000 Strasbourg, France
@xmath Institute of Astronomy, University of Cambridge, Madingley Road,
Cambridge, CB3 0HA, UK
@xmath florent.renaud@astro.unistra.fr

Originaly published in October 1961; translated in October 2010

This paper is an English translation of Michel Hénon’s thesis, Sur
l’évolution dynamique des amas globulaires originally published in
French in the Annales d’Astrophysique, Vol. 24, p.369 (1961).

Conventions and notations are as in the original version, for
consistency. The English version is written so that it is as faithful to
the French text as possible. The translator added some notes [ T.N. ]
for the sake of clarity, when required. Original French, English and
Russian abstracts written by M. Hénon are available in the original
version of the paper. The English part is reproduced below.

FR thanks Michel Hénon for the enthusiasm and kindness he expressed when
he was asked for permission to translate his work, as well as Douglas
Heggie and Mark Gieles for their careful proofreading.

As the author explains himself on the cover page of the original
version:

This work is the main thesis that M.M. Hénon presented to obtain the
degree of Docteur ès Sciences Physiques , at the Falculté des Sciences
de l’Université de Paris . The thesis has been defended in Paris, on
1961 December 11, before a jury composed of Messieurs Danjon (president
of the jury), Schatzman and Delcroix. This work is not related to a
series of papers previously published and entitled L’amas isochrone .
