# Abstract

Diese Dissertation behandelt eine grundlegende Fragestellung der
Hochenergie-Astrophysik. Um herauszufinden, welches der führenden
Modelle die Emission von Pulsaren korrekt beschreibt, untersuche ich das
Abknickverhalten des Energiespektrums des Pulsars im Krebsnebel zu hohen
Energien hin. Pulsare sind astronomische Objekte, die durch periodische
Abstrahlung (”Pulsation”) elektromagnetischer Strahlung von Radiowellen
bis hin zu Gammastrahlen gekennzeichnet sind. Zwei Modellklassen haben
sich in den vergangenen 40 Jahren herausgebildet, welche den
Pulsationsmechanismus mit Teilchenbeschleunigung in der inneren bzw.
äussssseren Magnetosphäre erklären können. Beide Szenarien sagen ein
Abknicken des Energiespektrums im Gammastrahlungsbereich voraus,
allerdings mit unterschiedlicher Stärke. Wenn die Strahlung in der
äusssseren Magnetosphäre erzeugt wird, erwartet man einen exponentiellen
Abfall, während für die Erzeugung in der inneren Magnetosphäre ein noch
stärkerer Abfall vorhergesagt wird. Deswegen ist die Bestimmung eines
Pulsar-Energiespektrums in der Nähe des erwarteten Abknickens, also bei
Energien zwischen einigen GeV und einigen zehn GeV eine bevorzugte
Methode, einem dieser Szenerien Glaubwürdigkeit zu verleihen oder es
andererseits auszuschliesssssen. Alle bisherigen Versuche,
Pulsarspektren im genannten Energiebereich mit bodengebundenen
Instrumenten zu vermessen, schlugen fehl; gleichzeitig hatten
satellitengestützte Detektoren eine zu kleine Sammelfläche, als dass die
genaue Vermessung von Spektren möglich gewesen wäre.

Diese Arbeit untersucht die Gammastrahlungsemission des Krebsnebels in
der Umgebung der Abknick-Energie mit Hilfe des MAGIC-Teleskops.
Ebenfalls ausgewertet werden öffentlich zugängliche Daten des
satellitengestützten Gammastrahlungsdetektors Fermi-LAT, so dass die
MAGIC-Ergebnisse mit dem bei niedrigeren Energien anschliessenden
Energiebereich von Fermi-LAT verglichen werden können.

Vor kurzem wurde ein neues Triggersystem (ein analoger Summentrigger) in
Betrieb genommen, welches die Energieschwelle des MAGIC-Teleskopes von
50 GeV auf 25 GeV heruntersetzt; damit wurde während Beobachtungen von
Oktober 2007 bis Januar 2009 der Pulsar im Krebsnebel erstmalig
nachgewiesen. Meine Untersuchungen zeigen, dass das Energiespektum im
Bereich von 25 GeV bis 100 GeV mit einem einfachen Potenzgesetz
verträglich ist. Allein schon die Tatsache, dass sich das Spektrum bis
100 GeV erstreckt, schliessssst eine Erzeugung in der inneren
Magnetosphäre aus.

Die Fermi-LAT Beobachtungen begannen im August 2008. Die öffentlichen
Fermi-LAT Daten zeigen, dass ein Potenzgesetz mit exponentiellem Abfall
bei einigen GeV das Krebspulsarspektrum zwischen 100 MeV und 30 GeV gut
beschreibt. Das ist verträglich mit einer Erzeugung in der äusssseren,
aber nicht in der inneren Magnetosphäre. Die Messungen beider
Instrumente deuten somit stark darauf hin, dass das entsprechende Modell
für eine Erzeugung in der inneren Magnetosphäre die Daten nicht korrekt
beschreibt. Wenn man nun die Resultate beider Messungen kombiniert,
zeigt sich, dass ein einfaches Modell zur Gammastrahlungs-Erzeugung in
der äusssseren Magnetosphäre die Daten nur unzulänglich beschreibt.
Verschiedene Annahmen sind notwendig, um die vorhandenen Abweichungen zu
erklären.

Weiterhin wurde die Energieabhängigkeit des Pulsprofils zwischen 100 MeV
und 100 GeV genau untersucht. Diverse interessante Eigenschaften wurden
gefunden, von denen die Veränderungen in den Pulsflanken und die
Entwicklung der Phasen der Pulsationsmaxima die erwähnenswertesten sind.
Von diesen Eigenschaften ausgehend, würde eine grössssere Menge von
Beobachtungsdaten erlauben, den Aufbau der Pulsarmagnetosphäre genau zu
untersuchen.

Mit dem Ziel, die Beobachachtungsmöglichkeiten fur Pulsare und andere
Quellklassen unter 100 GeV zu verbessern, wurde eine neuer
Photondetekor, der HPD R9792U-40, charakterisiert. Viele positive
Eigenschaften konnten gefunden werden, wie beispielsweise eine sehr hohe
Photon-Nachweiseffizienz, eine ausssserordentlich niedrige
Ionenrückkopplungswahrscheinlichkeit, sowie eine ausgezeichnete
Ladungsauflösung.

###### Contents

-    Abstract
-    1 Very High Energy Gamma Ray Astronomy
-    2 Pulsars
-    3 Imaging Atmospheric Cherenkov Telescope Technique and The MAGIC
    Telescope
-    4 Analysis Method of MAGIC Data
-    5 MAGIC Observations of the Crab Pulsar and Data Analysis
    -    5.1 Observations
    -    5.2 Sum Trigger Sub-patch Malfunction
    -    5.3 Data Selection
        -    5.3.1 Reflector Performance Selection
        -    5.3.2 Zenith Angle Selection
        -    5.3.3 Cloudiness Selection
        -    5.3.4 Event Rate Selection
        -    5.3.5 Nebula Measurement Selection
        -    5.3.6 Summary of the Data Selection
    -    5.4 @xmath Cut Optimization for Pulsar Analysis
    -    5.5 Analysis of the Energy Spectrum of the Crab Nebula
        -    5.5.1 Data Sample for the Crab Nebula Analysis
        -    5.5.2 Energy Range of the Crab Nebula Analysis
    -    5.6 Analysis of Optical Pulsation
    -    5.7 Detection of the Very High Energy Gamma-ray Pulsation from
        the Crab Pulsar
        -    5.7.1 The Pulsed Gamma-ray Signal
        -    5.7.2 Further Investigation of the Signal
    -    5.8 SIZE Dependence of the Pulsation
    -    5.9 Time Variation of the Pulsation from the Crab Pulsar
        -    5.9.1 Variability in Light Curve
        -    5.9.2 Variability in Flux
    -    5.10 Energy Spectra of the Pulsation from the Crab Pulsar
        -    5.10.1 Excess Distribution in the Reconstructed Energy and
            Size
        -    5.10.2 Spectrum Calculation by Forward Unfolding Assuming a
            Power Law
        -    5.10.3 Spectrum Calculation by Unfolding with Different
            Regularization Methods
        -    5.10.4 Discussion of the Results
    -    5.11 Concluding Remarks
-    6 Analysis of Fermi -LAT public Data
    -    6.1 Detector Design of Fermi -LAT
    -    6.2 Detector Performance of Fermi -LAT
    -    6.3 Data Sample
    -    6.4 The Light Curve
    -    6.5 The Crab Nebula Analysis
    -    6.6 The Crab Pulsar Spectrum
        -    6.6.1 Power Law + Cut-off Assumption for the Crab Pulsar
            Spectrum
        -    6.6.2 Power Law Extension Assumption for the Crab Pulsar
            Spectrum above the Cut-Off
    -    6.7 Concluding Remarks
-    7 Analysis of the Energy Spectrum and the Light Curve Combining
    MAGIC and Fermi -LAT results
    -    7.1 Energy Spectra of P1 + P2, P1 and P2
        -    7.1.1 How Much Do the MAGIC Measurements Deviate from an
            Exponential Cut-off Spectrum?
        -    7.1.2 How Much Do the MAGIC Measurements Deviate from an
            Sub-Exponential Cut-off Spectrum?
        -    7.1.3 Power Law Fit above 4 GeV
    -    7.2 P2/P1 Ratio and Bridge/P1 Ratio
    -    7.3 Rising and Falling Edges
    -    7.4 Peak Phases
        -    7.4.1 Kernel Density Method
        -    7.4.2 Example of the Kernel Density for Different Energies
        -    7.4.3 Results
    -    7.5 Possible Existence of the Third Peak
        -    7.5.1 Definition of the ON and OFF Phases for the Third
            Peak P3
        -    7.5.2 MAGIC and Fermi -LAT above 10 GeV
    -    7.6 Concluding Remarks
-    8 Discussion
    -    8.1 Constraints on the Emission Region
        -    8.1.1 By the Steepness of the Cut-off
        -    8.1.2 By the Highest Energy of the Observed Photons
    -    8.2 Estimates of the Electron Spectrum and Constraints on the
        Acceleration Electric Field
        -    8.2.1 Basic Equations for the Electron Energy and the
            Curvature Radiation Photon Energy
        -    8.2.2 Estimates of the Electron Spectrum Based on the
            Measured Gamma-ray Spectrum
        -    8.2.3 Constraints on the Acceleration Electric Field in an
            Ideal Dipole Magnetic Field
        -    8.2.4 Possible Explanations for the High Energy Tail of the
            Gamma-ray Spectrum in an Imperfect Dipole Magnetic Field
    -    8.3 Inverse Compton Scattering as a Second Radiation Component
    -    8.4 Radiation Efficiency
    -    8.5 Remarks on the High Energy Tail of the Crab Pulsar Energy
        Spectrum
    -    8.6 Energy Dependence of the Rising and Falling Edges in the
        Light Curve
    -    8.7 Energy Dependence of the Peak Phase
-    9 Development of High Quantum Efficiency Hybrid Photodetector HPD
    R9792U-40
-    10 Conclusions and Outlook
    -    10.1 Conclusions
    -    10.2 Future Prospect: Observations of Other Gamma-ray Pulsars
    -    10.3 Future Prospect: Improvement of the Telescope Performance
        -    10.3.1 Installation of the HPD R9792U-40
        -    10.3.2 Stereoscopic Observation with the MAGIC Stereoscopic
            System
        -    10.3.3 Pulsar Observation with CTA

## Introduction

The first detection of the TeV gamma-rays from a celestial object, i.e.
the discovery of the Crab Nebula by the Whipple telescope in 1989,
opened a new field in astronomy, which is called very high energy (VHE)
gamma-ray astronomy. In this thesis, VHE gamma-ray stands for photons
with energies above 10 GeV. As of now approximately 100 VHE gamma-ray
sources are known, which are categorized into several classes such as
active galactic nuclei, supernova remnants, pulsar wind nebulae and
gamma-ray binaries. Observations in VHE gamma-rays have given first
insight into the nature of these extremely dynamical objects emitting
non-thermal radiation.

Pulsars are a class of celestial objects, which emit periodic pulsed
radiation (pulsation) extending from radio up to gamma-rays. VHE
gamma-rays can serve as an important probe for the radiation mechanism
of pulsars, too. Pulsars are explained as rapidly rotating neutron stars
which possess extremely strong magnetic fields. Electrons are
accelerated within their magnetosphere by strong electric field and emit
beamed electromagnetic radiation, which will be observed as pulsation
due to the rotation of the neutrons star. On top of this general picture
of the pulsation mechanism, there are two competing major scenarios
which specify the acceleration/emission region within the magnetosphere.
One is the inner magnetosphere scenario, in which the pulsation
originates from near the magnetic pole on the neutron star surface. The
other is the outer magnetosphere scenario, in which the pulsation comes
from a region along the last closed magnetic field lines in the outer
magnetosphere. Both scenarios could reasonably explain all the features
of pulsars observed before 2007. One of the best ways to verify or
refute these scenarios is measuring the energy spectrum at around
cut-off energy, i.e. at energies between a few GeV and a few tens of
GeV. The reason is as follows: Both scenarios predict a high energy
cut-off in the gamma-ray energy spectrum, but with different cut-off
sharpness. An exponential cut-off is expected for the outer
magnetosphere scenario while a super-exponential cut-off is predicted
for the inner magnetosphere scenario. The sharpness of the cut-off and
the highest energy of the observed photons allow one to constrain the
emission region.

Before 2007, a satellite-borne detector, EGRET, detected 7 gamma-ray
pulsars and the energy spectra could well be measured only up to @xmath
GeV. On the other hand, ground-based imaging atmospheric Cherenkov
telescopes (IACTs) could set flux upper limits only above 100 GeV. There
existed no sufficient measurement in the important energy range, i.e.,
at energies between a few GeV and a few tens of GeV. It was evident that
filling this energy gap would lead to a clarification between the
competing scenarios and a better understanding of the pulsation
mechanism.

The MAGIC telescope is the IACT that has a largest single dish reflector
with a 17 m diameter. Accordingly, it has the lowest energy threshold
among IACTs (50 GeV in the case of the standard trigger). MAGIC has been
the best instrument to fill the energy gap from the higher side.
Moreover, in October 2007, the new trigger system (SUM trigger system)
was implemented, which reduced the energy threshold even further, from
50 GeV to 25 GeV. Nearly at the same time, a new satellite-borne
gamma-ray detector, Fermi -LAT, became operational in August 2008, which
has a @xmath times better sensitivity than EGRET and could measure the
pulsar energy spectrum well beyond 10 GeV. It began filling the gap from
the lower side.

In this thesis, the observational results on the Crab pulsar by MAGIC at
energies above 25 GeV are presented. The public data of the Fermi -LAT
on the Crab pulsar are also analyzed from 100 MeV to @xmath GeV. The
combined analysis of the results from two experiments is also carried
out, carefully taking into account the systematic uncertainties of both
experiments. Then, several constraints in the pulsar model based on the
combined energy spectrum are discussed. In addition to the spectral
study, energy-dependent pulse profiles between 100 MeV to 100 GeV are
intensely studied. The possibility to infer the fine structure of the
emission region based on the pulse profile is also discussed.

Aiming for better observations of some selected pulsars and other
sources below 100 GeV with MAGIC, a new photodetector, HPD R9792U-40, is
investigated. HPD R9792U-40 is a hybrid photodetector. Since a hybrid
photodetector has never been used in any IACTs, its properties and
performance are thoroughly studied.

The thesis is structured as follows. An introduction to VHE gamma-ray
astronomy is given in Chapter 1. Pulsars and theoretical models of the
pulsation mechanism are introduced in Chapter 2. Chapter 3 describes the
IACT technique and the MAGIC telescope. The analysis methods of the
MAGIC data and its performance are explained in detail in Chapter 4. The
analysis results of the MAGIC data and the public Fermi -LAT data on the
Crab pulsar are presented in Chapter 5 and Chapter 6, respectively. In
Chapter 7, a combined analysis of the results of the two experiments is
performed. Physics discussions on the results are presented in
Chapter 8. The properties and performance of HPD R9792U-40 and the
development of associated operation circuits are presented in Chapter 9.
Conclusions and outlook are added in Chapter 10.

## Chapter 1 Very High Energy Gamma Ray Astronomy

see http://wwwmagic.mppmu.mpg.de/publications/theses/TSaito.pdf

## Chapter 2 Pulsars

see http://wwwmagic.mppmu.mpg.de/publications/theses/TSaito.pdf

## Chapter 3 Imaging Atmospheric Cherenkov Telescope Technique and The
MAGIC Telescope

see http://wwwmagic.mppmu.mpg.de/publications/theses/TSaito.pdf

## Chapter 4 Analysis Method of MAGIC Data

see http://wwwmagic.mppmu.mpg.de/publications/theses/TSaito.pdf

## Chapter 5 MAGIC Observations of the Crab Pulsar and Data Analysis

The MAGIC observations are grouped in one-year long cycles and Cycle I
started in May 2005. In Cycles I and II, the Crab pulsar was observed
with the standard trigger. 16 hours of good-condition data showed only a
weak signal of pulsation with 2.9 @xmath (see Sect
LABEL:SectCrabObsBefore2007 ). Here, I analyze the data recorded in
Cycle III and Cycle IV with the SUM trigger with a much lower energy
threshold and a higher sensitivity below 100 GeV.

### 5.1 Observations

The SUM trigger was installed in October 2007 and, subsequently, the
Crab pulsar was observed in Cycles III and IV, for 48 hours (over 47
days) and 78 hours (over 36 days), respectively. All the observations
were made in ON-mode, since the SUM trigger was designed for ON-mode
observations. Although, as described in Sect LABEL:SectSignalExtract ,
pulsar observations do not require OFF observations, in order to assure
the validity of the analysis chain and the quality of the data sets by
the Crab nebula emission, OFF observations were made in October and
December 2007 for @xmath hours.

### 5.2 Sum Trigger Sub-patch Malfunction

One and five out of the 36 Sum Trigger sub-patches were malfunctioning
during the Crab pulsar observations in Cycle III and Cycle IV,
respectively. The effect can be seen by plotting @xmath of images on the
camera. The regions near the broken patches show a hole in @xmath
distribution, as shown in the top left (Cycle III data) and the middle
left (Cycle IV data) panel of Fig. 5.1 . When a variability of the Crab
pulsar flux between the two cycles is discussed, this difference must be
taken into account. By deactivating the broken patches in MC, the effect
can be reproduced as shown in the top right (Cycle III MC) and the
middle right (Cycle IV MC). The bottom left and the bottom right panel
show the difference between Cycle III and Cycle IV in data and MC,
respectively. According to the MC, the differences in gamma-ray
detection efficiency between the two cycles for @xmath 25-50, 50-100,
100-200 and 200-400 ph.e. are about 21%, 17%, 11% and 7%. This effect
will be corrected when the variability is discussed (see Sect. 5.9 ).
The calculation of the energy spectra will also be carried out with MCs
which reflect these subpatch malfunctions.

### 5.3 Data Selection

The new SUM trigger system lowers the energy threshold from 50 GeV to 25
GeV (see Sect. LABEL:SectSUMTrigger ). It has a big impact on the pulsar
observations because most of the signal is expected below 50 GeV (see
Fig. LABEL:FigThreshold ). However, such low energy events are easily
affected by the observational conditions. A slightly worse condition may
result in a significant increase in the energy threshold and a worse
sensitivity. Therefore, a more careful data selection than the normal
observations above 50 GeV is required, in terms of both hardware and
environmental conditions.

#### 5.3.1 Reflector Performance Selection

The mirror panels of the MAGIC telescope are adjustable (see Sect.
LABEL:SectReflector ) and their alignment on some days can be worse than
it should be. As described in Sect. LABEL:SectMuon , this can be checked
by muon events. Blue points in Fig. 5.2 show the light collection
efficiency estimated by muon events (the conversion factor from the
number of photons hitting the reflector to that of the detected
photoelectrons) for each observation day. The days when the efficiency
is lower than 0.081 (5% lower than the average) are excluded from the
analysis, since it may affect the trigger efficiency and the energy
reconstruction. On average, Cycle IV has 3% lower efficiency than Cycle
III, which is taken into account in the MC when the energy spectrum is
calculated. The PSF was checked by fitting a linear function to the
@xmath relation (see Sect LABEL:SectMuon ). The value at @xmath degrees
is used to evaluate the PSF, as shown by the red points in Fig. 5.2 .
From the study with MC, it was found that the PSF in Cycle IV was @xmath
worse than that in Cycle III, which is also taken into account when the
energy spectrum is computed.

#### 5.3.2 Zenith Angle Selection

As the angular distance from the source to the zenith (Zenith Angle,
@xmath ) becomes larger, the distance from the shower maximum to the
telescope increases. The relation between the gamma-ray energy and the
number of detected photons would change depending on the @xmath , due to
the different Cherenkov photon density on the ground ¹ ¹ 1 This is a
consequence of three effects: a) a higher Cherenkov threshold leading to
fewer photons (see the top right panel of Fig. LABEL:FigRefIndex ), b) a
wider spread of photons on the ground due to the larger distance and c)
increase in absorption and scattering losses (see Sect. LABEL:SectAbsorp
). . Needless to say, the threshold energy is also affected. Therefore,
in order to assure the lowest possible threshold and a uniform @xmath –
energy relation, I selected data with the @xmath below 20 degrees.

#### 5.3.3 Cloudiness Selection

As described in Chapter LABEL:SectPyrometer , haze and clouds affect the
air shower images. Especially for the lowest energies below 50 GeV, the
effect would be significant. Fig. 5.4 shows the event rate ² ² 2 Not the
trigger rate but the rate of the events which are not completely erased
by the image cleaning procedure. Therefore, most of the NSB accidental
trigger events are not included in the rate as a function of @xmath (see
Sect. LABEL:SectPyrometer ). A clear anti-correlation between @xmath and
the event rate can be seen. To assure that no data is affected by haze
and clouds, I selected data taken with @xmath lower than 20, as shown in
Fig. 5.5 . If the daily average value is more than 20, all the data
taken on that day are excluded.

#### 5.3.4 Event Rate Selection

Even if the environmental conditions and the reflector status are good,
the telescope performance might not be optimal because of inappropriate
DAQ settings, such as wrong threshold settings and the change in signal
transmission time (length), which can happen during long-term
observations. Such problems can be identified by checking the event
rate. For the very low threshold observations like pulsar observations,
almost half the trigger rate is due to NSB + after-pulsing accidental
events and, hence, the trigger rate may not reflect improper DAQ
settings. The event rate after the image cleaning would be more
indicative because images of such accidental events would be completely
erased by the image cleaning. As you can see from Fig. 5.6 , after
cutting away bad reflector days and cloudy days, almost all runs have a
good rate, meaning that hardware settings had been fine. Runs with the
event rate lower than 380 Hz were discarded just in case.

#### 5.3.5 Nebula Measurement Selection

From the rate cut described in the previous section, it is almost
guaranteed that event selection has been properly carried out. Just as
an additional cross-check, the detection efficiency of the Crab nebula
emission was examined. I analyzed the Crab nebula emission ³ ³ 3 As
noted in Sect. LABEL:SectCrabGeom , the nebula and the pulsar cannot be
spatially resolved by IACTs. The non-pulsed gamma-ray emission above 100
GeV is considered as a nebula emission with @xmath above 300, for which
@xmath cut is very powerful, i.e., the gamma-ray/hadron separation is
highly efficient (Sect. LABEL:SectGHsep ) and analysis is rather easy.
The @xmath cut at 0.1 is applied to the data and the excess is evaluated
with the @xmath cut at 10 degrees. The background was estimated by
fitting the @xmath distribution from 20 degrees to 80 degrees with a
parabolic function and then extrapolating the fitted function down to 0
degree.

An example of this analysis is shown in Fig. 5.7 , which is for the
observation on 1st January, 2008. In order to check the stability of
detection efficiency, the significance of the excess for each of the
observation days was scaled to one hour’s observation and plotted in
Fig. 5.8 . They are very stable and their mean value is 16.1, which is
consistent with the telescope sensitivity.

#### 5.3.6 Summary of the Data Selection

The selection of the good observation days are summarized in Table. 5.1
. 26 days out of 47 days and 18 days out of 36 days passed all the
selection cuts for Cycle III and IV, respectively. Within a good day,
some runs were also excluded due to unfavorable @xmath , @xmath or the
event rate. 25.1 and 34.0 hours of data remained for Cycle III and IV,
respectively.

### 5.4 @xmath Cut Optimization for Pulsar Analysis

For the pulsar analysis, the signal extraction can be carried out using
the light curve (see Sect. LABEL:SectSigExtLC ). The image parameter
@xmath is additionally used as an event selection parameter in order to
increase the signal-to-noise ratio. The best cut value on @xmath changes
with @xmath because the larger the @xmath , the better the shower
direction estimation. The dependency is especially strong at @xmath , as
one can see from the top right panel of Fig. 5.9 . Since most of the
signal from the Crab pulsar is expected at @xmath , a @xmath -dependent
@xmath cut is applied to the Crab pulsar data. It is optimized as
follows: First, MC gamma-ray and data (mostly hadron) samples are
divided into 20 of log @xmath ( @xmath ) bins from 1 (10 ph.e.) to 3
(1000 ph.e.), as shown in Fig. 5.9 . For each of the bins, the best
@xmath cut is calculated which maximizes the so-called Q-factor @xmath ,
where @xmath and @xmath is the fraction of events which survive the
@xmath cut for gamma-ray and hadron samples, respectively. Red stars in
the top right panel of Fig. 5.9 indicate the best @xmath cut values for
each bin. Then, those best values as a function of log @xmath are fitted
by a function @xmath , obtaining @xmath as the best parameters. The
function is shown in the same panel as a black line. In the data
analysis, the events which fulfill @xmath are considered as gamma-ray
candidates. At size 25 ph.e. the cut is at 45 degrees, while at 250
ph.e. it is at 8 degrees. @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are shown in the
bottom panel of Fig. 5.9 . @xmath is approximately 1.5 at 100 ph.e. and
lower for smaller @xmath s.

It should be noted that a cut in @xmath was found not to improve the
signal-to-noise ratio as much as in @xmath at @xmath where most of the
signal from the Crab pulsar is expected. In order to avoid systematic
errors in analysis, a @xmath cut is not applied.

### 5.5 Analysis of the Energy Spectrum of the Crab Nebula

The Crab nebula is generally used as a standard candle for the
calibration of the IACTs (see Sect. LABEL:SectCrabNebula ). It is the
brightest steady point-like source above 100 GeV. Actually that is why
it could conveniently be used to verify the quality of the data for the
Crab pulsar analysis (see Sect. 5.3.5 ). It would also be very important
to calculate its energy spectrum in order to assure that the analysis
tool and the MC samples are appropriate before starting the Crab pulsar
analysis.

#### 5.5.1 Data Sample for the Crab Nebula Analysis

I used 17.1 hours of data (ON-data) and 5.2 hours of OFF observation
data (OFF-data), both of which were taken in October and December 2007
and passed all the selection criteria described in Sect. 5.3 . The
conditions of the observations are summarized in Table 5.2 . The
pointing position of the OFF-data is on the same declination as for the
ON-data but differs by 2 hours in right ascension, which results in the
same trajectory on the sky between ON and OFF with a 2-hour time lag.

#### 5.5.2 Energy Range of the Crab Nebula Analysis

For the energy range below 50 GeV, a precise background estimation is
not easy in the case of the nebula observations. The reason is as
follows: For the nebula analysis, the light curve cannot be used for the
signal extraction and, hence, the @xmath distribution is used instead
(see Sect. LABEL:SectSignalExtract ). However, since the images with a
small @xmath are easily affected by the sky conditions, @xmath
distribution may slightly vary depending on the conditions, which may
lead to a difference between ON-data and OFF-data. Since the observed
events are strongly dominated by cosmic-ray background events, even a
tiny mismatch in @xmath distributions may result in a large systematic
error in the background estimation. It should be stressed that this is
not the case for the pulsar analysis. Since the light curve can be used
for the pulsed signal extraction, it does not require any
OFF-observation. Unless the sky condition changes significantly in the
time scale of a pulsar period (34 ms for the Crab pulsar), which is very
hard to imagine, the background estimation can be properly carried out.
For this reason, the nebula emission was analyzed only above 50 GeV.

The MC samples were generated from 6 GeV to 2 TeV. They are meant to be
used for the analysis of the Crab pulsar, which is known not to have
significant emission above 100 GeV. With these MC samples, it is very
hard to analyze the spectrum above 1 TeV properly because no information
above 2 TeV is present in MC and energy resolution is limited ( @xmath
at 1 TeV). In order to avoid any analytical bias due to the limited
energy range in MC production, the spectrum was analyzed up to 700 GeV.

The results are shown in Fig. 5.10 . The spectrum was unfolded using the
Tikhonov regularization method. It is known that the spectrum in this
energy range is better fitted by a variable power law

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

than a simple power law.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The power law fitting gives the best parameters of @xmath [cm @xmath s
@xmath TeV @xmath ] and @xmath , while @xmath with the degree of freedom
4 ( @xmath probability = 31.5 %). On the other hand, the variable power
law gives @xmath [cm @xmath s @xmath TeV @xmath ], @xmath and @xmath ,
while @xmath with the degree of freedom 3 ( @xmath probability = 31.4%).
In this limited energy range, both functions fit well. It should be
noted that the fits take into account the correlation between the
spectral points which is introduced by the unfolding procedure. The
spectrum measured by HESS telescopes above 500 GeV (see [ 11 ] ) and the
previous MAGIC measurements above 60 GeV (see [ 20 ] ) are also shown in
the same figure. They are consistent with one another in the overlapping
range, verifying the validity of the MC samples and analysis tools used
for the pulsar analysis.

### 5.6 Analysis of Optical Pulsation

For the pulsar analysis, the proper barycentric correction and the
accurate pulsar period information are essential. In order to check if
the barycentric correction and the pulse phase calculation are correctly
done, the optical pulsation of the Crab pulsar is very useful and
helpful since it can be clearly detected within 10 minutes of
observation thanks to the large reflector of MAGIC.

Fig. 5.11 shows optical pulsation detected by the central pixel of MAGIC
(see Sect. LABEL:SectCPIX ). @xmath hours of the observation data from
both cycles are used. The barycentric correction was done by @xmath and
the period information i.e. @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , are taken from
the “Jodrell Bank Crab Pulsar Monthly Ephemeris”, as described in Sect.
LABEL:SectPhaseCal . The phase is calculated by Eq. LABEL:EqPhaseCalc .
A glitch (see LABEL:SectGlitch ) occurred in May 2008, which is between
the Cycle III and the Cycle IV observations. Since there is no Crab
pulsar observation in that month and @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
updated monthly, the glitch does not affect the phase calculations.

The peak phase of P1 is slightly shifted earlier with respect to the
radio peak phase by @xmath in phase, corresponding to @xmath @xmath s,
which is known and consistent with other observations (see e.g. [ 146 ]
). Pulse shapes are also in good agreement with other observations,
although a small time variability has been reported and quantitative
comparison is not easy (see e.g. [ 110 ] ). Exactly the same method of
phase calculation is applied to gamma-ray signals.

### 5.7 Detection of the Very High Energy Gamma-ray Pulsation from the
Crab Pulsar

After all the selection described in Sect. 5.3 , 59.1 hours (Cycle
III + IV) of good data remained. The quality of the data sets, MC
samples, analysis tools and the pulsar phase calculations were verified,
as described in the previous sections. In this section, the analysis of
the pulsed gamma-ray signal from the Crab pulsar is described.

#### 5.7.1 The Pulsed Gamma-ray Signal

The light curve of all events with @xmath range from 25 to 500 are shown
in Fig. 5.12 . A @xmath -dependent @xmath cut described in 5.4 was also
applied. The background was estimated using the OP (off-pulse) region
(phase 0.52 to 0.88). P1 (phase -0.06 to 0.04), P2 (phase 0.32 to 0.43)
and the sum of P1 and P2 have @xmath , @xmath and @xmath excess events
with statistical significance of 4.28 @xmath , 7.39 @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. For the definition of the phase names, see Sect.
LABEL:SectPhaseNaming . The flux of P2 is twice as high as that of P1.
As can be seen in Fig. LABEL:FigCrabPulses , at 1 GeV, P1 has a higher
flux than P2. The energy dependence of P2/P1 ratio will be discussed in
Sect. 7.2 . The so-called bridge emission, which is seen in some energy
bands, is not visible in the MAGIC data. This will also be discussed in
Sect. 7.2 As one can see the bottom panel of Fig. 5.12 , although P1 is
conventionally defined as 0.32 to 0.43, most of the excess is
concentrated in a narrower phase interval. The precise discussion of the
pulse shape will take place in Sect. 7.3 .

#### 5.7.2 Further Investigation of the Signal

Since this is the first detection of a gamma-ray pulsar by an IACT ⁴ ⁴ 4
The discovery of the Crab pulsar with MAGIC was first achieved by the
efforts of my colleagues listed in Sect. LABEL:SectChoice and reported
in [ 22 ] , it is important to assure that the signal is not an artifact
of the analysis or of the instrument. A useful check is the growth of
the number of excess events as a function of the number of background
events. Since pulsar emission is thought to be stable in time, the
excess should grow linearly. The results are shown in the left panel of
Fig. 5.13 and indeed the excess grows linearly. The growth of
statistical significance is also shown in the right panel.

Another useful check is the “inverse selection” of events. If the excess
is due to gamma-ray signals, events discarded by the @xmath cuts should
not contain a significant excess. Figure 5.14 shows the light curve
produced with events which do NOT pass the @xmath cut. Excesses are
compatible with the background fluctuation.

### 5.8 SIZE Dependence of the Pulsation

In order to roughly estimate from which energies the excess events come
from, the energy dependence of the light curves should be examined.
Instead of the energy reconstructed with Random Forest (see Sect.
LABEL:SectEneRec ), which suffers a trigger-bias effect at these low
energies as discussed in Sect. LABEL:SectEneRec , I use @xmath for this
study. @xmath is the total number of photoelectrons in an image and a
good indicator of the primary gamma-ray energy, especially for this data
set, for which the @xmath range is limited up to 20 degrees. As one can
see in Fig. LABEL:FigEvsS , @xmath in ph.e. corresponds roughly to two
times the energy in GeV.

The data with @xmath from 25 to 800 were divided into 5 bins in log
@xmath . Data with @xmath above 800 were also analyzed. The light curves
of these six sub-samples are shown in Fig. 5.15 . The numbers of excess
events for P1, P2 and P1 + P2, shown in the right upper corner of each
panel, were calculated by estimating the background level with the OP
region (0.52 to 0.58). Most of the excess events are in the two lowest
@xmath bins. The third (100 -200) and fourth (200-400) bins also show a
2 @xmath level excess. Above 400 ph.e., no more excess is visible. The
size-dependence of the excess is shown graphically in Fig 5.16 .

A detail calculation of the energy spectrum of the pulsed gamma-ray
signal will take place in Sect. 5.10 .

### 5.9 Time Variation of the Pulsation from the Crab Pulsar

The previous study by L. Kuiper et al. (see [ 115 ] ) shows the flux of
the Crab pulsar at 1-10 MeV is stable in a time scale of years. However,
it is still interesting to check if the flux measured by MAGIC is stable
or not, especially because it is the flux beyond the cut-off energy. The
growth of the number of excess events as a function of the number of
background events already showed that there is no drastic change in flux
(see Fig. 5.13 ). Here I examine the stability of the flux and the light
curve more quantitatively. Due to the limited statistical significance
of the excess, dividing data sample into too many subsets does not make
much sense. Therefore, I only compared Cycle III and Cycle IV to search
for a possible yearly variability.

#### 5.9.1 Variability in Light Curve

Fig. 5.17 shows the light curves of Cycle III (top) and Cycle IV
(bottom). The @xmath range is from 25 to 500. In order to evaluate the
variation in the light curve, the @xmath test was performed for the 11
bins starting from -0.0682 to 0.432 in the histograms, which is roughly
from the beginning of P1 to the end of P2. The @xmath was 5.00 while the
degree of freedom was 10, indicating no significant difference between
the two light curves.

#### 5.9.2 Variability in Flux

As one can see from Fig. 5.17 , although Cycle IV has 30% longer
observation time, it shows less excess events than Cycle III. This can
be explained only by statistical fluctuation but the hardware
malfunction described in Sect. 5.2 may also have played a role. @xmath
-dependence of the number of excess events are also compared in Fig.
5.18 . Left, middle and right panels are for P1, P2 and P1 + P2. The
difference in observation time between the two cycles is corrected. The
effect of broken sub-patches estimated by MC (see Sect. 5.2 ) is also
corrected, such that Cycle III and IV have the same gamma-ray detection
efficiency. @xmath s are 1.04, 3.14, 2.46 for P1, P2 and P1 + P2, while
the number of dof is 4 for all phase intervals. Signals observed in
Cycle III and IV are statistically consistent and no significant
variability is seen between Cycle III and IV.

### 5.10 Energy Spectra of the Pulsation from the Crab Pulsar

Here I show the energy spectra for the pulsation of P1, P2 and P1 + P2.
Since the effective area is increasing rapidly from 20 GeV to 200 GeV
(see Sect. LABEL:SectStdSumComp ) and the energy resolution is rather
poor in this energy region (see Sect. LABEL:SectUnFold ), the spectra
must be calculated with great care. Events with @xmath lower than 30
will be excluded from the spectrum calculation in order to avoid a
possible mismatch between MC and data (see Sect. LABEL:SectMAGICSyst ).
A few different methods will be tried in order to estimate the
analytical uncertainty of the results.

#### 5.10.1 Excess Distribution in the Reconstructed Energy and Size

Fig. 5.19 shows the distributions of the number of excess events as a
function of @xmath and the reconstructed energy. It should be emphasized
again that the reconstructed energy is strongly biased by the trigger
effect (see Sect. LABEL:SectUnFold ). The energy spectrum will be
calculated from these distributions. @xmath (total charge in a shower
image) has less systematic uncertainty than the reconstructed energy,
whereas the resolution of the energy estimation by @xmath is poorer than
that by the reconstructed energy. Therefore, it is important to analyze
the spectrum with both and compare the results.

#### 5.10.2 Spectrum Calculation by Forward Unfolding Assuming a Power
Law

As long as the assumption of the spectral shape is valid, the forward
unfolding method should provide the most robust and reliable result, as
described in Sect. LABEL:SectUnFold . Here, I assumed a power law
spectrum with two free parameters, namely, differential flux at 30 GeV
@xmath and the spectral index @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Due to the relatively poor statistics and the narrow energy range, even
if the true spectrum is slightly curved, the power law assumption should
be valid.

The results based on the @xmath distribution (the left panel of Fig.
5.19 ) and the reconstructed energy distribution (the right panel of
Fig. 5.19 ) are shown in Table 5.3 . The obtained spectra are also
graphically shown in Fig. 5.20 by green (based on @xmath ) and red
(based on the reconstructed energy) lines. Unfolded excess
distributions, i.e., the expected excess distributions from the obtained
spectra, are overlaid in Fig. 5.19 . The @xmath values between the
unfolded excess distribution and the observed excess distribution are
shown in the fifth column of Table 5.3 . They are sufficiently small,
assuring the validity of the power law assumption.

#### 5.10.3 Spectrum Calculation by Unfolding with Different
Regularization Methods

(Backward) unfolding does not require an assumption of the spectral
shape a priori. However, as described in Sect LABEL:SectUnFold ,
different regularization methods might give different results. The
results are reliable only when all the regularization methods show
consistency. Tikhonov (see [ 182 ] ), Schmelling (see [ 163 ] ) and
Bertero (see [ 42 ] ) regularization methods were used for unfolding the
reconstructed energy distribution. The results are shown in Fig 5.20 as
black (Tikhonov), blue (Schmelling) and pink (Bertero) points. All the
results are consistent. The results with the Tikhonov method were fitted
by a power law function (Eq. 5.3 ), shown as a black line in the figure.
It should be noted that points are correlated with each other because of
the unfolding procedure but that the correlation is taken into account
when fitting is performed. The best fit parameters and @xmath values are
summarized in Table 5.3 .

#### 5.10.4 Discussion of the Results

As summarized in Table 5.3 , the three methods, namely, the forward
unfolding with the @xmath distribution, the forward unfolding with the
reconstructed energy distribution and the unfolding with reconstructed
energy distribution using the Tikhonov regularization method, show
consistent results. The energy spectra can be well described by a simple
power law, which is partially due to the limited statistics and the
narrow energy range. The flux of P2 at 30 GeV is twice as large as that
of P1, being consistent with the light curve. On the other hand, no
difference in spectral indices between them is visible. The indices are
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath for P1 + P2, P1 and P2, respectively, in the
case of the unfolding with the Tikhonov regularization method.

### 5.11 Concluding Remarks

After many careful checks, 59.1 hours of high quality data have been
obtained. All the analysis tools have been carefully examined as well.
From them, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath gamma-ray signal events have been
detected for P1, P2 and P1 + P2, respectively, corresponding to 4.28
@xmath , 7.39 @xmath and @xmath in statistical significance. The light
curves show some interesting features compared to lower energy bands,
such as very narrow P1 peak and the absence of the bridge emission.
These features will be further discussed in Chapter 7 together with
lower energy observations. Most of the excess events are concentrated on
@xmath whereas some excess events are still visible at @xmath . The
energy spectra have been calculated with a few different methods and all
of them have given consistent results. All of P1, P2 and P1 + P2 can be
described by a power law from 25 GeV to 100 GeV and P2 has twice as high
a flux as P1 at 30 GeV. The power law indices of P1 and P2 are
compatible and they are approximately @xmath . Significant time
variation of the pulsation between Cycles III and IV is not seen. These
results will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 7 , by comparing
with Fermi-LAT data from 100 MeV to @xmath GeV.

## Chapter 6 Analysis of Fermi-LAT public Data

MAGIC could observe gamma-rays from the Crab pulsar only above 25 GeV,
which is apparently beyond the spectral cut-off point. In order to make
progress in understanding the emission mechanism, the MAGIC results need
to be discussed in connection with the lower energies. However, even
after 9 years (April 1991 to May 2000) of operation of EGRET, which was
the only GeV gamma-ray detector that could detect the Crab pulsar before
2007, only @xmath photons above 5 GeV had been detected from the Crab
pulsar (see Fig. LABEL:Fig2.9sigma ). This gap in energy coverage
between MAGIC and EGRET was soon to be filled by data from a new
instrument.

The Large Area Telescope (LAT) aboard the Fermi Gamma-ray Space
Telescope was successfully launched on June 11, 2008. It can observe
gamma-rays above 100 MeV and clearly saw the Crab pulsar up to @xmath 30
GeV after 8 months of operation (see [ 4 ] ). It is certain that the
data of Fermi -LAT help to interpret the results of MAGIC observations
discussed in the previous chapter. Therefore, I analyzed one year of its
data, which was made public in August 2009.

### 6.1 Detector Design of Fermi-Lat

The Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope is equipped with the Gamma-ray Burst
Monitor (GBM) and the Large Area Telescope (LAT) (see the left panel of
Fig. 6.1 ). The GBM consists of 12 thallium-activated sodium iodide
(NaI(Tl)) scintillation counters and two bismuth germanate (BGO)
scintillation counters (see [ 132 ] ). Each counter has an area of 126
cm @xmath and energy ranges are 8 keV to 1 MeV and 200 keV to 40 MeV,
for the NaI(Tl) counter and the BGO counter, respectively. The primary
aim of the GBM is to detect gamma-ray bursts and its data have not been
made public. The LAT comprises trackers, calorimeters, and an
anti-coincidence detector (see [ 31 ] ). The LAT estimates the incoming
direction and the energy of a gamma-ray by converting it into an
electron-positron pair, which subsequently cause electromagnetic
cascades inside the detector.

  Tracker:  

    There are 16 tracker modules (see the right panel of Fig. 6.1 ) and
    each of them has 18 ( @xmath ) tracking planes. A tracking plane
    consists of two layers ( @xmath and @xmath ) of single-sided silicon
    strip detectors (35 cm long). The 16 planes at the top of the
    tracker are interleaved with high- @xmath converter material
    (tungsten) in which gamma-rays can convert to an electron-positron
    pair (see [ 31 ] ). The total vertical depth of the tracker
    including support material amounts to 1.5 radiation lengths.

  Calorimeter:  

    The primary purpose of the calorimeter is twofold: 1) to measure the
    energy deposition due to the electromagnetic particle shower that
    results from the electron-positron pair produced by the incident
    photon and 2) to image the shower development profile, thereby
    providing an important background discriminator and an estimator of
    the shower energy leakage fluctuations. There are 16 calorimeter
    modules under the trackers (see the right panel of Fig. 6.1 ). Each
    of them has 96 cesium iodide crystals doped with thallium (CsI(Tl))
    with a size of 2.7 cm @xmath 2.0 cm @xmath 32.6 cm. The crystals are
    optically isolated from each other and are arranged horizontally in
    eight layers of 12 crystals each. The total vertical depth of the
    calorimeter is 8.6 radiation lengths, i.e. 10.1 radiation lengths
    for the total instrument (see [ 31 ] ).

  Anti-coincidence detector:  

    The purpose of the anti-coincidence detector is to provide
    charged-particle background rejection. ¹ ¹ 1 The efficiency of
    charged particle detection is @xmath (0.99999 when combined with the
    other subsystems). This is one of the key advantages compared to
    ground-based instruments, where it is impossible to install a
    primary hadron veto. It surrounds the tracker modules (see the right
    panel of Fig. 6.1 ). High energy gamma-rays may cause a so-called
    “backsplash” effect in the massive calorimeter, i.e. isotropically
    distributed secondary particles (mostly 100-1000 keV photons) from
    the electromagnetic cascade can hit the anti-coincidence detector
    (the photons cause Compton scattering), creating false veto signals.
    The effect was present in EGRET and lowered the detection efficiency
    above 10 GeV by at least a factor of two. To minimize the false
    veto, the anti-coincidence detector is made up of 89 segmented
    plastic scintillators: A @xmath array on the top and @xmath arrays
    on each of the four sides. Each tile is read out by two
    photomultipliers coupled to wavelength shifting fibers. Tiles near
    the incident candidate photon trajectory may be considered for
    background rejection (see [ 31 ] ).

### 6.2 Detector Performance of Fermi-Lat

The basic performance of the LAT is summarized in Table 6.1 . Parameters
are taken from [ 31 ] . The energy resolution is dependent on the energy
and the incident angle (see the table) but it is roughly @xmath , which
is better than MAGIC (35% at 30 GeV, see Fig. LABEL:FigEneEst ). The
large FoV (2.4 sr) would also be of great advantage to compensate for
the small effective area. The timing accuracy of @xmath @xmath s is also
good enough to study the Crab pulsar. On the other hand, the angular
resolution is rather poor (0.6 degree at 1 GeV), leading to large
contamination of the galactic diffuse emission or nearby source
emissions to the target source.

The systematic uncertainty in the energy scale was conservatively
estimated to be @xmath 5% for 100 MeV to 1 GeV and @xmath 7% above 1
GeV, from the comparison between electron beam tests and their
simulation (see [ 3 ] and [ 2 ] ). The systematic uncertainty in
effective area was evaluated by comparing Vela observation results and
the simulation for them (see [ 3 ] ). It is 10% below 100 MeV,
decreasing to 5% at 560 MeV and increasing to 20% at 10 GeV and above.

### 6.3 Data Sample

After one year of operation, all the Fermi-LAT data and its analysis
tools were made public in August 2009. I analyzed one year of data from
4th August 2008 to 3rd August 2009. Events with an energy between 100
MeV to 300 GeV and with an arrival direction of 20 degrees around the
Crab pulsar were downloaded from the public Fermi website [ 210 ] . In
order to have solid results, the events with a zenith angle smaller than
105 degrees and with the highest quality “Diffuse class”, which means a
high probability of being a photon, were selected. This event selection
was performed by the Fermi official tool gtselect (see [ 210 ] ). Events
with imperfect spacecraft information and events taken when the
satellite was in the South Atlantic Anomaly were also rejected. These
selections were carried out by gtmktime (see [ 210 ] ).

The sky map of all the data used is shown in the left panel of Fig. 6.2
. The Crab pulsar is at the center of the map (star) and two more bright
sources, namely, IC 443 (cross) and Geminga (triangle), can also be
seen. In addition, the galactic diffuse gamma-ray emission is visible.
Since the angular resolution of the LAT detector is @xmath degree at 100
MeV (see [ 31 ] ), contamination from the nearby sources and the
galactic diffused emission must be taken into account when the Crab
pulsar is analyzed. Moreover, emission from the Crab nebula must also be
subtracted by using the pulse phase information.

### 6.4 The Light Curve

To make a light curve (phase diagram) of the Crab pulsar, first of all,
the pulse phase must be assigned to each individual event. This is done
by the official Fermi analysis tool, gtpphase (see [ 210 ] ). It
requires the pulsar ephemeris information and I used the “Jodrell Bank
Crab Pulsar Monthly Ephemeris” for that, as I did for the MAGIC analysis
(see Sect LABEL:SectPhaseCal ). Some of phase-resolved sky maps are
shown in Fig. LABEL:FigPulsarTopPage . Then, events from the direction
around the Crab pulsar were extracted from the data set. Because the
angular resolution has a strong energy-dependency, the extraction radius
@xmath [degree] should also be energy-dependent. I used the following
radius @xmath , which was also used in the Fermi official publication
(see [ 4 ] ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the estimated energy which is already assigned for each
event in the public data. @xmath decreases linearly to log @xmath (
@xmath ) until 1.14 GeV and stays constant at 1.3 degrees above this
energy. It should be noted that the emissions from both the Crab pulsar
and the Crab nebula are included within @xmath . The angular resolution
of Fermi -LAT does not enable a spatial resolution for the pulsar and
the nebula.

The light curve obtained by all the LAT data used is shown in the right
panel of Fig. 6.2 . Energy-dependent light curves from 100 MeV to above
10 GeV are shown in Fig. 6.3 . Below 10 GeV, the pulsations are seen
with good precision. A flat continuum in the light curves is mainly from
the continuous Crab nebula emission. Above 10 GeV, although the two
pulses are clearly visible, the statistical uncertainties are larger
than for lower energies. P1 (phases -0.06 to 0.04) and P2 (phases 0.32
to 0.43) have @xmath and @xmath excess events above 10 GeV with a
significance of 2.0 and 3.2, respectively, with the background level
(mainly from the nebula emission) estimated using the phases between
0.52 and 0.87.

There are several features visible in these light curves: The flux ratio
between P1 and P2 is changing with the energy.The widths of the two
pulses are decreasing as the energy goes higher. A hint of a possible
third peak is visible at a phase around 0.75, but only above 10 GeV.
These detailed features of the light curves will be discussed in Chapter
7 , together with the MAGIC results and lower energy observations.

### 6.5 The Crab Nebula Analysis

As is the case with MAGIC, the rather poor angular resolution of Fermi
-LAT does not enable a spatial resolution for the Crab pulsar and the
Crab nebula. Therefore, the nebula emission is the dominant background
of the Crab pulsar emission for Fermi -LAT data. It must be properly
analyzed by using the pulse phase information and, then, must be
subtracted from the Crab pulsar emission. Fortunately, the analysis of
the nebula has an important by-product: one can make sure of the
analysis method by checking if the obtained energy spectrum is smoothly
connected to the IACT measurements (see Sect. LABEL:SectCrabNebula ).

In order to analyze the nebula component, photons with the pulse phases
from 0.52 to 0.87 ² ² 2 It is almost the same as the OP (off-pulse)
phases defined in Sect. LABEL:SectPhaseNaming but not exactly. Since the
official Fermi publication used these phases for the nebula analysis
(see [ 4 ] ), I followed their example. (see the right panel of Fig. 6.2
), where no pulsed emission is seen in lower energies, are assumed to be
from the nebula (and other background photons such as galactic diffuse
emission). The selection of the right phase events is carried out by the
Fermi -LAT analysis tool gtselect . The effective observation time and
the collection area are calculated by gtltcube and gtexpmap (see [ 210 ]
). The spectrum is determined by means of the likelihood method, using
the official tool gtlike (see [ 210 ] ). It is done in the following
way: The spectral shapes with several parameters of the sources in the
FoV, the galactic and extragalactic diffuse emission models and the
detector response function are assumed a priori. Then, the best
parameters that maximize the likelihood of the observed data sets are
determined. P6_V3_Diffuse , which is officially provided by the Fermi
-LAT collaboration, was used for the detector response function, A
simple power law spectrum was assumed for the IC 443 while a power law
spectrum with an exponential cut-off was assumed for Geminga. For the
extragalactic and galactic diffuse emission, isotropic_iem_v02.txt and
gll_iem_v02.fit , which are included in the Fermi -LAT analysis tool
package as a standard model, were used. For the Crab nebula, the
spectrum based on the sum of the two power laws is assumed aiming for
the synchrotron and the inverse Compton emission components, which have
been suggested by the previous EGRET (see [ 115 ] ) and IACT
measurements (see e.g. [ 20 ] , [ 11 ] and Fig. LABEL:FigNebulaSpectrum
).

The spectrum of the Crab nebula calculated based on the Fermi -LAT data
is shown in Fig. 6.4 as a red line. One can see that synchrotron
spectrum is steeply falling from 200 MeV to 500 MeV and the inverse
Compton component becomes dominant above 800 MeV. They can be described
as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

In order to make sure that the assumption of the spectral shape of the
Crab pulsar is valid, the same data sets were divided into many subsets
according to the energy. Then, the likelihood analysis was applied to
each subset, assuming a simple power law in each small energy range. The
red points in the figure indicate the results for the divided subsets.
Instead of showing many short truncated lines, the value at the bin
center and its error are shown. All the points are very well aligned
along the line, showing the validity of the assumption.

The spectrum published by the Fermi -LAT collaboration with smaller data
samples ( 8 months of data) (see [ 4 ] ) are also shown in the same
figure as a green dashed line, which is consistent with my analysis. The
measurements by MAGIC (the published one and the one I calculated with
the data samples used for the pulsar analysis) and by HESS are also
shown in the same figure. The spectra are smoothly connected from 100
MeV to above 10 TeV. ³ ³ 3 The true spectrum should not be a simple
power law from 10 to 100 GeV. Therefore, the @xmath difference between
the fitting line of Fermi -LAT data and that of MAGIC data at 100 GeV in
Fig. 6.4 is not very meaningful.

It should be noted that the poor statistics of Fermi -LAT data in the
overlapped energy region from 50 GeV to 300 GeV does not allow a
relative flux scale calibration between Fermi -LAT and MAGIC with a
precision better than @xmath , which is larger than the systematic
uncertainties of both experiments (see Sect. LABEL:SectMAGICSyst and
Sect. 6.2 ).

### 6.6 The Crab Pulsar Spectrum

From the nebula analysis, all the background components (the nearby
source emissions, the diffuse emissions and the nebula emission itself)
have been determined. Keeping the spectral parameters for background
components fixed, the pulsed component is analyzed with the same
likelihood method. Analyses are made for four different phase intervals;
TP (total pulse, phase 0.00 to 1.00), P1 (-0.06 to 0.04), P2 (0.32 to
0.43) and P1 + P2 (sum of P1 and P2). These definitions are the same as
those described in Sect. LABEL:SectPhaseNaming .

#### 6.6.1 Power Law + Cut-off Assumption for the Crab Pulsar Spectrum

Previous EGRET measurements show that the energy spectrum of the Crab
pulsar can be well described by a power law between 100 MeV to a few GeV
(see [ 115 ] ), whereas non-detection by IACTs above 100 GeV (see [ 20 ]
) imply the cut-off to be around 10 GeV as mentioned in Sect.
LABEL:SectCrabObsBefore2007 . Therefore, I assumed the spectral shape as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

There are 4 free parameters, namely, the flux at 1 GeV @xmath , the
cut-off energy @xmath , the power law index @xmath and the sharpness of
the cut-off @xmath ⁴ ⁴ 4 As can be seen in Eq. 6.5 , although the flux
above the cut-off energy is suppressed, a low flux can still be expected
above the cut-off energy. A word “cut-off” does not mean extinction of a
gamma-ray flux. . As discussed in Sect LABEL:SectCutoffSteepness , in
the case where the emission region is close to the pulsar surface, the
cut-off should be sharp, i.e. @xmath should be significantly larger than
1, while, in the case where emission comes from the outer magnetosphere,
@xmath should be 1. Therefore, estimation of @xmath is important for the
investigation of the emission mechanism. However, due to the lack of
statistics above 10 GeV, the likelihood analysis with four free
parameters sometimes gives unstable results. Therefore, I made five
analyses with three free parameters, i.e. with @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath being free parameters and with @xmath fixed to be 0.66, 1, 1.33,
1.66 and 2.

The results are shown in Fig. 6.5 , Fig. 6.6 and Table 6.2 . Hereafter,
when @xmath , the spectral cut-off shape will be called the “exponential
cut-off”, while when @xmath , it will be called the “sub-exponential
cut-off”. The rest (with @xmath ) will be called the “super-exponential
cut-off”. In order to evaluate which assumption is more appropriate, the
likelihood ratio @xmath is calculated and shown in the seventh column of
Table 6.2 , where @xmath and @xmath are the likelihood value for a given
assumption and that for the exponential cut-off assumption,
respectively. The eighth column shows the corresponding probability. The
spectral parameters published by Fermi -LAT collaboration for TP under
the exponential cut-off assumption ⁵ ⁵ 5 Fermi -LAT collaboration
reported these spectral parameters only under the exponential cut-off
assumption in their publication [ 4 ] . In addition to the TP spectrum,
they analyzed the spectrum of many narrow phase intervals (width @xmath
). However, they did not publish the spectrum of P1 or P2, which I want
to compare with MAGIC results in Chapter 7. are also shown in the last
row of Table 6.2 . They are consistent with my analysis (compare with
the first row).

What one can see from Fig. 6.5 , Fig. 6.6 and Table 6.2 is the
following:

-   No significant difference is seen in the power law index @xmath
    among different phase intervals (although @xmath is dependent on the
    sharpness of the cut-off @xmath due to a mathematical effect). For
    the exponential cut-off assumption, @xmath .

-   The super-exponential assumptions are significantly worse than the
    exponential cut-off one. On the other hand, the sub-exponential
    cut-off assumption is as good as the exponential cut-off one.

-   80% of the total flux is from P1 + P2 at 1 GeV. P1 has twice as high
    a flux as P2 at 1 GeV.

-   The cut-off energy is higher for P2 than for P1. The difference in
    the cut-off energy between TP and P1 + P2 implies a higher cut-off
    energy for the bridge emission than for P1 + P2.

-   The flux of P1 and P2 become comparable at around 5 GeV because of
    the higher cut-off of P2. P2 dominates above 5 GeV.

The fact that super-exponential assumptions lead to worse fitting than
the exponential one suggests that the emission region of gamma-rays is
not close to the neutron star surface. This will be discussed further in
Chapter 7 . For the exponential cut-off model, the cut-off energies are
estimated to be 6.1 @xmath 0.5, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath GeV for TP,
P1 + P2, P1 and P2 respectively.

#### 6.6.2 Power Law Extension Assumption for the Crab Pulsar Spectrum
above the Cut-Off

It should be noted that the sharpness of the cut-off @xmath is already
determined below @xmath GeV and the spectral shape above 7 GeV is not
well determined due to the lack of statistics, as can be seen from the
error bars in Fig. 6.5 and Fig. 6.6 . Considering that the MAGIC results
show power law spectra with an index of @xmath above 25 GeV (see Sect.
5.10 ), I examine a power law assumption for the spectra above the
cut-off energy. The fact that the last point at 20 GeV is upwardly
deviated from the exponential cut-off spectrum by @xmath for all phase
intervals (see Fig. 6.5 ) may support this assumption.

I selected data above 4 GeV and made a spectral analysis assuming a
power law;

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The results are shown in Fig. 6.7 and Table 6.3 . In order to perform
the likelihood ratio test with respect to the exponential cut-off
assumption, the exponential cut-off assumption is also applied to the
same data set. This time @xmath is fixed to the best value obtained by
the previous analyses (see Table 6.2 ), so that the number of free
parameters are the same (two) for the two models. The likelihood ratio (
@xmath ) and the corresponding probability are shown in the fifth and
sixth columns of the table. None of the @xmath s are significantly
large, which means that above 4 GeV the power law assumption is as good
as the exponential cut-off assumption. The obtained spectral indices are
@xmath and consistent with the ones obtained from the MAGIC data, as
described in Sect. 5.10 (see Table 5.3 ). The spectra obtained with
MAGIC data and Fermi -LAT data will be compared in more detail in the
next chapter.

### 6.7 Concluding Remarks

By using one year of the public Fermi -LAT data, the Crab pulsar was
analyzed from 100 MeV to @xmath GeV. Energy-dependent light curves show
a few remarkable features, such as energy dependence of the pulse width
and the P2/P1 ratio. The possible third peak is also seen only above 10
GeV. These features will be discussed in detail, combined with the MAGIC
results and lower energy observations, in Chapter 7 . The energy
spectrum of the Crab pulsar can be well described by a power law with an
exponential cut-off, indicating that the emission region is not close to
the neutron star surface. The cut-off energies are estimated to be 6.1
@xmath 0.5 GeV, @xmath GeV, @xmath GeV, and @xmath GeV, for the TP, P1 +
P2, P1 and P2, respectively. Due to the lack of statistics, the spectral
shape above 7 GeV is not well determined. If data only above 4 GeV are
analyzed, a power law function with an index of @xmath fits the data
too, suggesting the possibility that the energy spectrum is extending by
a power law after the cut-off . Actually, the spectral indices are
consistent with the MAGIC results. These spectra obtained with Fermi
-LAT data will be compared with the ones obtained by MAGIC in Chapter 7
.

## Chapter 7 Analysis of the Energy Spectrum and the Light Curve
Combining MAGIC and Fermi-LAT results

MAGIC could measure the energy spectrum of the Crab pulsar from 25 GeV
to 100 GeV, whereas Fermi -LAT could measure from 100 MeV to @xmath GeV.
In this chapter, the energy spectrum and the light curve of the Crab
pulsar from 100 MeV to 100 GeV is further investigated, by combining the
results of the two experiments.

### 7.1 Energy Spectra of P1 + P2, P1 and P2

The energy spectra measured by MAGIC and Fermi -LAT are shown in Fig.
7.1 . The top, the bottom left and the bottom right panels show those
for P1 + P2, P1 and P2, respectively (see Sect. LABEL:SectPhaseNaming
for the definition of P1 and P2). Although the Fermi -LAT results are
well described by a power law with an exponential cut-off or with a
sub-exponential cut-off, the MAGIC results are apparently deviated from
them. In Sect. 7.1.1 and Sect. 7.1.2 , these deviations will be
quantitatively examined, taking into account the systematic
uncertainties of both experiments.

On the other hand, a power law can well describe both Fermi -LAT results
above 4 GeV (see Sect. 6.6.2 ) and MAGIC results between 25 GeV and 100
GeV (see Sect. 5.10 ). The obtained spectral slopes from the two
experiments seem similar. The power law assumption will be examined in
Sect. 7.1.3 , also taking into account the systematic uncertainties of
both experiments.

#### 7.1.1 How Much Do the MAGIC Measurements Deviate from an
Exponential Cut-off Spectrum?

In general, the theoretical calculations based on the outer
magnetosphere emission hypothesis (the OG model or the SG model) predict
an exponential cut-off at 1 - 10 GeV in the Crab pulsar energy spectrum,
as discussed in Sect. LABEL:SectCutoffSteepness , with which Fermi -LAT
results are indeed consistent. However, as can be seen from Fig. 7.1 ,
the MAGIC measurements seem to be deviated from the extrapolation from
the Fermi -LAT measurements assuming that the spectra of P1, P2, and
P1 + P2 above 25 GeV follow a power law with an exponential cut-off.
Here, I evaluate these deviations.

##### Method: @xmath Test on @xmath Distributions

The power law spectra with an exponential cut-off for P1, P2 and P1 + P2
obtained by Fermi -LAT data (see Table 6.2 ) are assumed to be also
valid above 25 GeV. By means of MC with these energy spectra, expected
@xmath distributions of excess events for P1, P2 and P1 +P2 in the MAGIC
data are computed. Then, @xmath tests are performed between these MC
predictions and the actual observed distributions. The binning of the
@xmath distribution is @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , which is the same as
for the spectrum calculations (see Sect. 5.10.1 ) except that the
highest two bins are combined so that all bins have a meaningful number
of excess events (with respect to the statistical uncertainty) in the
data. Among the free parameters in the Fermi -LAT likelihood analysis,
the uncertainty of the cut-off energy has the largest effect on the
expected @xmath distribution in the MAGIC data. Therefore, the analysis
is repeated while changing the cut-off energy from 1 GeV to 25 GeV. This
method is schematically shown in Fig. 7.2 .

It should be noted that this method does not involve the energy
reconstruction, which suffers the poor energy resolution and the trigger
bias effect below 100 GeV (see Sect. LABEL:SectUnFold ). @xmath (total
charge in a shower image) is one of the most reliable image parameters
and a good indicator of the gamma-ray energy. Therefore, a robust
evaluation of the deviation can be expected for this method.

##### Results of the @xmath Tests on @xmath Distributions

The top left panel of Fig. 7.3 shows the @xmath value as a function of
the cut-off energy. The number of degree of freedom is three. The
corresponding upper probability is expressed with the corresponding
Gaussian deviation and is indicated by black dotted lines. The green
lines on the plot indicate the cut-off energies with statistical errors
obtained from the Fermi -LAT data, i.e. (4.45 @xmath 0.31) GeV , (3.68
@xmath 0.29) GeV and (5.86 @xmath 0.74) GeV for P1 + P2, P1 and P2,
respectively (see Table 6.2 ). The top right panel of Fig. 7.3 shows the
comparison of @xmath distributions between the observed data and the MC
predictions for the Fermi -LAT-determined cut-off energies. Based on
these @xmath distributions, the inconsistencies between the exponential
cut-off spectra determined by Fermi -LAT and the MAGIC measurements are
estimated to be at @xmath , @xmath and @xmath levels for P1 + P2, P1 and
P2, respectively. The cut-off energies that minimize the @xmath values
are estimated to be @xmath GeV, @xmath GeV and @xmath GeV for P1 + P2,
P1 and P2, respectively, which are also in clear contradiction with the
Fermi -LAT-determined cut-off energies. The bottom panel shows the
comparison of @xmath distributions between the observed data and the MC
predictions for the cut-off energies that minimize the @xmath values.
These results are summarized in Table 7.1

##### Effect of Systematic Uncertainties

As mentioned in Sect. LABEL:SectMAGICSyst and 6.2 , the systematic
uncertainties in the energy scale of MAGIC and Fermi -LAT above 10 GeV
are 20% and 7%, respectively, while the systematic uncertainties in the
effective area (including the effective observation time) of MAGIC and
Fermi -LAT above 10 GeV are 10% and 20%, respectively. The apparent
contradiction between Fermi -LAT and MAGIC measurements under the
exponential cut-off assumption could be not due to the wrong assumption
but due to these systematic uncertainties of the two experiments.

In order to examine this possibility, I made the same analysis but
scaling down the energy for MAGIC by 30%, i.e., the spectrum @xmath used
in the MC is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the power law with an exponential cut-off whose power
law part is based on the Fermi -LAT measurements and whose cut-off
energy is a parameter ranging from 1 GeV to 25 GeV. This 30% would be
very conservative compared to the systematic uncertainties of both
experiments. On the other hand, no correction for the effective area is
applied because the uncertainty of the energy scale should dominate the
effect on the results, due to the steep fall-off of the spectrum at
MAGIC energies.

The @xmath value as a function of the cut-off energy is shown in the
left panel of Fig. 7.4 . The comparison of the @xmath distributions
between the observed data and the MC predictions for the Fermi
-LAT-determined cut-off energies is shown in the right panel of the
figure. Even after 30% of energy scaling, the discrepancies in the
@xmath distributions are @xmath , @xmath and @xmath level for P1 + P2,
P1 and P2, respectively.The cut-off energies that minimize the @xmath
values are @xmath GeV, @xmath GeV and @xmath GeV. These values are also
significantly inconsistent with the Fermi -LAT-determined values. These
results are summarized in Table 7.1

From these discrepancies, it is evident that the exponential cut-off
assumption is not valid at MAGIC energies ( @xmath GeV). The extension
of the pulsed gamma-ray emission observed by MAGIC requires a
modification of the current pulsar models, which will be further
discussed in Sect. 8.2 .

#### 7.1.2 How Much Do the MAGIC Measurements Deviate from an
Sub-Exponential Cut-off Spectrum?

As discussed in Sect. LABEL:SectCutoff and Sect.
LABEL:SectCutoffSteepness , nearly monoenergetic electrons (as many of
theoretical models assume, see e.g. [ 93 ] , [ 178 ] , [ 105 ] and [ 176
] ) produce an exponential cut-off, i.e., @xmath in Eq. 6.5 is 1. On the
other hand, if @xmath is smaller than 1, the inconsistency between the
Fermi -LAT measurements and the MAGIC measurements would become smaller
than for the exponential cut-off assumption.

Since Fermi -LAT results can also be explained by the sub-exponential
cut-off assumption ( @xmath , see Sect. 6.6.1 ), I examine the
sub-exponential cut-off assumption. It should be noted that @xmath
implies that the responsible electrons are not monoenergetic. In this
case, no theoretical predictions for @xmath exist. I take the
sub-exponential cut-off assumption ( @xmath ) as one of the most extreme
assumptions ¹ ¹ 1 In the case of the Vela pulsar, the energy spectrum of
the total pulse (phase 0 to 1) measured by Fermi -LAT shows @xmath in
Eq. 6.5 to be @xmath (see [ 6 ] ). On the other hand, the energy
spectrum from each narrow phase interval (width @xmath ) is still
consistent with an exponential cut-off spectrum. In this analysis of the
Crab pulsar, the widths of phase intervals are 0.1, 0.11 and 0.21 for
P1, P2 and P1 + P2. Therefore, @xmath would be rather an extreme
assumption.

##### Method: @xmath Test on @xmath Distributions

The method is the same as the one for the exponential cut-off assumption
(see Sect. 7.1.1 ) except that @xmath (see Eq. 6.5 ) is used for the
steepness of the cut-off.

##### Results of the @xmath Tests on @xmath Distributions

The top left panel of Fig. 7.3 shows the @xmath value as a function of
the cut-off energy. The number of degree of freedom is three. The
corresponding upper probability is expressed with the corresponding
Gaussian deviation and is indicated by black dotted lines. The green
lines on the plot indicate the cut-off energies for the sub-exponential
cut-off with statistical errors obtained from the Fermi -LAT data, i.e.
(2.20 @xmath 0.20) GeV , (1.79 @xmath 0.20) GeV and (3.00 @xmath 0.51)
GeV for P1 + P2, P1 and P2, respectively (see Table 6.2 ). The top right
panel of Fig. 7.5 shows the comparison of @xmath distributions between
the observed data and the MC predictions for the Fermi -LAT-determined
cut-off energies. Although discrepancies are smaller than those for the
exponential cut-off case because of the more gradual cut-off, the
inconsistencies between the sub-exponential cut-off spectra determined
by Fermi -LAT and the MAGIC measurements are at @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath levels for P1 + P2, P1 and P2, respectively. The cut-off energies
that minimize the @xmath values are @xmath GeV, @xmath GeV and @xmath
GeV for P1 + P2, P1 and P2, respectively, which are also in clear
contradiction with the Fermi -LAT-determined cut-off energies. The
bottom panel shows the comparison of @xmath distributions between the
observed data and the MC predictions for the cut-off energies that
minimize the @xmath values.

##### Effect of the systematic uncertainties

The effect of the systematic uncertainties of the two experiments can be
taken into account in the same way as for the exponential cut-off case,
i.e. the spectrum @xmath used in the MC is scaled down by 30% (see Eq.
7.1 ).

The @xmath value as a function of the cut-off energy is shown in the
left panel of Fig. 7.6 . The comparison of the @xmath distributions
between the observed data and the MC predictions for the Fermi
-LAT-determined cut-off energies are shown in the right panel of Fig.
7.6 . After 30% of energy scaling, the inconsistencies in the @xmath
distribution are at @xmath , @xmath and @xmath levels for P1 + P2, P1
and P2, respectively. The sub-exponential cut-off spectrum might explain
the energy spectrum of P1 if the systematic uncertainties of the two
experiments are conservatively taken into account. However, P1 + P2 and
P2 are still largely inconsistent. The cut-off energies that minimize
the @xmath values are @xmath GeV, @xmath GeV and @xmath GeV. These
values are still inconsistent with the Fermi -LAT-determined values.
These results are summarized in Table 7.1 .

The power law with a sub-exponential cut-off is not valid for P1 + P2
and P2 at the MAGIC energies ( @xmath GeV).

#### 7.1.3 Power Law Fit above 4 GeV

The super-exponential cut-off assumption is ruled out by the Fermi -LAT
results alone (see Sect. 6.6.1 ). Moreover, it is now evident that
neither the exponential cut-off nor the sub-exponential cut-off can
explain the observational results of Fermi -LAT and MAGIC consistently.

On the other hand, a power law can well describe both the Fermi -LAT
results above 4 GeV (see Sect. 6.6.2 ) and MAGIC results between 25 GeV
and 100 GeV (see Sect. 5.10 ), as can be seen in Fig. 7.1 . In this
section, an assumption that the spectra above 4 GeV follow a power law
is examined.

##### Method: Combined Fit to Fermi-LAT and MAGIC Data

A power law function is fitted to the data points of Fermi -LAT and
MAGIC together. In order to take into account a possible energy scale
difference between the two experiments, the correction factor @xmath is
introduced to the power law function as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Fermi -LAT points are statistically independent of each other but MAGIC
data points are correlated, due to the unfolding procedure. This
correlation will be taken into account when fitting is applied. Firstly,
@xmath is fixed to 1 and then, secondly, @xmath is treated as a free
parameter.

##### Results of Combined Fit to Fermi-LAT and MAGIC Data

The results are shown in Fig. 7.7 and Table 7.2 . Even without relative
energy correction, i.e. with @xmath fixed to 1, the fitting probability
is high enough (see the fifth column of the Table). By making @xmath a
free parameter, @xmath values are only slightly reduced and the obtained
@xmath s do not significantly deviate from 1. As a result, @xmath and
@xmath do not change significantly. @xmath is about 3 for all the phase
intervals and a significant difference is not seen.

The physics interpretation of this result will be discussed in Sect. 8.2
.

### 7.2 P2/P1 Ratio and Bridge/P1 Ratio

The light curves for different energies such as Fig. 5.15 and Fig. 6.3
suggest that the flux ratio between P1 and P2 changes with energy. The
fraction of the Bridge emission seems to be energy-dependent, too. Some
of the light curves from different energies are overlaid in Fig. 7.8 in
order to show the energy dependence of the P2/P1 ratio and the Bridge/P1
ratio. The P2/P1 ratio and/or the Bridge/P1 ratio have been studied by
many authors such as [ 115 ] , [ 184 ] , [ 133 ] , [ 127 ] and [ 128 ]
for a wide energy range from optical to gamma-rays. On the one hand, the
energy dependence of these ratios can be thought of as a consequence of
the different energy spectra for different phase intervals. On the other
hand, taking the flux ratio between two phase intervals cancels out the
systematic uncertainty of the absolute flux scale for different
detectors. Therefore, these ratios enable to study precisely the
relative spectral behavior of different phase intervals for a very wide
energy range using the measurements from many different detectors.

Here, I calculate the P2/P1 and Bridge/P1 ratios for Fermi -LAT and
MAGIC data and compare them with the lower energy results.

##### Method: Calculation of Energy-dependent P2/P1 and Bridge/P1 Ratios
from Light Curves

Fermi -LAT data sets are divided into 5 bins in energy, 100 - 300 MeV,
300 - 1000 MeV, 1 - 3 GeV, 3 - 10 GeV and above 10 GeV. MAGIC data are
divided into two bins in @xmath , 25 - 70 ph.e. and 70 - 500 ph.e.. The
number of excess events for P1, P2 and Bridge are calculated from light
curves of each energy bin, by estimating background by OP phases (For
the definition of P1, P2, Bridge and OP, see Sect. LABEL:SectPhaseNaming
and Table 7.3 .). Then, the ratio of P2 to P1 and that of Bridge to P1
are computed.

##### Results of Energy-dependent P2/P1 and Bridge/P1 Ratios

The numbers of excess events of P1, P2 and Bridge as a function of
energy are shown in the left panel of Fig. 7.9 and Table 7.4 . In the
energy ranges of above 10 GeV for Fermi -LAT and 70 - 500 ph.e. for
MAGIC, no significant excess was found in Bridge phases. Therefore, 95%
confidence level upper limits are shown for these bins. The horizontal
central value of each point corresponds to the log-mean energy of each
bin, taking into account the detector’s effective area and the energy
spectrum of the pulsar, while the horizontal error bar corresponds to
30% of the log-mean energy, which is a conservative estimation for the
absolute energy uncertainty. The P2/P1 ratio stays almost constant from
100 MeV to 3GeV and rises at energies above 3 GeV. On the other hand,
the Bridge/P1 ratio rises from 100 MeV to 3 GeV. Above 3 GeV, due to the
lack of statistics, it is not possible to draw a conclusion in the
behavior.

In Fig. 7.10 , the results are compared with those at lower energies.
The data points of lower wavelengths are adopted from [ 115 ] . A few
common features between the behavior of the P2/P1 ratio and that of the
Bridge/P1 ratio can be seen: From 1 eV to 1 MeV, they increase with
energy with a power law. From 1 MeV to 100 MeV, they drop rapidly and,
then, rise again above 100 MeV @xmath 1 GeV. The ratios at @xmath GeV
may be as high as those at 1 MeV, although the uncertainty is large due
to the lack of statistics.

### 7.3 Rising and Falling Edges

The energy spectra have been calculated for the specific phase
intervals. They are especially important to deduce the emission regions
of the pulsar on a large scale. On the other hand, as can be seen from
Fig. 5.15 and Fig. 6.3 , the pulse shape is not the same for all
energies. A study of the change of pulse shape with energy would also be
very helpful to understand the emission mechanism in more detail, i.e.
on a small scale, because the pulse phase should be connected to the
geometry of the emission region, as discussed in Sect.
LABEL:SectLightCurve .

Due to the lack of statistics (with respect to the large background), it
is difficult to analyze the pulse shape with MAGIC data alone. However,
the fact that the pulse peak phases are very similar for all energies
implies that the pulsations for all energies may originate from a common
physical process. Therefore, one can also expect common features in
pulse shapes. Once a common feature is found, one can statistically
examine it in the MAGIC data.

In fact, I found that by plotting the light curves in log scale, some
interesting features become visible. In Fig. 7.11 , light curves for
different energies from optical to very high energy gamma-rays are
shown. The optical light curve is obtained from the MAGIC central pixel
data. L. Kuiper provided the X-ray light curves, which have also been
used in [ 115 ] . They are based on ROSAT HRI (100 eV to 2.4 keV, see [
212 ] ), BeppoSAX MECS (2.4 keV to 10 keV, see [ 205 ] ), BeppoSAX PDS
(20 keV to 100 keV, see [ 205 ] ) and CGRO COMPTEL (750 keV to 30 MeV,
see [ 208 ] ). The gamma-ray light curves from 100 MeV to 10 GeV are
produced by myself based on the Fermi -LAT data. The gamma-ray light
curve at 20 to 200 GeV ² ² 2 This energy range is a rough estimation
based on the @xmath range from 25 to 500 ph.e.. No significant excess is
seen at 200 GeV. are taken from my analysis of the MAGIC data with
@xmath between 25 to 500 ph.e.. One can see the following features:

-   Both rising and falling edges show an exponential behavior.

-   Slopes are not symmetric between rising and falling edges.

-   Slopes change with energy.

Here, I discuss the pulse edges of P1 and P2. In the previous sections
and chapters, P1 and P2 referred to specific phase intervals, P1 being
from -0.06 to 0.04 and P2 being from 0.32 to 0.43, while in this section
they simply denote the first peak and the second peak.

##### Method: Fitting Exponential Functions to Pulse Edges

An exponential function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

is fitted to rising and falling edges of P1 and P2 for different
energies, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath being free parameters. Fitting
ranges were chosen such that the bridge emission and the pulse peak do
not worsen the goodness of the fit. Fitting ranges are summarized in
Table 7.5 . Then, the energy dependence of the rise time @xmath and the
fall time @xmath for P1 and P2 are examined.

##### Results of the Exponential Function Fitting to Pulse Edges

Fitted lines are overlaid on the light curves shown in Fig. 7.11 . The
obtained parameters and the fitting probabilities are shown in Table 7.6
. Fitting probabilities are reasonably good for all energies. The energy
dependence of the rise and the fall time of both peaks are graphically
shown in the upper panels of Fig. 7.12 . The horizontal values in Fig.
7.12 are determined in the following way: Below 100 MeV, horizontal
error bars show the full energy range of the data sets and the central
values are the logarithmic center of the range. Above 100 MeV, the
horizontal central values and error bars are determined in the same way
as the P2/P1 ratio study (see Sect. 7.2 ).

General behavior of the rise time and the fall time from optical to
gamma-rays can be summarized as follows:

-   Below 10 MeV, the rise time of both pulses and the fall time of P1
    are increasing, while the fall time of P2 is decreasing.

-   Above 100 MeV, the rise time of P1 and the fall time of P2 are
    decreasing, while the rise time of P2 and the fall time of P1 do not
    show clear energy dependence.

Hereafter, I would like to focus on the behavior above 100 MeV, where I
have personally analyzed all the data. In the lower panels of Fig. 7.12
, the energy dependence of the rise and the fall times above 100 MeV are
shown. They are well described by a linear function of log @xmath or a
constant value, where @xmath is the energy. By fitting a linear function
to the rise time of P1 and the fall time of P2 and by fitting a constant
value to the fall time of P1 and the rise time of P2, the following is
obtained:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

@xmath are 2.2/3, 12.2/4, 4.6/4 and 2.4/3 for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
,and @xmath , respectively.
MAGIC points and Fermi -LAT points can be fitted consistently. It is
also interesting that the rise time of P1 and the fall time of P2 show
very similar dependence on energy. The energy dependence of the pulse
shape above 100 MeV is schematically illustrated in Fig. 7.13 . As
energy increases, the outer edges, i.e. the rising edge of P1 and the
falling edge of P2 get sharper while the inner edges, i.e. the falling
edge of P1 and the rising edge of P2 do not change.

The physical interpretation of these results will be discussed in Sect.
8.6 .

### 7.4 Peak Phases

As described in Sect. LABEL:SectCrabLC , the pulse profiles of the Crab
pulsar are very similar at all energies, while a closer look at the
light curves reveals a slight energy dependence of the peak phase. For
example, the first peak in the X-ray data (see Fig. LABEL:FigCrabPulses
) and that in optical data (see Fig. 5.11 ) precede the radio peak by
@xmath in phase. Also, above 100 MeV, there seems to be a slight shift
of the peak phase, which can be seen if the light curves based on the
Fermi -LAT data are zoomed, as shown in Fig. 7.14 .

Here, I examine the energy dependence of the peak phase above 100 MeV by
using Fermi -LAT and MAGIC data. Apparently, the energy dependence of
the peak phases is not very strong. The precision of @xmath in phase
would be required to discuss the energy dependence. In order to fulfill
this requirement with the obtained data, a sophisticated method called
the “Kernel density method” is used.

#### 7.4.1 Kernel Density Method

##### The Basic Concept

If the statistical significance of the signal is large enough, the peak
phase can be precisely determined without assuming a specific pulse
shape. However, the significance of the obtained signal is not high
enough to determine the peak phase with a precision of @xmath ,
especially for energies above 10 GeV. By assuming the pulse shape a
priori, the fitting of the assumed shape to the obtained data might
improve the precision. In such a case, in order to achieve the best
possible precision, the data should not be converted into a binned phase
diagram but should be analyzed on an event-by-event basis. An
event-by-event maximum likelihood method could have been used for that
but, in the case of MAGIC data, which is dominated by @xmath million
background events, it requires too much computational power.

The Kernel density method also uses event-by-event information but it
does not require too much computational power. Moreover, the assumption
of the pulse shape is not needed either, although a so-called “kernel
estimator” must be chosen beforehand. The kernel density method is a
well established statistical method for estimating the probability
density function of a measured parameter, based on the observed data
sample (see e.g. [ 80 ] , [ 179 ] and [ 36 ] ). The true pulse profile
can be interpreted as a probability density function for the pulse phase
of the signals and, hence, the kernel density method can be applied.

The probability density @xmath as a function of phase @xmath can be
estimated as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the total number of
events, the phase of @xmath th event, a kernel estimator and the band
width of the kernel estimator @xmath . The method is schematically
illustrated in Fig. 7.15 . In a light curve (a phase histogram), the
phase of a given event is smeared by a kernel density estimator. @xmath
is the sum of the smeared curves of all the events. An example of the
application of the method using the MAGIC data is shown in Fig. 7.16 .

##### The Choice of the Kernel Estimator @xmath and its Width @xmath

As a kernel estimator @xmath , a normal Gaussian is commonly used in
many different applications,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

On the other hand, as shown in Fig. 7.17 , a Lorentzian represents the
pulse shape better. The Lorentzian kernel estimator is written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

One of these estimators should be used.

Not only the shape of the estimator but also the width @xmath must be
properly chosen (see [ 187 ] ). Too narrow a width will make the density
function @xmath too wiggly and produce many spurious features. On the
other hand, too big a width will lead to too smooth a function that
smears out all the structure. Since the pulse shape is not symmetric, as
described in the previous section, the smearing may cause a shift in the
peak phase. I chose @xmath based on the light curve of Fermi -LAT data
above 3 GeV, which is more or less the (logarithmic) center of the
concerned energy range. First, a Gaussian and a Lorentzian are fitted to
P1 and P2 independently. Results are shown in Fig. 7.17 . The best fit
@xmath s are @xmath (Gaussian fit to P1), @xmath (Gaussian fit to P2),
@xmath (Lorentzian fit to P1) and @xmath (Lorentzian fit to P2). The
optimal @xmath should be close to these values.

The final choice of the shape of @xmath (Gaussian or Lorentzian) and the
width @xmath was made such that the peak phase shift caused by the
smearing effect is minimal. The phase shift is estimated as follows:
Assuming a pulse shape to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is calculated by convoluting the pulse shape @xmath with the
kernel estimator @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, the difference in the peak phase @xmath between @xmath and @xmath
is estimated. Hereafter, @xmath is referred to as the “analytical phase
shift”. An example of the analytical phase shift is shown in Fig. 7.18 .

By substituting Eqs. 7.4 @xmath 7.7 for @xmath and @xmath in Eq. 7.12 ,
I estimated the energy dependence of the analytical phase shift @xmath
for different @xmath s, as shown in Fig. 7.19 . The Lorentzian kernel
estimators with @xmath for P1 and @xmath for P2, which are the half of
the fitted values (see Fig. 7.17 ) have the smallest effect. Even
smaller @xmath might reduce the effect further. However, if @xmath is
too small compared to the fitted values, @xmath would, in turn, produce
spurious structures, as mentioned before. Therefore, in the following
analysis, I use Lorentzian for @xmath with @xmath for P1 and @xmath for
P2. The residual @xmath will be subtracted from the obtained results.

##### Statistical Uncertainty Estimation by the Bootstrapping Method

One can estimate a probability density function @xmath from observed
data by the kernel density method and, then, determine the peak position
from it. However, it does not give the statistical uncertainty.

The statistical uncertainty of the result can be estimated by the
bootstrapping method which is well established and is used in many
statistical treatments (see e.g. [ 70 ] and [ 63 ] ). The procedure is
explained as follows: Let @xmath be the total number of observed events.
One randomly chooses @xmath events out of the observed @xmath events.
The same events can be chosen multiple times. Then, the same kernel
density method is applied to the chosen data sample. By repeating this
procedure @xmath times, one obtains @xmath different @xmath s. The RMS
of the peak phase distribution from them is used as the statistical
uncertainty of the peak phase. In this analysis, @xmath is used.

#### 7.4.2 Example of the Kernel Density for Different Energies

In Fig. 7.20 and Fig. 7.21 , the original light curves and the resulting
probability functions (kernel densities) are shown. The statistical
uncertainty of the function estimated by the bootstrapping method are
indicated by colors.

#### 7.4.3 Results

Results are shown in Fig. 7.22 . Open and filled squares indicate the
results before and after correcting the analytical phase shift @xmath ,
respectively. Horizontal values and errors are determined in the same
way as the P2/P1 ratio study (see Sect. 7.2 ). Blue lines indicate the
energy dependence of @xmath estimated in Sect. 7.4.1 (see Fig. 7.19 ).

After the correction (filled squares), the energy dependence is clearly
seen for P1 but it is not the case for P2, due to the large
uncertainties. This difference comes mainly from the pulse width. Since
P2 has twice as large a width as P1, the precision of the peak phase
becomes worse. The results after the correction (filled squares) are
fitted by a linear function and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

are obtained. @xmath are 6.26/5 and 3.18/5, for @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively.

The physical interpretation of the results will be discussed in Sect.
8.7 .

### 7.5 Possible Existence of the Third Peak

As mentioned in Sect. 6.4 , a possible third peak is seen above 10 GeV
in Fermi -LAT data. Judging from the light curve (see Fig. 6.3 ), the
flux might be as high as P1 and P2, although the large statistical
uncertainty does not permit a solid argument. Here, I examine the
existence of the possible third peak by using both Fermi -LAT data and
MAGIC data.

#### 7.5.1 Definition of the ON and OFF Phases for the Third Peak P3

The third peak has not been detected in other energies, except for
specific frequencies in radio, where fourth and fifth peaks are also
seen (see Sect. LABEL:FigCrabPulses ). Therefore, it is not possible to
define the third peak phase interval (P3) a priori. I define P3 to be
phases from 0.7 to 0.8. It is based on the observed result itself, which
leads to the overestimation of the flux and the statistical
significance, while no fine tuning of the bin-edges is carried out in
order to reduce the effect. In all the previous analyses, background
level had been estimated by OP phases 0.52 to 0.88 (0.52 to 0.87 for the
Fermi -LAT nebula analysis). For P3, phases from 0.5 to 0.65 and from
0.85 to 0.9 are used for the background estimation.

#### 7.5.2 MAGIC and Fermi-LAT above 10 GeV

The light curves of Fermi -LAT data above 10 GeV and MAGIC data with
@xmath from 25 to 500 are shown in Fig. 7.23 . Fermi -LAT data show 21.5
@xmath excess events corresponding to @xmath , while MAGIC data show
@xmath excess events corresponding to @xmath . More statistics are
required in order to verify or refute the presence of the signal.

Although the existence of the signal is not clear, I estimated the
energy spectrum of P3 based on Fermi -LAT data. Based on MAGIC data, the
differential flux upper limit was also calculated with a 95% confidence
level . They are shown in Fig. 7.24 . The estimation is done in the
following way: Instead of using the likelihood method for Fermi -LAT
data and the unfolding method for MAGIC data, the number of excess
events (or the upper limit on the number of excess events) in each
energy bin was simply divided by the effective area and the observation
time. Therefore, the spill-over effect from the adjacent bins are not
taken into account. The discrepancy between MAGIC upper limits and Fermi
-LAT measurements may imply an upward bias in the Fermi -LAT data
analysis, probably because the P3 phases are defined based on the
observed data themselves. The possibility that there is some signal,
whose excess was enhanced by the background fluctuation, cannot be
excluded. The time variability of the P3 excess is also another
explanation.

### 7.6 Concluding Remarks

Neither an exponential cut-off nor a sub-exponential cut-off can explain
the energy spectra measured by MAGIC and Fermi -LAT consistently, even
if the possible systematic uncertainties of both experiments are taken
into account. Assuming that the energy spectrum does not roll off
exponentially but extends with a power law after the cut-off energy,
they can be consistently explained with an index of @xmath (after the
cut-off). The physics interpretation of these spectral features will be
discussed in Sect 8.2 .

The P2/P1 ratio stays constant between 100 MeV and 3 GeV and rises above
3 GeV. On the other hand, the Bridge/P1 ratio increases by a power law
between 100 MeV and 3 GeV, while the behavior above 3 GeV cannot be
analyzed, due to the lack of statistics. The edges of the two pulses
have an exponential shape. The rise time of P1 and the fall time of P2
have a clear energy dependence while the fall time of P2 and the rise
time of P2 do not. The physics interpretation of this will be discussed
in Sect. 8.6 . The peak phase of P1 has a slight energy dependence while
this is not clear for P2, due to the difficulty in determining the P2
peak phase. The physics discussion on this will also be presented in
Sect. 8.7 . The third peak seen in Fermi -LAT data above 10 GeV with 3.5
@xmath is not clearly visible in MAGIC data. In order to verify or
refute the existence of the P3 signal, more statistics is required.

## Chapter 8 Discussion

Several interesting features of the pulsed gamma-ray radiation from the
Crab pulsar above 100 MeV have been newly found from the MAGIC and Fermi
-LAT data analyses. Quite a few results are not in agreement with model
predictions and extrapolations. Especially the following findings are
remarkable:

-   None of the super-exponential cut-off, the exponential cut-off and
    the sub-exponential cut-off can describe the measured energy
    spectrum.

-   The measured energy spectrum extends at least up to 100 GeV.

-   A power law with an index of @xmath can well explain the measured
    energy spectrum between 4 GeV and 100 GeV.

-   The edges of the two pulses have a clear exponential behavior. The
    rise time of P1 and the fall time of P2 have a clear energy
    dependence while the fall time of P1 and the rise time of P2 do not.

-   The peak phase of P1 has a small but significant energy dependence.

In this chapter, I discuss the new constraints on the pulsar emission
models and possible modifications of the standard model, based on these
findings. In addition, the radiation efficiency in gamma-rays above 100
MeV is discussed.

### 8.1 Constraints on the Emission Region

As discussed in LABEL:SectRegionDet , there are mainly two approaches to
infer the emission region, namely, by the steepness of the cut-off and
by the highest energy of the observed photons.

#### 8.1.1 By the Steepness of the Cut-off

As described in LABEL:SectCutoffSteepness , if the emission region is
close to the star surface, a superexponential cut-off is expected.
@xmath in Eq. 6.5 is typically 2 (see e.g. [ 141 ] and [ 65 ] ).
However, the analysis of Fermi-LAT data revealed that superexponential
assumption ( @xmath ) is less likely than exponential cut-off ( @xmath )
by 4.8 @xmath , 7.7 @xmath , 5.0 @xmath and 4.3 @xmath , for TP, P1 +
P2, P1, and P2 respectively. This indicates that emission region is far
from the star surface and that gamma-rays do not cause magnetic pair
creation. In essense, the modest steepness of the spectral cutoff allow
one to reject the PC model.

#### 8.1.2 By the Highest Energy of the Observed Photons

More quantitative estimation of the emission region can be made by the
highest energy of the observed photons. As discussed in Sect.
LABEL:SectCutoff , the highest energy of photons @xmath which can escape
from a given height @xmath can be estimated as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are the period of the pulsar
in second, the radius of the neutron star, the magnetic field strength
at the stellar surface and the critical magnetic field ( @xmath G).

MAGIC detected gamma-rays up to 100 GeV. For @xmath ms, @xmath G @xmath
and @xmath GeV, one obtains @xmath = 7.8. The height of the emission
region must be more than 7.8 times the pulsar radius, which is too large
for the PC model.

### 8.2 Estimates of the Electron Spectrum and Constraints on the
Acceleration Electric Field

From the argument in the previous section, it is clear that the emission
region is free from magnetic pair creation process, i.e. the emission
region should be in the outer magnetosphere. Since magnetic pair
creation is a basic physics process, this conclusion is rather robust.

Even if the emission region is assumed to be in the outer magnetosphere,
the energy spectrum observed by MAGIC contradicts the most favored
theoretical models, which predict an exponential cut-off. Below, I will
discuss possible modifications of the standard outer magnetosphere
model. After briefly reviewing the basic equations for the electron
energy spectrum within the pulsar magnetosphere and the curvature
radiation spectrum from these electrons in Sect. 8.2.1 , I will deduce
the electron spectrum based on the observed gamma-ray spectrum of
P1 + P2 in Sect. 8.2.2 . Then, constraints on the strength of the
acceleration electric field will be discussed in Sect. 8.2.3 .
Possibilities to explain the deviation of the observational results from
the standard model by a imperfect dipole magnetic field will be briefly
described in Sect. 8.2.4 .

#### 8.2.1 Basic Equations for the Electron Energy and the Curvature
Radiation Photon Energy

As discussed in Sect. LABEL:SectRadCooling , the energy of the electron
is set by the equilibrium between the gain in energy due to the
acceleration electric field and the energy loss via the curvature
radiation. The Lorentz factor of the electron @xmath can be written as a
function of the acceleration electric field strength @xmath and the
magnetic field curvature @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

See Sect. LABEL:SectCutoff , for the derivation of this equation,

As described in Sect. LABEL:SectCurv , the curvature radiation spectrum
from a single electron with an energy @xmath is written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

From Eq. 8.2 and Eq. 8.4 , the cut-off energy @xmath of the curvature
radiation is written as a function of @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### 8.2.2 Estimates of the Electron Spectrum Based on the Measured
Gamma-ray Spectrum

Here, I deduce the electron spectrum (the @xmath spectrum) based on the
measured gamma-ray spectrum of P1 + P2, assuming that gamma-rays above 4
GeV are generated by the curvature radiation. For simplicity, the
curvature of the magnetic field is assumed to be fixed at @xmath km ¹ ¹
1 The different @xmath for different emission region can be taken into
account by replacing @xmath with @xmath (see Eq. 8.4 ) .

##### 0) Standard Model: Nearly Monoenergetic Electron Spectrum

In general, it is considered that @xmath and @xmath of the last closed
field line do not change extremely largely over the emission region (see
e.g. [ 175 ] ). In addition, the dependency of @xmath on @xmath and
@xmath is rather weak (see Eq. 8.2 ). These are the reasons why a nearly
monoenergetic spectrum is derived for accelerarted electrons in most of
pulsar models based on the outer magnetosphere emission hypothesis.

The cut-off in the high energy gamma-ray spectrum is determined by the
curvature radiation spectrum from these nearly monoenergetic electrons,
in turn leading to the exponential cut-off (see Sect. 8.2.1 ). Examples
of the theoretical explanations of the Crab pulsar spectrum observed
before 2007 are shown in Fig. 8.1 , which are the same as Fig.
LABEL:FigOuterSpectrum . The highest end of the spectrum is explaned by
the curvature radiation from nearly monoenergetic electrons. In order to
explain the power law spectrum with an index of @xmath between @xmath
MeV and @xmath GeV, the synchrotron radiation (left panel) or the
inverse Compton scattering (right panel) is considered. Below 10 MeV,
the emissions from secondary electron-positron pairs created by high
energy gamma-rays are considered to be responsible for the observed
spectrum.

Applying the standard scenario to the observed spectrum of P1 + P2
around the cut-off energy is shown in Fig. 8.2 . I made a simple
calculation assuming that the @xmath spectrum of the electrons has a
Gaussian shape with the mean of @xmath and the RMS of @xmath . This
corresponds to @xmath [V/cm], which is consistent with, e.g. [ 175 ] .
The absolute flux scale was chosen such that the predicted gamma-ray
spectrum matches with the measurements.

As can be clearly seen in the figure, the measured spectrum requires
modification of the standard models.

##### 1) Steep Power Law Tail Assumption

Given the fact that the power law with an index of @xmath describes well
the observed gamma-ray spectrum above 4 GeV, the simplest assumption for
the electron spectrum would be a power law with an index of @xmath ,
because if the electron has a power law spectrum with an index of @xmath
, the resulting curvature radiation spectrum should show the power law
with an index of @xmath , as discussed in Sect LABEL:SectCurv . I
assumed a power law with an index of @xmath between @xmath and @xmath in
the @xmath spectrum. For @xmath , a Gaussian with the mean of @xmath and
the RMS of @xmath is assumed so that the modification with respect to
the standard model is only on higher energy side. The measured spectrum
of P12 can well be explained by the curvature radiation from these
electrons as expected (the top panels of Fig. 8.3 ). Obviously, the main
difficulty is to find a convincing argument for the shape of the
electron spectrum.

##### 2) Log-Gaussian Assumption

It might also be possible that the observed power-law-like behavior
above the cut-off energy is part of a curved spectrum, whose curvature
is not visible due to the statistical uncertainty, the limited energy
resolution and the limited energy coverage of the measurements.

For example, a log-Gaussian spectrum of the electrons produce a
gamma-ray spectrum extending to the MAGIC energies. In the bottom panels
of Fig. 8.3 , the log-Gaussian spectrum of the electron with the mean of
log @xmath and the RMS of log @xmath is assumed.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The spectrum above the cut-off can be reasonably explained, taking into
account that MAGIC and Fermi -LAT may have a relative energy scale
difference of up to @xmath %. The idea behind the log-Gaussian spectrum
of @xmath is that the electrons are not as monoenergetic as the standard
model predicts. This might originate from a small distortion of the
pulsar magnetosphere structure from the standard model.

##### 3) Two Population Assumption

Several authors consider the possibility that the observed pulsation is
the sum of the emissions from the two poles (see e.g. [ 175 ] and [ 178
] ). The two contributions to the light curve are shown in Fig. 8.4 .
Even though their calculations do not predict an energy spectrum
extending to 100 GeV, the possibility of the contributions from the two
isolated places make the two population assumption intriguing.

In fact, the model of two population of electrons can explain the
measurements as well, as shown in the top panels of Fig. 8.5 . Here I
assumed two Gaussian spectra with the mean @xmath being @xmath and
@xmath . @xmath km is used. The RMSs of the two Gaussians are 20 times
smaller than its mean. The peak flux of the second population is 200
times lower than that of the first.

##### 4) Power Law + Exponential Cut-off Assumption

The power law with an exponential cut-off for the electron spectrum
produces an interesting results. By assuming a power law with an index
of @xmath and cut-off at @xmath for electrons, the resulting curvature
radiation can explain the observed gamma-ray spectrum very well from 100
MeV to 100 GeV, if the relative energy scale difference of up to @xmath
% is taken into account (see the bottom panels of Fig. 8.5 ). This
assumption does not require additional emission mechanisms such as the
inverse Compton scattering and the synchrotron radiation in order to
explain the measured spectrum between 100 MeV to 3 GeV.

It is known that the electron energy spectrum may exhibit a power law
with an exponential cut-off in the case of shock acceleration in a
supernova remnant taking into account either the acceleration-time
limits (see [ 68 ] ) or radiative-loss limits (see [ 193 ] ). In order
to apply a similar scheme to a pulsar, the acceleration mechanism in the
pulsar magnetosphere needs to be reconsidered from scratch.

#### 8.2.3 Constraints on the Acceleration Electric Field in an Ideal
Dipole Magnetic Field

Based on Eq. 8.2 , @xmath as a function of @xmath and @xmath is
graphically shown in Fig. 8.6 . @xmath as a function of @xmath for
@xmath GeV, 20 GeV and 100 GeV are shown by blue lines in the same
figure.

It is known that @xmath of the dipole magnetic field is well
approximated as @xmath (see e.g. [ 34 ] ), where @xmath is the
co-rotation radius (see Sect. LABEL:SectLC ) and @xmath is the distance
from the center of the neutron star. Since the emission region must be
within the light cylinder, @xmath would be the reasonable upper limit on
@xmath . Assuming that the (true) gamma-ray spectrum is extending as a
power law up to 100 GeV without a cutoff, as is the case for 1) Steep
Power Law Tail Assumption in the previous subsection, there must be a
place where @xmath [V/cm]. This is @xmath times larger than the value
used in the standard model (see e.g. [ 175 ] ). Assuming that the
gamma-ray spectrum observed at around @xmath GeV is basically the tail
of the curvature radiation spectrum with a 20 GeV cut-off, as is the
case for 3) Two Population Assumption in the previous subsection, the
lower limit in @xmath will be @xmath [V/cm]. This is @xmath times larger
than the standard value.

#### 8.2.4 Possible Explanations for the High Energy Tail of the
Gamma-ray Spectrum in an Imperfect Dipole Magnetic Field

The high energy tail of the observed gamma-ray spectrum could be
explained by the imperfect dipole structure of the magnetic field.

The thickness of the Outer Gap or the Slot Gap can be as much as 0.1
@xmath at the light cylinder. The magnetic field lines in the middle of
the gap should not close within the light cylinder and should be
connected to the wind zone. Therefore, there is a possibility that the
magnetic field curvature @xmath near the light cylinder in the middle of
the gap is significantly larger than that of the dipole structure (see
the left panel of Fig. 8.7 ). As can be seen from Eq. 8.2 , the larger
the curvature ( @xmath ), the higher the electron energy ( @xmath ).
Alghouth the energy of the curvature radiation photon is proportinal to
@xmath , it is also proportional to @xmath (see Eq. 8.4 ), resulting in
the higher photon energy from the larger curvature (see Eq. 8.5 ).

A more efficient mechanism for producing the high energy tail could be
as follows: Let us assume that the magnetic fields are slight wiggling
along the dipole field in a small scale ( @xmath km). There may be two
radially connected regions the inner one of which has a
larger-than-dipole field curvature and the outer one of which has a
smaller-than-dipole field curvature (see the right panel of Fig. 8.7 ).
Since the curvature radiation cooling is weaker, electrons can be
accelerated to higher energies in the larger curvature field. These
electrons subsequently enter the smaller curvature field, generating the
anormally high energy curvature photons.

### 8.3 Inverse Compton Scattering as a Second Radiation Component

As shown in the top panels Fig. 8.5 , a second emission component can
explain the deviation of the MAGIC measurements from the standard model.
In the previous section, a second population of electrons is assumed. By
introducing the inverse Compton scattering, a single monoenergetic
electron population might also explain the MAGIC measurements.

As discussed in Sect. LABEL:SectIC , the energy of the radiated photon
via the inverse Compton scattering is (see Eq. LABEL:EqICE )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the energy of the target photon and @xmath is the
Lorentz factor of the electron. In order to have a radiation peak at 30
GeV for an electron population with @xmath , @xmath should be peaked at

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

For a thermal radiation, @xmath eV corresponds to 1 K, which is by far
lower than the stellar surface temperature ( @xmath K, see Sect
LABEL:SectSurfaceTemp ). On the other hand, the CMB radiation
corresponds to 2.7 K in temperature, which is actually close to @xmath
eV. However, it is known that the number density of CMB photons (400 cm
@xmath ) is much lower than the radio photons emitted within the pulsar
magnetosphere ( @xmath cm @xmath ) (see [ 103 ] ).

Therefore, in order to reproduce the inverse Compton scattering spectrum
peaked at around 30 GeV, there must be a particular mechanism to produce
a soft photon spectrum peaked at @xmath eV, which is hard to imagine.
Therefore, an effect of a simple inverse Compton scattering for the
extended spectrum is highly unlikely.

### 8.4 Radiation Efficiency

The total energy loss of a pulsar, i.e. the spin down luminosity @xmath
can be estimated from the period and the time derivative of it, as
described in Sect LABEL:SectSpinDown . For the Crab pulsar, it is @xmath
erg/s.

Here, I add an estimate of the radiation efficiency, which is a fraction
of the spin down luminosity deposited in a given energy range. The
estimation method is adopted from [ 4 ] . When the observed flux is
@xmath , the luminosity @xmath can be calculated as @xmath , where
@xmath and @xmath are the beaming angle factor and the distance from the
pulsar to the Earth. @xmath depends on the inclination angle @xmath of
the magnetic dipole axis and the viewing angle @xmath (see Sect
LABEL:SectLightCurve ). For the Crab pulsar, assuming the SG model or
the OG model, @xmath degrees and @xmath degrees well explain the light
curves (see e.g. [ 53 ] ), the nebula torus structure in X-ray (see [
142 ] ), and the polarization of the optical pulsation (see [ 170 ] ).
For @xmath and @xmath near these values, @xmath is the good
approximation according to [ 192 ] . The distance is known to be @xmath
kpc (see e.g. [ 185 ] ). From the measurements, @xmath above 100 MeV is
calculated to be @xmath erg/s.

Using @xmath erg, @xmath kpc and @xmath , the efficiency @xmath above
100 MeV is calculated as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Only 0.13% of the total energy loss is due to the radiation above 100
MeV. As discussed in Sect. LABEL:SectDipoleAccel and Sect.
LABEL:SectMagDipoleRadiation , the rotation energy is carried away
mostly by the pulsar wind.

Fig. 8.8 shows @xmath as a function of energy. Based on the combined
analysis described in Sect. 7.1.3 , @xmath for energies between 30 and
100 GeV is @xmath . If the spectrum had shown the pure exponential
cut-off, it would have been @xmath , which is a factor of @xmath lower
than the measurement. The discrepancy between the exponential cut-off
and the MAGIC measurement corresponds to @xmath = 0.6% of the radiation
energy above 100 MeV.

### 8.5 Remarks on the High Energy Tail of the Crab Pulsar Energy
Spectrum

Fermi -LAT measured the energy spectrum of the Crab pulsar with good
precision up to @xmath GeV, which is only a factor of @xmath higher than
the exponential cut-off energy ( @xmath in Eq. 6.5 ). The Fermi
-LAT-measured spectrum is consistent with the standard model. Therefore,
the standard model is successful in explaining the energy spectrum of
the Crab pulsar in the energy region where a vast majority of the
gamma-ray radiation energy is deposited.

On the other hand, MAGIC observed the energy spectrum of the Crab pulsar
above 25 GeV, which is a factor of @xmath higher than the exponential
cut-off energy. Only a small fraction of the radiation energy is
deposited above 25 GeV. The deviation from the standard model detected
by MAGIC requires only a higher order correction for the standard model.

It should also be mentioned that, all the dedeuced electron spectra
discussed in Sect. 8.2.2 eventually need to be corrected by the
“smearing” of the energy due to the limited and not-perfectly-known
energy resolution. While the simulations clearly showed that the
observed spectrum up to 100 GeV is not just an artifact of the energy
resolution (see Sect. 7.1.1 ), I could not determine the precise
partition of genuine high energy gamma-rays and lower energy gamma-rays
mismeasured with higher energy assignment. It is obvious that
clarification can only come from better measurements.

### 8.6 Energy Dependence of the Rising and Falling Edges in the Light
Curve

The basic shape of the light curve is explained by the structure of the
last closed field lines, as discussed in Sect. LABEL:SectLightCurve . In
that explanation, electrons are assumed to move parallel to the field
lines, i.e. the pitch angle @xmath of electrons is assumed to be 0.
Since the beaming angle of the emitted photons is @xmath , all the
photons are considered to be emitted tangentially to the field lines.
However, this scenario explains neither the exponential behavior of the
edges nor the energy dependence of the rise/fall time of the edges,
which are clearly visible in the observed data.

Observed results can be explained by, for example, assuming that the
emission from each field line is not beamed with an angle of @xmath ,
but has an exponential angular distribution characterized by its decay
constant @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is dependent on the photon energy. Then, the resulting
light curve should be broadened compared with the one without a sizable
emission angle , as shown in Fig. 8.9 .

Here, I additionally assume that the shape of the the outer edges (the
rising edge of P1 and the falling edge of P2) reflect the angular
distribution of the emission along a single field line, while the shape
of the inner edges (the falling edge of P1 and the rising edge of P2)
are governed by the overall field line structure (see Fig. 8.9 ). From
Eq. 7.4 and Eq. 7.7 , the rise time of P1 and the fall time of P2 as a
function of energy are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the simple mean of @xmath and @xmath is adopted. Since the
emission angle @xmath can be translated into the pulse phase @xmath as
@xmath / @xmath , Eq. 8.11 leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.12)
              @xmath   @xmath      (8.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This is by far larger than @xmath . The large emission angle should be
the consequence of the large pitch angle of the high energy electrons.
These electrons with a spiral orbit should emit synchrotron radiation,
which should explain the observed gamma-rays at least below 3 GeV (where
the energy dependence of the edges is clearly seen as shown in Fig. 7.12
.) The strength of the magnetic field at 1000 km from the neutron star
is @xmath G and high energy gamma-rays are therefore reasonably expected
(see Sect. LABEL:SectSynch ).

However, in order to realize such a large pitch angle orbit, there must
exist a process which nearly instantly provides a large perpendicular
momentum, because a gradual increase of perpendicular momentum cannot
occur due to the strong energy loss by the synchrotron radiation itself.
(This is actually the reason why the pitch angle of electrons is
normally considered to be 0.)

A possibility that the pitch angle @xmath can has a large value has been
discussed by, for example, S. A. Petrova (see [ 150 ] and references
therein). The basic idea is as follows: The accelerated electrons
efficiently absorb radio photons with a frequency corresponding to the
cyclotron frequency when it is converted into the electron rest frame.
This cyclotron resonance absorption of radio photons is so efficient
that it can cause a large pitch angle even though electrons are
continuously losing energy by the synchrotron radiation. This scenario
is used in [ 93 ] to reproduce the Crab pulsar energy spectrum at around
100 MeV (see Fig. 8.1 ). However, this process produces neither the
exponential angular distribution nor the electron-energy dependent pitch
angle (see [ 150 ] ).

### 8.7 Energy Dependence of the Peak Phase

In Fig. 8.10 , the first peak (P1) position as a function of energy is
shown from optical to high energy gamma-rays. It is expressed as “radio
delay”, which tells how much earlier the peak at a given energy occurs
compared to the radio peak (Jodrell Bank, at 610 MHz). The energy
dependence of the radio delay has been studied in the X-ray range. As
discussed by many authors (see e.g. [ 116 ] , [ 157 ] and [ 138 ] ), the
simplest explanation for the radio delay and its energy dependence is
the difference in the emission region within the magnetosphere. i.e.,
the higher the energy is, the more inner of the magnetosphere the
emission region is. In [ 138 ] , a simple linear function was fitted to
the data, deriving a shift of @xmath s keV @xmath (see the left panel of
the figure). It corresponds to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath indicate the path length difference with respect to the
radio emission region. Eq. 7.15 can be rewritten as @xmath in radio
delay, which is shown as a black line in the left panel of the figure.
In path length, this corresponds to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Considering the size of the light cylinder ( @xmath km), Eq. 8.14 and
Eq. 8.15 are reasonable. On the other hand Eq. 8.14 and Eq. 8.15 are
apparently not consistent as can be seen from Fig. 8.10 . Actually, the
shape of the energy spectrum of the Crab pulsar (see Fig.
LABEL:FigCrabOpticaltoGamma ) and the theoretical model (see Fig.
LABEL:FigOuterSpectrum ) suggests different mechanisms for X-ray and
high energy gamma-ray radiation. Therefore, it may be natural that the
energy dependence of the radio delay is different in the two
well-separated energy ranges.

It should be noted that the definition of the peak phase is different
for different types of analyses. For example, A. A. Abdo et al. (see [ 4
] ), which is the official publication from the Fermi collaboration,
determined the peak phase by fitting an asymmetric Lorentzian function
to the binned light curves. In their analysis, the peak phase above 100
MeV is constant and @xmath , which corresponds to @xmath @xmath s in
radio delay, though their highest energy bin of 3 to 10 GeV shows
marginal deviation of @xmath , corresponding to @xmath @xmath s in radio
delay.

## Chapter 9 Development of High Quantum Efficiency Hybrid Photodetector
HPD R9792U-40

see http://wwwmagic.mppmu.mpg.de/publications/theses/TSaito.pdf

## Chapter 10 Conclusions and Outlook

### 10.1 Conclusions

Before 2007, the energy spectrum of the Crab pulsar had been measured
only up to @xmath GeV by the satellite-borne detector, EGRET, while
IACTs had set flux upper limits only above 100 GeV. There existed no
sufficient measurement at around the cut-off energy, i.e, at energies
between a few GeV and a few tens of GeV, while the spectral shape at
around the cut-off energy is essential to constraining the emission
region of the pulsation,

The MAGIC telescope with the newly implemented SUM trigger successfully
detected emission from the Crab pulsar above 25 GeV during the
observations between October 2007 and February 2008 thanks to the
collective efforts of my colleagues, T. Schweizer, M. Lopez, A. N. Otte,
M. Rissi and M. Shayduk. However, an in-depth analysis and detailed
discussion in comparison with the adjacent energy range had not yet been
performed. Also, a new satellite-borne detector, Fermi -LAT, became
operational in August 2008 and the observational data were made public
in August 2009.

In this thesis, the Crab pulsar has been studied in detail in the
previously (almost) unstudied energy gap between 5 GeV and 100 GeV. For
the analysis, I used the data from both the upgraded MAGIC telescope and
the public Fermi -LAT data. The main results are summarized as follows:

-   MAGIC observations between October 2007 and January 2009 resulted in
    the detection of the Crab pulsar above 25 GeV with a statistical
    significance of 4.3 @xmath , 7.4 @xmath and 7.5 @xmath for the first
    peak (P1), the second peak (P2), and the sum of the two peaks
    (P1 + P2), respectively.

-    The energy spectrum of the Crab pulsar is consistent with a power
    law with an index of @xmath between 25 GeV and 100 GeV for P1, P2
    and P1 + P2. At 30 GeV, the flux of P2 is twice as high as that of
    P1.

-   A variation of the flux and the light curve of the Crab pulsar on a
    yearly time scale were not found in the MAGIC data.

-   One year of Fermi -LAT data showed a clear detection ( @xmath @xmath
    ) of the Crab pulsar from 100 MeV to @xmath GeV. Between 100 MeV and
    @xmath GeV, the energy spectrum is consistent with a power law with
    an exponential cut-off, for total pulse (TP), P1, P2 and P1 + P2.
    The cut-off energies are estimated to be @xmath GeV, @xmath GeV,
    @xmath GeV and @xmath GeV for TP, P1, P2 and P1 + P2, respectively.
    Due to the small detector area of @xmath m @xmath , the statistical
    uncertainty of the spectrum above @xmath GeV is rather large and it
    is not possible to detect any pulsed signal above 30 GeV.

-    From the Fermi -LAT observations, the superexponential cut-off
    assumption ( @xmath in Eq. 6.5 ) is ruled out by 4.8 @xmath , 5.0
    @xmath , 4.3 @xmath and 7.7 @xmath for TP, P1, P2 and P1 + P2,
    respectively.

-    The combination of the results from MAGIC and Fermi -LAT revealed
    that the exponential cut-off spectra determined by Fermi -LAT are
    inconsistent with MAGIC results above 25 GeV by @xmath , @xmath and
    @xmath for P1, P2 and P1 + P2, respectively, even if the possible
    absolute energy scale difference between the two experiments is
    carefully taken into account (up to 30%) .

-   The flux ratio of P2 to P1 and that of Bridge to P1 increase rapidly
    with energy between 100 MeV and 100 GeV. This behavior is similar to
    that in the energy range below 1 MeV but contrary to that in the
    energy range between 1 MeV to 100 MeV.

-    Both edges of the two peaks show a clear exponential behavior. In
    addition, the outer edges, i.e., the rising edge of P1 and the
    falling edge of P2 become sharper as the energy increases, while the
    inner edges, i.e. the falling edge of P1 and the rising edge of P2
    have no energy dependence. The rise time of P1 ( @xmath ) and the
    fall time of P2 ( @xmath ) can be expressed as
    @xmath

    @xmath

-    The phase of the first peak has a slight but significant energy
    dependence. This shift can be expressed as
    @xmath . As the energy increases, the peak position shifts to a
    later time in the light curve. For the second peak, because of the
    broader width, the peak phase is determined with a worse precision,
    and no significant energy dependence has been found.

-   In the Fermi -LAT data above 10 GeV, a hint of the third peak is
    seen at phase @xmath with a significance of 3.5 @xmath . However, in
    the MAGIC data, only a 1.7 @xmath excess has been found and the flux
    upper limit based on the MAGIC data is in marginal contradiction
    with the Fermi -LAT results.

-   Aiming for better observations of pulsars and other sources below
    100 GeV with MAGIC, I participated in the development of a new
    photodetector, the Hamamatsu hybrid photodetector HPD R9792U-40.
    Compared to the currently used PMTs, its photodetection efficiency
    is twice higher and its ion-feedback rate is 500 times lower. Its
    charge resolution is excellent, too. The lifetime of the
    photocathode was proven to be long enough to allow a ten year
    observation time without significant degradation. A compensation
    circuit for the correction of the temperature dependence of the gain
    and safety circuits against the strong light were also successfully
    developed.

Based on these results, the following physics conclusions have been
drawn:

-   The extension of the pulsed gamma-ray emission up to 100 GeV
    observed by MAGIC sets a lower limit in height of the emission
    region at 7.8 times the neutron star radius. This rules out the
    inner magnetosphere emission scenario, i.e. the Polar Cap model, for
    the pulsation mechanism. Strong rejection of the super-exponential
    cut-off assumption by Fermi -LAT also favors the outer magnetosphere
    emission scenario, i.e. the Slot Gap model or the Outer Gap model.

-   The rejection of the exponential cut-off assumption by the combined
    analysis of Fermi -LAT results and MAGIC results requires
    modifications of the standard outer magnetosphere model. If the
    magnetic field has an ideal dipole structure, there must be a place
    where the acceleration electric field is more than 10 times larger
    than that of the standard model ( @xmath [V/cm]). A distorted dipole
    structure of the magnetic field is another possible explanation.

-   It is unlikely that the contribution of the inverse Compton
    scattering is the reason for the discrepancy between the standard
    outer magnetosphere model and the observed results, considering the
    energy of accelerated electrons and that of possible target photons.

-   The radiation efficiency above 100 MeV is estimated to be @xmath
    from the Fermi -LAT measurement while that above 30 GeV is estimated
    to be @xmath from the MAGIC measurement. The discrepancy in the
    radiation energy above 30 GeV between the standard outer
    magnetosphere model and the MAGIC measurement amounts to 0.6% of the
    radiation energy above 100 MeV.

-   The exponential behavior of the pulse edges can be explained by
    assuming that the emission angle with respect to the magnetic field
    line has an exponential distribution. Under this assumption, the
    energy dependence of the exponential decay constant @xmath can be
    expressed as @xmath [deg], @xmath GeV.

-   The simplest explanation for the energy dependence of the peak phase
    is that the emission region shifts inward toward the neutron star.
    The energy-dependent difference in path length @xmath with respect
    to the radio emission region can be written as
    @xmath [km], @xmath GeV.

### 10.2 Future Prospect: Observations of Other Gamma-ray Pulsars

The power-law-like extension of the gamma-ray energy spectrum of the
Crab pulsar beyond the cut-off energy is a new discovery and currently
there is no concrete theoretical explanation for it, except the
discussions presented in this thesis. It would be necessary to check if
this feature is unique for the Crab pulsar or common for all/some of the
other pulsars. Although Fermi -LAT detected 46 gamma-ray pulsars, it is
not possible to study the spectral behavior well beyond the cut-off
energy with Fermi -LAT data due to the limited effective area of the
detector. MAGIC is currently the only detector that can study pulsars at
energies well beyond the cut-off energy. The next target of observation
for MAGIC could be the Geminga pulsar, which is the second brightest
above 1 GeV (next to the Crab pulsar) among the pulsars in the sky
region which MAGIC can observe. Above 10 GeV, its flux is comparable to
that of the Crab pulsar, according to the Fermi -LAT observations.

### 10.3 Future Prospect: Improvement of the Telescope Performance

The Crab pulsar is the only pulsar that has up to now been detected by
an IACT. Other pulsars have never been detected from ground despite
tremendous efforts. Even for the Crab pulsar, the energy spectrum could
be determined only with the moderate statistical significance after 59.1
hours of observations, which is relatively long for IACT observations.
The measured energy spectrum of the Crab pulsar is consistent with a
power law above 25 GeV. However, if the statistical uncertainty of the
measurements is smaller and the energy resolution is better, a possible
curvature of the spectrum might become visible, which surely helps to
understand the reason for the spectral extension after the cut-off.

In order to detect more pulsars and determine the energy spectrum with
higher precision, one needs to meet the following requirements:

-   A lower energy threshold.

-   A larger effective area below 100 GeV

-   A better (hadron+muon)/gamma separation below 100 GeV

-   A better angular resolution below 100 GeV

-   A better energy resolution below 100 GeV

For meeting these requirements, several improvements might be explored,
as described in the following subsections.

#### 10.3.1 Installation of the HPD R9792U-40

The replacement of the PMTs in the camera with the HPDs described in
Chapter LABEL:ChapterHPD would improve the telescope performance. The
HPDs will double the number of detected Cherenkov photons from air
showers. One can record shower images with higher precision, which will
lead to a better (hadron+muon)/gamma separation, a better angular
resolution and a better energy resolution. The energy threshold will
also be lowered. The effective area should also increase largely, not
only thanks to the higher photodetection efficiency but also due to the
lower ion-feedback rate, allowing a more efficient trigger. However, the
effect of the fast-and-huge afterpulsing, which may be attributed to the
generation of characteristic X-rays inside the HPD, should be carefully
studied.

#### 10.3.2 Stereoscopic Observation with the MAGIC Stereoscopic System

In October 2009, MAGIC started stereoscopic observations with two
telescopes. As schematically explained in the right panel of Fig. 10.1 ,
if an air shower image is recorded by the two telescopes, the arrival
direction can be reconstructed better than by a single telescope. In
addition, the impact point of the shower and the shower maximum height
can be determined with higher precision. This leads to a better energy
resolution. The information of the shower maximum height has another
advantage. A muon image may look like a low energy gamma-ray image if
the impact distances from both telescopes are large ( @xmath m).
However, the majority of muons can be identified by the reconstructed
shower maximum height (a muon does not produce a shower but can create a
shower-like image). In the case of muon images, the height should be
reconstructed to be @xmath km, which is unusually low for low energy
gamma-rays (see Fig. 10.2 ). Also, Hadron/gamma-ray separation will
improve simply due to the double amount of information from the two
telescopes.

However, the requirement for a coinciding signal from the two telescopes
reduces the effective area especially for low energies. Below 50 GeV,
the reduction can be as large as a factor of @xmath . The energy
threshold also increases. The trigger condition, i.e. whether or not the
coincidence condition is fulfilled, must be carefully studied taking
into account the advantage and the disadvantage of stereoscopic
observation.

#### 10.3.3 Pulsar Observation with CTA

A new project in VHE gamma-ray astronomy named Cherenkov Telescope Array
(CTA) was recently proposed and a large international collaboration was
formed (see [ 209 ] ). The basic concept of CTA is an array of a large
number of IACTs spread over a square kilometer area.

The telescope configuration would be as follows;

-   The array consists of 3 different sizes of telescopes, @xmath large
    size ones, @xmath middle size ones, and @xmath small size ones.

-   The large size telescopes have a reflector diameter of @xmath m with
    a FoV of 5 degree.

-   The middle size telescopes have a reflector diameter of @xmath m
    with a FoV of 8 degree.

-   The small size telescopes have a reflector diameter of @xmath m with
    a FoV of 10 degree.

-   The distance between telescopes is around the order of 100 m.

-   Two arrays will be constructed, a larger one in the southern
    hemisphere and a smaller one comprising only 23 m and 12 m
    telescopes in the northern hemisphere.

The parameters described above such as the numbers of telescopes, the
diameters of reflectors and the angle of FoVs are not yet fixed. The
primary purpose of the CTA project is the observation of VHE gamma-ray
sources in the energy range between 100 GeV and 10 TeV with a
sensitivity @xmath times higher than that of current IACTs. The
accessible energy range will also be extended down to @xmath GeV and up
to 100 TeV.

For pulsar observations, a sensitivity below 100 GeV is essential. Below
100 GeV, the sensitivity is mainly determined by the large size
telescopes, whose reflector area will be @xmath times larger than that
of MAGIC. If the SUM trigger system is used in CTA, and if a coincidence
between multiple telescopes is not required for a trigger, then the
energy threshold of the CTA may be roughly estimated to be @xmath GeV by
scaling with the reflector diameter. Since there will be 3 - 5
telescopes, the effective area would increase correspondingly. The
coincidence requirement might increase the threshold energy, but the
reduction of the effective area may not be as much as in the case of the
MAGIC-stereo system. The gain in sensitivity below 100 GeV should be
intensely studied before all the designs are fixed and the construction
of telescopes starts.