##### Acknowledgements. I would like to thank my advisor, John Schwarz,
for his guidance and support, for teaching me about string theory and
M-theory, and for introducing me to the study of superconformal
Chern-Simons theories. I would also like to thank Yu-tin Huang for
teaching me about on-shell scattering amplitudes and Sakura
Schafer-Nameki for teaching me about integrability and for all of her
help in general. This thesis would not be possible without the help of
these people. I thank Miguel Bandres, Dongmin Gang, Yu-tin Huang,
Eunkyung Koh, Sangmin Lee, and John Schwarz for their collaboration. I
have also benefited from interactions with Nima Arkani-Hamed, Jonathan
Bagger, Simon Caron-Huot, Hee-Joong Chung, Ori Ganor, David Gross,
Christoph Keller, Juan Maldacena, Joseph Marsano, Donald Marolf, Tristan
McLoughlin, Victor Mikhaylov, Karapet Mkrtchyan, Hiroshi Ooguri, Ari
Pakman, Chang-Soon Park, Joseph Polchinski, Warren Siegel, Jaewon Song,
Marcus Spradlin, Heywood Tam, Jaroslav Trnka, Ketan Vyas, Congkao Wen,
and Xi Yin. I also thank Carol Silberstein for all of her help. I would
also like to thank Sergei Gukov and John Schwarz for giving me the
opportunity to be the TA for the Relativistic Quantum Mechanics course
and the String Theory course at Caltech, as well as Rana Adhikari,
Yanbei Chen, Lee Lindblom, and Kip Thorne for giving me the opportunity
to be a TA for the General Relativity course at Caltech. I am grateful
to Sergei Gukov, Frank Porter, and Mark Wise for serving on my my thesis
defense committee. I thank the organizers, lecturers, and participants
of the 2010 PiTP and Cargese summer schools, the 2009 Mathematica Summer
School, and the 2008 summer school on Particles, Fields, and Strings at
UBC. My work is supported in part by a Richard P. Feynman Fellowship, a
James Albert Cullen Memorial Fellowship, and US DOE grant
DE-FG02-92ER40701.

###### Contents

-    1 Weak Coupling
    -    1.1 Two-Point Correlators
    -    1.2 The ABJM Spin Chain
    -    1.3 @xmath Sector
-    2 Strong Coupling
    -    2.1 World-Sheet Formalism
    -    2.2 Algebraic Curve Formalism
    -    2.3 Fluctuation Frequencies
        -    2.3.1 Point-Particle
        -    2.3.2 Spinning String
    -    2.4 One-Loop Energies
        -    2.4.1 Summation Prescriptions
        -    2.4.2 Point-Particle
        -    2.4.3 Spinning String
-    3 On-Shell Superspace
-    4 Dual Superconformal Symmetry
    -    4.1 Dual Superspace
    -    4.2 Dual Inversion Properties
    -    4.3 Dual Conformal Boost Generator
-    5 Yangian Symmetry
-    6 Recursion Relations
    -    6.1 Two-Line Shift
    -    6.2 Large- @xmath Behavior
-    7 Dual Symmetry of All Tree Amplitudes
-    8 Grassmannian Integral Formula

## Chapter \thechapter Introduction

What does it mean for a theory to be integrable? In practice, this means
that the calculation of physical observables can be reduced to a
well-posed finite mathematical problem. One necessary requirement for a
theory to be integrable is that the number of symmetries matches the
number of degrees of freedom. In order for a quantum field theory to be
integrable, it must therefore have an infinite number of symmetries. In
general, integrability is restricted to two-dimensional field theories.
On the other hand, there are several examples where a higher dimensional
theory is dual to an integrable system such as a spin chain. The
best-known example of this phenomenon is the duality between @xmath
super Yang-Mills (sYM) theory [ 1 ] and type IIB string theory [ 2 ] on
the background geometry @xmath [ 3 ] . The former is a four-dimensional
gauge theory and the latter is a two-dimensional sigma model. This
duality is an example of the AdS/CFT correspondence, which relates
string theory on a background geometry consisting of @xmath times some
compact space to a conformal field theory living on @xmath -dimensional
Minkowski space [ 4 ] .

@xmath sYM admits an expansion in @xmath at fixed ’t Hooft coupling
@xmath , where @xmath is the rank of the gauge group and @xmath is the
Yang-Mills coupling. The leading order in this expansion is known as the
planar approximation and higher orders are suppressed as @xmath becomes
large. The gauge theory parameters are related to the string theory
parameters as follows

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (0.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the AdS radius, @xmath is the string tension, and @xmath
is the coupling for string interactions. Since the planar approximation
corresponds to taking @xmath to infinity while holding @xmath fixed,
this corresponds to taking @xmath to zero or equivalently taking the
string theory to be non-interacting. Integrability has mainly been
explored in this regime. Furthermore, if one takes @xmath to be large,
then quantum corrections in the string theory sigma model (which are
suppressed by powers of @xmath ) become small and the string theory can
be described using supergravity.

At small ’t Hooft coupling, the anomalous dimensions of gauge invariant
operators can be computed by solving a Bethe Ansatz [ 5 , 6 ] . At
strong coupling, the equations of motion of the string theory sigma
model can be recast as a flatness condition for a certain one-form known
as the Lax connection [ 7 ] . Using this property, any classical
solution of the sigma model can be encoded in an algebraic curve [ 8 , 9
, 10 ] . Ultimately, it is possible to define an all-loop Bethe Ansatz
which interpolates from the gauge theory Bethe Ansatz to the string
theory algebraic curve [ 11 ] . This allows one to compute anomalous
dimensions at strong ’t Hooft coupling using string theory and
interpolate these results to weak coupling. Although the all-loop Bethe
Ansatz breaks down for finite-size operators after a certain order in
the ’t Hooft coupling, it is possible to generalize this formalism to
compute the anomalous dimensions of finite-size operators to arbitrary
order using a so-called Thermodynamic Bethe Ansatz (TBA) [ 12 , 13 , 14
, 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 ] .

Integrable structure can also be found in the on-shell planar scattering
amplitudes of @xmath sYM. In fact, the scattering amplitudes of @xmath
sYM theory exhibit many hidden structures which are related to type IIB
string theory on @xmath through the AdS @xmath /CFT @xmath
correspondence. For example, if one uses the momenta of a
maximal-helicity-violating (MHV) amplitude to define points in a dual
space via @xmath , then it turns out that the scattering amplitude is
related to a light-like polygonal Wilson loop whose cusps are located at
the dual points @xmath . This duality was first proposed at strong
coupling [ 20 ] . Remarkably, this duality also holds at weak coupling [
22 , 23 , 24 ] . Recently, there has also been progress in extending the
amplitude/Wilson loop duality to non-MHV amplitudes [ 25 , 26 ] .
Furthermore,there is a lot of evidence that this can be extended to an
amplitude/Wilson-loop/correlator duality [ 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 , 32 ]
.

Since the null-polygonal Wilson loops in @xmath super Yang-Mills enjoy
conformal symmetry, the amplitude/Wilson loop duality implies a hidden
dual conformal symmetry of the scattering amplitudes which is
inequivalent to the original conformal symmetry. Furthermore, it is
possible to extend the dual conformal symmetry to dual superconformal
symmetry, which becomes manifest once the amplitudes are written in a
dual superspace [ 33 , 34 , 35 ] . The origin of dual superconformal
symmetry can be understood using string theory. In particular, it is a
consequence of the fact that type IIB string theory on @xmath is
self-dual under a certain combination of T-duality transformations [ 36
, 37 ] . These T-duality transformation exchange superconformal symmetry
with dual superconformal symmetry on the gauge theory side [ 38 ] .

The presence of dual superconformal symmetry in @xmath sYM is intimately
related to its integrability since combining superconformal symmetry
with dual superconformal symmetry at tree-level gives an infinite tower
of symmetries known as the Yangian [ 39 , 40 , 41 ] . Yangian symmetry
also appears in the context of the @xmath sYM spin chain and the dual
string theory. The superconformal symmetry generators correspond to the
level-0 Yangian generators and the dual superconformal symmetry
generators provide part of the level-1 Yangian generators. Although
higher-level generators do not impose new constraints on the amplitudes,
the combination of superconformal symmetry and dual superconformal
symmetry is sufficient to fix all tree-level amplitudes [ 42 ] . It is
also possible to extend dual superconformal symmetry to loop amplitudes
[ 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 ] . Ultimately, a generating function with manifest
Yangian invariance has been proposed which is conjectured to capture the
leading singularities of all scattering amplitudes in @xmath sYM to all
orders in perturbation theory [ 47 ] . For a superamplitude with @xmath
external legs and MHV-degree @xmath , this generating function takes the
form of an integral over the Grassmannian @xmath .

Using the amplitude/Wilson loop duality, it is possible to compute MHV
amplitudes at strong coupling by computing null polygonal Wilson loops
via string theory [ 20 ] . Furthermore, the string theory calculation
can be reduced to solving a Thermodynamic Bethe Ansatz [ 48 , 49 ] .
Since a similar structure appears when computing the anomalous
dimensions of finite-size operators, this suggests a deep connection
between the computation of scattering amplitudes and anomalous
dimensions.

The progress in computing scattering amplitudes in @xmath sYM is largely
due to the spinor-helicity formalism, which uses (super)twistors to
covariantly parameterize on-shell momenta, polarization vectors, and
(for supersymmetric theories) on-shell multiplets. When written in terms
of supertwistors, on-shell amplitudes look substantially simpler.
Furthermore, twistor-inspired methods [ 50 ] have led to very efficient
techniques for computing amplitudes. For example, the MHV expansion [ 51
] and the Britto, Feng, Cachazo, and Witten (BCFW) [ 52 , 53 ] recursion
relations give a systematic procedure for constructing higher-point
tree-level amplitudes from lower-point tree-level amplitudes. This
procedure was recently extended to the loop integrands of planar
scattering amplitudes in @xmath sYM [ 54 , 55 ] .

In this thesis, we will focus on integrability in a new example of the
AdS/CFT correspondence which relates superconformal Chern-Simons
theories in three dimensions to type IIA string theory in @xmath . The
study of superconformal Chern-Simons theories was originally motivated
by the need to better understand M-theory, whose fundamental objects are
referred to as M2-branes and M5-branes [ 56 ] . A superconformal
Chern-Simons theory with maximal supersymmetry was discovered by Bagger,
Lambert, and Gustavsson (BLG) [ 57 , 58 , 59 ] , and is thought to
describe two interacting M2-branes [ 60 , 61 ] . Subsequent studies
showed that the BLG theory is the only theory which has maximal
supersymmetry at the classical level and is unitary [ 62 , 63 , 64 , 65
, 66 ] . It was then shown by Aharony, Bergman, Jafferis, and Maldacena
(ABJM) that in order to generalize the BLG theory to describe an
arbitrary number of M2-branes, one must sacrifice maximal supersymmetry
[ 67 ] . The ABJM theory has @xmath superconformal symmetry and @xmath
gauge symmetry, where @xmath is the Chern-Simons level. When @xmath ,
the supersymmetry is enhanced to @xmath due to quantum effects [ 68 , 69
] . When @xmath , the ABJM theory is dual to type IIA string theory on
@xmath .

Like @xmath sYM, the ABJM theory admits an expansion in @xmath at fixed
’t Hooft parameter @xmath . The parameters of the string theory are
related to the gauge theory parameters as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (0.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is proportional to the AdS radius. Since the discovery of
the ABJM theory, a lot of evidence has been found which suggests that it
is integrable in the planar limit. In particular, the planar dilatation
operator in the gauge theory was shown to be integrable up to six loops
[ 70 , 71 , 72 , 73 ] , classical integrability was demonstrated in
various subsectors of the dual string theory [ 74 , 75 , 76 ] , an
@xmath algebraic curve was formulated in [ 77 ] , an all-loop Bethe
Ansatz was conjectured in [ 78 ] , and a Thermodynamic Bethe Ansatz for
the ABJM theory was proposed in [ 79 , 80 ] . Moreover, a
spinor-helicity formalism was developed for three-dimensional
superconformal Chern-Simons theories [ 81 , 82 ] and used to show that
the four- and six-point tree-level amplitudes of the ABJM theory have
Yangian symmetry [ 81 ] and dual superconformal symmetry [ 83 ] . A
recursion relation for tree-level amplitudes was then constructed and
used to show that all tree-level amplitudes have dual superconformal
symmetry [ 84 ] . A Grassmannian integral formula similar to the
integral formula of @xmath sYM has also been proposed for the ABJM
theory [ 85 ] .

While the @xmath correspondence shares certain features with the @xmath
correspondence, it also exhibits several new features. First of all, the
@xmath magnon dispersion relation was found to be @xmath , where [ 86 ,
87 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is in contrast to the magnon dispersion relation for @xmath , where
@xmath for all values of @xmath [ 88 , 89 ] . The interpolating function
@xmath appears in the all-loop Bethe Ansatz and its nontrivial structure
in the @xmath correspondence can be attributed to the fact that the
theory only has 3/4 maximal supersymmetry. Another consequence of the
less-than-maximal supersymmetry is that the radius of @xmath receives
@xmath corrections, although this only becomes relevant at two loops in
the string theory sigma model [ 90 ] .

Furthermore, unlike the string theory dual to @xmath sYM, the string
theory dual to the ABJM theory is not fully described by a coset sigma
model since the coset sigma model description breaks down for string
configurations which have no support in @xmath [ 75 ] . In order to go
beyond one-loop in the string theory sigma model, one must use a
Green-Schwarz sigma model whose target space is the full @xmath
superspace [ 92 , 93 ] . New techniques have to be developed to prove
integrability in the full superspace [ 91 ] .

Another new feature of type IIA string theory on @xmath is that in the
Penrose limit, half of the excitations are twice as massive as the other
half [ 86 , 87 , 94 ] . The latter are subsequently referred to as
“light” and the former are referred to as “heavy”. This is in contrast
to what was found when looking at the Penrose limit of type IIB string
theory on @xmath , where all the excitations have the same mass [ 95 ] .
The origin of these two types of fluctuations can be understood from the
ABJM spin chain. In particular, the light fluctuations correspond to the
elementary excitations of the spin chain while heavy fluctuations
correspond to composite excitations of the spin chain. Whereas the ABJM
spin chain has only eight elementary excitations, the @xmath sYM spin
chain has sixteen elementary excitations, which are in one-to-one
correspondence with the fluctuations in the Penrose limit of type IIB
string theory on @xmath .

Since the heavy fluctuations in type IIA string theory on @xmath are not
dual to elementary excitations of the ABJM spin chain, care must be
taken when computing quantum corrections to the world-sheet theory,
which correspond to @xmath corrections to the classical string theory.
In particular, several groups found a disagreement with the all-loop
Bethe Ansatz after computing the one-loop correction to the energy of
the folded spinning string in @xmath [ 96 , 97 , 98 ] . In computing the
one-loop correction, these groups used the same prescription for adding
up fluctuation frequencies that was used in @xmath . Several ways to
resolve this discrepancy were proposed in [ 99 , 100 , 101 ] . In
particular two alternative summation prescriptions were proposed which
achieve agreement with the all-loop Bethe Ansatz by treating the
frequencies of heavy and light fluctuations on unequal footing.
Furthermore, the analysis of [ 101 ] indicates that the standard
summation prescription for computing one-loop corrections leads to
divergent results when applied to fluctuation frequencies computed using
algebraic curve techniques. Reference [ 100 ] pointed out that the
discrepancy can also be resolved if the interpolating function has the
form @xmath with @xmath .

The ABJM theory also exhibits many new features in terms of its on-shell
scattering amplitudes. First of all, since there is no chirality in
three dimensions, there is only one type of spinor with which one can
parameterize the scattering amplitudes of massless particles. More
concretely, in four dimensions, a null momentum can be written in terms
of two types of spinors as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (0.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are @xmath indices of opposite chirality. On the
other hand, a null momentum in three dimensions can be written in
bi-spinor form as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (0.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is an @xmath index. Furthermore, the BCFW recursion
relations are not applicable to three-dimensional conformal field
theories. In the usual BCFW approach, one linearly deforms two external
momenta of an on-shell amplitude by a complex parameter. In order to
define a similar recursion relation in three dimensions which preserves
on-shell properties and conformal symmetry, one must allow the
deformation to be nonlinear [ 84 ] .

Another implication of the lack of chirality in three dimensions is that
half of the dual supersymmetry generators fail to commute with the
equations that relate the dual superspace coordinates to the on-shell
superspace coordinates. This problem can be remedied by augmenting the
dual superspace by three Grassmann-even coordinates which carry only
R-symmetry indices [ 83 ] . Such coordinates are not required in order
to define a dual superspace in @xmath sYM, although they do appear if
one formulates @xmath sYM using a non-chiral superspace [ 102 ] .
Furthermore, the inclusion of these coordinates allows one to match the
nontrivial dual superconformal generators with level-1 Yangian
generators, which implies that the amplitudes of the ABJM theory have
Yangian symmetry. Although the ABJM theory is only @xmath maximal, this
is precisely the amount of supersymmetry for which dual superconformal
symmetry is possible in three dimensions.

The structure of this thesis is as follows. Chapter 2 focuses on
anomalous dimensions of long gauge-invariant operators in the ABJM
theory. First, we describe how to compute them at weak coupling using an
asymptotic Bethe Ansatz. In section 2.1.3, we present the two-loop Bethe
Ansatz for the @xmath sector of the ABJM spin chain and use it to
compute the anomalous dimensions of non-BPS operators. In section 2.2,
we describe how to compute anomalous dimensions at strong coupling using
string theory. The material in section 2.2 is taken from [ 101 ] . First
we describe two formalisms for computing the spectrum of fluctuation
frequencies about classical string solutions, which are known as the
world-sheet approach and the algebraic curve approach. In section 2.2.3,
we apply these techniques to two classical solutions which are dual to
the gauge theory operators analyzed in section 2.1.3, notably a point
particle and a circular string which are spinning in @xmath . In section
2.2.4, we analyze different prescriptions for computing one-loop
corrections to the energies of these classical solutions and match the
energies with the anomalous dimensions of the dual gauge theory
operators. Chapter 3 discusses on-shell amplitudes of the ABJM theory.
The material in Chapter 3 is mostly taken from [ 83 ] and [ 84 ] . In
section 3.1, we describe supertwistors which can be used to parameterize
the on-shell amplitudes of three-dimensional superconformal field
theories. Section 3.2.1 describes how to construct a dual superspace for
the ABJM theory. In particular, we will show that in order to define
dual supersymmetry generators in a consistent way, this space must
contain three Grassmann-even coordinates in addition to three bosonic
and six fermionic coordinates. In section 3.2.3, we define the dual
conformal boost generator and demonstrate that the four-point amplitude
of the ABJM theory has dual superconformal symmetry. Section 3.3 then
demonstrates that the nontrivial dual superconformal generators can be
matched with level-one Yangian generators, which establishes that
combining ordinary supersymmetry with dual superconformal symmetry gives
Yangian symmetry. In section 3.4, we describe the difficulties of
extending the BCFW recursion relation to three dimensional theories and
present an alternative recursion relation for the ABJM theory. In
section 3.5, we demonstrate that this recursion relation preserves dual
superconformal symmetry, which implies that all tree-level amplitudes of
the ABJM theory have Yangian symmetry. In section 3.6, we briefly
describe the Grassmannian integral formula which is conjectured to
generate all tree-level amplitudes of the ABJM theory. In Chapter 4, we
present some conclusions. There are also several appendices. Appendix A
reviews the ABJM theory, Appendix B reviews type IIA string theory on
@xmath , and Appendix C describes the twistor geometry of
three-dimensional Minkowski space.

## Chapter \thechapter Anomalous Dimensions

### 1 Weak Coupling

In this section, we will describe how to compute anomalous dimensions of
long gauge invariant operators in the planar limit of the ABJM theory.
We begin with a general discussion of two-point correlators, and then
describe the spin chain of the ABJM theory. We then specialize to the
@xmath sector, which is the simplest closed subsector of the spin chain,
and compute the dispersion relation of elementary and composite
excitations as well as the anomalous dimension of a non-BPS operator
which is dual to a circular spinning string in the dual string theory.

#### 1.1 Two-Point Correlators

A Euclidean conformal field theory (CFT) is completely characterized by
its two- and three-point correlators. It is possible to choose a basis
of local gauge invariant operators such that the two-point correlators
of these operators takes the form ¹ ¹ 1 This is a formula for scalar
operators, but it can be generalized to describe operators with spin.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the scaling dimension of @xmath , which can be split
into two pieces

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the classical scaling dimension and @xmath is the
anomalous dimension coming from quantum corrections. The operators
@xmath and their scaling dimensions can be thought of as eigen-operators
and eigenvalues of an anomalous dimension matrix, or dilatation
operator, @xmath . If the CFT has a large- @xmath expansion, where
@xmath is related to the rank of the gauge-group, then @xmath has the
following topological expansion:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the ’t Hooft coupling. If @xmath , then @xmath can be
computed perturbatively by computing the renormalization matrix @xmath
which cancels the divergences of the two-point correlators, and then
taking the logarithmic derivative of @xmath with respect to the
renormalization scale @xmath . If the CFT is dual to a string theory,
then it is also possible to compute the anomalous dimensions when @xmath
using the @xmath correspondence. In particular,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the energy of the string state dual to the operator
@xmath , @xmath is the radius of the dual supergravity background,
@xmath is the string tension, and @xmath is the coupling for string
interactions [ 104 , 105 ] . If @xmath scales like @xmath , then @xmath
is dual to a classical solution of string theory. In practice, one
matches the scaling dimension computed in the gauge theory with the
energy computed in the string theory by first expanding in @xmath , and
then expanding in @xmath in the gauge theory (where @xmath is R-charge
of the gauge theory operator), while first expanding in @xmath , and
then expanding in @xmath in the string theory [ 95 ] . We will describe
how to compute string energies in section 2.2.

In the large- @xmath limit, only the @xmath term in eq. 1.1 survives.
This is known as the planar limit. In this limit, multi-trace operators
decouple so we only need to consider single-trace operators.
Furthermore, the dilatation operator can be thought of as the
Hamiltonian of a spin chain. If the spin chain is integrable, then the
Hamiltonian can be diagonalized via a Bethe Ansatz. In the planar limit,
the string theory becomes non-interacting, since only world-sheets zero
genus contribute.

#### 1.2 The ABJM Spin Chain

A nice review of the ABJM spin chain can be found in [ 103 ] . Since the
matter fields in the ABJM theory are in the bifundamental representation
of the gauge group @xmath , gauge invariant operators are constructed by
taking the trace of an even number of fields which alternate between the
@xmath and @xmath representation. They can therefore be thought of as
alternating spin chains. Schematically, they have the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the scalar fields @xmath , @xmath , are in the fundamental
representation of the R-symmetry group @xmath , and their adjoints
@xmath are in the anti-fundamental representation (see Appendix A for
more details). One can also insert fermionic fields @xmath on the odd
sites, @xmath on the even sites, and covariant derivatives @xmath which
do not introduce extra sites. Field strength insertions can be replaced
with currents using the quantum equations of motion. One choice of
vacuum for the ABJM spin chain is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that the vacuum is protected by supersymmetry and therefore has a
zero anomalous dimension. For this choice of vacuum, the elementary
bosonic excitations correspond to inserting @xmath or @xmath on the odd
sites and @xmath or @xmath on the even sites. By supersymmetry, there
are also four elementary fermionic excitations. All other insertions
correspond to composite excitations of the spin chain. In particular,
there are eight independent composite excitations which correspond to
one elementary excitation on the even sites and one elementary
excitation on the odd sites.

The vacuum of the spin chain breaks the superconformal group from @xmath
to @xmath and the eight elementary excitations transform in the
representation @xmath , where @xmath refers to the even/odd sites of the
spin chain. This can also be understood by looking at the Dynkin diagram
of @xmath , which is depicted in Fig. 1 . Note that the Dynkin diagram
has an @xmath tail, corresponding to the nodes @xmath , and two wings
corresponding to the nodes @xmath . As we mentioned in the previous
subsection, if the ABJM spin chain is integrable, this implies that the
dilatation operator can be diagonalized using a Bethe Ansatz. In this
case, the roots of the Bethe equations are in one-to-one correspondence
with the nodes of the Dynkin diagram. In particular, @xmath and @xmath
are referred to as the momentum-carrying Bethe roots because they are
related to the momenta of excitations on the odd/even sites of the spin
chain. Once the momentum-carrying Bethe roots are determined, the
anomalous dimension and all higher charges of the spin chain can be
computed. The other roots are auxiliary in the sense that the spectrum
of the spin chain does not depend on them explicitly. The elementary
excitations on the odd sites correspond to exciting one @xmath root and
various combinations of roots in the @xmath tail, notably @xmath and
@xmath , where @xmath denote the number of @xmath roots which are
excited. Note that the first two combinations are bosonic and the second
two are fermionic since @xmath is a fermionic root. The elementary
excitations on the even sites correspond to replacing @xmath with @xmath
.

In the next subsection, we will specialize to the @xmath subsector of
the ABJM spin chain, which corresponds to exciting only the
momentum-carrying roots @xmath and @xmath . We will show that the
two-loop planar dilatation operator in this sector is integrable by
writing down a Bethe Ansatz which can be used to diagonalize it. We will
also describe some simple solutions to the Bethe Ansatz.

#### 1.3 @xmath Sector

In the @xmath sector, the odd sites of the spin chain are @xmath and the
even sites of the spin chain are @xmath . For an operator of length
@xmath , the planar two-loop dilatation operator is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath permutes the fields on sites @xmath and @xmath and the
indices are periodic, i.e., @xmath . It is easy to see that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

is annihilated by the dilatation operator, which is expected since this
operator is the vacuum of the spin chain. Furthermore, this operator is
protected by supersymmetry since its scaling dimension is equal to its
R-charge, i.e., it is a BPS operator. Note that there are two types of
excitations in the @xmath sector: @xmath and @xmath . If we think of
@xmath and @xmath as being down spins and the excitations @xmath and
@xmath as being up spins, the dilatation operator in eq. 1.2 is just the
Hamiltonian for two Heisenberg spin chains, one on the even sites and
one on the odd sites. The spin chains are only coupled by the constraint
that the sum of the momenta of all the excitations is zero (modulo
@xmath ). This constraint arises from the fact that the spin chain
corresponds to a trace of fields, which is invariant under cyclic
permutations.

The Heisenberg spin chain was solved by Hans Bethe [ 106 ] . The key
property of this model which makes it solvable is that the scattering of
an arbitrary number of excitations factorizes into @xmath scatterings.
In this sense, once one solves the Schrodinger equation for two
excitations, it is easy to generalize the solution to an arbitrary
number of excitations. A nice review of the coordinate Bethe Ansatz for
integrable spin chains in @xmath sYM can be found in [ 107 ] , for
example. Coming back to the @xmath spin chain, suppose we have an
operator of length @xmath with @xmath excitations on the odd sites and
@xmath excitations on the even sites. Then the Bethe Ansatz equations
are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the variables @xmath and @xmath are related to the momenta of the
excitations on the odd/even sites by @xmath and @xmath . Eqs. 1.4 and
1.5 contain dynamical information. In particular, the right-hand side of
each of these equations is just a product of two-body scattering
matrices. Note that the excitations on the odd sites do not scatter with
excitations on the even sites since there is no coupling between them in
the Hamiltonian. Eq. 1.6 simply states that the sum of all the momenta
should be zero (modulo @xmath ). After solving eqs. 1.4 , 1.5 , and 1.6
for the @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s, one just plugs them into eq. 1.7 to
obtain the anomalous dimension.

Let’s work out a simple example. In particular, let’s consider inserting
one excitation on the even sites and one excitation on the odd sites of
the operator in eq. 1.3 . If we think of the resulting non-BPS operator
as two Heisenberg spin chains, then each spin chain has @xmath sites.
Furthermore, we can think of the two elementary excitations as a single
composite excitation of the ABJM spin chain. In this case, eqs. 1.4 ,
1.5 , and 1.6 reduce to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Suppose the odd excitation has momentum @xmath and the even excitation
has momentum @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath and the equations above can
be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These are solved by @xmath . Plugging this into eq. 1.7 then gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, after we add one impurity to the even sites and one to the odd
sites of the operator in eq. 1.3 , the the quantum-corrected scaling
dimension of the resulting operator is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that the scaling dimension of the vacuum operator is @xmath (since
the scalar fields have mass dimension @xmath ). It follows that the
energy of a composite excitation of the spin chain is given by @xmath .
In the large- @xmath limit, this reduces to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since the composite excitation is made up of two elementary excitations,
we find that in the large- @xmath limit the energy of an elementary
excitation is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

As one more example, let’s consider adding @xmath excitations to the
even sites and @xmath excitations to the odd sites of the operator in
eq. 1.3 . We then obtain the following non-BPS operator:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the dots stand for permutations of @xmath and @xmath . Once again,
this operator can be thought of as two decoupled spin chains except in
this case, each spin chain has @xmath up spins and @xmath down spins.
Since the two spin chains are identical, we can set @xmath and eqs. 1.4
– 1.7 reduce to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an integer which is introduced after taking the log of
both sides of eq. 1.12 . This integer corresponds to the winding number
of the classical string which is dual to the operator in eq. 1.10 . In
the large- @xmath limit, the Bethe equations simplify and can be solved
using the methods described in [ 8 , 108 ] . In particular, following
the manipulations in section 3 of [ 108 ] , one finds that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

### 2 Strong Coupling

In this section, we will describe how to compute the one-loop energies
of the classical string theory solutions dual to the gauge theory
operators analyzed in section 2.1, notably a rotating point particle and
a circular string which are spinning in @xmath and have trivial support
in @xmath . The latter solution is the @xmath analogue of the @xmath
circular string which was discovered in [ 109 ] and studied extensively
in the @xmath correspondence [ 110 , 111 , 108 ] . The point-particle
and spinning string solutions are especially interesting to study in the
@xmath context because @xmath symmetry breaks down in the coset sigma
model for solutions with trivial support in @xmath [ 75 ] .

In order to compute the one-loop correction to the energy of a classical
solution, we must first compute the spectrum of fluctuations about the
solution. This can be computed by expanding the Green-Schwarz (GS)
action to quadratic order in the fluctuations and finding the normal
modes of the resulting equations of motion. We refer to this method as
the world-sheet (WS) approach. Alternatively, the spectrum can be
computed from the algebraic curve corresponding to this solution using
semi-classical techniques. We refer to this as the algebraic curve (AC)
approach. This approach was developed for type IIB string theory in
@xmath in [ 112 ] and then adapted to type IIA string theory in @xmath
in [ 77 ] . In the next two subsections, we describe the world-sheet and
algebraic curve formalisms in greater detail.

#### 2.1 World-Sheet Formalism

The world-sheet approach for computing the spectrum of fluctuations
about a classical solution in @xmath was developed in [ 113 ] . In this
subsection, we will describe the analogous formalism for @xmath .

Using the metric @xmath in eq. \thechapter .1 , the bosonic part of the
GS Lagrangian in conformal gauge is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are world-sheet indices, @xmath , and we have set @xmath .
Any solution to the bosonic equations of motion has at least five
conserved charges. In particular, there are two @xmath charges given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and there are three @xmath charges given by

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                                                                                                            
                                                                                              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4a)
                                                                                              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                                                                                                @xmath      
                                                                                              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                                                                                                @xmath      
  where @xmath is the energy and @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are angular momenta.                                 
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

A solution to the bosonic equations of motion is said to be a classical
solution if it also satisfies the Virasoro constraints

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that these are the only constraints that relate motion in @xmath to
motion in @xmath .

The spectrum of bosonic fluctuations around a classical solution can be
computed by expanding the bosonic Lagrangian in eq. 2.1 to quadratic
order in the fluctuations and finding the normal modes of the resulting
equations of motion. In the examples we consider in section 2.2.3, two
of the bosonic modes are massless and the other eight are massive. While
the eight massive modes correspond to the physical transverse degrees of
freedom, the two massless modes can be discarded. One way to see that
the massless modes can be discarded is by expanding the Virasoro
constraints to linear order in the fluctuations [ 113 ] .

To compute the spectrum of fermionic fluctuations, we only need the
quadratic part of the fermionic GS action for type IIA string theory.
This action describes two 10-dimensional Majorana-Weyl spinors of
opposite chirality which can be combined into a single non-chiral
Majorana spinor @xmath . The quadratic GS action for type IIA string
theory in a general background can be found in [ 114 ] . For the
supergravity background in eqs. \thechapter .1 – \thechapter .4 , the
quadratic Lagrangian for the fermions is given by

  -- -- -- -------
           (2.6)
  -- -- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Note that @xmath
is a base-space index while @xmath are tangent-space indices.

We will now recast the fermionic Lagrangian in eq. 2.6 in a form that
allows us to compute the fermionic fluctuation frequencies in a
straightforward way. First we note that after rearranging terms, eq. 2.6
can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we define @xmath , @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that @xmath and if the classical solution satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

then @xmath is a projection operator, i.e., @xmath . In addition, if the
classical solution satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

then the fermionic Lagrangian simplifies to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, if we consider the Fourier mode @xmath , where @xmath is a
constant spinor, then the equations of motion for the fermionic
fluctuations are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can choose a basis where @xmath has the form @xmath (where each
element in the @xmath matrix corresponds to a @xmath matrix). In this
basis, the matrix on the left-hand side of eq. 2.13 will have the form
@xmath . The fermionic frequencies are determined by taking the
determinant of @xmath and finding its roots.

Only half of the fermionic components appear in the Lagrangian in eq.
2.12 . Hence, a natural choice for fixing kappa-symmetry is to set the
other components to zero by imposing the gauge condition @xmath . This
gives the desired number of fermionic degrees of freedom.

#### 2.2 Algebraic Curve Formalism

The procedure for computing the spectrum of excitations about a
classical string solution using the @xmath algebraic curve was first
presented in [ 77 ] . In this section, we reformulate this procedure in
terms of an off-shell formalism similar to the one that was developed
for the @xmath algebraic curve in [ 115 ] . The off-shell formalism
makes things much more efficient. First we describe how to construct the
classical algebraic curve. Then we describe how to semi-classically
quantize the curve and obtain the spectrum of excitations.

##### Classical Algebraic Curve

For type IIA string theory in @xmath , any classical solution can be
encoded in a 10-sheeted Riemann surface whose branches, called
quasimomenta, are denoted by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This algebraic curve corresponds to the fundamental representation of
@xmath , which is ten-dimensional. Furthermore, the quasimomenta are not
all independent. In particular

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a complex number called the spectral parameter. More
precisely, @xmath should be regarded as ten branches of the same
analytical function. As we will see shortly, the algebraic curve arises
by diagonalizing a monodromy matrix which is computed from the Lax
connection of the string theory sigma model.

To compute the quasimomenta, it is useful to parameterize @xmath and
@xmath using the following embedding coordinates

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath . One can then compute the following connection:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath [ 77 ] . This connection is a @xmath
matrix and transforms under the bosonic part of the supergroup @xmath ,
notably @xmath . If the equations of motion of the string theory sigma
model are satisfied, then @xmath is a conserved current:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, @xmath is a flat connection:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eqs. 2.16 and 2.17 are equivalent to the flatness of the bosonic Lax
connection

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the spectral parameter introduced earlier.

Using the Lax connection, we can construct the following monodromy
matrix:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the path-ordering symbol and the integral is over a loop
of constant world-sheet time @xmath . Note that the eigenvalues of
@xmath are independent of the world-sheet time @xmath . Hence, the
monodromy matrix encodes an infinite set of conserved charges.

The quasimomenta are related to the eigenvalues of the monodromy matrix.
In particular, if we diagonalize the monodromy matrix we will find that
the eigenvalues of the @xmath part are in general given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , while the eigenvalues from the @xmath part are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The classical quasimomenta are then defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have suppressed the @xmath -dependence. From this formula, we
see that @xmath and @xmath correspond to the @xmath part of the
algebraic curve, while @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath correspond to the
@xmath part of the algebraic curve.

##### Semi-Classical Quantization

The algebraic curve will generically have cuts connecting several pairs
of sheets. These cuts encode the classical physics. To perform
semiclassical quantization, we add poles to the algebraic curve which
correspond to quantum fluctuations. If we think of the poles as
infinitesimal cuts, each pole connects two sheets. In particular, the
bosonic fluctuations connect two @xmath sheets or two @xmath sheets and
the fermionic fluctuations connect an @xmath sheet to a @xmath sheet.
See Fig. 2 for a depiction of the fluctuations. In total, there are
eight bosonic and eight fermionic fluctuations, and they are labeled by
the pairs of sheets that their poles connect. The labels are referred to
as polarizations and are summarized in Table 1 .

Notice that every fluctuation can be labeled by two equivalent
polarizations because every pole connects two equivalent pairs of sheets
as a consequence of eq. 2.14 . Fluctuations connecting sheet 5 or 6 to
any other sheet are defined to be light. Notice that there are eight
light excitations. All the others are defined to be heavy excitations.
The physical significance of this terminology will become clear later
on. When we compute the spectrum of fluctuations about the
point-particle in @xmath , for example, we will find that the heavy
excitations are twice as massive as the light excitations.

When adding poles, we must take into account the level-matching
condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number of excitations with polarization @xmath and
mode number @xmath . Furthermore, the locations of the poles are not
arbitrary; they are determined by the following equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the location of a pole corresponding to a fluctuation
with polarization @xmath and mode number @xmath .

In addition to adding poles to the algebraic curve, we must also add
fluctuations to the classical quasimomenta. These fluctuations will
depend on the spectral parameter @xmath as well as the locations of the
poles, which we will denote by the collective coordinate @xmath . The
functional form of the fluctuations is determined by some general
constraints:

-   They are not all independent:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   They have poles near the points @xmath and the residues of these
    poles are synchronized as follows:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.25)
      -- -------- -- --------

    This encodes the Virasoro constraints.

-   There is an inversion symmetry:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.26)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   The fluctuations have the following large- @xmath behavior:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.27)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath is called the anomalous part of
    the energy shift. Whereas the @xmath are inputs of the calculation,
    @xmath will be determined in the process of determining the
    fluctuations of the quasimomenta. The factor of two that appears in
    front of @xmath and @xmath is a consequence of the symmetry in eq.
    2.14 .

-   Finally, when the spectral parameter approaches the location of one
    of the poles, the fluctuations have the following form:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.28)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where the proportionality constants can be read off from the
    coefficient of @xmath in the @xmath ’th row of eq. 2.27 .

After computing the anomalous part of the energy shift, the total energy
of the fluctuations is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the first sum is over polarizations @xmath which correspond to
fluctuations in @xmath , and the second sum is over polarizations @xmath
which correspond to fermionic fluctuations. We will denote the energy
(or frequency) of a fluctuation with polarization @xmath as @xmath . It
is useful to consider the fluctuation frequency without fixing the value
of @xmath . In this case, the fluctuation frequency is said to be
off-shell.

Using arguments similar to those in [ 115 ] , one can deduce the
relations among the off-shell frequencies. First of all, the light
off-shell frequencies are related by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

Second, all the heavy off-shell frequencies can be written as the sum of
two light off-shell frequencies as summarized in Table 2 .

Finally, any off-shell frequency @xmath is related to its mirror
off-shell frequency @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , or @xmath for AdS, Fermionic, or @xmath polarizations,
respectively. The mirror polarization @xmath of the polarization @xmath
can be readily found using eq. 2.26 , e.g., @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
etc. Using these relations, only two of the eight light off-shell
frequencies are independent. For example,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.31a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.31b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In conclusion, if we compute the off-shell frequencies @xmath and @xmath
, then we can determine all the other off-shell frequencies
automatically from the relations in eqs. 2.30 , 2.31 , and Table 2 .

The on-shell frequencies are then obtained by evaluating the off-shell
frequencies at the location of the poles, which are determined by
solving eq. 2.24 , i.e. @xmath . It will be convenient to organize them
into the following linear combinations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath stands for light and @xmath stands for heavy.

#### 2.3 Fluctuation Frequencies

In this subsection, we use the algebraic curve formalism to compute the
spectrum of fluctuations about two classical solutions corresponding to
a point particle and a circular string which are spinning in @xmath .
The corresponding world-sheet calculations can be found in [ 101 ] . For
each classical solution, we compare the algebraic curve spectrum to the
world-sheet spectrum. We also compare the light/heavy fluctuation
frequencies about the point-particle solution to the spectrum of
elementary/composite excitations of the ABJM spin chain.

##### 2.3.1 Point-Particle

In terms of the coordinates of eqs. \thechapter .5 and Integrability of
@xmath Chern-Simons Theory , the solution for a point-particle rotating
with angular momentum @xmath in @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . This version of the solution is useful for
doing calculations in the world-sheet formalism. Alternatively, we can
write this solution in embedding coordinates by plugging eq. 2.34 into
eqs. \thechapter .7 and \thechapter .11 :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

This version of the solution is useful for doing calculations in the
algebraic curve formalism. The energy and angular momenta of the
particle can be read off from eqs. 2.2 – 2.4 : @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath . Furthermore, the Virasoro constraints in eq. 2.5 give @xmath
, or equivalently @xmath . Note that this is a BPS condition. We
therefore expect that the dimension of the dual gauge theory operator
should be protected by supersymmetry. We claim that this classical
solution is dual to the BPS operator in eq 1.3 .

##### Classical Quasimomenta

In this section, we compute the algebraic curve for the classical
solution given in eq. 2.35 . First we plug this solution into eq. 2.15 :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that this connection is independent of @xmath , so it is trivial to
compute the monodromy matrix in eq. 2.19 since path ordering is not an
issue. Diagonalizing the monodromy matrix and comparing the eigenvalues
to eqs. 2.20 and 2.21 then gives @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .
Recalling that @xmath and plugging these results into eq. 2.22 , we find
that the classical quasimomenta are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The algebraic curve corresponding to these quasimomenta is depicted in
Fig. 3 . Note that all sheets except those corresponding to @xmath and
@xmath have poles at @xmath .

##### Off-Shell Frequencies

Recall from eqs. 2.30 and 2.31 and Table 2 that if we know the off-shell
frequencies @xmath and @xmath , then all the others are determined.
Let’s begin by computing @xmath . Suppose we have two fluctuations
between @xmath and @xmath . To satisfy level-matching, let’s take one of
these fluctuations to have mode number @xmath and the other to have mode
number @xmath . Each fluctuation corresponds to adding a pole to the
classical algebraic curve. The locations of the poles are determined by
solving eq. 2.24 . We will denote the pole locations by @xmath . We then
make the following ansatz for the fluctuations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is defined in eq. 2.28 , @xmath stands for the sum over the
positive and negative mode number, and @xmath is a collective coordinate
for the positions of the two poles @xmath . We have not made an ansatz
for @xmath and @xmath because they are not needed to compute @xmath .
Notice that this ansatz satisfies the inversion symmetry in eq. 2.26 and
has pole structure in agreement with eq. 2.28 . In the large- @xmath
limit, the fluctuations reduce to

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we neglect @xmath terms. Comparing these expressions to eq. 2.27
implies that the anomalous energy shift is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The off-shell fluctuation frequency is then obtained by plugging this
into eq. 2.29 and recalling that the (1,5) fluctuation is fermionic:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This implies that the off-shell frequency for a single fluctuation
between @xmath and @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now let’s compute @xmath . Once again, let’s suppose that we have two
fluctuations between @xmath and @xmath which have opposite mode numbers
@xmath . We make the following ansatz for the fluctuations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath are some functions to be determined. Note that this ansatz
satisfies the inversion symmetry in eq 2.26 and has pole structure in
agreement with eq. 2.28 . Taking the large- @xmath limit gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Comparing these limits with eq. 2.27 implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, the residues of the poles at @xmath must be synchronized
according to eq. 2.25 . Near @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Equating the residues of @xmath and @xmath near @xmath then gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Combining this with eq. 2.37 implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

At this point, it is useful to recall that @xmath is a root of the
following equation (which comes from plugging eq 2.36 into eq. 2.24 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that this equation has two roots. The convention that we will
follow is to assign the pole to the root with larger magnitude. Hence,
if @xmath then @xmath and if @xmath then @xmath . The point to take away
from this discussion is that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using this fact, eq. 2.38 can be written as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The off-shell fluctuation frequency is then obtained by plugging this
into eq. 2.29 and recalling that the @xmath fluctuation is a @xmath
fluctuation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows that the off-shell frequency for a single fluctuation between
@xmath and @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The remaining off-shell frequencies are now easily computed from eqs.
2.30 and 2.31 and Table 2 . We summarize the off-shell frequencies in
Table 3 .

##### On-Shell Frequencies

To compute the on-shell frequencies, we must compute the locations of
the poles by solving eq. 2.24 . Recall that fluctuations that connect
@xmath or @xmath to any other sheets are referred to as light, and all
the others are referred to as heavy. A little thought shows that for
light fluctuations, eq. 2.24 reduces to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for heavy fluctuations it reduces to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Each of these equations admits two solutions. We will assign the
location of the pole to the solution with greater magnitude. Assuming
@xmath , the location of the pole for light excitations is then given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the location of the pole for heavy excitations is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Plugging these solutions into the off-shell frequencies in Table 3
readily gives the on-shell algebraic curve frequencies in Table 4 .

We summarize the spectrum of fluctuations obtained with the algebraic
curve and world-sheet formalisms in Table 4 . The algebraic curve
frequencies have been re-scaled by a factor of @xmath in order to
compare them to the world-sheet frequencies. Note that both sets of
frequencies agree with the spectrum of fluctuations that were found in
the Penrose limit (up to constant shifts) [ 86 , 87 , 94 ] .

While the constant shifts in the world-sheet spectrum occur with
opposite signs and can be removed by gauge transformations, this is not
the case for the algebraic curve frequencies. In fact, the constant
shifts in the algebraic curve frequencies have physical significance,
which can be seen by taking the mode number @xmath . In this limit, the
@xmath frequencies reduce to @xmath , the @xmath frequencies reduce to
0, and the fermionic frequencies reduce to @xmath . In this sense, the
@xmath algebraic curve frequencies have “flat-space” behavior. This
property was also observed for algebraic curve frequencies computed
about solutions in @xmath [ 112 ] . On the other hand, the world-sheet
frequencies do not have this property. In the next subsection, we will
see that the constant shifts in the algebraic curve spectrum have
important implications for the one-loop correction to the classical
energy.

Finally, let’s compare the light/heavy fluctuations in the string theory
to the elementary/composite excitations of the gauge theory spin chain.
Recalling that @xmath , if we divide the light frequencies by @xmath and
expand in the parameter @xmath we find that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we are neglecting constant shifts. From this, we see that the
spectrum of light fluctuations matches the spectrum of elementary
excitations of the spin chain given in eq. 1.9 if one makes the
replacement @xmath . This confirms that the magnon dispersion relation
contains an interpolating function @xmath which is equal to @xmath when
@xmath and @xmath when @xmath , as mentioned in the introduction.
Similarly, for the heavy excitations one finds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which matches the spectrum of composite excitations given in eq. 1.8 if
one makes the replacements @xmath and @xmath . This suggests that only
heavy fluctuations with even mode number are dual to composite
excitations of the spin chain.

##### 2.3.2 Spinning String

In the global coordinates of eqs. \thechapter .5 and Integrability of
@xmath Chern-Simons Theory , the solution for a circular spinning string
with two equal nonzero spins in @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath is the winding number. Using eqs.
\thechapter .7 and \thechapter .11 , we can also write this solution in
embedding coordinates (which are useful for doing algebraic curve
calculations):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eqs. 2.2 – 2.4 imply that @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .
Furthermore, the Virasoro constraints in eq. 2.5 give @xmath , or
equivalently @xmath . In the limit @xmath , this reduces to the BPS
condition @xmath , so we expect that the dual operator should have
engineering dimension @xmath and a nonzero but finite anomalous
dimension. We claim that this classical solution is dual to the non-BPS
operator in eq. 1.10 . Expanding the dispersion relation to first order
in the parameter @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to extrapolate this formula to the gauge theory, we must make
the replacement @xmath . We then get the following prediction for the
anomalous dimension of the dual gauge theory operator:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

The higher-order terms in the expansion of the classical string energy
in eq. 2.41 correspond to @xmath corrections to the anomalous dimension,
but the one-loop correction to the energy provides @xmath corrections to
the anomalous dimension, as we will now demonstrate.

The calculation of the fluctuation frequencies about the spinning string
using the algebraic curve formalism is somewhat involved, so we will
just list the main results. The details of the algebraic curve and world
sheet calculations can be found in [ 101 ] .

Since the spinning string has the same motion in @xmath as the
point-particle, the @xmath quasimomenta have the same structure and are
given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath for the spinning string. On the other hand, the
quasimomenta @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are nontrivial and are given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . From these quasimomenta, we see that the spinning string
algebraic curve has a cut between @xmath and @xmath and between @xmath
and @xmath (by inversion symmetry). The classical algebraic curve is
depicted in Fig. 4 .

We summarize the spectrum of fluctuations about the spinning string in
Tables 5 and 6 . The algebraic curve frequencies have been re-scaled by
a factor of @xmath in order to compare them to the world-sheet
frequencies.

We find that the algebraic curve spectrum matches the world-sheet
spectrum up to constant shifts and shifts in mode number. Furthermore,
if we set the winding number @xmath and take @xmath , we find that all
the frequencies in Table 5 reduce to the corresponding frequencies in
Table 4 , which is expected since setting the winding number to zero
reduces the string to a point-particle. This is an important check of
our results for the spinning string. On the other hand, if we set the
mode number @xmath , we find that the algebraic curve frequencies once
again have flat-space behavior, i.e., the @xmath frequencies reduce to
@xmath , the @xmath frequencies reduce to 0, and the fermionic
frequencies reduce to @xmath .

Finally, we would like to point out that both the algebraic curve and
world-sheet spectra have instabilities when @xmath . For example if we
set @xmath , then the algebraic curve frequencies labeled by (3,5) and
(3,6) become imaginary for @xmath and @xmath and the corresponding
world-sheet frequencies become imaginary for @xmath . ² ² 2 We would
like to thank Victor Mikhaylov for showing us his unpublished notes on
the spinning string algebraic curve [ 116 ] . In these notes, he also
derives the algebraic curve for the spinning string and uses it to
compute the fluctuation frequencies, however the asymptotics that he
imposes on the algebraic curve are different from the asymptotics we use
in eq. 2.27 . The differences occur in the signs of several terms on the
right-hand side of eq. 2.27 . As a result, we obtain frequencies with
different constant shifts.

#### 2.4 One-Loop Energies

In the previous subsection, we computed the spectrum of fluctuations
about the point-particle and spinning string solutions using world-sheet
and algebraic curve techniques and found that the algebraic curve
frequencies agree with the world-sheet frequencies up to constant shifts
and shifts in mode number. Although the algebraic curve and world-sheet
frequencies look similar, they have very different properties. In the
next section, we will describe how to compute the one-loop corrections
to the energy of these classical solutions. Computing one-loop
corrections is subtle because it involves evaluating an infinite sum of
fluctuation frequencies. In particular, the algebraic curve spectrum
gives a divergent one-loop correction if we use the same prescription
for adding up the frequencies that was used for type IIB string theory
on @xmath . Since the point-particle is a BPS solution, we expect that
its one-loop correction should vanish. Furthermore, since the spinning
string solution becomes near-BPS in a certain limit, we expect its
one-loop correction to be nonzero but finite. Hence the algebraic curve
does not give one-loop corrections which are compatible with
supersymmetry if one uses the standard summation prescription. In the
next section, we describe an alternative summation prescription which
gives a vanishing one-loop correction for the point-particle and a
finite one-loop correction for the spinning string when used with both
the algebraic curve spectrum and the world-sheet spectrum. In section
2.2.4.3, we will show that the one-loop energy of the spinning string
can be matched with the anomalous dimension of the dual gauge theory
operator in eq. 1.10 , which was computed using a Bethe Ansatz.

##### 2.4.1 Summation Prescriptions

Given the spectrum of fluctuations about a classical string solution, we
compute the one-loop correction to the string energy by adding up the
spectrum. The standard formula, which we refer to as the old summation
prescription, is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is proportional to the classical energy, @xmath stands for
bosonic/fermionic, @xmath is the mode number, and @xmath is some label.
For example, if we are dealing with frequencies computed from the
algebraic curve, then they will be labeled by a pair of integers called
a polarization, as explained in section 2.2. Although this formula works
well for string solutions in @xmath , it gives a one-loop correction
which disagrees with the all-loop Bethe ansatz when applied to the
folded-spinning string in @xmath [ 96 , 97 , 98 ] . In [ 99 ] Gromov and
Mikhaylov subsequently proposed the following formula for computing
one-loop corrections in @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath / @xmath are referred to as heavy/light frequencies and are
defined in eqs. 2.32 and 2.33 . For later convenience, we note that eq.
2.44 can be written in terms of heavy and light frequencies as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the large- @xmath limit, eq. 2.45 can be approximated by the
following integral:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

In [ 99 ] it was shown that Eq. ( 2.47 ) gives a one-loop correction
which agrees with the all-loop Bethe Ansatz when applied to the spectrum
of the folded spinning string.

An alternative prescription for computing one-loop corrections, which we
refer to as the new prescription, was proposed in [ 101 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

This sum can be motivated by the observation in section 2.2.3.1 that
only heavy fluctuations with even mode numbers correspond to composite
excitations of the spin chain. Alternatively, from the frequencies in
Table 4 , one sees that heavy fluctuations with mode number @xmath can
be thought of as threshold bound states of two light fluctuations with
mode number @xmath ³ ³ 3 Note that the heavy modes are only threshold
bound states at infinite ’t Hooft coupling. At finite ’t Hooft coupling,
each heavy fluctuation becomes more massive than two light fluctuations,
and therefore becomes unstable [ 117 ] . Although the heavy fluctuations
cannot be asymptotic states, they can still appear on internal lines in
Feynman diagrams and therefore should be included in the path integral.
. This suggests that only heavy modes with even mode number should
contribute to the one-loop correction. The formula for the one-loop
correction should therefore have the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The coefficients @xmath and @xmath can then be fixed uniquely by
requiring that the integral approximation to this formula reduces to eq.
2.47 in the large- @xmath limit, ensuring that this summation
prescription gives a one-loop correction to the folded spinning string
energy which agrees with the all-loop Bethe Ansatz. One then finds that
@xmath and @xmath .

One virtue of the summation prescription in eq. 2.48 compared to the one
in eq. 2.45 is that it gives more well-defined results for one-loop
corrections. For example, consider the case where @xmath , where @xmath
is some constant (we will see shortly that the AC frequencies for the
point-particle have this form). In this case, eq. 2.45 does not have a
well-defined @xmath limit; in particular the sum alternates between
@xmath depending on whether @xmath is even or odd. On the other hand,
eq. 2.48 vanishes for all @xmath .

In the next two subsections, we will use the summation prescriptions in
eqs. 2.46 and 2.48 to compute the one-loop corrections to the energies
of the point-particle and spinning string solutions.

##### 2.4.2 Point-Particle

Using eqs. 2.32 and 2.33 , we see that @xmath and @xmath are constants
for both the world-sheet and algebraic curve spectra. In particular, for
the world-sheet spectrum we find that @xmath . As a result, both the
standard summation prescription in eq. 2.46 and the new summation
prescription in eq. 2.48 give a vanishing one-loop correction to the
energy. On the other hand, for the algebraic curve spectrum we find that
@xmath and @xmath . For these values of @xmath and @xmath , the new
summation prescription gives a vanishing one-loop correction but the
standard summation prescription gives a linear divergence:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus we find that both summation prescriptions are consistent with
supersymmetry if we use the spectrum computed from the world-sheet, but
only the new summation is consistent with supersymmetry if we use the
spectrum computed from the algebraic curve.

##### 2.4.3 Spinning String

For the spinning string, @xmath and @xmath defined in eqs. 2.32 and 2.33
are nontrivial:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where WS stands for world-sheet, AC stands for algebraic curve, and we
are using the notation in Table 6 .

To compute the one-loop correction, we must evaluate an infinite sum of
the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the frequency @xmath in this equation should not be confused
with the off-shell frequencies defined in section 2.2.2. Since we have
two summation prescriptions (the old one in eq. 2.46 and the new one in
eq. 2.48 ) and two sets of frequencies (world-sheet and algebraic curve)
there are four choices for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath / @xmath refers to the summation prescription.

To gain further insight, let’s look at the summands in eq. 2.50 in two
limits: the large- @xmath limit and the large- @xmath limit. By looking
at the large- @xmath limit, we will learn about the convergence
properties of the one-loop corrections, and by looking at the large-
@xmath limit and evaluating the sums over @xmath using @xmath -function
regularization, we will be able to compute the @xmath contributions to
the one-loop corrections. These are referred to as the analytic terms.
There are also terms proportional to @xmath , which are referred to as
the non-analytic terms, and exponentially suppressed terms, i.e., terms
that scale like @xmath . These terms are sub-dominant compared to the
analytic terms in the large- @xmath limit.

##### Large-@xmath Limit

Note that in all four cases @xmath , so the one-loop correction in eq.
2.49 can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

The large- @xmath limit of @xmath for the four choices of @xmath is
summarized in Table 7 .

From this table we see that all one-loop corrections are free of
quadratic and logarithmic divergences because terms of order @xmath and
order @xmath cancel out in the large- @xmath limit. At the same time, we
find a linear divergence when we apply the old summation prescription to
the algebraic curve spectrum, since the summand has a constant term. In
all other cases however, the summands are at most @xmath , which
suggests that the one-loop corrections are convergent. Hence we find
that both summation prescriptions give finite one-loop corrections when
applied to the world-sheet spectrum, but only the new summation
prescription gives a finite result when applied to the algebraic curve
spectrum. This is the same thing we found for the point-particle. The
new feature of the spinning string is that the finite one-loop
correction is nonzero and therefore provides a nontrivial prediction to
be compared with the dual gauge theory.

##### Large-@xmath Limit

In the previous section we found that when @xmath , the one-loop
correction is divergent, but for the other three cases in eq. 2.50 , it
is convergent. This means we have three possible predictions for the
one-loop correction, however by expanding the summands in the large-
@xmath limit and evaluating the sums over @xmath at each order of @xmath
using @xmath -function regularization, we find that all three cases give
the same result. The technique of @xmath -function regularization, which
was developed in [ 118 ] , is convenient for computing the analytic
terms in the large- @xmath expansion of one-loop corrections but does
not capture non-analytic and exponentially suppressed terms. The latter
terms can be computed using the techniques described in [ 119 ] . We now
describe this procedure in more detail.

If we expand the summand in the large- @xmath limit, only even powers of
@xmath appear:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

For each power of @xmath , the sum over @xmath can be written as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we expand @xmath in the limit @xmath , we find that it splits into
two pieces:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is @xmath . We will refer to @xmath as the finite piece
because it converges when summed over @xmath , and @xmath as the
divergent piece because it diverges when summed over @xmath .
Furthermore, we find that @xmath and @xmath . Hence, the odd powers of
@xmath cancel out of the divergent piece when we add @xmath to @xmath
and we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Noting that @xmath and @xmath when @xmath is a positive integer, we see
that only the constant term in the divergent piece contributes if we
evaluate the sum over @xmath using @xmath -function regularization:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Combining this with eqs. 2.52 and 2.53 then gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the procedure described above, we obtain a single prediction for
the one-loop correction to the energy of the spinning string:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Recalling that @xmath and making the replacement @xmath in eq. 2.4 then
gives a prediction for the @xmath correction to the anomalous dimension
of the gauge theory operator in eq. 1.10 :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The first term in eq. 2.55 came from expanding the classical dispersion
relation for the spinning string to first order in the parameter @xmath
and then making the replacement @xmath . Note that this result agrees
with the gauge theory computation in eq. 1.15 .

## Chapter \thechapter Scattering Amplitudes

### 3 On-Shell Superspace

The study of on-shell scattering amplitudes in @xmath sYM has shown that
many symmetries, structures, and dualities can be discovered by
parameterizing the scattering amplitudes using supertwistors.
Furthermore, amplitudes take a much simpler form and can be computed
much more efficiently when parametrized in terms of these variables.
Supertwistors are objects which transform in the fundamental
representation of the superconformal group. For a three-dimensional
superconformal field theory, a supertwistor takes the following form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a bosonic twistor with four components which trasforms
in the fundamental representation of the conformal group @xmath , and
@xmath is a fermionic twistor which transforms in the fundamental
representation of the R-symmetry group. For a theory with @xmath
supersymmetry like the ABJM theory, the index @xmath runs from 1 to 6.
Note that the twistors are real and self-conjugate, i.e., they satisfy
the following canonical commutation relations:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the invariant tensor of @xmath . The @xmath twistors can
be broken into two-component objects

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the @xmath ’s are @xmath spinors used for the bi-spinor
representation of massless momenta:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will take all momenta to be outgoing. As a result, the spinor @xmath
is real for particles that are physically outgoing ( @xmath ) and purely
imaginary for particles that are physically incoming ( @xmath ). Since
the right-hand side is symmetric in the spinor indices, the left-hand
side is indeed a three-component object, as expected. Note that the
twistors of three-dimensional Minkowski space have a geometric
interpretation similar to the twistors of four-dimensional Minkowski
space. In particular, a point in twistor space corresponds to a null ray
in Minkowski space and a point in Minkowski space corresponds to a line
in twistor space [ 120 ] . This is described in greater detail in
Appendix C.

Since supertwistors of the ABJM theory are self-conjugate, the
scattering amplitudes can be parameterized using the half-supertwistor
variables @xmath , where @xmath runs from one to three. The three @xmath
variables are linear combinations of the six @xmath variables such that
the @xmath ’s anticommute. These variables are referred to as the
on-shell space. In terms of these variables, the generators of the
superconformal group @xmath can be represented as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The constant appearing in the dilatation operator counts the engineering
dimension of the scalar field, which is @xmath . From the R-symmetry
generator @xmath , we see that an @xmath -point superamplitude must have
fermionic degree @xmath . This is in contrast to the chiral formulation
of @xmath sYM, where the fermionic degree is related to the MHV-degree
of the amplitude rather than the number of external legs.

The on-shell superfields of the ABJM theory take the form [ 81 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The matter fields appearing in the superfield expansion have @xmath
R-symmetry indices, so it is easy to match them with the matter fields
in the ABJM Lagrangian, which is reviewed in Appendix A. Note that the
fields @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , are in the fundamental
representation of the R-symmetry group @xmath , and their adjoints
@xmath and @xmath are in the anti-fundamental representation. The gauge
fields do not appear in the expansion of the on-shell superfields
because Chern-Simons fields have no on-shell degrees of freedom.

Equipped with the on-shell superspace, we now introduce the building
blocks for the construction of superconformal amplitudes. First we
define the supermomentum delta function:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the summation is over all external lines, which are labeled by
@xmath . The Lorentz-invariant objects are then:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are antisymmetric and @xmath .

Given these building blocks, it is not possible to construct a
dilatation-invariant amplitude with an odd number of external legs. This
can be seen by noting that the first term in the dilatation operator (
@xmath ) in eq. 3.2 counts the mass dimension while the second term
gives a constant factor of @xmath , where @xmath is the number of
external legs. When the number of external legs is odd, it is not
possible to cancel the constant term because all of the building blocks
have integer mass dimension. It follows that all odd-point on-shell
tree-level amplitudes must vanish. This can also be understood from the
Lagrangian since any off-shell amplitude with an odd number of external
legs will have at least one gauge field as an external leg. Since the
gauge fields have no propagating degrees of freedom, all on-shell
amplitudes with an odd number of external legs vanish.

The first nontrivial amplitude is the four-point color-ordered
superamplitude, which reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

We describe color-ordering in the ABJM theory in Appendix A. At
four-point, the spinor inner products have the following relationships:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

These relations follow from momentum conservation. Note that the
superamplitude encodes the scattering amplitudes of all possible
component fields. The component amplitudes can be read off from the
superamplitude as the coefficients of monomials of the @xmath
coordinates. By expanding the four-point superamplitude in the @xmath
coordinates, one can match the component amplitudes with color-ordered
four-point amplitudes computed using Feynman diagrams.

For example, let’s consider the scattering of four scalar fields @xmath
. If legs 1 and 3 correspond to @xmath and legs 2 and 4 correspond to
@xmath , then this scattering amplitude should be the coefficient of
@xmath in the @xmath -expansion of the superamplitude in eq. 3.6 . This
can be understood by looking at the superfield expansion in eq. 3.4 ,
from which we see that the coefficient of @xmath is 1 and the
coefficient of @xmath is @xmath . Since all the fermionic coordinates
are contained in the supermomentum delta function, this coefficient can
be extracted from the following integral:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, we find that the color-ordered four-point scalar amplitude is
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we are leaving out the momentum-conserving delta function.

It is not difficult to verify this result using Feynman diagrams. The
Feynman diagrams contributing the color-ordered amplitude are
illustrated in Fig. 5 . Using the color-ordered Feynman rules described
in appendix A, one finds that the amplitude is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To compare this with eq. 3.8 , we must write it in terms of the spinor
variables of the on-shell superspace. Note that the numerator in the
first term can be written as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From this, we see that the numerator is totally antisymmetric under
exchange of the four external particle labels. Furthermore, it is not
difficult to see that the numerator in the second term is equal to the
numerator in the first term. It follows that the numerators are equal to
@xmath (up to a numerical factor), which is totally antisymmetric. For
example, exchanging @xmath with @xmath gives @xmath . Hence, we find
that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where @xmath are the usual Mandelstam variables, which satisfy @xmath .
From eq. 3.5 , we see that @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If we plug these
relations into the equation above, we obtain eq. 3.8 . This confirms
that the scalar component of the four-point superamplitude in eq. 3.6
matches the four-point scalar amplitude of the ABJM theory. Since all
the other four-point amplitudes are related by supersymmetry, this
implies that eq. 3.6 is in fact the four-point superamplitude of the
ABJM theory.

Let us conclude this subsection with some general comments about the
superamplitudes of the ABJM theory. It is customary to introduce a
collective notation @xmath . Following the convention of ref. [ 85 ] ,
the superamplitudes can be written as functions of @xmath , where the
index @xmath labels the external particles and @xmath is associated with
the @xmath / @xmath multiplet. The superamplitudes are invariant up to a
sign under @xmath , which we refer to as an orientation reversal:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Furthermore, since the @xmath multiplets are bosonic/fermionic, the
superamplitudes are invariant up to a sign after cyclic permutation by
two sites [ 81 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 4 Dual Superconformal Symmetry

In this section, we will construct a dual superspace and use it to
define dual superconformal symmetry in the ABJM theory. We will find
that the dual superspace contains three bosonic coordinates @xmath , six
fermionic coordinates @xmath , and three Grassmann-even coordinates
@xmath . The Grassmann-even coordinates are a new feature of the ABJM
theory and arise because the superspace is non-chiral. We will then show
that the four-point amplitude has dual superconformal symmetry. In
section 3.5, we will explain how to extend dual superconformal symmetry
beyond the four-point superamplitude.

#### 4.1 Dual Superspace

In order to define dual superconformal symmetry, we must first define a
dual space. Since the ABJM theory lives in 3D Minkowski space and has
@xmath supersymmetry, we will assume that the dual space has three
bosonic coordinates and six fermionic coordinates. These coordinates are
related to the on-shell superspace as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . In words, the displacement between points in the dual
superspace correspond to the external supermomenta of the scattering
amplitudes. In these new coordinates, supermomentum conservation is
automatically satisfied. Note that @xmath should not be identified with
the usual (super)space-time, since they would have incorrect mass
dimensions. Eqs. 4.1 define a hyperplane in the full space @xmath . The
amplitudes have support on this hyperplane. One can translate from the
dual coordinates back to the on-shell space via

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that @xmath and @xmath parameterize the ambiguity that arises from
the fact that eqs. 4.1 are invariant under a constant shift in the dual
coordinates. Furthermore, the hyperplane equations lead to the following
relationships:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath . In obtaining these relationships, we noted
that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is easy to prove using eqs. 4.1 and 3.5 . Given the @xmath ’s and
@xmath ’s, one can obtain all the @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s. In
particular, after fixing @xmath , the @xmath coordinates can be
determined using the first relation in eq. 4.1 . After solving for the
@xmath coordinates, the @xmath coordinates can then be determined using
the last relation in eq. 4.3 .

Having defined a dual superspace, let’s try to construct @xmath dual
supersymmetry generators. By analogy with the definition of dual
supersymmetry in @xmath sYM, there is a simple ansatz for the dual
supersymmetry generators in the ABJM theory:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

If we follow what was done for @xmath super Yang-Mills, however, we
immediately encounter a difficulty: half of the supercharges are
inconsistent with the constraints in eq. 4.1 . In particular, the second
supercharge violates the @xmath -space constraint in eq. 4.1 :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

With a little thought, one can see that there are no terms which can be
added to @xmath to cancel this “anomaly.”

We can solve this problem by introducing three Grassmann-even
coordinates, @xmath , which are related to the on-shell twistor space as
follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

In addition to introducing new coordinates, we alter the second
supercharge as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now it is straightforward to see that the hyperplane constraints are
preserved

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Furthermore, the @xmath -space constraint is also preserved, so no
additional coordinates are needed.

In summary, the dual superspace contains three bosonic coordinates, six
fermionic coordinates, and three Grassmann-even coordinates. The
coordinates of the dual superspace are related to the coordinates of the
on-shell superspace via eqs. 4.1 , which can be viewed as defining
hyperplanes in the full superspace. The @xmath superspace is summarized
in Fig. 6 .

Since the R-symmetry of the field theory corresponds to the isometries
of @xmath , eq. 4.7 suggests that the @xmath coordinates should be
associated with three commuting Killing vectors in @xmath . The fact
that type IIB string theory on @xmath is self-dual after T-dualizing
directions corresponding to the dual superspace of @xmath super
Yang-Mills suggests that type IIA string theory on @xmath should be
self-dual if one performs T-dualities along the translational directions
of @xmath , three-directions in @xmath , and six fermionic directions.
Although several attempts have been made to demonstrate this, none have
succeeded.

#### 4.2 Dual Inversion Properties

In this subsection, we will deduce the transformation properties of the
@xmath superspace under dual conformal transformations. The dual
translations and dual inversion of the @xmath coordinates are defined in
the usual way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and dual inversion of the @xmath coordinates can be defined as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The dual inversion properties of the on-shell superspace can be deduced
by requiring compatibility of the above transformation rules with eq.
4.3 . From the first line of eq. 4.3 , one can deduce that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a proportionality constant. This constant can be fixed
through the compatibility of the second relationship in the first line
of eq. 4.3 with inversion:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus we arrive at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly, for the fermionic variable @xmath , one has:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

By applying this formula to the hyperplane constraint in eq. 4.7 , we
can deduce the dual inversion formula for the @xmath coordinates:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 4.3 Dual Conformal Boost Generator

In this subsection, we will prove that the four-point amplitude has dual
superconformal symmetry. We will then derive an expression for the dual
conformal boost generator, which will be useful for demonstrating that
the amplitudes have Yangian symmetry.

We will first show that the four-point tree-level superamplitude of the
ABJM theory is dual conformal covariant. This is easiest to demonstrate
if we write the four-point amplitude in terms of the ( @xmath )
coordinates of the dual superspace. Note that the @xmath coordinates are
auxiliary in the sense that given @xmath and @xmath , the @xmath ’s can
be determined using the hyperplane constraints in eqs. 4.1 and 4.7 . As
a result, it is possible to express the amplitudes in terms of @xmath .

Prior to the identification @xmath for an @xmath -point amplitude, the
hyperplane constraints imply that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the dual space, the (super)momentum delta functions are therefore
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The inversion properties of the delta functions follow from the
definitions @xmath and @xmath . In particular,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the inversion property of the fermionic delta function is derived
from eq. 4.11 on the support of @xmath . Note that in three dimensions,
it is only for @xmath =6 dual supersymmetry that the momentum and
supermomentum delta functions combine to give an invariant under dual
inversion.

Using eq. 4.4 , we therefore find that the four-point amplitude in eq.
3.6 can be written as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, using eq. 4.10 , we find that the four-point amplitude
transforms as follows under dual inversion:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this, we see that the four-point tree amplitude transforms
covariantly under a dual conformal boost:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the dual conformal boost is defined in the usual way, notably a
dual inversion-translation-inversion. Therefore, under the redefined
generator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

we have @xmath .

Note that the dual supersymmetry generators either vanish or reduce to
ordinary superconformal symmetry generators when restricted to the
on-shell space. Hence, if the dual conformal boost generator is defined
according to eq. 4.22 , this implies that the four-point superamplitude
has @xmath dual superconformal symmetry (since all the other dual
superconformal generators can be obtained by commuting the dual
superconformal boost generator with the dual supersymmetry generators).
More generally, if the @xmath -point amplitude of the ABJM theory
transforms covariantly under dual inversion,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

this implies that all the tree-level amplitudes of the ABJM theory have
dual superconformal symmetry. We will prove this in section 3.5.

Let’s derive an explicit expression for the dual conformal boost
generator in the full @xmath superspace. In order to do so, let’s first
compute how the dual coordinates @xmath and @xmath transform under a
dual inversion-translation-inversion. For the @xmath coordinates, we
have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath . Using @xmath , we see that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly, for the @xmath coordinates we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Using @xmath we see that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, when acting in @xmath space, the dual conformal boost generator
is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the first term generates dual conformal boosts of @xmath , the
second term generates dual conformal boosts of @xmath , and the third
term follows from eq. 4.22 . We can extend this definition to the
on-shell superspace by adding terms so that it commutes with the
hyperplane constraints in eqs. 4.1 and 4.7 modulo constraints [ 41 ] .
Doing so gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.27)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Indeed, one can check that eq. 4.27 preserves eqs. 4.1 and 4.7 .
Alternatively, we can deduce the action of the dual conformal boost
generator on all the coordinates of the @xmath superspace by using the
dual inversion properties derived in section 3.2.2.

### 5 Yangian Symmetry

In [ 81 ] , the authors showed that the four- and six-point tree-level
superamplitudes of the ABJM theory have Yangian symmetry. The Yangian
algebra is generated by a set of level-zero and level-one generators
@xmath and @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the structure of the superconformal group. The indices
can be raised and lowered using the metric of the superconformal group.
For @xmath , these are computed in Appendix F of [ 81 ] . The level-zero
generators are identified with the superconformal generators and the
level-one generators are given by a sum of bi-local products of
single-site superconformal generators [ 39 , 40 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The commutation relations in eq. 5.1 lead to two sets of Jacobi
identities. There is a third set of deformed Jacobi identities which
involve two level-1 generators, which are known as the Serre relations.

In @xmath sYM, Yangian symmetry of the tree-level amplitudes follows
from combining superconformal symmetry with dual superconformal
symmetry. In this subsection, we will demonstrate that this is also true
for the ABJM theory. In particular, we will demonstrate that the dual
conformal boost generator is equivalent to a level-one Yangian generator
when acting on on-shell amplitudes. Since all the other level-1 Yangian
generators can be obtained from the algebra in eq. 5.1 , it follows that
dual superconformal symmetry plus ordinary superconformal symmetry
implies Yangian symmetry of the on-shell amplitudes.

Since the amplitudes can be written purely in terms of the on-shell
superspace variables @xmath , we only consider the part of the dual
conformal boost generator which acts on this space, which is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath means that we are restricting to the on-shell space. Next,
we trade @xmath and @xmath for @xmath and @xmath using eq. 4.2 . In this
way, all of the dual coordinates can be replaced except @xmath and
@xmath , however the terms containing these variables take the form

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Since @xmath are the usual Lorentz, supersymmetry, and dilatation
generators (under which the amplitudes are invariant), these terms
vanish on the amplitudes. The remaining terms, which we denote as @xmath
, are

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In order to relate this object to a level-one generator, we will write
it in terms of the ordinary superconformal generators given in eq. 3.2 :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

At this point, it’s convenient to add the following term (which vanishes
on amplitudes):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

We finally arrive at

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

which is indeed the level-one generator @xmath obtained in [ 81 ] .

While the dual supersymmetry generators either vanish or reduce to
ordinary superconformal generators when restricted to the on-shell
space, the dual conformal boost generator implies a new constraint on
the amplitudes because it is equivalent to a level-1 Yangian generator
when restricted to the on-shell space. By commuting the dual conformal
boost generator with the dual supersymmetry generators, it is not
difficult to deduce that the dual generators @xmath and @xmath are also
nontrivial, while the remaining dual superconformal symmetry generators
either vanish or reduce to ordinary superconformal symmetry generators
when restricted to the on-shell space. Furthermore, it is possible to
match @xmath and @xmath with level-1 Yangian generators with the help of
the @xmath coordinates [ 83 ] . Since the level- @xmath Yangian
generators can be obtained by taking @xmath commutators of level-1
Yangian generators, they do not impose additional constraints on the
tree-level amplitudes when @xmath .

### 6 Recursion Relations

The computation of amplitudes can be drastically simplified using the
BCFW recursion relations, which relate higher-point tree-level
amplitudes to lower-point tree-level amplitudes. In the BCFW approach,
one analytically continues the external momenta of an on-shell amplitude
into the complex plane in such a way that the amplitude remains on-shell
and becomes a rational function in the complex plane whose only
singularities arise from internal propagators becoming on-shell. The
recursion relation then follows from the fact that a rational function
can be reconstructed from the residues of its poles, provided that the
function vanishes at infinity. The residues in this case are simply
products of lower-point on-shell amplitudes [ 53 ] .

In the simplest version of the BCFW recursion relation, one shifts two
external momenta by a complex parameter @xmath . For legs @xmath and
@xmath , the shift is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

for some vector @xmath . In order for the external legs to remain
on-shell, the shift vector @xmath must satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Although these constraints admit nontrivial solutions in @xmath
dimensions, for @xmath the only solution is @xmath .

The analysis above can be translated into spinor language. Under a
general two-line shift in three-dimensions, @xmath , momentum
conservation implies that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Assuming that the shift is a linear transformation of @xmath , one can
write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then momentum conservation implies that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

i.e., the shift is an element of O @xmath .

If we assume that @xmath in eq. 6.4 is linear in @xmath and reduces to
the unit matrix when @xmath , then it can be parameterized as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is not difficult to see, however, that eq. 6.5 constrains all of
@xmath ’s to be zero. A similar analysis shows that eq. 6.5 also
constrains the three-line shift to be trivial, i.e., if we take @xmath
to be an O @xmath matrix that depends linearly on @xmath , then eq. 6.5
constrains it to be the identity. The first non-trivial solution which
depends linearly on @xmath appears for a four-line shift. It is possible
to define a linear two-line shift in a three-dimensional field theory
with massive fields. In this case, the kinematics is essentially
four-dimensional. Scattering amplitudes in mass-deformed superconformal
Chern-Simons theories were considered in [ 121 ] .

In order to construct a two-line shift without introducing a mass
deformation, we must relax the assumption that @xmath is linear in
@xmath . In the next subsection, we will construct such a matrix and use
it to derive a recursion relation for tree-level amplitudes.

#### 6.1 Two-Line Shift

We parameterize the @xmath matrix by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that this matrix reduces to the unit matrix when @xmath . Also note
that for the ABJM theory, this deformation has a @xmath symmetry since
@xmath is related to @xmath by an orientation reversal:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

under which the superamplitudes are invariant up to a sign (see eq. 3.9
). Without loss of generality, let’s suppose the deformation acts on
legs 1 and @xmath . Since we are interested in a recursion relation for
superamplitudes, we also need to consider super-momentum conservation,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The conservation of both momentum and super-momentum can be maintained
if we also deform the fermionic coordinates @xmath and @xmath . Thus we
define the super-shift as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

or

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we are using the collective notation @xmath .

We will now derive the recursion relation that follows from this
supershift. In the following discussion, we will factor out the
momentum-conserving delta function from the amplitudes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

After applying the deformation to an on-shell amplitude, it acquires
poles in the complex parameter @xmath . Near these poles, the amplitude
factorizes into two lower-point on-shell amplitudes connected by a
propagator. We will denote the two lower-point amplitudes by @xmath and
@xmath . The poles of the amplitude in this factorization channel are
therefore given by the roots of @xmath , where @xmath labels the
factorization channel and @xmath is the momentum in the propagator. If
the amplitudes vanish at @xmath and @xmath , it follows that undeformed
amplitude @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the index @xmath labels the roots of @xmath , which we denote as
@xmath , and the integration variable @xmath is allocated to the
internal propagator of each channel. Integrating over @xmath is
equivalent to summing over all fields which can appear in the
propagator. For simplicity, we have suppressed the dependence on the
other variables of the on-shell superspace. This is the recursion
relation for three-dimensional superconformal field theories. This
recursion relation is applicable to the ABJM theory, because the
superamplitudes vanish as @xmath goes to zero and infinity, as we will
explain in the next subsection. Furthermore, this recursion relation was
used to compute six- and eight-point component amplitudes in the ABJM
theory and the results agree with Feynman diagram calculations and
calculations based on the Grassmannian integral formula, which will be
described in section 3.6 [ 84 ] .

For any channel, @xmath in eq. 6.12 has the form @xmath , so the roots
are obtained by solving a quadratic equation. To see this, note that the
deformed external momenta are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath , it follows that @xmath has the form claimed above.

After a little algebra, eq. 6.12 can be written more explicitly as
follows:

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (6.15)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath are the roots of @xmath , and

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In obtaining the above equation, we used the fact that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which follows from eq. 3.9 .

Since @xmath is invariant under both @xmath and @xmath , it must be a
function of @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore, since the integrand in eq.
6.15 is symmetric under @xmath , it can be written as a rational
function of @xmath and @xmath . Hence, the final result is free from any
square-root factors that @xmath may contain.

#### 6.2 Large-@xmath Behavior

The recursion relation derived in the previous subsection is justified
only when @xmath vanishes as @xmath . For the ABJM theory, @xmath is the
same as @xmath up to a sign because exchanging @xmath with @xmath in eq.
6.7 acts as an orientation reversal, so it suffices focus on the
behavior as @xmath . Since the proof of good large- @xmath behavior is
somewhat technical, we will just summarize the main ideas in the
analysis. The basic strategy is to identify component amplitudes which
have the same large- @xmath behavior as the superamplitudes, and use
background field techniques to show that these amplitudes vanish
sufficiently quickly as @xmath .

To identify which component amplitudes have the same large- @xmath
behavior as the superamplitudes, consider shifting legs @xmath and
@xmath of the superamplitude, and expand the superamplitude in @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Each sub-amplitude @xmath depends on all @xmath ’s and all @xmath ’s
except @xmath . After the super-shift, @xmath , the superamplitude
becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.18)
              @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

On the first line, the @xmath -dependence of @xmath is entirely due to
the shift @xmath . Hence, these sub-amplitudes have the same large-
@xmath behavior as the component amplitudes under the bosonic shift. On
the second line, the expansion variables are the undeformed @xmath , so
the relation between @xmath and @xmath follows from the shift property
of @xmath . In particular, @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore, using the
supersymmetric Ward identity, one can show that all the @xmath have the
same large- @xmath behavior. It follows that the component amplitudes
contained in @xmath have the same large- @xmath behavior as the
superamplitude. Note that @xmath contains the component amplitudes whose
shifted legs are @xmath or @xmath fields, since these are the
lowest-weighted components in the superfield expansion in eq. 3.4 .
Hence, the large- @xmath behavior of the superamplitude is the same as
the large- @xmath behavior of component amplitudes of the form @xmath ,
for example.

It is convenient to analyze the large- @xmath behavior of these
amplitudes using a background field formulation which describes hard
particles scattering through a soft background [ 122 ] . If we take the
shifted legs to be adjacent, the amplitudes under consideration reduce
to diagrams of the form depicted in Fig. 7 , where the horizontal line
represents fields whose momenta scale like @xmath in the large- @xmath
limit, and the crosses represent soft background fields.

In the background field formalism, there are two kinds of gauge
symmetry, notably the gauge symmetry of the background and the gauge
symmetry of the fluctuations. From eq. 6.13 , we see that in the large-
@xmath limit, the shifted momenta scale like @xmath , where @xmath is a
null vector. It is therefore convenient to use the background gauge
symmetry to impose the following conditions on the background gauge
fields:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

After gauge-fixing the background, we still have the gauge symmetry of
the fluctuations (under which the background is inert). We can therefore
use the Faddeev-Popov procedure to introduce the following gauge-fixing
terms for the gauge-field fluctuations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath represent the fluctuations of the gauge fields
and @xmath , @xmath are gauge-fixing parameters. Note that these
gauge-fixing terms don’t preserve the background gauge symmetry. On the
other hand, the background gauge symmetry is already broken by eq. 6.20
, so there’s no need to choose gauge-fixing terms which preserve the
background gauge symmetry.

Using the approach described above, it can be shown that the tree-level
superamplitudes scale like @xmath as @xmath , which is sufficient for
the recursion relation to be applicable [ 84 ] .

### 7 Dual Symmetry of All Tree Amplitudes

While an on-shell recursion relation provides an efficient way to
construct higher-point amplitudes from lower-point amplitudes, it also
serves as a convenient tool for analyzing the symmetries of amplitudes.
If one can demonstrate that the recursion relation preserves a symmetry
of the lowest-point tree-level amplitude, it follows by induction that
the symmetry holds for all tree-level amplitudes. Indeed, the dual
superconformal symmetry of tree-level amplitudes in maximal sYM defined
in four [ 34 ] , six [ 123 ] , and ten dimensions [ 124 ] follows from
the fact that the BCFW recursion relations preserve dual superconformal
symmetry. In this section, we will use the recursion relation described
in section 3.4 to demonstrate that the dual superconformal symmetry of
the four-point superamplitude can be extended to all on-shell tree-level
superamplitudes in the ABJM theory. This boils down to showing that the
amplitudes are covariant under dual inversion.

Note that the dual coordinates are defined up to an overall translation
in the dual superspace. We are therefore free to choose the origin of
the dual superspace such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , and we are considering an @xmath -point amplitude. For
this choice, eq. 4.1 implies that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

This choice is convenient because if we apply the deformation in eq 6.10
to legs 1 and @xmath , this only shifts @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Furthermore, the magnitude of @xmath is invariant under the shift, i.e.,
@xmath . This can be seen by noting that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We would now like to show that when the on-shell amplitudes are written
in terms of the dual superspace coordinates @xmath , they transform
covariantly under dual inversion:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In section 3.2.3, we argued that eq. 7.5 implies that the amplitudes
have dual superconformal symmetry.

The proof is based on induction. Assuming that eq. 7.5 is satisfied by
all amplitudes with fewer than @xmath external legs, we will use the
recursion relation defined in section 3.4.1 to show that @xmath inverts
the same way. In particular, the recursion relation in eq. 6.15 implies
that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

In obtaining this expression, we noted that @xmath . Note that since we
chose the origin of the dual space according to eq. 7.1 , shifting legs
1 and @xmath corresponds to shifting the dual coordinate @xmath and
@xmath . We illustrate this in Fig. 8 for the case @xmath .

Let’s focus on a factorization channel where @xmath is a @xmath -point
amplitude and @xmath is a @xmath -point amplitude. When written in terms
of dual coordinates,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we suppress the @xmath coordinates for simplicity. We will now
deduce the inversion property of @xmath by applying a dual inversion to
eq. 7.6 . By assumption, the functions @xmath and @xmath invert as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The inversion of the propagator term in eq. 7.6 is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Furthermore, a simple calculation shows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the dual inversion rules in section 3.2.2, we find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The only remaining piece to invert in eq. 7.6 is @xmath . From the
observation that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

one can easily see that @xmath is equivalent to @xmath so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Combining eqs. 7.6 , 7.8 , 7.9 , 7.10 , and 7.12 , and recalling that
@xmath implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, if @xmath inverts according to eq. 7.5 for all @xmath , then so
does @xmath . Since @xmath satisfies this property (as shown in section
3.2.3), this completes the proof that all tree-level ABJM amplitudes are
dual superconformal invariant. Given that the tree-level amplitudes have
dual superconformal symmetry, one can use generalized unitarity methods
[ 125 , 126 ] to show that the integrands of the cut-constructible loop
amplitudes have this symmetry as well [ 84 ] .

### 8 Grassmannian Integral Formula

In this section, we will briefly describe the matrix integral formula
proposed in [ 85 ] , which is conjectured to generate all tree-level
amplitudes of the ABJM theory. For the @xmath -point superamplitude, the
integral is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The integration variable @xmath is a @xmath matrix. The dot products
denote @xmath , @xmath . Note that the index @xmath runs from @xmath to
@xmath and the index @xmath labels the external particles and runs from
@xmath to @xmath . The @xmath -th minor, @xmath , of @xmath is defined
as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The delta functions can be written more explicitly as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we are organizing the spinors @xmath into two @xmath -dimensional
vectors @xmath , @xmath , and we are organizing the fermionic variables
@xmath into three @xmath -dimensional vectors @xmath , @xmath . We see
that the integral has fermionic degree @xmath , which is required by
superconformal symmetry, as explained in section 3.1. Furthermore, ref.
[ 85 ] demonstrated that this formula has Yangian symmetry and the same
cyclic symmetry as the scattering amplitudes of the ABJM theory (see eq.
3.10 ).

Note that the integrand in eq. 8.1 has a @xmath -symmetry @xmath , where
@xmath . This symmetry can be used to remove @xmath degrees of freedom
from the @xmath matrix @xmath . Furthermore, the bosonic delta function
@xmath removes @xmath degrees of freedom and the orthogonality
constraint @xmath removes @xmath degrees of freedom. The net number of
integration variables is therefore given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the @xmath appears because three of the bosonic delta functions
ultimately become momentum-conserving delta functions. Hence, no
integration is required to obtain the four- and six-point tree-level
amplitudes from eq. 8.1 .

If we think of the matrix @xmath as a set of @xmath vectors in @xmath ,
then eq. 8.1 can be interpreted as an integral over @xmath -planes in
@xmath , which are subject to an equivalence relation @xmath , where
@xmath , and an orthogonality constraint coming from @xmath . This space
is referred to as the orthogonal Grassmannian, @xmath .

As an example, let’s reproduce the four-point superamplitude using the
Grassmannian integral formula. In ref. [ 84 ] , the integral formula was
also used to compute six- and eight-point component amplitudes. For the
case @xmath , one can use the GL @xmath gauge symmetry to set

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The bosonic delta function @xmath then implies that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using the Schouten identity

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

we see that eqs. 8.4 and 8.5 are solved by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Hence, the delta function @xmath reduces to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Inserting this solution into the remaining delta functions and the
minors, and using eq. 3.7 , one finds that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Combining eq.( 8.7 ) and eq.( 8.8 ), we see that the integral over
@xmath trivially gives the four-point superamplitude in eq. 3.6 .

## Chapter \thechapter Conclusion

In this thesis, we have presented evidence that the superconformal
Chern-Simons theory discovered by ABJM is integrable in the planar
limit. In a certain limit, this theory is dual to type IIA string theory
on @xmath and therefore represents a new example of the @xmath
correspondence. Although @xmath sYM and the ABJM theory have some common
features, notably they are both superconformal field theories which have
string theory duals, the ABJM theory exhibits many new properties. As a
result, the techniques for computing anomalous dimensions and scattering
amplitudes that were developed for @xmath sYM cannot be trivially
applied to the ABJM theory. Below we list some of the main differences
between @xmath sYM and the ABJM theory:

-   While @xmath sYM lives in four dimensions, the ABJM theory lives in
    three dimensions. This has several important implications:

    -   Conformal symmetry in three dimensions allows for Chern-Simons
        gauge fields but not Yang-Mills gauge fields, since the latter
        would introduce a dimensionful parameter. Since Chern-Simons
        gauge fields do not have dynamical degrees of freedom, this
        implies that only matter fields can appear on external lines of
        the on-shell amplitudes.

    -   Chirality is not defined in three dimensions. Whereas there are
        two types of spinors in four dimensions (which have opposite
        chirality), there is only one type of spinor in three
        dimensions. As a result, the position twistor of the ABJM theory
        is self-conjugate, as described in section 3.1. Nevertheless, as
        we describe in Appendix C, twistors in three dimensions have the
        same geometric interpretation as twistors in four dimensions in
        the sense that a point in twistor space corresponds to a null
        ray in Minkowski space and a point in Minkowski space
        corresponds to a line in twistor space.

    -   Since the superspace of the ABJM theory is non-chiral, this
        implies that the dual superspace of the ABJM theory should
        include three Grassmann-even coordinates which carry @xmath
        -symmetry indices, in addition to three bosonic and six
        fermionic coordinates (see section 3.2.1 for more details). Such
        coordinates do not arise in the dual superspace of @xmath sYM
        (unless one uses a non-chiral superspace [ 102 ] ). This
        definition of the dual superspace suggests that type IIA string
        theory on @xmath should be self-dual after performing T-duality
        transformations along the three translational directions of
        @xmath , three directions in @xmath , and six fermionic
        directions. All attempts to demonstrate this however, have
        encountered singularities [ 127 , 128 , 129 , 130 ] .

    -   Helicity is not defined in three dimensions (except by
        dimensional reduction from a four-dimensional theory [ 131 ] ,
        but three-dimensional Chern-Simons theories do not arise by
        dimensional reduction). Hence, while the on-shell color-ordered
        superamplitudes of @xmath sYM are labeled by the number of
        external lines and MHV-degree, the on-shell color-ordered
        superamplitudes of the ABJM theory are only labeled by the
        number of external lines. Formally, the @xmath -point
        superamplitude of the ABJM theory is similar to the @xmath
        -point superamplitude of @xmath sYM with MHV-degree @xmath .
        Whereas the generating function for tree-level amplitudes in
        @xmath sYM takes the form of an integral over the Grassmannian
        @xmath , the analogous formula for the ABJM theory is an
        integral over the orthogonal Grassmannian, @xmath . This is
        described in section 3.6.

    -   The BCFW recursion relation, which involves linearly deforming
        the momenta of two external lines of an on-shell amplitude by a
        complex parameter, only works in four and higher dimensions. In
        order to define a deformation of two external momenta in three
        dimensions which preserves the on-shell properties of the
        amplitudes and conformal symmetry, one must allow the
        deformation to be nonlinear. This is described in greater detail
        in section 3.4.

-   While @xmath sYM has maximal supersymmetry, the ABJM theory only has
    @xmath maximal supersymmetry.

    -   As a result, many quantities, such as the magnon dispersion
        relation and the all-loop Bethe Ansatz, are dependent on an
        interpolating function @xmath which has different asymptotics at
        weak and strong coupling. This is in contrast to @xmath sYM,
        where @xmath for all values of the coupling. So far, @xmath is
        only known at very small and very large coupling. It has been
        suggested that the value of @xmath may be scheme-dependent in
        the ABJM theory [ 100 ] . If this is the case, then @xmath
        should be eliminated in favor of a physical observable which has
        been computed in the same scheme.

    -   Another implication of less-than-maximal supersymmetry is that
        the radius of the string theory background receives @xmath
        corrections, although this effect only becomes relevant at two
        loops in the string theory sigma model [ 90 ] .

-   While the matter fields of @xmath sYM are in the adjoint
    representation of the gauge group @xmath , the matter fields in the
    ABJM theory are in the bifundamental representation of the gauge
    group @xmath .

    -   It still possible to define color-ordering and double-line
        notation for Feynman diagrams. In the double-line notation,
        there there are two types of lines; one for each @xmath of the
        gauge group. See Appendix A for more details.

    -   As explained in section 2.1, gauge invariant operators in the
        ABJM theory must contain an even number of fields which
        alternate between the representations @xmath and @xmath . If
        these operators are thought of as spin chains, then there are
        two types of elementary excitations: those residing on the even
        sites and those residing on the odd sites. In total, there are
        eight elementary excitations which transform in the
        representation @xmath . This is in contrast to the @xmath sYM
        spin chain, which has sixteen elementary excitations which
        transform in the representation @xmath .

    -   In the string theory dual to @xmath sYM, the sixteen transverse
        fluctuations about a generic classical solution are dual to the
        sixteen elementary excitations of the spin chain. On the other
        hand, in the string theory dual to the ABJM theory, only half of
        the transverse fluctuations are dual to to the elementary
        excitations of the spin chain. These are referred to as “light”
        fluctuations. The other eight fluctuations are referred to as
        “heavy.” As a result, care must be taken when computing one-loop
        corrections to the energy of classical string solutions, which
        involves adding up the fluctuation frequencies. In section
        2.2.4, we describe various summation prescriptions and argue
        that the appropriate prescription for type IIA string theory in
        @xmath treats heavy and light frequencies on unequal footing.

-   Whereas the @xmath superspace is a supercoset, the @xmath superspace
    is not [ 92 , 93 ] . As a result, the string theory dual to the ABJM
    theory cannot be fully described by a coset sigma model. It is
    possible to describe a subsector of the string theory using the
    @xmath coset sigma model, but @xmath -symmetry breaks down in this
    model when the superstring has trivial support in @xmath . Although
    integrability has been demonstrated in this subsector of the theory
    and one other subsector [ 74 , 75 , 76 ] , proving integrability of
    the full superstring theory will probably require new techniques.

Despite the many new features exhibited by the ABJM theory, a great deal
of progress has been made in computing it’s anomalous dimensions at weak
coupling via a Bethe Ansatz and at strong coupling using string theory.
Furthermore, as we described in section 3.5, the tree-level amplitudes
enjoy dual superconformal symmetry.

Regarding the anomalous dimensions of the ABJM theory, there are still a
number of open questions:

-   As mentioned above, it would be useful to compute the interpolating
    function @xmath which appears in the asymptotic Bethe Ansatz
    equations and the Thermodynamic Bethe Ansatz and to determine if
    this function is scheme-dependent. One way to approach this is to
    compute higher-loop corrections to the magnon dispersion relation in
    the gauge theory and string theory. The interpolating function was
    computed to fourth order at weak coupling in [ 132 ] . Beyond
    one-loop in the string theory sigma model, one must take into
    account the full @xmath superspace, whose radius receives @xmath
    corrections.

-   It is important to understand the interpretation of the heavy
    fluctuations which appear in type IIA string theory on @xmath . This
    question is closely related to which summation prescription should
    be used when computing one-loop corrections to classical string
    energies. In [ 101 ] , it was argued that only heavy fluctuations
    with even mode number should be included since the resulting
    one-loop corrections are generically finite, well-defined, and match
    gauge theory calculations. It would be interesting to further test
    various summation prescriptions by computing exponentially
    suppressed finite-size corrections to classical string energies and
    comparing them to gauge theory calculations. The first steps in this
    direction were taken in [ 133 , 134 , 135 ] , which computed
    finite-size corrections for giant magnons in @xmath , and in [ 136 ]
    , which computed finite-size corrections to the magnon dispersion
    relation.

-   Although the all-loop @xmath Bethe Ansatz is highly constrained by
    symmetry and satisfies various nontrivial consistency conditions, it
    contains three dressing phases which are not uniquely fixed by
    crossing symmetry [ 78 , 137 ] . The first hint that the all-loop
    @xmath Bethe Ansatz should include a dressing phase came from
    including curvature corrections to the plane-wave limit of the
    Green-Schwarz action and comparing the string spectrum to
    perturbative calculations in the gauge theory [ 138 , 139 ] . It
    would therefore be interesting to perform a similar calculation in
    the @xmath context. The first steps in this direction were taken in
    [ 140 , 136 ] .

-   A Lax connection has been constructed for the @xmath coset sigma
    model, as well as a subsector of the string theory that is not
    reachable by the coset sigma model. Furthermore, the Lax connection
    of the full string theory was shown to be flat to at least second
    order in the fermionic fields [ 76 ] . Although this strongly
    suggests that the full superstring theory is integrable, this
    example illustrates the need to develop a method to construct a Lax
    connection when the target space of the string theory is not a
    supercoset.

There are also many open questions regarding the scattering amplitudes
of the ABJM theory:

-   Using unitarity methods, it has been shown that the integrands of
    the loop amplitudes have dual superconformal symmetry, but due to
    infrared singularities, the loop integrals are-ill defined without a
    regulator. Since a regulator will generally render the symmetry
    anomalous, it would be interesting to see if one can define a
    regulator and modify the dual superconformal symmetry generators in
    such a way that the regulator becomes symmetry-preserving. This was
    done for @xmath sYM by considering the dual symmetry to be
    five-dimensional, with the extra dimension giving rise to a massive
    regulator [ 43 , 44 , 45 ] .

-   After learning how to compute loop integrals in the ABJM theory, it
    would be interesting to investigate a possible amplitude/Wilson loop
    duality by computing the two-loop correction to the four-point
    superamplitude and comparing it to the four-cusp null-polygonal
    Wilson loop computed in [ 141 ] . For @xmath sYM, the
    amplitude/Wilson loop duality has recently been extended beyond MHV
    amplitudes and conjectured to include correlators as well. It would
    therefore be interesting to see if the four-point superamplitude of
    the ABJM theory can be matched with a correlator [ 142 ] .

-   It would be interesting to investigate if the recursion relation
    developed for the ABJM theory is applicable to other superconformal
    Chern-Simons theories, such as the BLG theory [ 57 , 58 , 59 ] . In
    order for this recursion relation to be applicable, the
    superamplitudes must vanish when the complex deformation parameter
    @xmath goes to zero and infinity. Although various component
    amplitudes in the ABJM theory have bad large- @xmath behavior, there
    is enough supersymmetry to ensure that the superamplitudes have good
    large- @xmath behavior. This may not be true for theories with less
    supersymmetry.

-   In @xmath sYM, dual superconformal symmetry is a consequence of the
    fact that type IIB string theory on @xmath is self-dual after
    performing T-duality transformations along isometries corresponding
    to the dual superspace of @xmath sYM. As mentioned above, a similar
    analysis for type IIA string theory on @xmath encounters
    singularities. It would be interesting to determine if there is some
    combination of T-duality transformations under which the string
    theory is self-dual.

The study of integrability of @xmath superconformal Chern-Simons
theories is still in its early stages, so there are many other open
questions. Ultimately, this subject should continue to provide new
perspectives on integrability and the @xmath correspondence.

## Chapter \thechapter Review of the ABJM Theory

The ABJM theory is a three-dimensional superconformal Chern-Simons gauge
theory with @xmath supersymmetry. The field content consists of four
complex scalars @xmath , four Dirac fermions @xmath , their adjoints
@xmath , @xmath , and two gauge fields, @xmath and @xmath . Note that
the index @xmath is an @xmath R-symmetry index. The gauge group is
@xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are the associated gauge fields. The
fields @xmath and @xmath transform in the @xmath representation of the
gauge group and their adjoints transform in the @xmath representation.

The Lagrangian for the ABJM theory is given by [ 143 , 144 , 145 ] :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , i.e., we take the transpose of fermion rather than the
conjugate transpose, and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that @xmath , where @xmath is an integer known as the Chern-Simons
level. The coupling constant can absorbed into the normalization of the
fields. In particular, if we re-scale the fields by @xmath , the
coupling constant only appears as an overall factor of @xmath
multiplying the Lagrangian. Also note that the first two terms in @xmath
break the R-symmetry from @xmath to @xmath because they contain @xmath .

The fields can be expanded in terms of matrices as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath , are hermitian generators of @xmath satisfying
@xmath , @xmath is @xmath times an @xmath matrix, @xmath for @xmath ,
and @xmath . Hence, at the level of matrix representations, the main
difference between the gauge fields and the matter fields is that the
matter fields are not hermitian. It should be emphasized that the matter
fields carry two different indices, one for each @xmath . Using these
conventions, the definition of color-ordering in the ABJM theory is
similar to the definition of color ordering in Yang-Mills theories. In
particular, a color-dressed amplitude can be expressed as a sum of
color-ordered amplitudes which are multiplied by a trace of matrices:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the sum is over all permutations, @xmath , that mix even and odd
sites among themselves modulo cyclic permutations by two sites. A cyclic
permutation by two sites is trivial because of the cyclicity of the
trace. The function @xmath gives @xmath if @xmath involves an odd
permutation of the odd sites, and @xmath otherwise. This sign arises
because the superfields on the odd sites are fermionic.

In section 3.1, we compute the 4-point color-ordered scalar amplitude
using Feynman diagrams. The color-ordered cubic vertex coupling two
scalars to a gauge field is depicted in Fig. 9 .

Moreover, the gauge field propagators are then given by

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .1)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

where @xmath refers to the @xmath field, @xmath are gauge-fixing
parameters, and @xmath are adjoint indices. Taking @xmath gives Landau
gauge propagators:

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .2)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

The resulting propagators are depicted in Fig. 10 . A more complete list
of color-ordered Feynman rules can be found in [ 84 ] , for example.

It is possible to draw Feynman diagrams in the ABJM theory using
double-line notation. Since the matter fields transform in the
bifundamental representation of the gauge group, there are two types of
lines [ 82 ] . For example, when the Feynman diagrams in Fig. 5 are
written in double-line notation, they are given by Fig. 11 . The
color-factor associated with these diagrams is @xmath .

## Chapter \thechapter Review of Type IIA String Theory on @xmath

The supergravity background of the string theory dual to the ABJM theory
consists of the following string frame metric, dilaton, and
Ramond-Ramond fluxes [ 67 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      ( \thechapter .1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      ( \thechapter .2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      ( \thechapter .3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      ( \thechapter .4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------------------

where @xmath is the radius of curvature in string units, @xmath is the
Kahler form on @xmath , and @xmath is an integer corresponding to the
level of the dual Chern-Simons theory. The 2-form gauge field in the
NS-NS sector is zero. Note that the @xmath space has radius @xmath while
the @xmath space has radius @xmath .

The metric for an @xmath space with unit radius in global coordinates
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .5)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

where @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

The embedding coordinates are defined by

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .6)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

and they are related to the global coordinates by

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .7)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

Because the global coordinates are not well defined at @xmath it is
useful to define Cartesian coordinates @xmath for which the metric is
given by

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .8)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

These coordinates are related to the global coordinates by @xmath . Note
that this metric is only valid for @xmath .

The metric for a unit @xmath space is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath @xmath @xmath and @xmath .

The embedding coordinates ( @xmath ) are defined by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .10)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

where @xmath . The embedding coordinates are related to the global
coordinates by

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .11)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Note that the @xmath metric can be written in terms of embedding
coordinates as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath .

We use the following representation of the 10d Dirac matrices ( @xmath
):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the @xmath identity matrix, the @xmath are 4d Dirac
matrices given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the Pauli matrices are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally, we define the 10d chirality operator as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

## Chapter \thechapter Twistor Geometry of 3D Minkowski Space

In this appendix, we will describe the geometric interpretation of the
twistors of three-dimensional Minkowski space. A similar discussion for
the twistors of four-dimensional Minkowski space can be found in [ 146 ]
. We begin with the conformal compactification of 3D Minkowski space:

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .1)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

If we complexify the spacetime, it can also be parameterized by the
following five coordinates (which are defined up to re-scalings):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In terms of @xmath eq. \thechapter .1 can be expressed as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .2)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

where @xmath is totally antisymmetric. Note that @xmath is antisymmetric
and traceless with respect to the invariant tensor of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .3)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

where @xmath . The Latin indices @xmath run from 1 to 4, and the Greek
indices @xmath run from 1 to 2.

The most general solution to eq. \thechapter .2 is

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .4)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

where @xmath and @xmath are defined up to re-scalings by complex
parameters, i.e., @xmath and @xmath where @xmath and @xmath are complex
numbers. From eq. \thechapter .3 , we also have

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .5)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

@xmath and @xmath are referred to as twistors. Since @xmath and @xmath
each have three complex degrees of freedom, when combined with the
constraint in eq. \thechapter .5 , we find that @xmath in eq.
\thechapter .4 indeed has five complex degrees of freedom, which
confirms that it is the most general solution to eq. \thechapter .2 .
Since two distinct twistors define a line in twistor space, we see that
a point in Minkowski space corresponds to a line in twistor space.
Although we are treating the twistors as elements of @xmath , they will
ultimately be subject to reality constraints.

Given two points in conformally compactified 3D Minkowski space, we have
a natural inner product:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that this inner product changes under re-scalings of @xmath and
@xmath . To fix this, we introduce the infinity twistor:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where each element in the matrix is a @xmath matrix. Using the infinity
twistor, we can define an inner product that’s invariant under
rescalings:

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .6)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

Furthermore, we can relate points in conformally compactified Minkowski
space to points in Minkowski space as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .7)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

where we use a proportionality symbol because @xmath is only defined up
to re-scalings. Note that @xmath since @xmath . We can confirm that eq.
\thechapter .7 is sensible by plugging it into eq. \thechapter .6 .
Indeed, this is proportional to the distance between two points in
Minkowski space:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Suppose that we take the twistors @xmath and @xmath in eq. \thechapter
.4 to be @xmath and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .8)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

Combining eq. \thechapter .7 with eq. \thechapter .8 gives

  -- -- -- -------------------
           ( \thechapter .9)
  -- -- -- -------------------

where @xmath is a proportionality constant. We can determine @xmath by
comparing the bottom-right matrix element on each side of eq.
\thechapter .9 . Noting that @xmath , we readily find that @xmath .
Comparing the top-right matrix element on each side of eq. \thechapter
.9 gives

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .10)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Multiplying each side of eq. \thechapter .10 by @xmath gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly, multiplying each side of eq. \thechapter .10 by @xmath gives
@xmath . We will refer to this as the incidence relation or twistor
equation. From eq. \thechapter .5 , we find that the twistors obey the
following constraint:

  -- -------- -- --------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .11)
  -- -------- -- --------------------

Noting that @xmath , we see that eq. \thechapter .10 can be written as
follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which makes it manifest that @xmath .

Consider two points in Minkowski space @xmath and @xmath whose lines in
twistor space intersect. At the point of intersection, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we take take the difference of these two equations we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since @xmath has a zero eigenvalue. Hence, @xmath and @xmath are null
separated.

In summary, a point in Minkowski space defines a line in twistor space
and a point in twistor space defines a null ray in Minkowski space. The
essential difference between the twistors of four-dimensional Minkowski
space and the twistors of three-dimensional Minkowski space, is that the
latter must obey an additional constraint given in eq. \thechapter .11 .