Hawking radiation, despite its presence in theoretical physics for over
thirty years, remains elusive and undetected. It also suffers, in its
original context of gravitational black holes, from conceptual
difficulties. Of particular note is the trans-Planckian problem, which
is concerned with the apparent origin of the radiation in absurdly high
frequencies. In order to gain better theoretical understanding and, it
is hoped, experimental verification of Hawking radiation, much study is
being devoted to systems which model the spacetime geometry of black
holes, and which, by analogy, are also thought to emit Hawking
radiation. These analogue systems typically exhibit dispersion, which
regularizes the wave behaviour at the horizon but does not lend itself
well to analytic treatment, thus rendering Hawking’s prediction less
secure. A general analytic method for dealing with Hawking radiation in
dispersive systems has proved difficult to find.

This thesis presents new numerical and analytic results for Hawking
emission spectra in dispersive systems. It examines two black-hole
analogue systems: it begins by introducing the well-known acoustic
model, presenting some original results in that context; then, through
analogy with the acoustic model, goes on to develop the lesser-known
fibre-optical model. The following original results are presented in the
context of both of these models:

-   an analytic expression for the low-frequency temperature is found
    for a hyperbolic tangent background profile, valid in the entire
    parameter space; it is well-known that the spectrum is approximately
    thermal at low frequencies, but a universally valid expression for
    the corresponding temperature is an original development;

-   an analytic expression for the spectrum, valid over almost the
    entire frequency range, when the velocity profile parameters lie in
    the regime where the low-frequency temperature is given by the
    Hawking prediction; previous work has focused on the low-frequency
    thermal spectrum and the characterization of the deviations from
    thermality, rather than a single analytic expression; and

-   a new unexplored regime where no group-velocity horizon exists is
    examined; the Hawking spectra are found to be non-zero here, but
    also highly non-thermal, and are found, in the limit of small
    deviations, to vary with the square of the maximum deviation; the
    analytic expression for the case with a horizon is found to carry
    over to this new regime, with appropriate modifications.

Furthermore, the thesis examines the results of a classical
frequency-shifting experiment in the context of fibre-optical horizons.
The theory of this process is presented for both a constant-velocity and
a constantly-decelerating pulse, the latter case taking account of the
Raman effect. The resulting spectra are at least qualatitively
explained, but there is a discrepancy between theory and experiment that
has not yet been accounted for.

\AddToShipoutPicture

* \AtPageCenter []

Hawking Radiation in Dispersive Media

by

School of Physics and Astronomy, University of St Andrews

Submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy

May, 2011

I. Candidate’s declarations

I, Scott James Robertson, hereby certify that this thesis, which is
approximately 40,000 words in length, has been written by me, that it is
the record of work carried out by me and that it has not been submitted
in any previous application for a higher degree. I was admitted as a
research student in September 2006 and as a candidate for the degree of
PhD in September 2006; the higher study for which this is a record was
carried out in the University of St Andrews between 2006 and 2010.

Date Signature of candidate

II. Supervisor’s declaration

I hereby certify that the candidate has fulfilled the conditions of the
Resolution and Regulations appropriate for the degree of PhD in the
University of St Andrews and that the candidate is qualified to submit
this thesis in application for that degree.

Date Signature of supervisor

III. Permission for electronic publication

In submitting this thesis to the University of St Andrews I understand
that I am giving permission for it to be made available for use in
accordance with the regulations of the University Library for the time
being in force, subject to any copyright vested in the work not being
affected thereby. I also understand that the title and the abstract will
be published, and that a copy of the work may be made and supplied to
any bona fide library or research worker, that my thesis will be
electronically accessible for personal or research use unless exempt by
award of an embargo as requested below, and that the library has the
right to migrate my thesis into new electronic forms as required to
ensure continued access to the thesis. I have obtained any third-party
copyright permissions that may be required in order to allow such access
and migration, or have requested the appropriate embargo below. The
following is an agreed request by candidate and supervisor regarding the
electronic publication of this thesis: Access to printed copy and
electronic publication of thesis through the University of St Andrews.

Date Signature of candidate

Signature of supervisor
