##### Contents

-    1 Overview
    -    1.1 Foundations of entanglement renormalization and the MERA
    -    1.2 Entanglement renormalization in free fermionic systems
    -    1.3 Entanglement renormalization in free bosonic systems
    -    1.4 Algorithms for entanglement renormalization
    -    1.5 Entanglement renormalization and quantum criticality
    -    1.6 Entanglement renormalization in two spatial dimensions
    -    1.7 The spin- @xmath Kagome lattice Heisenberg model with
        entanglement renormalization
-    2 Foundations of entanglement renormalization and the MERA
    -    2.1 Introduction
    -    2.2 The MERA
    -    2.3 Quantum circuit
    -    2.4 Renormalization group transformation
    -    2.5 Choose your MERA
    -    2.6 Exploiting symmetries
    -    2.7 Conclusion
-    3 Entanglement renormalization in free fermionic systems
    -    3.1 Introduction
    -    3.2 ER applied to free fermions
    -    3.3 Results and discussion
    -    3.4 Conclusions
-    4 Entanglement renormalization in free bosonic systems
    -    4.1 Introduction
    -    4.2 Coupled harmonic oscillators
    -    4.3 Momentum-space RG
    -    4.4 Real-space RG
    -    4.5 Results and discussion
    -    4.6 Conclusions
-    5 Algorithms for entanglement renormalization
    -    5.1 Introduction
    -    5.2 Computation of expected values of local observables and
        correlators
    -    5.3 Optimization of a disentangler/isometry
    -    5.4 Optimization of the MERA
    -    5.5 Benchmark calculations for 1D systems
    -    5.6 Conclusions
-    6 Entanglement renormalization and quantum criticality
    -    6.1 Introduction
    -    6.2 RG fixed point
    -    6.3 Correlators
    -    6.4 Conformal field theory
    -    6.5 Algorithm for scale invariant MERA
    -    6.6 Benchmark results
    -    6.7 Discussion
-    7 Entanglement renormalization in two spatial dimensions
    -    7.1 Introduction
    -    7.2 The MERA on a 2D lattice
    -    7.3 Results for the 2D Ising model
    -    7.4 Role of disentanglers
-    8 The spin- @xmath Kagome lattice Heisenberg model
    -    8.1 Introduction
    -    8.2 ER on the kagome lattice
    -    8.3 Results and discussion
    -    8.4 Defective valence bond crystals
    -    8.5 Conclusions
-    9 Conclusion and Future Outlook
    -    9.1 Summary
    -    9.2 Future Work and Outlook
-    A The ground-state of free fermion models in two dimensions
    -    A.1 Particle conserving free-fermions
    -    A.2 Non particle conserving free-fermions
-    B The ground-state of harmonic lattice systems

## Chapter 1 Overview

  “ It would indeed be remarkable if Nature fortified herself against
  further advances in knowledge behind the analytical difficulties of
  the many-body problem .”

- Max Born (1960)

Understanding the collective behavior of quantum many-body systems, that
is quantum systems composed of a large number of interacting microscopic
degrees of freedom, is a central aspect in many areas of contemporary
physics including particle physics and condensed matter physics. Solving
a many-body problem to calculate, for instance, equilibrium properties
or the outcome of a dynamic process, even while allowing for some degree
of approximation, is often very difficult. Many techniques, both
analytical and numeric, have been developed to address specific classes
of quantum many-body problems. Techniques based upon perturbation theory
have proved incredibly successful for weakly interacting systems like
those encountered e.g. in quantum electro-dynamics (QED) [ MS93 , Sre07
] . For instance, perturbative calculations of electromagnetic fine
structure constant @xmath have been verified experimentally to
astonishing accuracy; to within ten parts in a billion @xmath .

In other branches of physics, notably condensed matter physics, relevant
many-body systems are often no longer in the weakly interacting regime
and cannot be analysed by perturbation theory. Instead, without the
general purpose tool of perturbation theory (and given that few systems
of interest admit analytic solutions), much of condensed matter physics
has been traditionally based upon a set on approximations specific to
the problem at hand. Unfortunately, satisfactory tools or approximations
are not known for many models of potential interest in condensed matter
theory, and these models have remained defiant to theoretical
investigation. For instance the Hubbard model [ Hub63 ] , a simple model
of interacting fermions on a lattice proposed by John Hubbard in 1963,
is thought to possibly describe high-temperature superconductivity.
Despite intensive research efforts over many years, this possibility has
neither been confirmed nor refuted, nor is even the phase diagram of the
Hubbard model well understood. In general, the difficulty of solving
many-body problems, such as the Hubbard model, has retarded progress in
theoretical condensed matter physics. As a consequence many exotic
quantum phenomena involving extended systems, such as the aforementioned
high-temperature superconductor or the spin-liquid phase of matter,
remain not well understood on a theoretical level.

Given the staggering progress made in computer technology in recent
decades, numerical approaches to many-body problems are becoming
increasingly dominant. Unfortunately, even with vast amounts of
computational power available, large quantum many-body systems still
cannot be addressed exactly. For instance, one would typically like to
analyse systems with a large number of particles (often many hundreds or
thousands) yet, due the exponential growth of the Hilbert space with
particle number, only a few tens of particles may be analyzed exactly.
As of 2009, a powerful supercomputer can analyze systems of at most
@xmath spin half particles using exact diagonalisation (ED) techniques [
LL09 , RS10 ] . Despite this limitation, exact diagionalization (often
combined with finite-size scaling techniques) remains a ubiquitous
numerical tool in many areas of computational physics.

Numerical techniques based upon Monte Carlo sampling of the
multi-dimensional integrals which arise in quantum many-body problems
have proved incredibly useful and versatile for studying many-body
problems. These comprise a large class of algorithms collectively
referred to as quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) [ McM65 , And75 , Cep95 ] .
Indeed, much of the contemporary understanding of lattice models in
@xmath or higher dimensions has come from studies with QMC. Quantum
Monte Carlo allows calculation of many-body effects in the wavefunction
at the cost of statistical uncertainty that can be reduced by increasing
the number of samples taken. While QMC techniques have proved an
invaluable tool for many-body systems they are unfortunately only viable
for a certain class of Hamiltonians. Specifically, QMC techniques can
only be efficiently applied to study systems for which the Feynman path
integral can be evaluated as a sum over configurations with positive
weights. However, there is a large class of systems for which the path
integral does not have any known representation with only positive
weights and the sampling time becomes exponentially large with system
size; this is the famous sign problem . Two important classes of
problems in which the sign problem is encountered are frustrated models
of magnetism and systems of interacting fermions. Despite intensive
research efforts there remains no general solution to the sign problem
(though there have been partial solutions found for particular systems,
for instance [ HS00 , BHR03 , CD04 , AK10 ] ) and many models of
interest remain out of reach to QMC techniques.

Another leading numerical method for many body systems is the density
matrix renormalization group (DMRG) [ Whi92 , Whi93 ] , a method based
upon ideas from the real-space renormalization group (RG) [ Fis98 ] . In
the context of lattice models, the RG aims to obtain the physics of low
energy states by grouping degrees of freedom and retaining only the
relevant ones. Wilson’s numerical renormalization group (NRG) [ Wil75 ]
provided an explicit prescription to implement rescaling transformations
of the lattice and was successful in solving the Kondo problem. But it
was not until the advent of White’s DMRG algorithm in 1991 that RG
methods became (and remain today) the dominant numerical approach for 1
@xmath lattice systems. Typically, the DMRG algorithm can be used to
address the ground state of large 1 @xmath lattice systems (hundreds of
sites) with many digits of precision. Unlike QMC techniques, DMRG does
not suffer from the sign problem and can be applied to study interacting
fermions and frustrated spin systems. The advent of the DMRG algorithm
revolutionised the study of quantum systems; by allowing highly accurate
simulation of a large class of 1 @xmath lattice problems DMRG has led to
a deeper understanding of many types of quantum systems including
fermionic systems, such as the Hubbard model, bosonic systems, problems
with impurities, and quantum dots joined with quantum wires. However, in
@xmath or higher dimensional quantum lattice systems, DMRG is limited to
small system sizes ( @xmath sites), although this is still significantly
larger than what is possible with exact diagonalization alone. This
limitation arises due to the failure of the matrix product state (MPS)
ansatz, the tensor-network ansatz upon which DMRG is based, to properly
capture the geometry of quantum correlations in higher dimensional
systems.

Though QMC and DMRG are both stunningly successful techniques in their
own right, certain classes of many body problem remain intractable to
either method; mainly frustrated spin systems and interacting fermions
on large 2 @xmath lattices. These systems cannot be analyzed with QMC
due to the sign problem, nor with DMRG due to the inability of DMRG to
analyze large 2 @xmath systems. Accordingly, there have been significant
research efforts to devise new numerical many-body techniques that both
@xmath do not possess a sign problem and @xmath scale efficiently with
system size in @xmath dimensional quantum lattice systems. Several of
these proposals are based upon generalizations of the MPS tensor network
ansatz, or proposals of entirely new tensor network ansatz, that
properly capture the correlation structure of 2 @xmath systems. Among
this new breed of many-body techniques, based upon tensor network
ansatz, are projected entangled pair states (PEPS) [ PVC06 , JOV @xmath
08 ] , tensor entanglement renormalization group (TERG) [ GLW08 , GLSW09
] and, the subject of this thesis, entanglement renormalization (ER) [
Vid07 , Vid08 ] .

We now proceed to outline the various aspects of entanglement
renormalization that are analysed in this thesis.

### 1.1 Foundations of entanglement renormalization and the MERA

In Chapter 2 , we present a short introduction to entanglement
renormalization and its related tensor network, the multiscale
entanglement renormalization ansatz (MERA). The MERA is presented both
from the perspective as a peculiar class of quantum circuit and also
from the complementary perspective of the renormalization group (RG).
Several realizations of the MERA in 1 @xmath and 2 @xmath lattices are
presented. The notion of the causal cone of the MERA is introduced and
the impact on computational efficiency is discussed. We also discuss how
spatial symmetries can be incorporated into the MERA.

### 1.2 Entanglement renormalization in free fermionic systems

Chapter 3 explores the performance of entanglement renormalization in
systems of free spinless fermions on 1 @xmath and 2 @xmath lattices. The
implementation of ER considered makes use of properties of free fermions
to achieve substantial reductions in computational cost, and also to
simplify the subsequent analysis of results. The ability of ER to
accurately coarse-grain fermionic systems in insulating, conducting and
superconducting phases (whose corresponding ground states span all known
forms of entropy scaling) is investigated. We examine the accuracy of
the ER simulations as compared to exact results in terms of the
truncation error of the correlation matrix, the accuracy of the ground
energy and the accuracy of two-point correlators. The results
demonstrate the ability of a coarse-graining transformation based upon
ER to accurately capture the low-energy physics of a variety of free
fermion systems in @xmath dimensional lattices.

### 1.3 Entanglement renormalization in free bosonic systems

In Chapter 4 , we investigate the performance of ER in systems of free
bosons, while highlighting the connection between momentum-space RG
transformations and real-space RG transformations. The process of
applying RG transforms to the system in momentum-space is explained and
contrasted against the equivalent steps of applying real-space RG. A
critical system and examples of relevant and irrelevant perturbations
thereof are considered. A comparison between results obtained from exact
momentum-space RG and the results from numerical real-space RG is
presented. The results of this Chapter demonstrate that a real-space RG
transform based upon entanglement renormalization is able to reproduce
the exact results from momentum-space RG to a high accuracy in @xmath
dimensional lattice systems, both for the critical and non-critical
cases considered. Also demonstrated is the ability of the MERA to
provide an efficient and accurate representation of the ground state of
free boson systems, thus extending to the bosonic case the results of
Chapter 3 .

### 1.4 Algorithms for entanglement renormalization

In Chapter 5 we describe how to compute expected values of local
observables and two-point correlators from a MERA, and also present
optimisation algorithms that allow the MERA approximation to the ground
state of an arbitrary system to be obtained. A highlight of the
algorithms is their computational cost. For an inhomogeneous lattice
with @xmath sites, the cost scales as @xmath , whereas for translation
invariant systems it drops to just @xmath . Other variations of the
algorithm allow us to address infinite systems, and scale invariant
systems (e.g. quantum critical systems), at a cost independent of @xmath
. We also present benchmark calculations for different 1 @xmath quantum
lattice models, namely Ising, 3-level Potts, XX and Heisenberg models.
We compute ground state energies, magnetizations and two-point
correlators throughout the phase diagram of the Ising and Potts models,
which includes a second order quantum phase transition. We find that, at
the critical point of an infinite system, the error in the ground state
energy decays exponentially with the refinement parameter @xmath ,
whereas the two-point correlators remain accurate even at distances of
millions of lattice sites. We then extract critical exponents from the
order parameter and from two-point correlators. Finally, we also compute
a MERA that includes the first excited state, from which the energy gap
can be obtained and seen to vanish as @xmath at criticality.

### 1.5 Entanglement renormalization and quantum criticality

Chapter 6 explains how to use the MERA to investigate quantum critical
systems that are invariant under changes of scale. An algorithm is
presented which, given a critical Hamiltonian, details how to compute a
scale invariant MERA for its ground state. Then, starting from the scale
invariant MERA, a procedure is described to identify the scaling
operators/dimensions of the theory. A closed expression for two-point
and three-point correlators is derived, and a connection between the
MERA and conformal field theory (which can be used to readily identify
the continuum limit of a critical lattice model) is established.
Finally, benchmark calculations for the Ising and Potts models are
presented.

### 1.6 Entanglement renormalization in two spatial dimensions

In Chapter 7 we build upon the MERA schemes introduced in Chapter 2 ,
and also the optimisation algorithms presented in Chapter 5 , to
describe an implementation of the MERA that allows us to consider 2
@xmath systems of arbitrary size, including infinite systems. In this
way we demonstrate the scalability of entanglement renormalization in
two spatial dimensions and decisively contribute to establishing the
MERA as a competitive approach to systematically address 2 @xmath
lattice models. We also demonstrate the performance of the scheme by
analysing the 2 @xmath quantum Ising model, for which we obtain accurate
estimates of the ground state energy and magnetizations, as well as
two-point correlators (shown to scale polynomially at criticality), the
energy gap, and the critical magnetic field and beta exponent. Finally,
we discuss how the use of disentanglers affects the simulation costs, by
comparing the MERA with a tree tensor network (TTN).

### 1.7 The spin-@xmath Kagome lattice Heisenberg model with
entanglement renormalization

Chapter 8 examines a long-standing problem in condensed matter physics,
the nature of the ground-state of the spin- @xmath kagome lattice
Heisenberg model (KLHM), using entanglement renormalization. Progress in
understanding the KLHM has been hindered, as with many other models of
frustrated antiferromagnets, by the inapplicability of quantum Monte
Carlo methods due to the sign problem. This investigation is the first
demonstration of the utility of entanglement renormalization to study 2
@xmath lattice models that are beyond the reach of quantum Monte Carlo
techniques. After describing a scheme for ER on the Kagome lattice with
periodic boundary conditions, we address lattices of @xmath sites. We
then analyse bond energies, two-point and bond-bond correlators of the
ground state on the various lattice sizes. The results give strong
numerical evidence in favor of a VBC ground state for the KLHM.

## Chapter 2 Foundations of entanglement renormalization and the MERA

### 2.1 Introduction

Entanglement renormalization (ER) [ Vid07 ] is a numerical technique
based on locally reorganizing the Hilbert space of a quantum many-body
system with the aim to reduce the amount of entanglement in its wave
function. It was introduced to address a major computational obstacle in
real space renormalization group (RG) methods [ Wil75 , Whi92 , Whi93 ,
MW94 , MW96 ] , responsible for limitations in their performance and
range of applicability, namely the proliferation of degrees of freedom
that occurs under successive applications of a RG transformation.

Entanglement renormalization is built around the assumption that, as a
result of the local character of physical interactions, some of the
relevant degrees of freedom in the ground state of a many-body system
can be decoupled from the rest by unitarily transforming small regions
of space. Accordingly, unitary transformations known as disentanglers
are applied locally to the system in order to identify and decouple such
degrees of freedom, which are then safely removed and therefore do no
longer appear in any subsequent coarse-grained description. This
prevents the harmful accumulation of degrees of freedom and thus leads
to a sustainable real space RG transformation, able to explore
arbitrarily large 1 @xmath and 2 @xmath lattice systems, even at a
quantum critical point. It also leads to the multi-scale entanglement
renormalization ansatz (MERA), a variational ansatz for many-body states
[ Vid08 ] .

The MERA, based in turn on a class of quantum circuits, is particularly
successful at describing ground states at quantum criticality [ Vid07 ,
Vid08 , EV10b , EV10a , CDR08 , GMF08 , PEV09 , EV09b ] or with
topological order [ AV08 , KRV09 ] . From the computational viewpoint,
the key property of the MERA is that it can be manipulated efficiently,
due to the causal structure of the underlying quantum circuit [ Vid08 ]
. As a result, it is possible to efficiently evaluate the expected value
of local observables, and to efficiently optimize its tensors. Thus,
well-established simulation techniques for matrix product states, such
as energy minimization [ VPC04 , PVC06 ] or simulation of time evolution
[ Vid03 , Vid04 ] , can be readily generalized to the MERA [ DEO08 ,
RMV08 ] .

The goal of this Chapter is to provide a short introduction to
entanglement renormalization and the MERA, establishing the notation and
terminology that shall be used in the rest of this thesis. Specifically,
Sect. 2.3 introduces the MERA from the perspective of quantum circuits
while Sect. 2.4 offers a complementary interpretation of the MERA in
terms of the renormalization group (RG). Several realizations of the
MERA in 1 @xmath and 2 @xmath lattices are discussed in Sect. 2.5 and
Sect. 2.6 details how spatial symmetries can be incorporated into the
MERA.

### 2.2 The MERA

Let @xmath denote a @xmath -dimensional lattice made of @xmath sites,
where each site is described by a Hilbert space @xmath of finite
dimension @xmath , so that @xmath . The MERA is an ansatz to describe
certain pure states @xmath of the lattice or, more generally, subspaces
@xmath .

There are two useful ways of thinking about the MERA that can be used to
motivate its specific structure as a tensor network, and also help
understand its properties and how the algorithms ultimately work. One
way is to regard the MERA as a quantum circuit @xmath whose output wires
correspond to the sites of the lattice @xmath [ Vid08 ] . Alternatively,
we can think of the MERA as defining a coarse-graining transformation
that maps @xmath into a sequence of increasingly coarser lattices, thus
leading to a renormalization group transformation [ Vid07 ] . Next we
briefly review these two complementary interpretations.

### 2.3 Quantum circuit

As a quantum circuit @xmath , the MERA for a pure state @xmath is made
of @xmath quantum wires, each one described by a Hilbert space @xmath ,
and unitary gates @xmath that transform the unentangled state @xmath
into @xmath (see Fig. 2.1 ).

In a generic case, each unitary gate @xmath in the circuit @xmath
involves some small number @xmath of wires,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the identity operator in @xmath . For some gates,
however, one or several of the input wires are in a fixed state @xmath .
In this case we can replace the unitary gate @xmath with an isometric
gate @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the space of the @xmath input wires that are not in a
fixed state @xmath and @xmath is the space of the @xmath output wires.
We refer to @xmath as a @xmath gate or tensor.

Fig. 2.2 shows an example of a MERA for a 1 @xmath lattice @xmath made
of @xmath sites. Its tensors are of types @xmath and @xmath . We call
the @xmath tensors isometries @xmath and the @xmath tensors
disentanglers @xmath for reasons that will be explained shortly, and
refer to Fig. 2.2 as a binary 1 @xmath MERA, since it becomes a binary
tree when we remove the disentanglers. Most of the early work for 1
@xmath lattices [ Vid07 , Vid08 , EV10b , EV10a , DEO08 , RMV08 ] has
been done using the binary 1 @xmath MERA. However, there are many other
possible choices. In Chapters 5 and 6 , for instance, we will mostly use
the ternary 1 @xmath MERA of Fig. 2.3 , where the isometries @xmath are
of type @xmath and the disentanglers @xmath remain of type @xmath . Fig.
2.4 makes more explicit the meaning of Eq. 2.2 for these tensors. Notice
that describing tensors and their manipulations by means of diagrams is
fully equivalent to using equations and often much more clear.

Eq. 2.2 encapsulates a distinctive property of the MERA as a tensor
network: each of its tensors is isometric (notice that Eq. 2.1 is a
particular case of Eq. 2.2 ). A second key feature of the MERA refers to
its causal structure. We define the past causal cone of an outgoing wire
of circuit @xmath as the set of wires and gates that can affect the
state on that wire. A quantum circuit @xmath leads to a MERA only when
the causal cone of an outgoing wire involves just a constant (that is,
independent of @xmath ) number of wires at any fixed past time (Fig. 2.5
). We refer to this property by saying that the causal cone has a
bounded ‘width’.

The usefulness of the quantum circuit interpretation of the MERA will
become clear in Chap. 5 , in the context of computing expected values
for local observables. There, the two defining properties, namely Eq.
2.2 and the peculiar structure of the causal cones of @xmath , will be
the key to making such calculations efficient.

### 2.4 Renormalization group transformation

Let us now review how the MERA defines a coarse-graining transformation
for lattice systems that leads to a real-space renormalization group
scheme, known as entanglement renormalization [ Vid07 ] .

We start by grouping the tensors in the MERA into @xmath different
layers, where each layer contains a row of isometries @xmath and a row
of disentanglers @xmath . We label these layers with an integer @xmath ,
with @xmath for the lowest layer and with increasing values of @xmath as
we climb up the tensor network, and denote by @xmath the isometric
transformation implemented by all tensors in layer @xmath , see Figs.
2.2 and 2.3 . Notice that the incoming wires of each @xmath define the
Hilbert space of a lattice @xmath with a number of sites @xmath that
decreases exponentially with @xmath (specifically, as @xmath and @xmath
for the binary and ternary 1 @xmath MERA). That is, the MERA implicitly
defines a sequence of lattices

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the original lattice, and where we can think of lattice
@xmath as the result of coarse-graining lattice @xmath .

Specifically, as illustrated in Figs. 2.2 and 2.3 , this coarse-graining
transformation is implemented by the operator @xmath that maps pure
states of the lattice @xmath into pure states of the lattice @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

and that proceeds in two steps (Fig. 2.6 ). Let us partition the lattice
@xmath into blocks of neighboring sites. The first step consists of
applying the disentanglers @xmath on the boundaries of the blocks,
aiming to reduce the amount of short range entanglement in the system.
Once (part of) the short-range entanglement between neighboring blocks
has been removed, the isometries @xmath are used in the second step to
map each block of sites of lattice @xmath into a single effective site
of lattice @xmath .

By composition, we obtain a sequence of increasingly coarse-grained
states,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

for the lattices @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath is the original state.
Overall the MERA corresponds to the transformation @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath .

Regarding the MERA from the perspective of the renormalization group is
quite instructive. It tells us that this ansatz is likely to describe
states with a specific structure of internal correlations, namely,
states in which the entanglement is organized in different length
scales. Let us briefly explain what we mean by this.

We say that the state @xmath contains entanglement at a given length
scale @xmath if by applying a unitary operation (i.e. a disentangler) on
a region @xmath of linear size @xmath , we are able to decouple (i.e.
disentangle) some of the local degrees of freedom, that is, if we are
able to convert the state @xmath into a product state @xmath , where
@xmath is the state of the local degrees of freedom that have been
decoupled and @xmath is the state of the rest of the system. [Here we
assumed, of course, that the decoupling is not possible with a unitary
operation that acts on a subregion @xmath of the region @xmath , where
the size @xmath of @xmath is smaller than the size of @xmath , @xmath ].

What makes the MERA useful is that the entanglement in most ground
states of local Hamiltonians seems to decompose into moderate
contributions corresponding to different length scales. We can identify
two behaviors, depending on whether the system is in a phase
characterized by symmetry-breaking order or by topological order (see [
LW05 ] and references therein). In systems with symmetry-breaking order,
ground-state entanglement spans all length scales @xmath smaller than
the correlation length @xmath in the system — and, consequently, at a
quantum critical point, where the correlation length @xmath diverges,
entanglement is present at all length scales [ Vid07 ] . In a system
with topological order, instead, the ground state displays some form of
(topological) entanglement affecting all length scales even when the
correlation length vanishes [ AV08 , KRV09 ] .

### 2.5 Choose your MERA

We have introduced the MERA as a tensor network originating in a quantum
circuit. Its tensors have incoming and outgoing wires/indices according
to a well-defined direction of time in the circuit. Therefore, a MERA
can be regarded as a tensor network equipped with a (fictitious) time
direction and with two properties:

-   Its tensors are isometric (Eq. 2.2 ).

-   Past causal cones have bounded width (Fig. 2.5 ).

From a computational perspective, these are the only properties that we
need to retain. In particular, there is no need to keep the vector space
dimension of the quantum wires (equivalently, of the sites in the
coarse-grained lattice) constant throughout the tensor network.
Accordingly, we will consider a MERA where the vector space dimension of
a site of lattice @xmath , denoted @xmath , may depend on the layer
@xmath (this dimension could also be different for each individual site
of layer @xmath , but for simplicity we will not consider this case
here). Notice that @xmath corresponds to the sites of the original
lattice @xmath .

Bond dimension.— Often, however, the sites in most layers will have the
same vector space dimension (except, for instance, the sites of the
original lattice @xmath , with @xmath , or the single site of the top
lattice @xmath , with dimension @xmath ). In this case we denote the
dominant dimension simply by @xmath , and we refer to the MERA as having
bond dimension @xmath . The computational cost of the algorithms
described in subsequent sections is often expressed as a power of the
bond dimension @xmath .

Rank.— We refer to the dimension @xmath of the space @xmath
(corresponding to the single site of the uppermost lattice @xmath ) as
the rank of the MERA. For @xmath , the MERA represents a pure state
@xmath . More generally, a rank @xmath MERA encodes a @xmath
-dimensional subspace @xmath . For instance, given a Hamiltonian @xmath
on the lattice @xmath , we could use a rank @xmath MERA to describe the
ground subspace of @xmath (assuming it had dimension @xmath ); or the
ground state of @xmath (if it was not degenerate) and its @xmath
excitations with lowest energy. The isometric transformation @xmath in
Eq. 2.6 can be used to build a projector @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

onto the subspace @xmath .

Given the above definition of the MERA, many different realizations are
possible depending on what kind of isometric tensors are used and how
they are interconnected. We have already met two examples for a 1 @xmath
lattice, based on a binary and ternary underlying tree. Fig. 2.7 shows
two schemes for a 2 @xmath square lattice. It is natural to ask, given a
lattice geometry, what realization of the MERA is the most convenient
from a computational point of view. A definitive answer to this question
does not seem simple. An important factor, however, is given by the
fixed-point size of the support of local observables under successive RG
transformations—which corresponds to the width of the past causal cones.

Support of local observables.— In each MERA scheme, under successive
coarse-graining transformations a local operator eventually becomes
supported in a characteristic number of sites. This is the result of two
competing effects: disentanglers @xmath tend to extend the support of
the local observable (by adding new sites at its boundary), whereas the
isometries @xmath tend to reduce it (by transforming blocks of sites
into single sites). For instance, in the binary 1 @xmath MERA, local
observables end up supported in three contiguous sites (Fig. 2.2 ),
whereas in the ternary 1 @xmath MERA local observables become supported
in two contiguous sites (Fig. 2.3 ).

Therefore, an important difference between the binary and ternary 1
@xmath schemes is in the natural support of local observables. This can
be seen to imply that the cost of a computation scales as a larger power
of the bond dimension @xmath for the binary scheme than for the ternary
scheme, namely as @xmath compared to @xmath . However, it turns out that
the binary scheme is more effective at removing entanglement, and as a
result a smaller @xmath is already sufficient in order to achieve the
same degree of accuracy in the computation of, say, a ground state
energy. In the end, we find that for the 1 @xmath systems analyzed in
Sect. 5.5 , the two effects compensate and the cost required in both
schemes in order to achieve the same accuracy is comparable. On the
other hand, in the ternary 1 @xmath MERA, two-point correlators between
selected sites can be computed at a cost @xmath , whereas analogous
calculations in the binary 1 @xmath MERA are much more expensive.
Therefore in any context where the calculation of two-point correlators
is important, the ternary 1 @xmath MERA is a better choice.

The number of possible realizations of the MERA for 2 @xmath lattices is
greater than for 1 @xmath lattices. For a square lattice, the two
schemes of Fig. 2.7 are obvious generalizations of the above ones for 1
@xmath lattices. The first scheme, proposed in [ EV10b ] (see also [
CDR08 ] ), involves isometries of type @xmath and the natural support of
local observables is a block of @xmath sites. The second scheme involves
isometries of type @xmath and local observables end up supported in
blocks of @xmath sites. Here, the much narrower causal cones of the
second scheme leads to a much better scaling of the computational cost
with @xmath , only @xmath compared to @xmath for the first scheme.

Another remark in relation to possible realizations concerns the type of
tensors we use. So far we have insisted in distinguishing between
disentanglers @xmath (unitary tensors of type @xmath ) and isometries
@xmath (isometric tensors of type @xmath ). We will continue to use this
terminology throughout this paper, but we emphasize that a more general
form of isometric tensor, e.g. of type @xmath , that both disentangles
the system and coarse-grains sites, is possible and is actually used in
some realizations [ EV09b ] .

### 2.6 Exploiting symmetries

Symmetries have a direct impact on the efficiency of computations,
because they can be used to drastically reduce the number of parameters
in the MERA. Important examples are given by space symmetries, such as
translation and scale invariance, see Fig. 2.8 .

The MERA is made of @xmath disentanglers and isometries. In order to
describe an inhomogeneous state @xmath or subspace @xmath , all these
tensors are chosen to be different. Therefore, for fixed @xmath the
number of parameters in the MERA scales linearly in @xmath .

However, in the presence of translation invariance, one can use a
translation invariant MERA, where we choose all the disentanglers @xmath
and isometries @xmath of any given layer @xmath to be the same, thus
reducing the number of parameters to @xmath (if there are @xmath
layers). We emphasize that a translation invariant MERA, as just
defined, does not necessarily represent a translation invariant state
@xmath or subspace @xmath . The reason is that different sites of @xmath
are placed in inequivalent positions with respect to the MERA. As a
result, often the MERA can only approximately reproduce translation
invariant states/subspaces, although the departure from translation
invariance is seen to typically decrease fast with increasing @xmath .
In order to further mitigate inhomogeneities, we often consider an
average of local observables/reduced density matrices over all possible
sites, as will be discussed in Chap. 5 .

In systems that are invariant under changes of scale, we will use a
scale invariant MERA, where all the disentanglers and isometries can be
chosen to be the same and we only need to store a constant number of
parameters. The scale invariant MERA is useful to represent the ground
state of some quantum critical systems [ Vid07 ] and the ground subspace
of systems with topological order at the infrared limit of the RG flow [
AV08 , KRV09 ] .

A reduction in parameters (as a function of @xmath ) is also possible in
the presence of internal symmetries, such as @xmath (e.g. particle
conservation) or @xmath (e.g. spin isotropy). Exploitation of internal
symmetries is discussed in Ref. [ SPV09 ] and shall not be further
considered in this thesis.

### 2.7 Conclusion

In this Chapter, the MERA has been introduced both from the perspective
of a perculiar class of quantum circuit and from the perspective of an
RG transformation of the lattice. Several implementations of the MERA
for @xmath and @xmath systems have been described and we have briefly
discussed how the presence of symmetries can be exploited to reduce the
computational cost of the MERA. The binary MERA of Fig. 2.2 and the
4-to-1 MERA scheme of Fig. 2.7 shall be used in Chapters 3 and 4 to
explore the performance of the MERA in @xmath dimensional lattices of
free fermions and free bosons.

## Chapter 3 Entanglement renormalization in free fermionic systems

### 3.1 Introduction

The renormalization group (RG), concerned with the change of physics
with the observation scale, is among the main ideas underlying the
theoretical structure of statistical mechanics and quantum field theory,
and is of central importance in the modern formulation of critical
phenomena and phase transitions [ Fis98 ] . Its influence extends well
beyond the conceptual domain: RG transformations are also the basis of
numerical approaches to the study of strongly correlated many-body
systems.

In a lattice model, a real-space RG transformation produces a
coarse-grained system by first joining the lattice sites into blocks and
then replacing each block with an effective site [ KGH @xmath 67 ] . Two
very natural requirements for a RG transformation are: ( @xmath ) it
should preserve the long-distance physics of the system; ( @xmath ) when
this physics is invariant under changes of scale, the system should be a
fixed point of the RG transformation.

For the important case of a quantum system at zero temperature, the
first requirement is fulfilled if, as determined by White in his density
matrix renormalization group (DMRG) [ Whi92 , Whi93 ] , the vector space
of the effective site retains the local support of the ground state.
Entanglement renormalization (ER) has been proposed in order to
simultaneously meet the second requirement. By using disentanglers , ER
aims to produce a coarse-grained lattice locally identical to the
original one, in the sense that their sites have the same vector space
dimension. When this is accomplished, the original system and its
coarse-grained version can be meaningfully compared, e.g. through their
Hamiltonians or ground state properties, leading to a proper real-space
RG flow.

In this Chapter we explore the performance of ER in systems of free
spinless fermions on 1 @xmath and 2 @xmath lattices using the binary
MERA and 4-to-1 MERA schemes described in Figs. 2.6 and 2.7 of Chap. 2 .
Specifically, we consider systems specified by the quadratic Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the chemical and pairing potentials and the
first sum involves only nearest neighbors. In spite of its simplicity,
Hamiltonian @xmath contains a rich phase diagram as a function of @xmath
and @xmath , including insulating, conducting and superconducting phases
[ LDY @xmath 06 ] . Importantly, the corresponding ground states span
all known forms of entropy scaling [ LDY @xmath 06 , BCS06 ] . In
addition, @xmath can be diagonalized through linear (Fourier and
Bogoliubov) transformations of the fermion operators @xmath and @xmath
while, by Wick’s theorem, all properties of its Gaussian ground state
@xmath can be extracted from the two-point correlators @xmath and @xmath
. Then, provided that our RG transformation also maps fermion modes
linearly, the entire analysis can be conducted in the space of two-point
correlators and quadratic Hamiltonians of @xmath fermionic modes, as
represented by @xmath matrices. Hence quadratic fermionic models such as
Eq. 3.1 ) offer an appealing testing ground for ER, one where
computational costs have been greatly simplified (e.g. @xmath can be
diagonalized exactly with just @xmath operations) while keeping a rich
variety of non-trivial ground state structures.

### 3.2 ER applied to free fermions

We start by rephrasing, in the language of correlation matrices, the
process of coarse-graining a @xmath -dimensional (hypercubic) lattice.
We assume that the system is in the ground state @xmath of @xmath ,
which we compute using standard analytic techniques (see e.g. [ LDY
@xmath 06 ] ). It is convenient to redraw the hypercubic lattice so that
each site contains @xmath fermion modes for some integer @xmath . Then a
hypercube of @xmath sites defines a block that contains @xmath modes.
The goal of the RG transformation is to replace this block with just one
effective site made of @xmath modes, with @xmath . We would like to have
@xmath , so that the sites of the coarse-grained and original lattices
are identical and we can compare the corresponding Hamiltonians or
ground-state reduced density matrices. However, in the coarse-graining
step only modes of the block that are disentangled from the rest of the
system can be removed. As a result, @xmath often must be larger than
@xmath .

For the sake of simplicity, we continue the analysis for the case of a 1
@xmath lattice. Let us temporarily replace the @xmath spinless fermion
operators @xmath in Eq. 3.1 with @xmath (self-adjoint) Majorana fermion
operators @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The ground state @xmath is then completely specified by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , henceforth referred to as the correlation matrix , is
real and antisymmetric. Similarly, the reduced density matrix @xmath for
a block made of 2 sites, that is with @xmath spinless modes
(equivalently, @xmath Majorana modes) is described by a @xmath submatrix
@xmath of @xmath . This matrix is brought into (block) diagonal form by
a special orthogonal transformation @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the eigenvalues of @xmath , each one associated with a
pair of Majorana fermions. These pairs recombine into @xmath spinless
fermions in a product state [ VLRK03 , LRV04 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , the state of a spinless fermion mode, is mixed if @xmath
and pure if @xmath . Notice that since the ground state @xmath is a pure
state, a mode in a mixed state must be entangled with modes outside the
block, whereas a mode in a pure state is unentangled from the rest of
the system. We build an effective site by removing from the block, or
projecting out from @xmath , all the modes that are unentangled (pure),
and just keeping those @xmath modes that are entangled (mixed). In this
way, the coarse-grained lattice retains the ground state properties.

The equivalence of Hilbert space truncation and the removal of fermionic
modes Here we describe the process of coarse-graining a lattice by
replacing blocks of sites with effective sites. We show that the
truncation of the Hilbert space of a given block can be implemented by
eliminating some of the modes in that block. We consider a fermionic
lattice system in its (gaussian) ground state @xmath . Let @xmath be the
vector space of a block containing @xmath modes and let @xmath denote
the reduced density matrix of @xmath on the block. We assume that the
support of @xmath is concentrated in a subpace @xmath . Then, following
White [ Whi92 , Whi93 ] , the optimal coarse-graining of the block is
obtained by defining an effective site @xmath with vector space @xmath .
In our case, @xmath is the tensor product of density matrices @xmath for
individual modes [ VLRK03 , LRV04 ] ,

@xmath (3.6)

Suppose that the first @xmath modes are in a mixed state and the
remaining @xmath modes are in a pure state. Then we can write

@xmath (3.7)

where @xmath is a mixed state with rank @xmath whereas @xmath is a
projector with rank 1. Let @xmath be a tensor factorization of @xmath
such that @xmath . The key observation is that @xmath , and that @xmath
and @xmath have the same none-vanishing eigenvalues. Therefore, we have
two equivalent ways of constructing the space @xmath for the effective
site @xmath while preserving the support of the ground state density
matrix @xmath . On the one hand, @xmath can be obtained by projecting
@xmath on the support @xmath of @xmath . On the other, @xmath can also
be build by factorizing the space @xmath into two factor spaces @xmath
and @xmath , and by then tracing out the second factor, corresponding to
modes in a pure state. Both constructions lead to an equivalent
effective lattice. Finally, tracing out the factor space of mode @xmath
corresponds, in the language of correlation matrices @xmath , to
removing the @xmath th row and a @xmath th column of @xmath in Eq. 3.4 ,
process to which we referred to as projecting out the mode.

The key idea of ER, see Fig. 3.1 , is to use disentangling unitary
transformations, or disentanglers , to diminish @xmath by increasing the
number of modes in the block that are unentangled from the rest of the
system. A disentangler is implemented through a special orthogonal
matrix @xmath that acts on two neigboring sites across the boundary of
the block, wheareas the coarse-graining is implemented by an isometry
@xmath that selects the @xmath spinless fermion modes to be kept in the
effective site, where @xmath and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let @xmath describe three consecutive blocks. Then the correlation
matrix @xmath for the effective site reads (Fig. 3.1 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Similarly, the correlation matrix @xmath for the modes to be removed is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Our goal is to maximize the purity of the modes to be projected out, so
that they become as unentangled as possible. The sum of their purities,
@xmath , is half of the antisymmetric trace of @xmath , @xmath .
Consequently, @xmath and @xmath are obtained from the optimization

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

that we address through a sequence of alternating optimizations for
@xmath and @xmath [ EV09a ] .

Then, given the correlation matrix @xmath for @xmath , the RG
transformation is implemented in three steps: ( @xmath ) first a
submatrix @xmath for three consecutive blocks is extracted from @xmath ;
( @xmath ) then disentangler @xmath and isometry @xmath are computed
using the optimization ( 3.12 ) while keeping @xmath modes in the
effective site; ( @xmath ) finally, @xmath and @xmath are used to
transform the original @xmath -mode system into a coarse-grained system
with just @xmath modes and effective correlation matrix @xmath . Some of
the modes that are removed are still slightly mixed. Their mixness
@xmath quantifies the errors introduced. Iteration of the RG
transformation produces a sequence of increasingly coarse-grained
lattices, described by correlation matrices @xmath . The corresponding
disentanglers @xmath and isometries @xmath constitute the multi-scale
entanglement renormalization ansatz (MERA) [ Vid08 ] for the ground
state @xmath .

### 3.3 Results and discussion

We have applied the present RG approach to Hamiltonian ( 3.1 ) in the
thermodynamic limit @xmath . First we consider 1 @xmath systems, where
the whole @xmath plane can be mapped into the quantum spin XY model
using a Jordan-Wigner transformation. ( @xmath ) For the line @xmath
[equivalent to the quantum spin Ising model] we consider @xmath modes
per site and apply @xmath iterations of the RG transformation, so that a
final effective site (with just @xmath modes) corresponds to @xmath
modes of the original system. At the critical point @xmath , which is
the most demanding, the mixedness of the removed modes is at most @xmath
. The effect on local observables, even after the 13 iterations, is
remarkably small: the error in the critical ground state energy is less
than @xmath , while the two-point correlators @xmath , reconstructed
from the MERA, accumulate a relative error that ranges from @xmath for
nearest neighbors to @xmath for @xmath . Had we not used disentanglers,
the error in the energy would be @xmath after only a single RG
transformation and an error of @xmath in the two-point correlators is
already achieved for @xmath . ( @xmath ) The line @xmath [equivalent to
the quantum spin XX model] is critical for @xmath . Here we consider
@xmath modes per site and apply again 13 iterations of the RG
transformation, reaching sizes of @xmath modes. The errors in energy and
correlators are similar to those in the line @xmath . In both cases, an
analysis of the RG flow and its fixed points in terms of entanglement is
quite insightful, see Fig. 3.2 . ER can also be used to generate a RG
transformation in the space of Hamiltonians, by replacing Eq. 3.12 with
a minimization of the energy. Fig. 3.3 shows that critical systems are
also fixed points of this alternative approach, that preserves the low
energy spectrum.

In 2 @xmath the model has three phases, denoted I, II and III in Ref. [
LDY @xmath 06 ] , where the distinct forms of entanglement scaling were
characterized. In phases II (critical, with a Fermi surface consisting
of a finite number of points) and III (non-critical, with a gap in the
energy spectrum) we are once more able to coarse-grain the system in a
quasi-exact, sustainable manner. This is remarkable. The entropy of a
square block made of @xmath modes grows as the size of its boundary,
@xmath [ LDY @xmath 06 ] . This implies that the number of modes we
should keep in an effective site grows exponentially with the number of
iterations of the RG transformation, which is precisely why DMRG does
not work for large 2 @xmath systems. Instead, disentanglers bring this
number again down to just a constant . As a result one can, in
principle, explore systems of arbitrary sizes. In particular, by
considering @xmath modes per site we apply @xmath iterations of the RG
transformation, with a final block effectively spanning @xmath modes,
whilst maintaining truncation errors of the same scale as the 1 @xmath
models analyzed, @xmath . As in the 1 @xmath case, the structure of
fixed points of the RG flow can be understood in terms of the
renormalized entanglement, see Fig. 3.4 . On the other hand, Phase I
(critical, with a one-dimensional Fermi surface) is so entangled that ER
is no longer able to prevent the growth in the number @xmath of modes
that need to be kept per site. The system displays a logarithmic
correction to the entropy, @xmath [ LDY @xmath 06 , BCS06 , Wol06 , GK06
] , while the MERA can only reproduce a linear scaling @xmath [ Vid08 ]
if just a constant number of modes are kept per site, @xmath .

### 3.4 Conclusions

We have presented, in the simplified context of fermion models with
quadratic Hamiltonian, unambiguous evidence of the validity of the ER
approach in 1 @xmath and 2 @xmath systems. Similar derivations can be
also conducted for bosonic lattice systems with quadratic Hamiltonians,
as is investigated in Chap. 4 . These results show that the MERA [ Vid08
] is an efficient description of certain 2 @xmath ground states. A
number of examples also confirm that ( @xmath ) ER produces a
quasi-exact, real-space RG transformation where the coarse-grained
lattice is locally equivalent to the original one, enabling the study of
RG flow both in the space of ground states and Hamiltonians; ( @xmath )
non-critical systems end up in a stable fixed point of this RG flow,
where the corresponding ground state is a product (i.e. fully
disentangled) state, whereas scale invariant critical systems end up in
an unstable fixed point, with an entangled ground state. Moreover, ER
sheds new light into the ground state structure of two-dimensional
systems with a one-dimensional Fermi surface. There, the presence of
logarithmic corrections in the entropy @xmath of a large block [ LDY
@xmath 06 , BCS06 , Wol06 , GK06 ] cannot be accounted for with the MERA
with constant number of modes @xmath per level of coarse-graining,
hinting for the need for a generalized MERA in order to properly
describe such systems.

## Chapter 4 Entanglement renormalization in free bosonic systems:
real-space versus momentum-space renormalization group transforms

### 4.1 Introduction

The renormalization group (RG) is a set of tools and ideas used to
investigate how the physics of an extended system changes with the scale
of observation [ KGH @xmath 67 , Wil75 , Fis98 , Car96 , Shi99 , Del04 ,
Sha94 , Whi92 , Whi93 , Sch05 ] . The RG plays a prominent role in the
conceptual foundation of several areas of physics concerned with systems
that consists of many interacting degrees of freedom, as is the case of
quantum field theory, statistical mechanics and condensed matter theory
[ KGH @xmath 67 , Fis98 , Car96 , Shi99 , Del04 , Sha94 ] . In addition
it also provides the basis for important numerical approaches to study
such systems [ Wil75 , Whi92 , Whi93 , Sch05 , MW94 , MW96 ] .

Given a microscopic description of an extended system in terms of its
basic degrees of freedom and their interactions, RG methods aim to
obtain an effective theory , one that retains only some of these degrees
of freedom but is nevertheless still able to reproduce its low energy
(or long distance) physics. The effective theory is obtained through
coarse-graining transformations that remove those degrees of freedom
deemed to be frozen at the observation scale of interest. For instance,
given a Hamiltonian @xmath for an extended system one may aim to use
successive RG transforms to obtain a sequence of coarse-grained
Hamiltonians @xmath each an effective theory describing the original
system at successively lower energy scales, c.f. Fig. 4.1 . Broadly
speaking, RG techniques fall into two categories depending on how the
coarse-graining is implemented, namely momentum-space RG [ Del04 ] and
real-space RG [ Whi92 , Whi93 , Sch05 , MW94 , MW96 ] .

Momentum-space RG is applied to theories that are expressed in Fourier
space. It works by integrating out high-momentum modes of a field and it
is often associated to perturbative approaches. Instead, real-space RG
is applied directly to theories that are written in terms of local
degrees of freedom, say spins in the case of a spin system defined on a
lattice. It is not linked to perturbation theory and can in particular
be applied to strongly interacting systems. As proposed by Kadanov [ KGH
@xmath 67 ] , the coarse-graining transformation is implemented by
replacing a block of spins with a single effective spin, a procedure
refined by Wilson [ Wil75 ] and subsequently turned by White into the
density matrix renormalization group (DMRG) algorithm [ Whi92 , Whi93 ,
Sch05 ] , an impressively precise numerical tool to study
one-dimensional systems.

A major difficulty of momentum-space RG comes precisely from the fact
that it requires, as a starting point, a description of the system in
Fourier space. Such description is not always available and might not be
obtained easily. Consider for instance a system of interacting spins, as
specified by some generic spin-spin interaction. There, obtaining a
momentum-space representation might be as difficult as solving the whole
theory. In this and many other cases, a RG approach must be performed in
real space.

In spite of its indisputable success, the DMRG algorithm [ Whi92 , Whi93
, Sch05 ] suffers from a shortcoming that has important implications.
Because of the accumulation of short-ranged entanglement near the
boundary of a spin block, the dimension of the Hilbert space used to
effectively describe the block must grow with each iteration of the RG
transformation. As a result, for instance, unstable fixed points of the
RG flow (scale invariant critical systems) cannot be fixed points of the
DMRG algorithm. Another, more practical consequence of this growth is
that it limits the size of @xmath critical systems that can be analyzed
and, most importantly, it severely limits the success of DMRG
computations in higher spatial dimensions.

Entanglement renormalization (ER) is a real-space RG method proposed in
order to overcome the above difficulties [ Vid07 ] . The main feature of
ER is the use of disentanglers . These are unitary transformations,
locally applied near the boundary of a spin block, that remove
short-ranged entanglement before the system is coarse-grained. As a
result, the effective dimension of the Hilbert space for a spin block
can be kept constant under successive RG transformations, so that the
approach can be applied to arbitrarily large systems. In this Chapter we
explore the ability of entanglement renormalization to produce a
sensible RG flow, one with the expected structure of fixed points and
flow directions according to momentum-space RG, in @xmath dimensional
harmonic lattice systems. Such systems are an ideal testing-ground for
ER. On the one hand, they have well studied properties [ PEDC05 , AEPW02
, Skr05 , CEPi06 ] and can be fully characterized in terms of
correlation matrices, a fact that simplifies the analysis and
conveniently reduces the computational complexity of ER calculations. On
the other hand, an RG analysis of free-particle theories can be
conducted simply and without approximations in momentum-space allowing
for a comparison between the numerical results obtained using ER and the
exact solution. The setting of harmonic lattices also allows for ER to
be formulated in the language of bosonic modes, a formalism familiar to
researchers in the areas of condensed matter physics and quantum field
theory.

The results of this Chapter, presented in Sect. 4.5 , demonstrate that a
real-space RG transform based upon entanglement renormalization is able
to reproduce the exact results from momentum-space RG to a high accuracy
in @xmath dimensional lattice systems, both for the critical and
non-critical cases considered. Also demonstrated is the ability of the
MERA to provide an efficient and accurate representation of the ground
state of free boson systems, thus extending to the bosonic case the
results of Ref. [ EV10b ] and those of the previous Chapter. These
results provide strong evidence that the ER approach, which can be
implemented without making use of the special properties of
free-particle systems, could be used to investigate low-energy
properties of strongly interacting systems not tractable with
momentum-space RG approaches [ DEO08 , RMV08 , EV09a ] .

The Chapter is organized in sections as follows (see also Fig. 4.2 ).
Sect. 4.2 introduces the harmonic systems under consideration. In Sect.
4.3 the process of renormalizing the system in momentum-space is
explained, highlighting conceptual features of the RG. The critical
system and examples of relevant and irrelevant perturbations are
considered. Sect. 4.4 explains the details of the real-space RG
implementation, both in terms of renormalizing the Hamiltonian and in
terms of renormalizing the ground state directly. In Sect. 4.5 a
comparison between results obtained from exact momentum-space RG and the
results from numerical real-space RG is presented.

### 4.2 Coupled harmonic oscillators

In this Chapter the low-energy subspaces of harmonic lattices in @xmath
spatial dimensions are to be analysed using both real-space and
momentum-space RG transformations. We begin with a brief introduction to
harmonic lattices detailing equivalent representations in real-space and
momentum-space coordinates, and the Fourier transform that shifts
between such descriptions. For clarity the following derivations shall
only be presented for the @xmath system as the generalization to @xmath
, or higher dimensional systems, is straight forward. The Hamiltonian
for a chain of @xmath harmonic oscillators each with mass @xmath ,
angular frequency @xmath , and coupled with nearest neighbors via
‘spring constant’ @xmath , is written

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where in the second line we have chosen @xmath and defined @xmath for
convenience. Note that periodic boundary conditions are assumed. The
operators @xmath and @xmath are the usual canonical coordinates with
commutation @xmath . In our present considerations it is convenient to
focus on the critical (massless) Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

though the non-zero mass case will later be reintroduced in Sect. 4.3.1
. As a preliminary to the momentum-space RG, the Hamiltonian @xmath
shall be recast into momentum-space variables via Fourier transform of
the canonical coordinates. The Fourier-space coordinates @xmath and
@xmath are defined

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Substitution of the Fourier-space coordinates brings the Hamiltonian of
Eq. 4.2 into diagonal form, here a set of @xmath uncoupled oscillators

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Defining @xmath , with constant ‘ @xmath ’ representative of the lattice
spacing, the thermodynamic limit ( @xmath ) can be taken

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The theory has a natural momentum cut-off @xmath originating from the
finite lattice spacing; taking the lattice spacing ‘ @xmath ’ to zero
recovers the continuum limit with corresponds to the field theory of a
real, massless scalar field. Two equivalent representations of the
harmonic chain have been obtained; that of Eq. 4.2 written in terms of
spatial modes (amenable to numeric, real-space RG) and that of Eq. 4.5
written in terms of momentum modes (amenable to analytic, momentum-space
RG). The dispersion relation @xmath of the system, which describes the
energy of momentum mode @xmath and is known from the solution to a
single oscillator, is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The RG transformations of the Hamiltonian shall be chosen such that the
resulting effective theory preserves the low-energy structure of the
original theory, or equivalently, preserves the small @xmath part of the
dispersion relation. As the low-energy part of the dispersion is gapless
and linear we would expect that, under the RG flow, the renormalized
Hamiltonians would tend to a fixed point that has a linear, gapless
dispersion.

### 4.3 Momentum-space RG

In this section the harmonic system of Eq. 4.5 , which has been recast
in a Fourier basis, is analysed using momentum-space RG. Although the RG
analysis of interacting systems is more complicated that the free
particle analysis undertaken here, and often involves perturbation
theory, the basic procedure is the same. It is useful to consider the RG
transformation as occuring in three steps. (i) Firstly the momentum
cut-off is reduced, @xmath , and modes greater than the cut-off are
integrated out of the theory. As there is no interaction between the
momentum modes of Eq. 4.5 , this step is presently very simple; the
cut-off is reduced @xmath whilst leaving the form of the Hamiltonian for
modes with momentum @xmath unchanged

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

(ii) Next the length associated to the system is changed, this can be
implemented as a scaling of the lattice spacing ¹ ¹ 1 The approach of
rescaling the lattice spacing is common in the context of condensed
matter problems; equivalently we could have rescaled the momentum of the
theory, @xmath , as is the approach most often used for the RG in a
quantum field theory setting. , @xmath , which gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

A change has been made to the observation scale of the system in terms
of length . Next a change in the observation scale is made in terms of
energy . Indeed, in the final step (iii) the fields are rescaled

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

so that the new field operators have a modified commutation relation
@xmath , in accordance with the desired change of energy scale. In
principle the RG transformation is complete, however in this instance a
further transform is required to recast the critical Hamiltonian into a
manifestly invariant form. The field operators are rescaled once more

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In contrast to the previous transform of Eq. 4.9 , this transform is
commutation preserving hence does not affect the physics of the system;
namely the dispersion relation remains unchanged. Implementing the third
step, together with the auxiliary transform of Eq. 4.10 , the first
renormalized Hamiltonian @xmath is given

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The RG transformation is summarized: (i) the degrees of freedom that are
not relevant to the low energy physics are removed, followed by a
changes of observation scale in terms of (ii) length ( @xmath ) and
(iii) energy ( @xmath ). Starting from a theory with a natural length
scale, the lattice spacing @xmath , the RG transform is thus used to
derive an effective theory with the new length scale @xmath . The scale
factors chosen in steps (ii) and (iii) may depend on the implementation
of the RG as well as the problem to which it is being applied. Iterating
the RG transform (dropping the ‘primes’ from notation), the @xmath
renormalized Hamiltonian is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

with corresponding dispersion relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the limit of infinitely many transforms, @xmath , we get the
Hamiltonian @xmath at the fixed point of the RG flow

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The fixed point Hamiltonian has a purely linear, gapless dispersion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

as anticipated.

#### 4.3.1 Relevant perturbation

In the previous section the massless harmonic lattice of Eq. 4.5 , a
critical system, was shown to be a (non-trivial) fixed point of the RG
flow. We now consider the stability of this Hamiltonian under the
addition of perturbations. Perturbations to the critical theory can be
classified as being relevant or irrelevant depending on whether the
deviations from the fixed point, induced by the perturbations, grow or
diminish under the RG flow. In order to study relevent perturbations a
mass term @xmath is reintroduced to the critical system of Eq. 4.5 ; as
shall be shown shortly this term grows under the RG flow. Hence, it
significantly modifies the low-energy physics from that of the
unperturbed system. The mass term is diagonal in both real-space and
momentum-space representations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The perturbed Hamiltonian @xmath is equal to the original Hamiltonian of
Eq. 4.1 describing coupled harmonic oscillators of mass @xmath . Since
this perturbation term does not reorder mode energies ( @xmath is still
an increasing function of @xmath ) the same RG transformations may be
performed on @xmath as on the unperturbed system @xmath . This analysis
shows that the @xmath renormalized perturbation term @xmath grows
exponentially with the RG iteration @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus even the addition of even a small mass @xmath to the critical
system leads to a large difference between the perturbed @xmath and
original @xmath Hamiltonians after only a few RG iterations; that is to
say, the perturbed system tends to a different fixed point of the RG
flow. This is further evidenced by consideration of the dispersion
relation @xmath of the perturbed system @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In contrast to the linear, gapless dispersion @xmath of the massless
theory described by Eq. 4.15 , we now see a quadratic dependence of the
energy on the momentum @xmath , together with an energy gap that grows
exponentially with the number @xmath of RG iterations.

#### 4.3.2 Irrelevant perturbation

Perturbations that become smaller along the RG flow are termed
irrelevant perturbations , as these do not affect the asymptotic,
low-energy behavior of the system. In this section we construct and
analyze an example of such a perturbation. The irrelevant perturbation
@xmath is constructed from neighboring and next-to-nearest neighboring
quadratic couplings

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.19)
  -- -- -- --------

In the Fourier basis @xmath has representation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

We consider the perturbed system @xmath with the perturbation strength
chosen @xmath . The @xmath renormalized perturbation @xmath may be
obtained through the same sequence of RG transforms as applied to the
unperturbed system

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The perturbation @xmath is thus exponentially suppressed under the RG
flow. Equivalently, the addition of this term to the critical system has
an effect on the low-energy physics that diminishes with each RG
iteration, as is seen directly from the dispersion @xmath of the
perturbed system @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which converges to the same linear, gapless fixed point as did the
unperturbed system of Eq. 4.15 .

### 4.4 Real-space RG

In this section an implementation of real-space RG based upon
coarse-graining transformations of the lattice is described. Following
the seminal works of Migdal, Kadanoff, and Wilson in real-space RG [ KGH
@xmath 67 , Wil75 ] , the coarse-graining transformation maps a block of
sites from the original lattice @xmath into a single site of a coarser
lattice @xmath . Let us consider a @xmath lattice @xmath of @xmath
sites, each site described by a vector space @xmath . We divide @xmath
into blocks of two sites and, following Wilson, implement a
coarse-graining transformation by means of an isometry @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the vector space of two sites, @xmath is the vector
space of a site in the coarser lattice @xmath of @xmath sites and @xmath
is the identity in @xmath . This coarse-graining transformation, which
we shall refer to as a local projection (LP) transformation, is depicted
graphically in Fig. 4.4 . From an initial Hamiltonian @xmath defined on
lattice @xmath we can obtain an effective Hamiltonian @xmath on lattice
@xmath via the transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

The LP transformation has the property of preserving locality of
operators; for instance if the original Hamiltonian was a sum of
two-body interactions, @xmath , then the effective Hamiltonian would
remain a sum of two-body interactions, @xmath . An alternative
coarse-graining transformation, known as entanglement renormalization
(ER), follows as a modification of the LP scheme. As with the LP scheme,
we map two sites of @xmath into a single effective site of @xmath via an
isometry @xmath , however in ER one first enacts unitary disentanglers
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

across the boundaries of adjacent blocks, as show Fig. 4.4 . Thus the
effective Hamiltonian @xmath , as given by a transformation with
entanglement renormalization, is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inclusion of the disentanglers in the RG scheme, although having the
unfortunate effect of increasing the computational cost of numeric
implementation, has profound implications regarding the ability of the
method to produce a sensible real-space RG flow, as shall be
demonstrated in the results of Sect. 4.5 .

Starting from the original Hamiltonian @xmath one could, by iteration of
the RG map, generate a sequence of effective Hamiltonians defined on
successively coarser lattices

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the transformation @xmath representing either a LP or ER
transformation. The LP transformation @xmath is characterised by the
corresponding isometry @xmath , while the ER transformation @xmath is
characterised jointly by an isometry and a disentangler, @xmath .
Equation 4.27 can be used to directly investigate how @xmath changes
under scale transformations allowing e.g. one to characterise the
stability of @xmath under perturbations or investigate properties of the
system in the thermodynamic limit directly.

In order to make meaningful comparisons between effective Hamiltonians
defined at different length scales, say between @xmath and @xmath
defined on lattices @xmath and @xmath respectively, it is required that
the dimension of the Hilbert space of a site in @xmath remains the same
as that of @xmath , or equivalently that @xmath in Eq. 4.23 . This
ensures that, for instance, two-body operators defined on @xmath and
@xmath exist in the same parameter space, allowing a direct comparison
between the coefficients that describe the operators. Keeping the
dimension of effective lattice sites in lattice @xmath constant between
RG transforms is also desirable for computational purposes. Indeed, if
the dimension of effective sites were to grow with each RG iteration
then the computational cost of implementing the transformations would
also grow, limiting the number of transforms which may be performed. An
investigation of whether the LP and ER transformations can accurately
coarse-grain Hamiltonians over repeated RG iterations while keeping a
fixed local dimension is a focus of this Chapter.

Note that, in general, the disentanglers and isometries @xmath that best
preserve the low-energy space of a Hamiltonian @xmath under
coarse-graining will depend on the specific Hamiltonian @xmath itself;
in practice optimisation techniques such as [ DEO08 , RMV08 , EV09a ] ,
or the techniques presented in Chap. 5 , are required to compute the
tensors @xmath . There are however some systems where analytic
expressions for these tensors may be obtained [ AV08 , KRV09 ] .

#### 4.4.1 RG of the harmonic lattice

We now turn our attention to the analysis of the harmonic lattice system
with ER ² ² 2 The LP coarse-graining may be viewed as a simplification
of ER in which the disentanglers @xmath are set to identity transforms.
Therefore only implementation of ER need be explicitly described. .
Following the ideas discussed in the previous section, several possible
algorithms [ DEO08 , RMV08 , EV09a ] could be applied to study the
low-energy subspace of the harmonic systems directly. Application of
these algorithms requires only that the Hamiltonian in question is
composed of a sum of local interaction terms, as is the case with the
systems we consider. However, as this study is focused on Hamiltonians
containing only quadratic couplings , this property can be exploited in
order to significantly reduce the cost of the numerical RG as well as
simplify the analysis of the results. The Hamiltonian of Eq. 4.1 ,
describing a @xmath harmonic chain of @xmath modes, can be written in a
concise quadratic form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

by defining a quadrature vector @xmath with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , henceforth referred to as the Hamiltonian matrix, is a
@xmath Hermitian matrix. The coarse-graining transformations shall be
chosen such that the effective Hamiltonians also only contain quadratic
couplings, described by some new Hamiltonian matrix @xmath . Thus the RG
analysis may be performed in the space of Hamiltonian matrices @xmath ,
as opposed to the (much larger) space of full-fledged Hamiltonians
@xmath and a more efficient realization of ER is possible. Retaining the
quadratic form of the Hamiltonian entails limiting the disentanglers
@xmath and isometries @xmath which comprise the ER map to cannonical
transformations, namely transformations that preserve commutation
relations. Consider a transformation of the Hamiltonian matrix by a
@xmath matrix @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order for the transformation to be commutation preserving it is
required that the transform @xmath be a symplectic matrix, @xmath . A
symplectic transform can be characterized as leaving the symplectic
matrix @xmath invariant under conjugation, @xmath . Given our convention
of grouping the quadrature vectors in Eq. 4.29 the symplectic matrix
takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath as the @xmath identity. Additionally, the Hamiltonians under
consideration take even simpler form than Eq. 4.28 ; as there is no
coupling between @xmath and @xmath quadrature degrees of freedom in the
harmonic chain, the Hamiltonian may be expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is thus convenient to restrict symplectic transforms @xmath to those
which preserve the form of Eq. 4.32 ; we only consider transforms of the
type @xmath , with @xmath a special orthogonal transformation, @xmath .
It can be easily checked that @xmath is a symplectic transform. In fact,
this is an element of the maximal compact subgroup of Sp @xmath . The
@xmath -quadrature part of the Hamiltonian in Eq. 4.32 remains trivial
under these transformations, allowing us to focus on the @xmath
-quadrature part @xmath of the Hamiltonian matrix, which transforms as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us group a number @xmath of contiguous bosonic modes of the @xmath
harmonic chain together; each group of @xmath modes shall henceforth be
referred to as a site of the original lattice @xmath . The disentanglers
@xmath , which act on two sites (that is, on @xmath modes), are chosen
as special orthogonal transforms @xmath . Isometries @xmath are realized
as a composition of a special orthogonal transform followed by a
projection, @xmath , with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

The transformation of the entire lattice is achieved by first
constructing the direct sum of the local operators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Given the disentangler and isometry @xmath , the Hamiltonian @xmath is
coarse-grained into a new Hamiltonian @xmath defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

By the definition of the isometry in Eq. 4.34 it is ensured that if the
initial lattice @xmath has @xmath bosonic modes per lattice sites then
the coarser lattices @xmath also have @xmath modes per lattice site. As
discussed earlier in Sect. 4.4 , keeping the number of degrees of
freedom per lattice site constant between RG maps is necessary to allow
meaningful comparison of operators at different length scales. Note that
the number of modes per site @xmath plays the role of a refinement
parameter; choice of a larger @xmath retains more parameters in the
description of the effective theory, yielding more accurate results, at
the cost of greater computational expense. The simplest choice of a
one-to-one correspondence between bosonic modes and lattice sites, i.e.
setting @xmath , does not give sufficiently accurate numerics, hence the
need for grouping @xmath modes into each lattice site.

It is only for a proper choice of disentangler and isometry @xmath that
@xmath of Eq. 4.36 retains the low-energy subspace of the original
@xmath . This proper choice is found by optimisation over all possible
@xmath . It is desired that the RG transform be optimized to project
onto the minimum energy subspace of the original Hamiltonian; a matrix
equation which describes the minimization can be written

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the effective Hamiltonian @xmath as Eq. 4.36 . The matrix @xmath
describes a Hamiltonian that is translation invariant between blocks of
@xmath modes, hence the trace of @xmath (which describes the entire
system) may be minimised by minimising the trace of an individual block
of @xmath . An optimisation method, based upon alternating updates for
isometries @xmath and disentanglers @xmath , can be used to find
suitable @xmath that minimise Eq. 4.37 and best preserve the low-energy
space of the original Hamiltonian @xmath . The optimisation method to be
used here is similar to the general algorithm described in Sect. IV of
Ref. [ EV09a ] .

Assuming that suitable @xmath have been obtained, the full real-space RG
transformation of the Hamiltonian may be achieved in three steps, as
illustrated Fig. 4.5 , analogous to the three steps of momentum-space
procedure described Sect. 4.3 . Firstly, (i) the Hamiltonian matrix
@xmath is transformed with direct sums of the disentanglers and
isometries as Eq. 4.36 . Recall from Eq. 4.34 that an isometry @xmath ,
which acts upon a block of @xmath modes, consists of a special
orthogonal transform followed by a projection, @xmath . The projection
has form @xmath with the trivial (zero) part @xmath describing the
@xmath modes to be removed from the system and the identity part @xmath
describing the @xmath modes retained in the effective description. In
the next step, (ii) the zero rows/columns, those which were acted upon
in the previous step by @xmath , are removed from Hamiltonian matrix to
form a new matrix @xmath . (iii) The final step of rescaling the fields
is realized by scaling the Hamiltonian matrix by a factor, the same
rescaling as Eqs. 4.9 and 4.10 for momentum-space RG is realized by
defining @xmath , with @xmath as the first renormalized Hamiltonian.
Iterating this procedure @xmath times gives the @xmath renormalized
Hamiltonian @xmath . In the thermodynamic limit, @xmath , the
transformation can be iterated an arbitrary number of times to obtain a
sequence of Hamiltonian matrices

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

each describing a theory with quadratic interactions between at most
next-nearest-neighbor sites, and each defined on an identical lattice
@xmath that has @xmath bosonic modes per lattice site.

#### 4.4.2 Ground state RG

In the previous section an implementation of real-space RG that could be
used to coarse-grain harmonic lattice Hamiltonians was described. We now
detail a similar procedure which allows ground-states of the harmonic
lattices to be coarse-grained directly. Since we are dealing with
systems of free-particles, the covariance matrix @xmath gives a complete
description of the (Gaussian) ground state @xmath . In the case of a
Hamiltonian as in Eq. 4.32 , the convariance matrix is of the form
@xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are defined as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The derivation of analytic expressions for @xmath , @xmath is a standard
calculation and can be found e.g. Ref. [ AEPW02 ] , but is also
presented in Appendix B for completeness. Again, we choose the
disentanglers @xmath and isometries @xmath to be canonical
transformations. We obtain a sequence of increasingly coarse-grained
states each defined by covariance matrix @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath as the original ground state. The coarse-graining
transformations of the ground state shall be realized by symplectic
transforms @xmath acting in the space of the covariance matrix, @xmath .
As there is no correlation between @xmath and @xmath quadrature
coordinates, i.e. @xmath , we may restrict consideration to symplectic
transforms @xmath that are only of the form @xmath with @xmath a real,
invertible @xmath invertible matrix. The covariance matrix @xmath
transforms under conjugation by matrix @xmath , which implies that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

yeilding a new state @xmath . The disentanglers @xmath , which act on
two contiguous sites each of @xmath modes, are thus realized as real,
invertible @xmath matrices that transform the covariance matrix as per
Eq. 4.41 . Isometries @xmath , which act on two contiguous sites within
a block, are realised as @xmath with @xmath as a real, invertible @xmath
matrix and @xmath a projection onto @xmath modes of the block. The
direct-sum of the local operators @xmath is constructed

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

in order to coarse-grain the entire lattice. Starting from the
covariance matrix @xmath describing the ground state of the original
system and, for any choice of @xmath , a new state @xmath can be
obtained on a coarser lattice @xmath through an ER transform

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

It is only for proper choice of tensors @xmath that the above
transformation correctly preserves the properties of the original state
and produces a meaningful coarse-grained state. We now address the issue
of how the proper tensors @xmath can be found. In the application of the
RG to the system Hamiltonian, both in momentum-space and real-space
formulation, the modes truncated at each iteration were chosen as
high-energy modes in order to leave the low-energy structure of the
original theory intact. For the ground state RG a different criteria is
required to judge which modes should be truncated from the system. The
proper truncation criteria in order to preserve the ground state
properties, proposed by White as part of his DMRG algorithm [ Whi92 ,
Whi93 ] , requires that the truncation of a block should be chosen to
keep the support of the density matrix for the block. In the present
formulation of bosonic modes, in which the representation of the state
is given by a covariance matrix as opposed to a density matrix, this
rule imposes that only modes in a block that can be identified as being
in a product state with the rest of the system can be truncated and
safely removed from the description of the state. Thus in comparison
with Hamiltonian RG, which was optimised to truncate modes such that
effective theory had minimal energy, here we optimise for @xmath so that
the truncated modes have minimal entanglement with the rest of the
system.

The entanglement of a block with the rest of the system is known to be
related to the symplectic eigenvalues of @xmath for the block [ PEDC05 ,
AEPW02 ] . Let the covariance matrix @xmath describe the correlations
within a block @xmath of two @xmath -mode sites. The @xmath symplectic
eigenvalues @xmath of the block @xmath are the eigenvalues of the matrix
formed by taking the product of matrices @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Heisenberg position-momentum uncertainty relation, which here may be
simplified as @xmath , enforces that all symplectic eigenvalues are
positive and have magnitude greater than unity, @xmath for all @xmath .
The entanglement entropy @xmath of a mode ‘ @xmath ’ with symplectic
eigenvalue @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . It is seen that the entropy @xmath is zero when mode
@xmath is in a minimum uncertainty state, @xmath , and an also that
@xmath is increasing function of @xmath . It follows that, if a mode
with eigenvalue @xmath can be identified within a block @xmath , then we
are assured that the mode is in a product state with the rest of the
system and may be safely truncated. Hence the tensors @xmath should be
optimized to minimize the eigenvalues @xmath , and thus the entanglement
entropy, of the modes to be projected out. The projection @xmath in Eq.
4.42 was defined to select the modes to be retained; we now construct
the complimentary projector @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

which projects onto the space of the modes to be truncated. The part
@xmath of the covariance matrix @xmath that is to be projected out
during the RG iteration may be written @xmath with

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Given that the modes projected out of block @xmath are to have minimum
entropy, the transforms @xmath should be chosen to minimise the matrix
equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

As with the energy minimization described by Eq. 4.37 for the
Hamiltonian RG , this equation is optimised variationally to find good
disentanglers @xmath and isometries @xmath .

The application of RG transformations to the Hamiltonian could be
interpreted as producing effective theories for the low-energy subspace
of the original system. Is there a similar interpretation for the
coarse-graining of the ground state? To address this question we assume
that the ER map has been iterated @xmath successive times on the
original ground state @xmath to get the coarse-grained state @xmath .
Each of the @xmath coarse-grainings is characterised by a disentangler
@xmath and isometry @xmath , thus the set of these transforms @xmath for
@xmath characterise the sequence of RG maps. If the modes truncated
during each iteration were in an exact product state, equivalently the
eigenvalues of every mode ‘ @xmath ’ truncated was @xmath , then the
sequence of transformations could be inverted as follows. Starting from
@xmath , truncated modes (which were in a product state) are replaced
back, and each of the transforms of Eq. 4.44 is inverted

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

as to recover the exact original state @xmath . The coarse-graining of
the ground state can be interpreted as storing information about the
short range properties of the state into the tensors @xmath while
preserving the long range information about the state; the set of
tensors @xmath together with state @xmath thus serve as a representation
of the original state @xmath . The set @xmath and @xmath form the
multi-scale entanglement renormalization ansatz (MERA) [ Vid08 ] , a
variational ansatz for states on the lattice, c.f. Fig 4.6 . [If the
ground state RG is performed with an LP coarse-graining, as opposed to
one based upon ER, a tree tensor network (TTN) [ SDV06 , TEV09 ]
approximation to the state is obtained in terms of the isometries @xmath
]. For the harmonic lattices we consider, as with most non-trivial
models, the coarse-graining cannot be performed exactly and a MERA will
be an approximate, rather than exact, representation of the true ground
state. In the present case, irrespective of how the transforms @xmath
are chosen, the modes to be truncated will still be slightly entangled
as manifested in their symplectic eigenvalues, which will fulfill @xmath
. This entanglement will be ignored during the coarse-graining thus
limiting the precision with which the original ground state @xmath may
be recovered.

In the present setting of free bosons, in which the exact ground state
@xmath is already known, we compute the MERA and TTN approximations to
the ground state via coarse-graining the ground state covariance matrix.

The point of this exercise is that it allows us to assess the accuracy
with which a MERA or a TTN can represent the many-body state. It also
provides the opportunity to study the RG flow of the ground state @xmath
under scale transformations. However, had our goal been to investigate
properties of the unknown ground state of a system @xmath with the help
of real-space RG, it would have been absurd to assume knowledge of the
exact ground state @xmath from the beginning. In that case, an
approximation @xmath to the ground state may be found through e.g.
variational minimization of energy @xmath as per Ref. [ EV09a ] or
through an alternative method [ DEO08 , RMV08 ] .

### 4.5 Results and discussion

#### 4.5.1 RG flow of Hamiltonians

In Sect. 4.3 the low energy subspace of harmonic chains were analysed
exactly with momentum-space RG. This analysis yielded sequences of
dispersion relations describing the RG flow towards a critical fixed
point as well as the RG flow resulting from adding relevant and
irrelevant perturbation terms, as given by Eqs. 4.15 , 4.18 and 4.22
respectively. The same harmonic systems can also be analysed numerically
by applying successive real-space RG transformations @xmath , based upon
ER, following the variational method described in Sect. 4.4.1 . This
produces a sequence of Hamiltonian matrices @xmath , each an effective
theory describing successively lower energy subspace of the original
system. By construction, @xmath only contains quadratic couplings
between nearest and next-to-nearest neighboring sites. The dispersion
relations of the effective Hamiltonians @xmath are found by Fourier
transform in a similar manner as presented for the original Hamiltonian
in Sect. 4.2 . Figure 4.7 shows the comparison of the analytic
(momentum-space) and numeric (real-space) dispersion relations.

The dispersion relations produced from numeric real-space RG with ER are
seen to approximate the exact results to a high degree of accuracy for
the three of the cases considered: a critical system, and relevant and
irrelevant perturbations on the critical system. Furthermore, the
critical Hamiltonian @xmath converges to a fixed point of the RG flow,
@xmath , after @xmath RG transforms. This fixed point Hamiltonian matrix
@xmath is manifestly invariant under further transformations, @xmath ,
to within small numerical errors. Consequently the isometries @xmath and
disentanglers @xmath , which comprise the ER transform @xmath , also
converged to fixed points @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . The Hamiltonian
matrix @xmath of the critical system with the addition of an irrelevant
perturbation, @xmath , converges to the same fixed point as the
unperturbed Hamiltonian @xmath for @xmath transforms.

#### 4.5.2 RG flow of ground states

On the other hand, in Sect. 4.4.2 we describe a real-space RG to
coarse-grain the ground state of the @xmath harmonic chain. The
coarse-graining transformations can be based upon either the LP or ER
schemes of Fig. 4.4 . The real-space RG produces a sequence of
increasingly coarse-grained ground-states @xmath , where @xmath is the
ground state covariance matrix of a harmonic chain with mass @xmath .
Fig. 4.8 displays the entanglement entropy @xmath , as defined in Eq.
4.46 , of a site in the coarse-grained state @xmath as a function of the
RG iteration @xmath .

The entropy of the ground state @xmath of the critical chain, @xmath ,
when coarse-grained with the LP scheme, increases by a constant with
each RG iteration. More precisely, if we recall that a site in lattice
@xmath corresponds to a block of @xmath sites of the original lattice,
this growth of entropy reproduces the expected logarithmic scaling,
@xmath , for @xmath critical systems [ VLRK03 , CC04 ] . This growth
demonstrates that it is impossible for a critical ground state to be a
fixed point of the LP scheme.

The ground state of a system with finite mass @xmath can also be
analysed with the LP method. Initially, the ground state displays the
same logarithmic growth of entropy as in the critical case, but it
saturates approximately after @xmath iterations of the RG
transformation, where @xmath is the correlation length.

Turning to the ER scheme, if disentanglers are included in the
coarse-graining step then the entropy per site of state @xmath remains
constant under RG transforms. This is made possible by the
disentanglers, which remove short-range entanglement at each iteration.
Moreover, for the critical case, the sequence of successively
coarse-grained ground-states @xmath explicitly converges to a fixed
point, @xmath for @xmath . The non-critical ground states @xmath of a
harmonic chain with finite mass @xmath converged to a trivial fixed
point, a product state @xmath , under RG iteration. This occurs at the
length scale of the correlation length @xmath . The numeric results have
been obtained by keeping @xmath bosonic modes per lattice site. The MERA
approximation to the ground state, obtained from successive
coarse-grainings with ER, proves remarkably accurate. For the critical
system, which is the hardest to analyse from a computational point of
view, the MERA obtained from @xmath RG iterations can reproduce the
exact correlators of the ground state to error bounded by @xmath .

#### 4.5.3 Local projection vs entanglement renormalization

Figs. 4.9 and 4.10 present numeric dispersion relations for the harmonic
lattices in @xmath and @xmath spatial dimensions respectively, and
compare results produced by coarse-graining with LP to those obtained by
coarse-graining with ER. The dispersion relations for the effective
theories produced from the LP method are reasonably accurate after a
small number of RG iterations. However, they rapidly diverge from the
exact results in subsequent iterations. On the other hand,
coarse-graining with ER is shown to keep significantly better support of
the low energy subspace and, most importantly, to maintain accuracy over
repeated RG iterations. The numeric spectra obtained with ER for the
@xmath lattices of Fig. 4.10 displays a loss of accuracy towards the
high-energy cut-off, which indicates difficulty in keeping a sharp
cut-off numerically. However, this is of little concern as the primary
interest lies in the low-energy physics and not the high-energy cut-off
of the effective theory.

The average mode energy @xmath of an effective theory, defined in terms
of its dispersion relation @xmath , is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

for a @xmath system and similar for @xmath . The average mode energy is
used to qualitatively analyze the accuracy of the effective theories
obtained with real-space RG, as presented in Fig. 4.11 . Keeping more
modes-per-site @xmath , hence more parameters in the description of the
effective theory, increases the accuracy with which the numeric RG may
be performed. However, even with the choice of a very large @xmath ,
very large the LP method shows significant increase in error along the
RG flow for both the @xmath critical and @xmath near-critical harmonic
systems. This figure also confirms what was established visually in
Figs. 4.9 and 4.10 ; that coarse-graining with ER not only produces a
more accurate low-energy theory than with LP, but also maintains
constant accuracy over successive RG maps.

### 4.6 Conclusions

Real-space RG techniques, primarily in the form of the DMRG algorithm [
Whi92 , Whi93 , Sch05 ] , have proved an invaluable tool for the numeric
analysis of low-energy properties of extended quantum systems. However,
this class of real-space RG methods (including the LP coarse-graining
described here) suffer from an important deficiency: namely they do not
reproduce proper RG flows. As demonstrated by Fig. 4.8 , a @xmath
critical system could not possibly be a fixed point of the LP map due to
the growth of entropy along the RG flow, which is caused by the
accumulation of short-range degrees of freedom. This deficiency in turn
limits the size of @xmath critical and @xmath lattices that can be
analysed with such methods.

In this Chapter we have demonstrated, by comparison against exact
results from momentum-space RG, that a coarse-graining based upon
entanglement renormalization can reproduce proper RG flows.
Demonstrations included the analysis of a critical Hamiltonian @xmath
and its ground state @xmath , which were shown to rapidly converge to
non-trivial fixed points of the RG flow, @xmath and @xmath respectively,
and analysis of several non-critical systems which converged to trivial
fixed-points of the RG flow. By addition of an irrelevant perturbation
to the critical Hamiltonian @xmath , a new Hamiltonian @xmath was
obtained that described the same phase as @xmath , but differed in the
local interaction. As is required of a proper RG flow, @xmath and @xmath
converged to the same fixed point @xmath under the RG map defined by ER.
It is important to note that the tensors @xmath , which comprised the
real-space RG transform, were not chosen based on heuristic arguments or
the desire for a particular outcome. Instead they were found through
optimisation based upon either energy minimization, as in Eq. 4.37 , or
attempting to retain the support of the ground state, as in Eq. 4.49 .

In addition, the coarse-graining transformation based upon ER was shown
to induce a sustainable RG map; one that could be applied arbitrarily
many times without significant loss of accuracy and without the need to
increase the local dimension @xmath of the effective theories (so that
the computational cost is also kept constant). The sustainability of the
ER based RG map allows investigation of low-energy properties in
arbitrarily large or infinite @xmath and @xmath lattices, as has also
been demonstrated in recent studies in which local observables are
evaluated directly in the thermodynamic limit [ EV09a , EV09b , EV10c ]
and critical exponents computed [ PEV09 , MRGF09 ] without the need for
finite size scaling techniques.

The implementation of entanglement renormalization presented in this
Chapter exploited properties of free-particle systems in order to reduce
the computational cost. More general algorithms exist, as shall be
described in the following Chapter, which allow implementation without
making use of the special properties of free particle systems. Thus it
is possible to use real-space RG, based upon ER, as a means of
investigating the low-energy properties of strongly-correlated systems
where perturbative approaches are not valid. However, the implementation
of ER in the interacting case is computationally expensive- especially
so for @xmath lattices. The application of ER to interacting quantum
systems on @xmath lattices is investigated in Chap. 7 and Chap. 8 .

## Chapter 5 Algorithms for entanglement renormalization

### 5.1 Introduction

Entanglement renormalization provides a conceptual framework for
implementing real-space RG transforms on lattice systems. As was
described Chapter 2 , ER is naturally related to a class of quantum
many-body states, the so-called multiscale entanglement renormalization
ansatz (MERA). Perhaps the most important application of ER, and
certainly the application that is the focus of this thesis, is as a
numerical tool for investigation of low-energy subspaces of quantum
many-body systems. However, the usefulness of ER extends beyond that of
solely as a numerical tool [ AV08 , KRV09 , Swi09 ] . Chapters 3 and 4
achieved the first step in realizing ER as a numeric tool for quantum
many-body systems by demonstrating the ability of the MERA to accurately
represent a variety of ground state and low energy wavefunctions in
@xmath dimensional systems of free fermions and free bosons.
Nevertheless, the variational methods used in these Chapters to optimise
the MERA was specific to the free-particle systems under consideration.
In this Chapter we present opimisations algorithms that allow one to
compute the MERA for the ground-state or low-energy subspace of a
generic local Hamiltonian. We also describe how expected values may be
computed from the MERA and provide benchmark results for a variety of
@xmath spin models.

The Chapter is organised as follows. Sect. 5.2 explains how to compute
expected values of local observables and two-point correlators. Central
to this discussion is the past causal cone of a small block of lattice
sites and the ascending and descending superoperators, which can be used
to move local observables and density matrices up and down the causal
cone. Sect. 5.3 considers how to optimize a single tensor of the MERA
during an energy minimization. This optimization involves linearizing a
quadratic cost function for the (isometric) tensor, and computing its
environment . In Sect. 5.4 we describe algorithms to minimize the energy
of the state/subspace represented by a MERA. A highlight of the
algorithms is their computational cost. For an inhomogeneous lattice
with @xmath sites, the cost scales as @xmath , whereas for translation
invariant systems it drops to just @xmath . Other variations of the
algorithm allow us to address infinite systems, and scale invariant
systems (e.g. quantum critical systems), at a cost independent of @xmath
. Sect. 5.5 presents benchmark calculations for different 1 @xmath
quantum lattice models, namely Ising, 3-level Potts, XX and Heisenberg
models. We compute ground state energies, magnetizations and two-point
correlators throughout the phase diagram of the Ising and Potts models,
which includes a second order quantum phase transition. We find that, at
the critical point of an infinite system, the error in the ground state
energy decays exponentially with the refinement parameter @xmath ,
whereas the two-point correlators remain accurate even at distances of
millions of lattice sites. We then extract critical exponents from the
order parameter and from two-point correlators. Finally, we also compute
a MERA that includes the first excited state, from which the energy gap
can be obtained and seen to vanish as @xmath at criticality.

### 5.2 Computation of expected values of local observables and
correlators

We begin this section by briefly recalling the MERA formalism presented
in Sects. 2.2 , 2.3 and 2.4 of Chap. 2 . Let @xmath denote a @xmath
-dimensional lattice made of @xmath sites, where each site is described
by a Hilbert space @xmath of finite dimension @xmath , so that @xmath .
The MERA is an ansatz to describe certain pure states @xmath of the
lattice or, more generally, to describe a @xmath dimensional subspace
@xmath . The MERA for the @xmath site lattice may be grouped into @xmath
different layers, where each layer contains a row of isometries @xmath
and a row of disentanglers @xmath . We label these layers with an
integer @xmath , with @xmath for the lowest layer and with increasing
values of @xmath as we climb up the tensor network. The MERA implicitly
defines a sequence of lattices

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the original lattice, and where we can think of lattice
@xmath as the result of coarse-graining lattice @xmath .

Let @xmath denote a local observable defined on two contiguous sites
@xmath of @xmath . In this section we explain how to compute the
expected value

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is a projector (see Eq. 2.7 ) onto the @xmath -dimensional
subspace @xmath represented by the MERA. For a rank @xmath MERA,
representing a pure state @xmath , the above expression reduces to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Evaluating Eq. 5.2 is necessary in order to extract physically relevant
information from the MERA, such as e.g. the energy and magnetization in
a spin system. In addition, the manipulations involved are also required
as a central part of the optimization algorithms described in Sects. 5.3
and 5.4 . The results of this section remain relevant even in cases
where no optimization algorithm is required (for instance when an exact
expression of the MERA is known [ AV08 , KRV09 ] ).

As explained below, the expected value of Eq. 5.2 can be computed in a
number of ways:

-   By repeated use of the ascending superoperator @xmath , the local
    operator @xmath is mapped onto a coarse-grained operator @xmath on
    lattice @xmath . Eq. 5.2 can then be evaluated as the trace of the
    coarse-grained operator @xmath , @xmath .

-   Alternatively, by repeated use of the descending superoperator
    @xmath , a two-site reduced density matrix @xmath for lattice @xmath
    is obtained. Eq. 5.2 can then evaluated as @xmath .

-   More generally, the ascending and descending superoperators @xmath
    and @xmath can be used to compute an operator @xmath and density
    matrix @xmath for the coarse-grained lattice @xmath . Eq. 5.2 can
    then be evaluated as @xmath .

First we introduce the ascending and descending superoperators @xmath
and @xmath and explain in detail how to perform the computation of the
expected value of Eq. 5.2 . Then we address also the computation of the
expected value

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is an operator that decomposes as a sum of local operators
in @xmath ; as well as the computation of two-point correlators.
Finally, we revisit these tasks in the presence of translation
invariance and scale invariance.

The ascending and descending superoperators are an essential part of the
MERA formalism that was introduced in Ref. [ Vid08 ] (see e.g. Fig. 4 of
Ref. [ Vid08 ] for an explicit representation of the descending
superoperator @xmath ). These superoperators have been also called MERA
quantum channel/MERA transfer matrix in Ref. [ GMF08 ] .

#### 5.2.1 Ascending and descending superoperators

In the previous section we have seen that the MERA defines a sequence of
increasingly coarser lattices @xmath . Under the coarse-graining
transformation @xmath of Eq. 2.4 , a local operator @xmath , supported
on two consecutive sites @xmath of lattice @xmath , is mapped onto
another local operator @xmath supported on two consecutive sites @xmath
of lattice @xmath (Fig. 2.3 ). This is so because in @xmath most
disentanglers and isometries of @xmath and @xmath are annihilated in
pairs according to Eq. 2.2 . The resulting transformation is implemented
by means of the ascending superoperator @xmath described in Fig. 5.1 ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

In order to keep our notation simple, we do not specify on which
lattice/sites the superoperator @xmath is applied, even though @xmath
actually depends on @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Instead, when necessary
we will simply indicate which of its three structurally different forms
(namely, left @xmath , center @xmath or right @xmath in Fig. 5.1 ) is
being used.

As above, let @xmath denote two consecutive sites of lattice @xmath and
let @xmath denote two consecutive sites of lattice @xmath that lay
inside the past causal cone of @xmath . Given a density matrix @xmath in
@xmath , the descending superoperator @xmath of Fig. 5.2 produces a
density matrix @xmath in @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Notice that the descending superoperator @xmath (which depends on @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath ) is the dual of the ascending superoperator @xmath
, @xmath . Indeed, as can be checked in Fig. 5.3 , by construction we
have that, for any @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Correspondingly, there are also three structurally different forms of
the descending superoperators, namely left @xmath , center @xmath and
right @xmath in Fig. 5.2 .

#### 5.2.2 Evaluation of a two-site operator

We can now proceed to compute the expected value @xmath of Eq. 5.2 from
the MERA. This computation corresponds to contracting the tensor network
depicted in the upper half of Fig. 5.4 .

In a key first step, the contraction of the tensor network for @xmath is
significantly simplified by the fact that, by virtue of Eq. 2.2 , each
isometric tensor outside the past causal cone of sites @xmath is
annihilated by its Hermitian conjugate. As a result, we are left with a
new tensor network that contains only (two copies of) the tensors in the
causal cone, as represented in the second half of Fig. 5.4 . Because the
past causal cones in the MERA have a bounded width, this tensor network
can now be contracted with a computational effort that grows with @xmath
just as O @xmath . One can proceed in several ways:

Bottom-top.— In the bottom-top approach, we would start by contracting
the indices of @xmath and the disentanglers and isometries of the first
layer ( @xmath ) of the causal cone; then we would contract the indices
of disentanglers and isometries of the second layer ( @xmath ); and so
on (Fig. 5.6 ). However, this corresponds to repeatedly applying the
ascending superoperator @xmath on @xmath . Therefore this is precisely
how we proceed, obtaining a sequence of increasingly coarse-grained
operators

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

supported on lattices @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
respectively. Here, the @xmath matrix @xmath at the top of the MERA is
obtained according to Fig. 5.5 and the expected value of Eq. 5.2
corresponds to its trace,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Top-bottom.— In the top-bottom approach, we would instead start by
contracting the indices of the tensors in the top layer ( @xmath ) of
the causal cone; then we would contract the indices of the tensors in
the layer right below ( @xmath ); and so on (Fig. 5.7 ). However, that
corresponds to first computing a density matrix @xmath for the two sites
of @xmath according to Fig. 5.5 and then repeatedly applying the
descending superoperator @xmath . Therefore this is how we proceed,
producing a sequence of two-site density matrices

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

supported on lattices @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
respectively ¹ ¹ 1 Each operator @xmath in Eq. 5.10 is both Hermitian (
@xmath ) and non-negative ( @xmath ) but its trace is @xmath . For
simplicity, we call @xmath a density matrix for any @xmath , even though
it is only a proper density matrix for @xmath . . The last density
matrix @xmath describes the state of the two sites of @xmath on which
the local operator @xmath is supported. Therefore we can evaluate the
expected value of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Middle ground.— More generally, one can also evaluate the expected value
of Eq. 5.2 through a mixed strategy where the ascending and descending
superoperators are used to compute the operator @xmath and density
matrix @xmath supported on lattice @xmath , which fulfill

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

In all the cases above, one needs to use the ascending/descending
superoperators about @xmath times, at a cost O @xmath , so that the
total computational cost is O @xmath .

#### 5.2.3 Evaluation of a sum of two-site operators

In order to compute the expected value

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

of an operator @xmath on @xmath that decomposes as the sum of two-site
operators, we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

and individually evaluate each contribution @xmath by using e.g. the
bottom-top strategy of the previous subsection, with a cost O @xmath .
However, by properly organizing the calculation, the cost of computing
@xmath can be reduced to O @xmath . We next describe how this is
achieved. The strategy is closely related to the computation of expected
values in the presence of translation invariance, as discussed later in
this section. Again, there are several possible approaches:

Bottom-top.— We consider the sequence of operators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the operator @xmath is the sum of @xmath local operators,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is obtained from @xmath by coarse-graining, @xmath . Each local
operator @xmath in @xmath is the sum of three local operators from
@xmath (see (a),(b) and (c) in Fig. 5.1 ), which are lifted to @xmath by
the three different forms of the ascending superoperator, @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath has @xmath local operators, @xmath is
obtained from @xmath by using the ascending superoperator @xmath only
@xmath times. Then, since @xmath , this means that the entire sequence
of Eq. 5.15 requires using @xmath only O @xmath times. Once @xmath is
obtained, the expected value of @xmath follows from

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Top-bottom.— Here we consider instead the sequence of ensembles of
density matrices

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an ensemble of the @xmath two-site density matrices
@xmath supported on nearest neighbor sites of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

From each density matrix in the ensemble @xmath we can generate three
density matrices in the ensemble @xmath by applying the three different
forms of the descending superoperator, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (see
(a),(b) and (c) in Fig. 5.2 ). All the @xmath density matrices of
ensemble @xmath can be obtained from density matrices of @xmath in this
way. Since @xmath , we see that by using the descending superoperator
@xmath only O @xmath times, we are able to compute all the density
matrices in the sequence of ensembles of Eq. 5.18 . Once the ensemble
@xmath has been obtained,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

the expected value of @xmath follows from

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Middle ground.— More generally, we could build operator @xmath as well
as ensemble @xmath and evaluate the expected value of @xmath from the
equality

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Each of the strategies above require the use of the ascending/descending
superoperators O @xmath times and therefore can indeed be accomplished
with cost O @xmath .

#### 5.2.4 Evaluation of two-point correlators

Let us now consider the computation of a two-point correlator of the
form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath denote two one-site operators applied on two
arbitrary sites @xmath and @xmath of @xmath , see Fig. 5.8 . Fig. 5.9
shows the tensor network to be contracted. Again, we can use Eq. 2.2 to
remove all disentanglers and isometries that lay outside the joint past
causal cone for sites @xmath and @xmath . Then, we can proceed to
contract the resulting tensor network, for instance through a bottom-top
or top-bottom approach, with the help of the ascending and descending
superoperators (and generalizations thereof). Notice that since at
intermediate layers the two legs of the causal cone may contain two
sites each one, in general we will need to compute operators/density
matrices that span more than just two sites, and the cost of their
computation will be larger than O @xmath .

However, for specific choices of sites @xmath , we are still able to
compute @xmath with overall cost @xmath , as illustrated in Fig. 5.10 .
We emphasize that this was not possible in the binary 1 @xmath MERA and
is one of the main reasons to work with the ternary 1 @xmath MERA. For
such choices of sites @xmath and @xmath , each of the two legs of the
joint past causal cone contains just one site until, at some layer
@xmath , they fuse into a single two-site leg. We can introduce one-site
ascending and descending superoperators @xmath and @xmath (Fig. 5.11 ),
in terms of which we can express, for @xmath , the transformation of a
product operator @xmath into a product operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

or of a density matrix @xmath into a density matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are sites corresponding to single-site legs of
the causal cone. In, say, the bottom-top approach we can compute the
correlator of Eq. 5.23 by using the single-site ascending superoperator
@xmath for layers @xmath and then the two-site ascending super-operator
@xmath for layer @xmath .

#### 5.2.5 Translation invariance

The computation of the expected value @xmath of a single local operator
@xmath in the case of a translation invariant MERA (see Fig. 2.8 ) can
proceed as explained earlier in this section. In the present case one
would expect the result to be independent of the sites @xmath on which
the operator is supported, but a finite bond dimension @xmath typically
introduces small space inhomogeneities in the reduced density matrix
@xmath and therefore also in @xmath .

Given a two-site operator @xmath , an expected value that is independent
of @xmath can be obtained by computing an average over sites,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath            @xmath      (5.26)
              @xmath   @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the terms @xmath denote translations of the same operator @xmath .
This average can be computed e.g. by obtaining the @xmath density
matrices @xmath individually and then adding them together, with an
overall cost O @xmath . However, with a better organization of the
calculation the cost can be reduced to O @xmath .

We first need to introduce average versions of the ascending and
descending superoperators. Given a two-site operator @xmath in lattice
@xmath , we can build a two-site operator @xmath by using an average of
the three two-site operators resulting from lifting @xmath to lattice
@xmath , namely @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . In terms of the average
ascending superoperator @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

this transformation reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Importantly, if we coarse-grain the translation invariant operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number of sites of @xmath and the terms @xmath
denote translations of @xmath , the resulting operator can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the terms @xmath denote translations of @xmath and where @xmath
and @xmath are related through Eq. 5.29 . In other words, the average
ascending superoperator @xmath can also be used to characterize the
coarse-graining, in the translation invariant case, of operators of the
form of Eq. 5.13 .

Let @xmath denote the two-site density matrix obtained by averaging over
all density matrices @xmath on different pairs @xmath of two contiguous
sites of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

and similarly for lattice @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Recall that each density matrix @xmath on lattice @xmath gives rise to
three density matrices in @xmath according to the three versions of the
descending superoperator, namely @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . It follows
that the density matrix @xmath can be obtained from the density matrix
@xmath by using the average descending superoperator ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can now proceed to compute the average expected value of Eqs. 5.26 -
5.27 . This can be accomplished in several alternative ways.

Bottom-top.— Given a two-site operator @xmath , we compute a sequence of
increasingly coarse-grained operators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is obtained from @xmath by means of the average ascending
superoperator @xmath . Then we simply have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Top-bottom.— Alternatively, we can compute the sequence of average
density matrices

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is obtained from @xmath by means of the average descending
superoperator @xmath and where @xmath corresponds to the average density
matrix on lattice @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

in terms of which we can express the average expected value as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Middle ground.— As costumary, we can also use both @xmath and @xmath to
compute @xmath and @xmath , and evaluate the average expected value as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

In all the above strategies the average ascending and descending
superoperators @xmath and @xmath are used O @xmath times and therefore
the computational cost scales as O @xmath .

To summarize, with a translation invariant MERA we can coarse-grain a
single two-site operator @xmath (with a transformation that involves
averaging over all possible causal cones) or compute the average density
matrix @xmath by using the average ascending/descending superoperators.
This leads to a sequence of operators @xmath and density matrices @xmath
,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.42)
     @xmath      (5.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which the expected value of @xmath is obtained as @xmath , as
@xmath or, more generally, as @xmath .

#### 5.2.6 Scale invariance

In the case of a translation invariant MERA that is also scale invariant
(see Fig. 2.8 ), the average ascending superoperators @xmath is
identical on each layer @xmath , since it is always made of the same
disentangler @xmath and isometry @xmath . We then refer to it as the
scaling superoperator @xmath [ PEV09 ] . Its dual @xmath corresponds to
the descending superoperator @xmath .

As derived in Ref. [ GMF08 ] , the expected value of a local observable
@xmath in the thermodynamic limit can be obtained by analyzing the
spectral decomposition of the scaling superoperator @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

We refer to the eigenoperators @xmath of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

as the scaling operators . Notice that the operators @xmath , which are
bi-orthonormal to the operators @xmath , are eigenoperators of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

We recall that the scaling operator @xmath is made of isometric tensors
(cf. Eq. 2.2 ) and therefore the identity operator @xmath is an
eigenoperator of @xmath with eigenvalue 1 (that is, @xmath is unital),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand, since the MERA is built as a quantum circuit —and
descending through the causal cone corresponds to advancing in the time
of a quantum evolution— it is obvious that the descending superoperator
@xmath is a quantum channel, and so are @xmath and @xmath (see also [
GMF08 ] ). In particular, @xmath is a contractive superoperator [ BR79 ]
, which means that the eigenvalues @xmath in Eq. 5.44 are constrained to
fulfill @xmath . In practical simulations [ PEV09 ] one finds that the
identity operator @xmath is the only eigenoperator of @xmath with
eigenvalue one, @xmath , and that @xmath for @xmath . Let @xmath denote
the corresponding unique fixed point of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

In an infinite system, the local density matrix of any lattice @xmath
(with finite @xmath ) results from applying @xmath on @xmath an infinite
number of times, and it is therefore equal to the fixed point @xmath [
GMF08 ] . Consequently, Eqs. 5.42 and 5.43 are then replaced with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.49)
     @xmath      (5.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where in addition, by decomposing @xmath in terms of the scaling
operators @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can explicitly compute @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

This expression shows that, unless @xmath , the operator @xmath
decreases exponentially with @xmath (recall that @xmath for @xmath ) and
its expected value must vanish. The average expected value of @xmath
then reads:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Two-point correlators for selected positions can also be expressed in a
simple way, by considering the one-site scaling superoperator @xmath ,
which is how we refer to the superoperator @xmath of Fig. 5.11 in the
case of a scale invariant MERA. Its spectral decomposition,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

provides us with a new set of (one-site) scaling operators @xmath .
Given two arbitrary one-site operators @xmath and @xmath , we can always
decompose them in terms of these @xmath (similarly as in Eq. 5.51 ).
Thus we can focus directly on a correlator of the form @xmath . Here
@xmath and @xmath are restricted to selected positions as in Fig. 5.10 .
Then we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the scaling dimension of the scaling operator @xmath ,
whereas @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath from Eq. 5.48 .

In deriving Eq. 5.55 we have used that, by construction, @xmath for some
@xmath . Coarse-graining @xmath a number @xmath of times produces a
multiplicative factor @xmath and the residual two-site operator @xmath ,
whose expected value gives @xmath . On the other hand, by noting that
@xmath , we arrive at @xmath , which explains the denominator in Eq.
5.55 .

In conclusion, from the scale invariant MERA we can characterize the
expected value of local observables and two-point correlators, as
expressed in Eqs. 5.53 and 5.55 - 5.56 . All critical exponents of the
theory can be extracted from the scaling dimensions @xmath . The scale
invariant MERA is further explored in Chapter 6 , including a
description of an algorithm to optimise for a scale invariant MERA and
benchmark computations of scaling dimensions @xmath for several
different spin models.

The required manipulations include computing @xmath from @xmath (using
sparse diagonalization techniques) and diagonalizing @xmath , all of
which can be accomplished with the ternary 1 @xmath MERA with cost O
@xmath .

### 5.3 Optimization of a disentangler/isometry

In preparation for the algorithms to be described in the next section,
here we explain how to optimize a single tensor of the MERA.

Let @xmath be a Hamiltonian made of nearest neighbor, two-site
interactions @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

For purposes of the optimization below, we choose each term @xmath so
that it has no positive eigenvalues, @xmath . [This can be achieved with
the simple replacement @xmath , where @xmath is the largest eigenvalue
of @xmath .]

Our goal for the time being will be to minimize the energy (Fig. 5.12
.i)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a projector onto the @xmath -dimensional subspace @xmath
by modifying only one of the tensors of the MERA. The optimization of a
disentangler @xmath is very similar to that of an isometry @xmath , and
we can focus on describing the latter in more detail.

Suppose then that, given a MERA, we want to optimize an isometry @xmath
while keeping the rest of the tensors fixed. The cost function @xmath is
quadratic in @xmath (more specifically, it depends bi-linearly on @xmath
and @xmath ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are two sets of matrices and @xmath is a
constant (that originates in all the Hamiltonian terms of Eq. 5.57
outside the future causal cone of @xmath ). Unfortunately there is no
known algorithm to solve a quadratic problem subject to the additional
isometric constraint of Eq. 2.2 . One can, however, attempt several
approximate strategies. Here we describe an iterative approach based on
linearizing the cost function @xmath .

In this approach, we temporarily regard @xmath and @xmath as independent
tensors, and optimize @xmath while keeping @xmath fixed. The cost
function reads, up to the irrelevant constant, simply

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we call the matrix @xmath the environment of the isometry @xmath
and we treat it as if it was indepedent of @xmath . @xmath is then
minimized by the choice @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are the unitary
transformations in the singular value decomposition of the environment,
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

(here @xmath are the singular values of @xmath ).

Accordingly, given an initial isometry @xmath , the optimization is
performed by iterating the following four steps @xmath times:

-   Compute the environment @xmath with the newest version of @xmath (as
    explained below, see also Fig 5.13 ).

-   Compute the singular value decomposition @xmath .

-   Compute the new isometry @xmath .

-   Replace @xmath with @xmath .

The environment @xmath of an isometry @xmath (at layer @xmath ) can be
decomposed as the sum of 6 contributions @xmath ( @xmath ), each one
expressed as a tensor network that involves neighboring isometric
tensors of the same layer @xmath (disentanglers and isometries) as well
as one Hamiltonian term @xmath and one density matrix @xmath , see Fig.
5.13 . The two-site Hamiltonian term @xmath collects contributions from
all the Hamiltonian terms in Eq. 5.57 included in the future causal cone
of the sites @xmath of @xmath and is computed with the help of the
ascending superoperator @xmath . Similarly, the two-site density matrix
@xmath is computed with the help of the descending superoperator @xmath
. The computation of @xmath and @xmath , which only needs to be
performed once during the optimization of @xmath , has a cost @xmath .

On the other hand, once we have @xmath and @xmath , computing @xmath has
a cost @xmath and needs to be repeated at each iteration of the steps
L1-L4, with a total cost @xmath . In actual MERA simulations we find
that the cost function @xmath typically drops very close to the eventual
minimum already after a small number of iterations @xmath of the order
of 10.

The optimization of a disentangler @xmath is achieved analogously, but
in this case the environment @xmath decomposes into three contributions
@xmath ( @xmath ), see Fig. 5.14 . The required Hamiltonian terms and
density matrices can be computed at a cost @xmath , while the
optimization of @xmath following steps L1-L4 has a cost @xmath .

### 5.4 Optimization of the MERA

In this section we explain a simple algorithm to optimize the MERA so
that it minimizes the energy of a local Hamiltonian of the form Eq. 5.57
. We first describe the algorithm for a generic system, and then discuss
a number of specialized variations. These are directed to exploit
translation invariance, scale invariance and to simulate systems where
there is a finite range of correlations.

#### 5.4.1 The algorithm

The basic idea of the algorithm is to attempt to minimize the cost
function of Eq. 5.58 by sequentially optimizing individual tensors of
the MERA, where each tensor is optimized as explained in the previous
section.

By choosing to sweep the MERA in an organized way, we are able to update
all its @xmath tensors once with cost @xmath . Here we describe a
bottom-top approach where the MERA is updated layer by layer, starting
with the bottom layer @xmath and progressing upwards all the way to the
top layer (top-bottom and combined approaches are also possible).

Given a starting MERA and the Hamiltonian of Eq. 5.57 , a bottom-top
sweep is organized as follows:

-   Compute all two-site density matrices @xmath for all layers @xmath
    and sites @xmath .

Starting from the lowest layer and for growing values of @xmath , repeat
the following two steps:

-   Update all disentanglers @xmath and isometries @xmath of layer
    @xmath .

-   Compute all two-site Hamiltonian terms @xmath for layer @xmath .

Then, finally,

-   Update the top tensor of the MERA.

In step A1, we compute all nearest neighbor reduced density matrices
@xmath for all the lattices @xmath , so that they can be used in step
A2. We first compute the density matrix for the two sites of @xmath as
explained in Fig. 5.5 . Then we use the descending superoperator @xmath
to compute the 6 possible nearest neighbor, two-site density matrices of
@xmath . More generally, given all the relevant density matrices of
@xmath , we use @xmath to obtain all the relevant density matrices of
@xmath . In this way, the number of operations is proportional to the
number of computed density matrices, namely @xmath , and the total cost
is @xmath .

Step A2 breaks into a sequence of single-tensor optimizations that
sweeps a given layer @xmath of the MERA. Each individual optimization in
that layer is performed as explained in the previous section. Note that
in order to optimize, say, an isometry @xmath , we build its environment
@xmath by using (i) the density matrices computed in step A1; (ii) the
Hamiltonian terms that were either given at the start for @xmath or have
been computed in A3 for @xmath ; (iii) the neighboring disentanglers and
isometries within the layer @xmath . We can proceed, for instance, by
updating all disentanglers of the layer from left to right, and then
update all the isometries. This can be repeated a number @xmath of times
until the cost function does not change significantly.

In step A3, the new disentanglers and isometries of layer @xmath are
used to build the ascending superoperator @xmath , which we then apply
to the Hamiltonian terms of layer @xmath to compute the Hamiltonian
terms for layer @xmath . As explained after Eq. 5.16 , each Hamiltonian
term in layer @xmath is built from three contributions from layer @xmath
.

In step A4, the optimized top tensor corresponds to the @xmath
eigenvectors with smaller energy eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian of the
two-site lattice @xmath , obtained by exact diagonalization.

The overall optimization of the MERA consists of iterating steps A1-A4
until some pre-established degree of convergence in the energy @xmath is
achieved. Suppose this occurs after @xmath iterations. Then the cost of
the optimization scales as @xmath . We observe that it is often
convenient to keep @xmath and @xmath relatively small (say between 1 and
5), since it is not worth spending much effort optimizing a single
tensor/layer that will have to be optimized again later on with a
modified cost function.

#### 5.4.2 Translation invariant systems

When the Hamiltonian @xmath is invariant under translations, we can use
a translation invariant MERA ² ² 2 A translation invariant MERA,
characterized by one disentangler and one isometry at each layer, need
not represent a translation invariant state @xmath . Hence the need to
consider the average density matrix @xmath .

In this case, each layer @xmath is characterized by a disentangler
@xmath and an isometry @xmath . In addition, on each lattice @xmath we
have one two-site hamiltonian @xmath and one average density matrix
@xmath . Then a bottom-top sweep of the MERA breaks into the steps A1-A4
for the inhomogeneous case above, but with the following
simplifications:

In step A1, we compute @xmath from @xmath using the average descending
superoperator @xmath of Eq. 5.34 ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then the whole sequence @xmath , with @xmath , is computed with cost
@xmath .

In step A2, the minimization of the energy @xmath by optimizing, say,
the isometry @xmath is no longer a quadratic problem (since a larger
power of @xmath appears now in the cost function). Nevertheless, we
still linearize the cost function @xmath and optimize @xmath according
to the steps L1-L4 of the previous section. Namely, we build the
environment @xmath (which now contains copies of @xmath and @xmath , all
of them treated as frozen), compute its singular value decomposition to
build the optimal @xmath , and then replace @xmath and @xmath with
@xmath and @xmath in the tensor network for @xmath before starting the
next iteration.

In step A3, the new hamiltonian term @xmath is obtained from @xmath
using the average ascending superoperator @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

Step A4 proceeds as in the inhomogeneous case.

The overall cost of optimizing the MERA is in this case @xmath .

#### 5.4.3 Scale invariant systems

Given the Hamiltonian @xmath for an infinite lattice at a quantum
critical point, where we expect the system to be invariant under
rescaling, we can use a scale invariant MERA to represent its ground
state [ Vid07 , Vid08 , EV10b , EV10a , GMF08 , PEV09 ] . A scale
invariant MERA is also relevant in the context of topological order in
the infra-red limit of the RG flow [ AV08 , KRV09 ] , both for finite
and infinite systems; we will not consider such systems here.

Let us assume that all disentanglers and isometries are copies of a
unique pair @xmath . Then, as explained in Ref. [ PEV09 ] , the
optimization algorithm can be specialized to take advantage of scale
invariance as follows:

In step A1, we apply sparse diagonalization techniques to compute the
fixed point density matrix @xmath from the superoperator @xmath . This
amount to applying @xmath a number of times and therefore can be
accomplished with cost @xmath .

In step A2, the environment for e.g. the isometry @xmath , @xmath , is
computed as a weighted sum of environments for different layers @xmath .
In a translation invariant MERA the environment for layer @xmath is a
function @xmath of the pair @xmath , the density matrix @xmath and the
Hamiltonian term @xmath (specifically, @xmath is the sum of the diagrams
in Fig. 5.13 ). A scale invariant MERA corresponds to the replacements

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that only @xmath retains dependence on @xmath . We then choose the
average environment

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the weight @xmath reflects the fact that for each isometry at
layer @xmath there are @xmath isometries at layer @xmath . Using
linearity of the @xmath in its fourth argument we arrive at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

In practice, only a few terms of the expansion of @xmath (say @xmath )
seem to be necessary. Given @xmath , the optimization proceeds as usual
with a singular value decomposition.

Steps A3 and A4 are not necessary.

That is, the algorithm to minimize the expected value of @xmath consists
simply in iterating the following two steps:

-   Given a pair ( @xmath ), compute a pair @xmath .

-   Given the pairs ( @xmath ) and @xmath , update the pair ( @xmath ).

In practical simulations it is convenient to include a few (say one or
two) transitional layers at the bottom of the MERA, each one
characterized by a different pair ( @xmath , @xmath ). In this way the
bond dimension @xmath of the MERA can be made independent of the
dimension @xmath of the sites of @xmath . These transitional layers are
optimized using the algorithm for translation invariant systems.

#### 5.4.4 Finite range of correlations

A third variation of the basic algorithm consists in setting the number
@xmath of layers in the MERA to a value smaller than its usual one
@xmath (in such a way that the number @xmath of sites on the top lattice
@xmath may still be quite large) and to consider a state @xmath of the
lattice @xmath such that after @xmath coarse-graining transformations it
has become a product state,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . For instance, Fig. 5.15 shows a MERA for @xmath and
@xmath . The four top tensors of this MERA are of type @xmath , where
the lack of upper index indicates that the top lattice @xmath is in a
product state of its @xmath sites.

We refer to this ansatz as the finite range MERA, since it is such that
correlations in @xmath are restricted to a finite range @xmath , roughly
@xmath sites, in the sense that regions separated by more than @xmath
sites display no correlations. This is due to the fact that the past
causal cones of distance regions of @xmath have zero intersection, see
Fig. 5.15 .

Given a ground state @xmath with a finite correlation length @xmath ,
the finite range MERA with @xmath turns out to be a better option to
represent @xmath than the standard MERA with @xmath layers, in that it
offers a more compact description and the cost of the simulations is
also lower since there are less tensors to be optimized. The algorithm
is adapted in a straightforward way. The only significant difference is
that the top isometries, being of type @xmath , do not require any
density matrix in their optimization (their environment is only a
function of neighboring disentanglers and isometries, and of Hamiltonian
terms).

A clear advantage of the finite range MERA is in a translation invariant
system, where the cost of a simulation with range @xmath is O @xmath ,
that is, independent of @xmath . This allows us to take the limit of an
infinite system. We find that, given a translation invariant Hamiltonian
@xmath , where @xmath is the same for all @xmath , the optimization of a
finite range MERA will lead to the same collection of optimal
disentanglers and isometries @xmath , for different lattice sizes @xmath
larger than @xmath . This is due to the existence of disconnected causal
cones, which imply that the cost functions for the optimization are not
sensitive to the total system size provided it is larger than @xmath .
As a result, @xmath can be used to define not just one but a whole
collection of states @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , for lattices of
different sizes @xmath , such that they all have the same two-site
density matrix @xmath and therefore also the same expected value of the
energy per link,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

In particular, we can use the finite range MERA algorithm to obtain an
upper bond for the ground state energy of an infinite system, even
though only @xmath pairs @xmath are optimized.

### 5.5 Benchmark calculations for 1D systems

In order to benchmark the algorithms of the previous section, we have
analyzed zero temperature, low energy properties of a number of 1 @xmath
quantum spin systems. Specifically, we have considered the Ising model [
Pfe70 , BG85 ] , the 3-state Potts model [ SP81 ] , the XX model [ LSM61
] and the Heisenberg models [ Bax82 ] , with Hamiltonians

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.69)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.70)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.71)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the spin @xmath Pauli matrices and
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the matrices

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.73)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.74)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We assume periodic boundary conditions in all instances and use a
translation invariant MERA to represent an approximation to the ground
state and, in some models, also the first excited state. For Ising and
Potts models the parameter @xmath is the strength of the transverse
magnetic field applied along the @xmath -axis, with @xmath corresponding
to a quantum phase transition. Both the XX model and Heisenberg model
are quantum critical as written.

Fig. 5.16 shows the accuracy obtained for ground-state energies of the
above models in the limit of an infinite chain, as a function of the
refinement parameter @xmath . Simulations were performed with either the
finite correlation range algorithm (for the non-critical Ising) or the
scale invariant algorithm (for critical systems). In all cases one
observes roughly exponential convergence to the exact energy with
increasing @xmath . For any fixed value of @xmath , the MERA
consistently yields more accuracy for some models than for others. For
the Ising model, the cheapest simulation considered ( @xmath ) produced
5 digits of accuracy, whilst the most computationally expensive
simulation ( @xmath ) produced 10 digits of accuracy. The time taken for
the MERA to converge, running on a 3GHz dual-core desktop PC with 8Gb of
RAM, is approximately a few minutes/hours/days/weeks for @xmath
respectively. We stress that these simulations were performed on single
desktop computers; a parallel implementation of the code running on a
computer cluster might bring significantly larger values of @xmath
within computational reach.

Fig. 5.17 demonstrates the ability of the MERA to reproduce finite size
effects. It shows the transverse magnetization as a function of the
transverse magnetic field for several system sizes. The results smoothly
interpolate between those for small system sizes and those for an
infinite chain, and match the available exact solutions. On the other
hand, the MERA can also be used to explore the phase diagram of a
system. Fig. 5.18 shows the spontaneous magnetization, which is the
system’s order parameter, for a @xmath chain of @xmath sites for both
Ising and Potts models, where @xmath has been chosen large enough that
the results under consideration do not change singnificantly with the
system size (thermodynamic limit). A fit for the critical exponent of
the Ising model gives @xmath whilst the fit for the Potts model produces
@xmath . These values are within less than @xmath and @xmath of the
exact exponents @xmath and @xmath for the Ising and Potts models
respectively. Obtaining an accurate value for this critical exponent
through a fit of the data near the critical point is difficult due to
the steepness of the curve near the critical point. Through an
alternative method involving the scaling super-operator @xmath (Sect.
5.2 ), more accurate critical exponents can be obtained, as shall be
demonstarted in Chapter 6 .

The previous results refer to local observables. Let us now consider
correlators. A scale-invariant MERA, useful for the representation of
critical systems, gives polynomial correlators at all length scales, as
shown in Fig. 5.19 for the critical Ising and Potts models. Note that
Fig. 5.19 displays the correlators that are most convenient to compute
(as per Fig. 5.10 ). These occur at distances @xmath for @xmath and are
evaluated with cost @xmath . Evaluation of arbitrary correlators is
possible (see Fig. 5.8 ) but its cost is several orders of @xmath more
expensive. The precision with which correlators are obtained is
remarkable. A @xmath MERA for the Ising model gives @xmath correlators,
at distances up to @xmath sites, accurate to within @xmath of exact
correlators. Critical exponents @xmath are obtained through a fit of the
form @xmath with @xmath as correlators of @xmath or @xmath
magnetization. For the Ising model, the exponents for @xmath and @xmath
magnetizations are obtained with less than @xmath error each. For the
Potts model exponents are obtained with less than @xmath and @xmath
error for @xmath and @xmath magnetization respectively.

Finally, we also demonstrate the ability of MERA to investigate
low-energy excited states by computing the energy gap in the Ising and
Potts models. Fig. 5.20 shows that the gap grows linearly with the
magnetic field @xmath and independent of @xmath in the disordered phase
@xmath , whilst at criticality it closes as @xmath . Even a relatively
cheap @xmath MERA reproduces the known critical energy gaps to within
@xmath for systems as large as @xmath sites. The expected value of
arbitrary local observables (besides the energy) can also be easily
evaluated for the excited state.

### 5.6 Conclusions

In this Chapter we have provided a rather self-contained description of
an algorithm to explore low energy properties of lattice models (Sect.
5.3 - 5.4 ), and benchmark calculations addressing 1 @xmath quantum spin
chains (Sect. 5.5 ).

Many of the features of the MERA algorithm highlighted by the present
results were also observed in systems of free fermions and free bosons
in Chapters 3 and 4 . These include (i) the ability to consider
arbitrarily large systems, (ii) the ability to compute the low-energy
subspace of a Hamiltonian, (iii) the ability to disentangle non-critical
systems completely, (iv) the ability to find a scale-invariant
representation of critical systems and finally (v) the reproduction of
accurate polynomial correlators for critical systems. However, the
algorithms of Chapters 3 and 4 exploit the formalism of Gaussian states
that is characteristic of free fermions and bosons and cannot be easily
generalized to interacting systems. Instead, the algorithms discussed in
this Chapter can be used to address arbitrary lattice models with local
Hamiltonians.

An alternative method to optimise the MERA is with a time evolution
algorithm as described in Ref. [ RMV08 ] . The time evolution algorithm
has a clear advantage: it can be used both to compute the ground state
of a local Hamiltonian (by simulating an evolution in imaginary time)
and to study lattice dynamics (by simulating an evolution in real time).
We find, however, that the algorithm described in the present Chapter is
a better choice when it comes to computing ground states. On the one
hand, the time-evolution algorithm has a time step @xmath that needs to
be sequentially reduced in order to diminish the error in the
Suzuki-Trotter decomposition of the (euclidean) time evolution operator.
In the present algorithm, convergence is faster and there is no need to
fine tune a time step @xmath . In addition, the present algorithm allows
to compute not only the ground state but also low energy excited states.
It is unclear how to use the time evolution algorithm to achieve the
same.

The benchmark calculations presented in this manuscript refer to 1
@xmath systems. For such systems, however, DMRG [ Whi92 , Whi93 ]
already offers an extraordinarily successful approach. The strength of
entanglement renormalization and the MERA relies on the fact that the
present algorithms can also address large 2 @xmath lattices, as is
discussed Chapter 7 .

## Chapter 6 Entanglement renormalization and quantum criticality

### 6.1 Introduction

The study of quantum critical phenomena through real-space
renormalization group (RG) techniques [ Wil75 , Whi92 , Whi93 ] has
traditionally been obstructed by the accumulation, over successive RG
transformations, of short-range entanglement across block boundaries.
Entanglement renormalization was proposed as a technique to address this
problem. By removing short-range entanglement at each iteration of the
RG transformation, not only can arbitrarily large lattice systems be
considered, but the scale invariance characteristic of critical
phenomena is also seen to be restored.

In this Chapter we explain how to use the MERA to investigate scale
invariant systems. It has recently been shown that the scale invariant
MERA can represent the infra-red limit of topologically ordered phases [
AV08 , KRV09 ] , here we focus instead on its use at quantum
criticality. We present the following results: (i) given a critical
Hamiltonian, an adaptation of the algorithm of the previous Chapter to
compute a scale invariant MERA for its ground state; then, starting from
a scale invariant MERA, (ii) a procedure to identify the scaling
operators/dimensions of the theory and (iii) a closed expression for
two-point and three-point correlators; (iv) a connection between the
MERA and conformal field theory, which can be used to readily identify
the continuum limit of a critical lattice model; finally (v) benchmark
calculations for the Ising and Potts models.

We note that result (ii) was already discussed by Giovannetti,
Montangero and Fazio in Ref. [ GMF08 ] using the binary MERA of Ref. [
Vid08 ] . Our derivations, as with those of the previous Chapter, are
conducted using the ternary MERA, in terms of which results (iii)-(iv)
acquire a simple form.

We start by considering a finite 1 @xmath lattice @xmath made of @xmath
sites, each one described by a vector space @xmath of dimension @xmath .
The (ternary) MERA is a tensor network that serves as an ansatz for pure
states @xmath of the lattice, see Fig. 6.1 . Its tensors, the
disentanglers and isometries , are organized in @xmath layers, each one
implementing a RG transformation. Such transformations produce a
sequence of lattices,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where lattice @xmath is a coarse-graining of lattice @xmath , and the
top lattice @xmath is sufficiently small to allow exact numerical
computations. Let @xmath denote a local observable supported on two
contiguous sites of @xmath , and let @xmath be the density matrix that
describes the state of the system on two contiguous sites of @xmath .
Then the ascending and descending superoperators @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

generate a sequence of operators and density matrices

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are supported on two contiguous sites of the
lattice @xmath . Eq. ( 6.3 ) allows us to monitor how the local operator
@xmath transforms under successive RG transformations, whereas its
expected value @xmath can be evaluated by computing @xmath in Eq. ( 6.4
).

### 6.2 RG fixed point

The scale invariant MERA corresponds to the limit of infinitely many
layers, @xmath , and to choosing the disentanglers and isometries in all
layers to be copies of a unique pair @xmath and @xmath [ Vid07 , Vid08 ]
. In this case we refer to the ascending superoperator @xmath , which no
longer depends on @xmath , as the scaling superoperator @xmath (see Fig.
6.1 ), and to its dual @xmath as @xmath . Notice that @xmath is a
fixed-point RG map. Then, as customary in RG analysis [ Car96 , PDFS97 ]
, the scaling operators @xmath and scaling dimensions @xmath of the
theory,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

are obtained by diagonalizing this map,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the eigenvectors of the dual @xmath , @xmath . Eq. 6.6
was first discussed in Ref. [ GMF08 ] by Giovannetti, Montangero and
Fazio. It formalizes a previous observation (see Eq. 5 of Ref. [ Vid08 ]
) that the scale invariant MERA displays polynomial correlations. By
construction, @xmath is unital , @xmath , so that the identity operator
@xmath in @xmath is a scaling operator with eigenvalue @xmath ; and
contractive , meaning @xmath [ BR79 ] . Here we will assume, as it is
the case in the examples below, that only the identity operator @xmath
has eigenvalue @xmath . Then the operator @xmath is a density matrix
that corresponds to the unique fixed point of @xmath , @xmath , and
since

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

for any starting @xmath , it follows that @xmath is the state of any
pair of contiguous sites of @xmath (consistent with scale invariance,
@xmath is also the state of any pair of contiguous sites of @xmath for
any finite @xmath ). The computation of the expected value of the local
observable @xmath is then straightforward,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

which for the scaling operators reduces to @xmath .

### 6.3 Correlators

Let us now diagonalize the one-site scaling superoperator @xmath of Fig.
6.2 ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the scaling dimensions @xmath coincide with @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 Our
numerics show that the lowest @xmath scaling dimensions fulfill @xmath ,
where @xmath grows with @xmath . . The correlator for two scaling
operators @xmath and @xmath placed on contiguous sites reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Suppose now that @xmath and @xmath are placed in two special sites
@xmath as in Fig. 6.2 , where @xmath is such that @xmath for @xmath .
Then after @xmath iterations of the RG transformation, @xmath and @xmath
become first neighbors again. Notice that each iteration contributes a
factor @xmath . Using the identity @xmath we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and obtain a closed expression for two-point correlators,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

For three-point correlators we define the constants

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the trace corresponds to the correlator on three consecutive sites
and @xmath is obtained from @xmath . For @xmath , analogous
manipulations lead to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 6.4 Conformal field theory

The continuous limit of a quantum criticial lattice system (scale
invariant case) corresponds to a conformal field theory (CFT) [ Car96 ,
PDFS97 ] . A CFT contains an infinite set of quasi-primary fields @xmath
, with scaling dimensions @xmath . The correlators involving two or
three quasi-primary fields have expressions analogous to Eqs. 6.11 and
6.14 , and the (symmetric) coefficients @xmath for three-point
correlators coincide with those in the so-called operator product
expansion (OPE). Moreover, quasi-primary fields are organized in
conformal towers corresponding to irreducible representations of the
Virasoro algebra. Each tower contains one primary field @xmath at the
top, with conformal dimensions @xmath (such that its scaling dimension
is @xmath ), and its infinitely many descendants, which are
quasi-primary fields with scaling dimension @xmath for some integer
@xmath .

A CFT is completely specified by its symmetries once the following
conformal data has been provided: (i) the central charge @xmath , (ii) a
complete list of primary fields with their conformal dimensions and
(iii) the OPE for these primary fields. For instance, the Ising CFT in
1+1 dimensions has central charge @xmath , three primary fields identity
@xmath , spin @xmath and energy @xmath with conformal dimensions @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath , and OPE coefficients

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The present analysis readily suggests a correspondence between the
scaling operators @xmath of the scale invariant MERA, defined on a
lattice, and the quasi-primary fields @xmath of a CFT, defined in the
continuum. Together with the algorithm described below, this
correspondence grants us numerical access, given a critical Hamiltonian
@xmath on the lattice, to most of the conformal data of the underlying
CFT, namely to scaling dimensions and OPE coefficients. The central
charge @xmath can also be obtained from the von Neumann entropy @xmath ,
which for a block of @xmath sites scales, up to some additive constant,
as @xmath [ VLRK03 , CC04 ] . We then have @xmath , or simply

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 6.5 Algorithm for scale invariant MERA

Given a critical Hamiltonian @xmath for an infinite lattice, we obtain a
scale invariant MERA for its ground state @xmath by adapting the general
strategy discussed in Chapter 5 . Recall that tensors (disentanglers
@xmath and isometries @xmath ) are optimized so as to minimize the
energy @xmath . After linearization this reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are known as environments and @xmath are two
irrelevant constants. In the translation invariant case the environment
for, say, an isometry @xmath at layer @xmath of the MERA, @xmath , is a
function of the disentangler @xmath and isometry @xmath of that layer, a
two-site density matrix @xmath and a two-site Hamiltonian term @xmath .
In the present case, we replace the above with the unique pair @xmath ,
the fixed-point density matrix @xmath , and an average Hamiltonian
@xmath , where the weights @xmath account for the relative number of
tensors in different layers of the MERA. Then, starting from some
initial pair @xmath and the critical Hamiltonian @xmath made of two-body
terms @xmath , the following steps are repeated until convergence:

1.  Given the latest @xmath , compute @xmath .

2.  Given @xmath , update the pair @xmath .

In step A1, the scaling superoperator @xmath is built as indicated in
Fig. 6.1 . We compute the fixed-point density matrix @xmath by sparse
diagonalization of @xmath , and the average Hamiltonian @xmath by using
@xmath , @xmath ² ² 2 In practice we only compute the first @xmath terms
( @xmath ) of the expansion @xmath . This average is only needed when
@xmath contains operators that are irrelevant in the RG sense. . Step A2
is decomposed into a sequence of alternating optimizations for @xmath
and @xmath as in the generic algorithm of Chapter 5 , where each tensor
is updated by computing a singular value decomposition of its
environment.

### 6.6 Benchmark results

We illustrate the above ideas and the performance of the algorithm by
considering the Ising and 3-level Potts quantum critical models in 1
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.18)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are Pauli matrices, and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath . Notice that sites have a vector space of dimension @xmath or
@xmath . In order to use a scale invariant MERA with @xmath , we allow
the disentanglers and isometries of the first few (typically one to
five) layers to be different from @xmath and @xmath . We iterate steps
A1-A2 about 1000 times. With a cost per iteration that scales as @xmath
and using a 3 GHz dual core desktop with 8 Gb of RAM, simulations for
@xmath take of the order of minutes, hours, days and weeks respectively.
The following results correspond to @xmath .

From Eq. 6.16 we obtain an estimate for the central charge, namely
@xmath and @xmath , to be compared with the exact results @xmath and
@xmath . Fig. 6.3 shows the smallest scaling dimensions @xmath of the
scaling superoperator @xmath ³ ³ 3 Our numerics show that the lowest
@xmath scaling dimensions fulfill @xmath , where @xmath grows with
@xmath . . We obtain remarkable agreement with those expected from CFT,
as shown in Table 6.1 .

Recall that all the critical exponents of the model can be obtained from
the scaling dimensions of primary fields. For instance, for the Ising
model the exponents @xmath and @xmath are @xmath and @xmath , whereas
the scaling laws express the critical exponents @xmath in terms of
@xmath and @xmath [ PDFS97 ] . Further, the OPE coefficients for primary
fields of, say, the critical Ising model are computed as follows. The
matrix @xmath in Eq. 6.10 is diagonal for the scaling operators
corresponding to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , which we normalize so that
@xmath . With this normalization, we then compute the coefficients
@xmath using Eq. 6.13 . We reproduce all the values of Eq. 6.15 with
errors bounded by @xmath .

### 6.7 Discussion

In this Chapter we have explained how to compute the ground state of a
critical Hamiltonian using the scale invariant MERA and how to extract
from it the properties that characterize the system at a quantum
critical point. Our results, which build upon those of Ref. [ Vid07 ,
EV10b , EV10a , Vid08 , AV08 , GMF08 , EV09a ] , also unveil a concise
connection between the scale invariant MERA and CFT. This correspondence
adds significantly to the conceptual foundations of entanglement
renormalization. The scale invariant MERA can be regarded as
approximately realizing an infinite dimensional representation of the
Virasoro algebra [ Car96 , PDFS97 ] . The finite value of @xmath
effectively implies that only a finite number of the quasi-primary
fields of the theory can be included in the description. Fields with
small scaling dimension, such as primary fields, are retained foremost.
As a result, given a Hamiltonian on an infinite lattice, we can
numerically evaluate the scaling dimensions and OPE of the primary
fields of the CFT that describes the continuum limit of the model. This
approach differs in a fundamental way from, and offer an alternative to,
the long-established techniques of Refs. [ Car84 , Car86 ] , based
instead on finite size scaling. We conclude by noting that most of our
considerations rely on scale invariance alone and can be applied to
study also critical ground states in 2 @xmath systems, as is
demonstrated next in Chapter 7 .

## Chapter 7 Entanglement renormalization in two spatial dimensions

### 7.1 Introduction

Entanglement renormalization has been proposed as a real-space
renormalization group (RG) method [ Wil75 ] to study extended quantum
systems on a lattice. A highlight of the approach is the removal, before
the coarse-graining step, of short-range entanglement by means of
unitary transformations called disentanglers . This prevents the
accumulation of short-range entanglement over successive RG
transformations. Such accumulation is the reason why the density matrix
renormalization group (DMRG) [ Whi92 , Whi93 ] – an extremely powerful
technique for lattices in one spatial dimension – breaks down in two
dimensions, where it can only address small systems.

The use of disentanglers leads to a real-space RG transformation that
can in principle be iterated indefinitely, enabling the study of very
large systems in a quasi-exact way. This RG transformation also leads to
the so-called multi-scale entanglement renormalization ansatz (MERA) [
Vid08 ] to describe the ground state of the system – or, more generally,
a low energy sector of its Hilbert space. In a translation invariant
lattice made of @xmath sites, the cost of simulations grows only as
@xmath [ EV09a ] . In the presence of scale invariance, this additional
symmetry is naturally incorporated into the MERA and a very concise
description, independent of the size of the lattice, is obtained in the
infrared limit of a topological phase [ AV08 , KRV09 ] or at a quantum
critical point [ Vid07 , Vid08 , EV10b , EV10a , GMF08 , PEV09 , MRGF09
] .

The basic principles of entanglement renormalization are the same in any
number of spatial dimensions, however, numerical work with 2 @xmath
lattices incurs a much larger computational cost. In Chapters 3 and 4 we
explored the use of ER in 2 @xmath lattices of free fermions and free
bosons. Entanglement Renormalization has also been tested for an Ising
model in a square lattice of small linear size @xmath [ CDR08 ] . It
must be emphasized, however, that the approach of Chapters 3 and 4
relies on the gaussian character of free particles and can not be
generalised to the interacting case, whereas the results of Ref. [ CDR08
] were obtained by exploiting a significant reduction in computational
cost that occurs only for small 2 @xmath lattices.

In this Chapter we present an implementation of the MERA that allows us
to consider, with modest computational resources, 2 @xmath systems of
arbitrary size, including infinite systems. In this way we demonstrate
the scalability of entanglement renormalization in two spatial
dimensions and decisively contribute to establishing the MERA as a
competitive approach to systematically address 2 @xmath lattice models.
The key of the present scheme is a carefully planned organization of the
tensors in the MERA, leading to simulation costs that grow as @xmath ,
where @xmath is the dimension of the vector space of an effective site.
This is drastically smaller than the cost @xmath of the 4-to-1 MERA
scheme (see Fig. 2.7 ) that was used in Chapters 3 and 4 and in Ref. [
CDR08 ] . We also demonstrate the performance of the scheme by analysing
the 2 @xmath quantum Ising model, for which we obtain accurate estimates
of the ground state energy and magnetizations, as well as two-point
correlators (shown to scale polynomially at criticality), the energy
gap, and the critical magnetic field and beta exponent. Finally, we
discuss how the use of disentanglers affects the simulation costs, by
comparing the MERA with a tree tensor network (TTN) [ TEV09 ] .

### 7.2 The MERA on a 2D lattice

Let us consider a square lattice @xmath made of @xmath sites, each one
described by a Hilbert space @xmath of finite dimension @xmath . The
proposed 2 @xmath MERA is characterized by the coarse-graining
transformation of Fig. ( 7.1 ), where blocks of @xmath sites of lattice
@xmath are mapped onto single sites of a coarser lattice @xmath . This
is achieved in three steps: first disentanglers @xmath are applied on
the four sites located at the corners of four adjacent blocks; then
disentanglers @xmath are applied at the boundary between two adjacent
blocks, transforming four sites into two; finally, isometries @xmath are
used to map a block into a single effective site. In this way, tensors
@xmath and @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 The tensors of the MERA are called disentanglers
@xmath or isometries @xmath depending on whether they are in charge of
eliminating short-range entanglement or of mapping a block of sites into
a single site [ Vid07 , Vid08 , EV09a ] . This distinction is somewhat
arbitrary: one can consider tensors that fulfill the two roles
simultaneously, such as tensor @xmath in Fig. 7.1 , that we still call
disentangler. All these tensors must be isometric, that is @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath . The hermitian conjugation ( @xmath ) in Eq. ( 7.1 )
appears for consistency with previous references. ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

transform the state @xmath of the lattice @xmath in which we are
interested (typically the ground state of a local Hamiltonian @xmath )
into a state @xmath of the effective lattice @xmath through the sequence

  -- -- -- -------
           (7.2)
  -- -- -- -------

To understand the role of these tensors, it is useful to think of the
state @xmath as possessing three different kinds of entanglement:
short-range entanglement residing at the corners of four adjacent
blocks, short-range entanglement residing near the boundary shared by
two blocks, and long-range entanglement. Then the disentanglers @xmath
and @xmath are used to reduce the amount of short-range entanglement
residing near the corners and boundaries of the blocks. In other words,
in states @xmath and @xmath increasing amounts of short-range
entanglement from @xmath have been removed. This fact facilitates
significantly the job of the isometry @xmath , namely to compress into
an effective site of @xmath those degrees of freedom in a block that
still remain entangled (now mostly through long-range entanglement) with
degrees of freedom outside the block. Thus, the resulting state @xmath
still contains the long-range entanglement of @xmath , but most of its
short-range entanglement is gone. We complete the above construction by
noticing that a @xmath -dimensional space @xmath is often too small to
accommodate all the relevant degrees of freedom left on a block.
Accordingly, we shall describe the effective sites of @xmath with a
space of larger dimension @xmath . This dimension @xmath determines both
the accuracy and cost of the simulations.

The transformation of Fig. 7.1 can now be applied to lattice @xmath ,
producing a coarser lattice @xmath . More generally, if @xmath is
finite, @xmath iterations will produce a sequence of lattices @xmath
where the top lattice @xmath contains only a small number of sites and
can be addressed with exact numerical techniques. Thus, given a
Hamiltonian @xmath on @xmath , we can use the above RG transformation to
obtain a sequence of Hamiltonians @xmath , then diagonalize @xmath to
find its ground state @xmath , and finally recover the ground state
@xmath of @xmath by reversing all the RG transformations:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is precisely how the MERA is defined. Specifically, the MERA for
@xmath is a tensor network containing (i) a top tensor, that describes
@xmath , and (ii) @xmath layers of tensors (disentanglers and
isometries), where each layer is used to invert one step of the
coarse-graining transformation of Fig. 7.1 according to the sequence (
7.3 ).

The technical details on how to numerically optimize the disentanglers
and isometries of the MERA to approximate the ground state @xmath of
@xmath are analogous to those discussed in Chapter 5 for a 1 @xmath
lattice and will not be repeated here. Instead, we focus on the key
aspect that makes the present 2 @xmath scheme much more efficient than
the previous 4-to-1 scheme. For this purpose, we consider an operator
@xmath whose support is contained within a block of @xmath sites of
lattice @xmath . Direct inspection shows that, no matter where this
block is placed with respect to the disentanglers and isometries of Fig.
7.1 , the support of the resulting coarse-grained operator @xmath is
also contained within a block of @xmath sites of @xmath , and the same
holds for any subsequent coarse-graining. This is in sharp contrast with
the 2 @xmath scheme of Refs. [ EV10b , EV10a , CDR08 ] , where the
minimal stable support of local observables (or ’width’ of past causal
cones ) corresponded to blocks of @xmath sites. In the present case,
much smaller objects (operators acting on @xmath sites instead of @xmath
sites) are manipulated during the calculations, resulting in the
announced dramatic drop in simulation costs.

### 7.3 Results for the 2D Ising model

We have tested the proposed scheme by investigating low energy
properties of the quantum Ising model with transverse magnetic field,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

on a square lattice with periodic boundary conditions (local dimension
@xmath ). First of all, we consider a sequence of lattices with
increasing linear size @xmath . For each of them, a MERA approximation
to the ground state of @xmath for different values @xmath of the
transverse magnetic field is obtained using @xmath . Computing the
ground state for @xmath and critical transverse magnetic field takes
@xmath 4 days on a 3GHz dual-core desktop PC with 8Gb RAM when starting
from a randomly initialized MERA ² ² 2 Calculations for @xmath are
achieved by using a disentangler @xmath with @xmath on selected indices.
The computation time is reduced to a few hours per point by re-using a
MERA previously converged (for a similar magnetic field) as the starting
point of a simulation. . Fig. 7.2 displays the expected value of the
parallel and transverse magnetizations, both of which show
characteristic signs of a second order phase transition as @xmath
increases. We emphasize that since the simulation costs grow only as the
logarithm of @xmath , it is straightforward to increase the system size
until e.g. finite size effects become negligible on local observables.

Fig. 7.3 shows how the parallel and transverse magnetizations change
with increasing @xmath , for @xmath . Since the cost of the simulations
grows as @xmath , only small values of @xmath can be considered in
practice. However, with @xmath one already obtains estimates for the
location of the critical point and the critical exponent @xmath that
already fall within @xmath of the best Monte Carlo results [ RK99 , BD02
] .

By using the MERA to represent a two-dimensional subspace and minimizing
the expectation value of @xmath , we obtain the system’s energy gap
@xmath . Fig. 7.4 shows @xmath as a function of the transverse magnetic
field and system size. Notice that at the critical point the gap closes
with the system size as @xmath (dynamic exponent @xmath ). Two-point
correlators can also be extracted. Fig. 7.4 shows the correlator @xmath
along a row or column of the lattice, obtained using the scale invariant
algorithm of Chapter 6 , which directly addresses an infinite lattice at
the critical point.

### 7.4 Role of disentanglers

In order to highlight the importance of disentanglers, we have also
performed simulations with a tree tensor network (TTN) [ TEV09 ] . This
corresponds to a more orthodox real-space RG approach where the block of
@xmath sites in Fig. 7.1 is directly mapped into an effective site
without the use of disentanglers. Recall that a 2 @xmath ground state
typically displays a boundary law, @xmath , for the entanglement entropy
@xmath of a block of @xmath sites. To reproduce this boundary law with a
TTN, one needs to increase the dimension @xmath at each step of the
coarse-graining. Specifically, @xmath must grow doubly exponentially
with the linear size @xmath of the lattice. On the other hand, the cost
of manipulating a 2 @xmath TTN grows only as a small power of @xmath .
As a result, much larger values of @xmath can be used with a TTN,
leading to a very competitive approach for small lattice sizes [ TEV09 ]
. Fig 7.5 (i and ii) compares the performance of the MERA and the TTN in
lattices of size @xmath and @xmath . It shows that a TTN is more
efficient than the MERA in computing the ground state of the @xmath
lattice; however, this trend is already reversed in the @xmath lattice,
where the cumulative benefit of using disentanglers clearly outweighs
the large cost they incur. Disentanglers, by acting on the boundary of a
block, readily reproduce the entropic boundary law (for any value of
@xmath ) and allow us to consider arbitrarily large systems. Fig. 7.5
(iii and iv) shows results for an infinite lattice near and at
criticality.

To summarize, we have proposed an entanglement renormalization scheme
for the square lattice and demonstrated its scalability by addressing
the quantum Ising model on systems of linear size @xmath , with cost
@xmath , and on an infinite system at criticality, with cost @xmath .
The key of the present approach is the use of two types of disentanglers
that remove short-range entanglement residing near the corners and near
the boundaries of the blocks while leading to narrow causal cones of
@xmath sites. Similar schemes can be built for other lattice geometries,
as is demonstrated for a Kagome lattice in the next Chapter.

## Chapter 8 The ground state of the spin-@xmath Kagome lattice
Heisenberg model with Entanglement Renormalization

### 8.1 Introduction

Low dimensional spin- @xmath quantum systems have long been the focus of
intense research efforts, largely fueled by the search for exotic states
of matter. An important example of a geometrically frustrated quantum
antiferromagnet [ Lhu05 ] is the spin- @xmath kagome-lattice Heisenberg
model (KLHM). Despite a long history of study, the nature of its ground
state remains an open question. Leading proposals include valence bond
crystal (VBC) [ MZ91 , SM02 , NS03 , BA04 , SH07 , SH08 ] and spin
liquid (SL) [ Sac92 , LE93 , WV06 , Mil98 , Has00 , HSF05 , RHLW07 ,
HRLW08 , JWS08 ] ground states. Interest has been further stimulated by
recent experimental work on Herbertsmithite ZnCu @xmath (OH) @xmath Cl
@xmath , a possible physical realization of the model [ SNBN05 ] .

Progress in our understanding of the KLHM has been hindered, as with
many other models of frustrated antiferromagnets, by the inapplicability
of quantum Monte Carlo methods due to the negative sign problem.
Nevertheless, systems with up to 36 sites have been addressed with exact
diagonalization [ LE93 , LL09 ] , whereas the density matrix
renormalization group (DMRG) has been used to explore lattices of order
@xmath sites [ JWS08 ] . Unfortunately, it is very difficult to infer
the nature of the ground state of an infinite system from these results.
The reason is that these lattices are still relatively small given the
36-site unit cell of the leading VBC proposal, or the algebraic decay of
correlations in some SL proposals. In larger systems, support for a SL
ground state has also been obtained with a SL ansatz [ HSF05 , RHLW07 ,
HRLW08 ] , whereas evidence for a VBC has been obtained for an infinite
lattice with a series expansion around an arbitrary dimer covering [
SH07 , SH08 ] , but both approaches are clearly biased.

In this Chapter we report new, independent numerical evidence in favor
of a VBC ground state for the KLHM model obtained by a numerical study
with entanglement renormalization. Entanglement renormalization is a
real space RG approach which, through the proper removal of short-range
entanglement, is capable of providing an approximation to ground states
of large 2 @xmath lattices, as has been demonstrated in Chapters 3 , 4
and 7 , by means of a multi-scale entanglement renormalization ansatz
(MERA). After describing a MERA scheme for the Kagome lattice with
periodic boundary conditions, we address lattices of @xmath sites. Our
simulations converge to a VBC state compatible with that first proposed
by Marston and Zeng [ MZ91 ] and revisited by Nikolic and Senthil [ NS03
] , and by Singh and Huse [ SH07 , SH08 ] . For an infinite lattice we
obtain an energy per site E=-0.4322. This energy corresponds to an
explicit (MERA) wave-function and therefore provides us with a strict
upper bound for the true ground state energy. Importantly, its value is
lower than the energy of any existing SL ansatz on a sufficiently large
lattice, which we interpret as strong evidence for a VBC ground state in
the thermodynamic limit. These results also demonstrate of the utility
of entanglement renormalization to study 2 @xmath lattice models that
are beyond the reach of quantum Monte Carlo techniques.

### 8.2 ER on the kagome lattice

The present approach is based on the coarse-graining transformation of
Fig. 8.1 , which is applied to a kagome lattice @xmath made of @xmath
sites. It maps blocks of 36 sites of @xmath onto single sites of a
coarser lattice @xmath made of @xmath sites. A Hamiltonian @xmath
defined on lattice @xmath becomes an effective Hamiltonian @xmath on
lattice @xmath . Analogously, the ground state @xmath of @xmath is
transformed into the ground state @xmath of @xmath . The transformation
decomposes into three steps. Firstly disentanglers @xmath , unitary
tensors that act on @xmath sites, are applied across the corners of
three neighboring blocks. Then disentanglers @xmath are applied across
the sides of two neighboring blocks; these tensors reduce ten sites
(each described by a vector space @xmath of dimension @xmath ) into two
effective sites (each described by a vector space @xmath of dimension
@xmath ). Finally isometries @xmath map the remaining sites of each
block into a single effective site of @xmath . Thus the tensors @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

transform the ground state @xmath of lattice @xmath into the ground
state @xmath of lattice @xmath through the sequence

  -- -- -- -------
           (8.2)
  -- -- -- -------

The disentanglers @xmath and @xmath aim at removing short-range
entanglement across the boundaries of the blocks; therefore states
@xmath and @xmath possess decreasing amounts of short range
entanglement. If state @xmath only has short-range entanglement to begin
with, then it is conceivable that the state @xmath has no entanglement
left at all. For a finite lattice ( @xmath ) we consider a state @xmath
that after the coarse graining transformation give rise to an entangled
state @xmath on @xmath sites. For an infinite lattice we will instead
make an important assumption, namely that @xmath is a product
(non-entangled) state. How short-ranged must the entanglement in @xmath
be for this assumption to be valid? By reversing the transformation on a
product state @xmath , it can be seen that each site in @xmath is still
entangled with at least @xmath neighboring sites.

### 8.3 Results and discussion

The disentanglers and isometries @xmath were initialized randomly and
then optimized so as to minimize the expected value of the KLHM
Hamiltonian,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

by following the algorithms described Chapter 5 , with cost @xmath ¹ ¹ 1
The computational cost of simulations can be signifcantly reduced by
incorporating symmetries of the system into the MERA tensor network [
SPV09 ] . In this work, a U(1) symmetry is incorporated into the MERA to
allow large @xmath simulations that would otherwise be unaffordable. .
Specifically, for lattices with @xmath and @xmath sites, the resulting
(one-site and four-site) Hamiltonian @xmath is diagonalized exactly.
Instead, for @xmath , we use the finite correlation range algorithm
(Sect. 5.4.4 ). All computations led to highly dimerized wave-functions
of the VBC type. In order to explain the results, consider the exact
‘honeycomb’ VBC state, denoted @xmath , whose 36-site unit cell is shown
in Fig. 8.2 . Each unit cell contains two ‘perfect hexagons’ (resonating
bonds around a hexagon) and a ‘pinwheel’. Three different types of
strong bonds can be identified: those of the pinwheels (red), parallel
bonds (green) and perfect hexagons (blue). The pinwheel and parallel
bonds are singlets (energy per bond @xmath ) while the perfect hexagons
are in the ground state of a periodic Heisenberg chain of 6 sites
(energy per bond @xmath ). The rest of links have zero energy. We call a
‘honeycomb’ VBC a state that has strong bonds according to the above
pattern, even though the rest of bonds (weak bonds) need not have zero
energy. The ‘honeycomb’ VBC was originally proposed by Marston and Zeng
[ MZ91 ] (see also [ NS03 , SH07 , SH08 ] ). Our simulations with @xmath
and @xmath produce a VBC of this type as the best MERA approximation to
the ground state.

The energies obtained for an infinite lattice are shown in Table 8.1 .
For each value of @xmath , the MERA is an explicit wave-function and
therefore provides an upper bound to the exact ground state energy.
Energies computed for the @xmath lattice matched those of the infinite
lattice to within @xmath and have been omitted. These @xmath energies
also match closely those obtained by series expansion in Ref. [ SH07 ] ,
and are lower than those obtained in Ref. [ JWS08 ] with DMRG ( @xmath
for @xmath ) and in Ref. [ RHLW07 ] with fermonic mean-field theory and
Gutzwiller projection ( @xmath for @xmath ). We further notice that,
where finite size effects are still relevant, such as in the @xmath
case, they tend to decrease the ground state energy.

Fig. 8.3 shows the distribution of bond energies obtained for the @xmath
lattice. With @xmath , one observes an energy increase per site over
@xmath of @xmath in the parallel (green) bonds and also in some of the
hexagon (blue) bonds, with the weak bonds having lower energy in return.
As @xmath is increased, the energy of the ‘strong’ bonds becomes
slightly larger and that of the ‘weak’ bonds continues to decrease.
However, the dimerization clearly survives: the bond energies are not
seen to converge to a uniform distribution as required for a SL.

Fig. 8.4 shows spin-spin correlators evaluated along two different
lattice axis @xmath and @xmath (cf. Fig. 8.2 ) for @xmath . These
correlators decay exponentially with well defined ‘plateaus’, where the
correlation is the same with both spins of a strong bond. Correlations
along the line joining a perfect hexagon and a pinwheel are seen to
decay faster than along the line joining two perfect hexagons,
consistent with the observation from Fig. 8.3 that the perfect hexagon
bonds remain almost exact singlets even for high values of @xmath .
Table 8.2 shows bond-bond connected and disconnected correlators, @xmath
and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

between a reference bond ‘1’ and a surrounding bond @xmath (cf. Fig. 8.2
). While disconnected correlators decay exponentially with distance,
some connected correlators remain significant at arbitrary distances,
demonstrating the long-range order of the VBC state.

Let us discuss the results for a lattice with @xmath sites. When
initialized with random tensors, the MERA produced VBC type
configurations which typically did not match the honeycomb VBC, although
simulations initialized in the state @xmath retained the honeycomb VBC
pattern (see Fig. 8.3 ). Here the randomly initialized VBC produced a
lower energy ( @xmath above the exact diagonalization result @xmath of [
LE93 ] ) than the honeycomb VBC type solution for an equivalent value of
@xmath (cf. Table 8.1 ). These results strongly suggest that finite size
effects in the @xmath site lattice lead to a significant departure from
the physics of the infinite system.

### 8.4 Defective valence bond crystals

In this section we detail a modification of the MERA optimization
algorithm of Sect. 5.4 that was found necessary to ensure proper
convergence of some simulations of the KLHM. All simulations of the KLHM
we found to converge to highly dimerized VBC type states. For lattices
of @xmath sites the lowest energy state that was found, or best
approximation to the ground-state, had a pattern of strong bonds
matching the ‘honeycomb’ VBC state. However, not all randomly
initialized simulations converged to this state; in some instances the
MERA wave-function converged to a ‘defective’ VBC state, an example of
which is shown Fig. 8.5 . The observed defective VBC’s ranged from
states which matched the honeycomb VBC with only a few misplaced strong
bonds to states with an almost completely disordered placement of strong
bonds. A defective VBC was observed to have on average @xmath higher
energy per site than the corresponding honeycomb VBC type MERA of the
same @xmath . The exact difference in energy depended on the amount of
defects; typically, states that deviated more from the honeycomb VBC had
higher energy than states which deviated less. In the instances that the
method did not converge to the honeycomb VBC one may conclude that the
optimization of the MERA became trapped in a local minimum.

Becoming trapped in a local minimum is not surprising given that the
optimization of the MERA is based upon updates of individual tensors.
During the initial iterations of the optimization, locally stable
structures, such as singlets between neighboring spins, form. But they
do not necessarily form in places compatible with a global minimization
of the energy. Once the method has converged to a particular VBC state,
the transformation required to bring the state to a different VBC, with
a new pattern of strong bonds, requires simultaneous shifts of many
strong bonds. This is unlikely to occur with an optimization based on
energy-lowering updates of individual tensors.

There are many ways to decrease the risk of becoming trapped in a local
minimum due to the formation of local singlets. In the present work this
is achieved by restricting how much a tensor is allowed to change in one
single update; this may be thought of as decreasing the rate at which
the MERA is ‘cooled-down’ from an initial (high-energy) state to the
(low-energy) approximation to the ground-state. The goal of this
restriction is to prevent locally stable structures from forming too
early in the optimization.

In order to discuss how this restriction may be implemented, we first
refresh some details of the variational MERA optimization, see Sect. 5.4
. In the standard algorithm, a tensor @xmath in the MERA is replaced
with a better (that is leading to lower energy) tensor @xmath as
follows. First one computes the linearized environment of @xmath ,
denoted @xmath . Then, given the singular value decomposition of the
environment, @xmath , one chooses the updated tensor to be @xmath . Here
we wish to restrict the amount @xmath the tensor can change, @xmath .
This is achieved by using a modified environment @xmath defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

for some @xmath . As before, given the singular value decomposition of
the modified environment @xmath , the updated tensor @xmath is chosen to
be @xmath . The parameter @xmath acts as a soft constraint to ensure the
tensor change @xmath is kept small with each update, a larger value of
@xmath giving a smaller change @xmath . In the limit of @xmath , the
tensor @xmath would remain constant, @xmath , in the update. Simulations
of the KLHM with a suitable value of @xmath , say @xmath for the initial
optimization, were much more likely to converge to a defect free
honeycomb VBC than were unrestrained ( @xmath ) optimizations.

### 8.5 Conclusions

To summarize, we have used entanglement renormalization techniques to
obtain new numerical evidence indicating that the ground state of the
KLHM is of the honeycomb VBC type. In order to assess the robustness of
this result, we briefly discuss some of the limitations of the present
approach.

Firstly, the coarse-graining transformation of Fig. 8.1 , which maps 36
sites into one site, was designed to ensure compatibility with the
36-site unit cell of honeycomb VBC type solutions. While our approach
did not preclude solutions with a smaller, compatible unit cell (such as
a 12-site unit cell or a fully translation invariant solution), we
cannot rule out the possibility that a state with an incompatible unit
cell might have a lower energy.

Secondly, the infinite lattice was investigated by restricting the range
of entanglement in the ansatz to blocks of 84 spins, imposed through an
unentangled state @xmath in Eq. 8.2 . This restriction was only
implemented after preliminary simulations with @xmath had produced
identical energies irrespectively of whether @xmath was allowed to be
entangled. However, it could still be that entanglement in @xmath would
make a big difference for larger values of @xmath . We find this
scenario quite unlikely, but could not test it due to computational
limitations.

Finally, the MERA is an essentially unbiased method provided that the
candidates to be the ground state of the system have all a relatively
small amount of entanglement. But when deciding between a VBC (which
mostly has short-range entanglement) and e.g. the algebraic SL of Refs.
[ RHLW07 , HRLW08 ] (significantly more entangled at all length scales),
it might well be that the MERA is biased toward the low entanglement
solution. Therefore our results do not conclusively exclude a SL ground
state. We emphasized, however, that the ground state energies obtained
with the MERA are lower than the SL energies of Refs. [ RHLW07 , HRLW08
, JWS08 ] .

Future work includes the computation of singlet and triplet excitation
gaps, and studying the effect of adding a magnetic field and anisotropic
terms to the Hamiltonian. Such additions to the Hamiltonian can be
considered without modifying the present approach.

## Chapter 9 Conclusion and Future Outlook

### 9.1 Summary

The content and major results of this thesis are summarised below.
Firstly, Chapter 2 reviewed the foundations of entanglement
renormalization and the MERA as first introduced in Refs. [ Vid07 ,
Vid08 ] . Chapters 3 and 4 then explored the performance of entanglement
renormalization in the simple setting of free fermions and free bosons
respectivly. Here it was demonstrated that a real-space renormalization
group transformation based upon entanglement renormalization could
induce a sustainable coarse-graining transformation in variety of @xmath
dimensional free fermion and free boson models. The substainability of
the RG transformation with entanglement renormalization allowed
investigation of arbitrarily large @xmath dimensional lattice systems
without loss of accuracy, as was shown through comparison with exact
solutions. An exception was found for critical @xmath free-fermion
models with a @xmath fermi surface, whose entropy is known to scale as
@xmath , where ER could no longer produce a be sustainable RG
transformation. It was concluded that a generalized MERA would be
required to analyse such systems.

Chapter 5 described how to compute expected values of observables from a
MERA and also presented optimization algorithms to compute the
ground-state MERA for an arbitrary local Hamiltonian. A highlight of
algorithms was their computational cost which, for a chain of @xmath
sites, scales as @xmath for non-translation invariant systems, @xmath
for translation invariant systems and scales independant of @xmath for
scale-invariant systems. This Chapter also presented benchmark results
for several @xmath spin models, mainly for Ising and Potts models,
including accurate computation of ground energy, local observables,
correlators and energy gaps. Chapter 6 analysed the connection between
entanglement renormalization and conformal field theory (CFT). It was
demonstrated explicitly for several 1 @xmath spin models that this
connection could be exploited to extract most of the conformal data of
the CFT that described the models in the continuum limit. This included
accurate calculation of the scaling dimensions, the central charge and
OPE coefficients for Ising and Potts models.

In Chapter 7 the optimisation algorithms presented in Chapter 5 were
generalised to the specific problem of analysing quantum many-body
problems on @xmath dimensional lattices. Benchmark calculations with the
quantum Ising model demonstrated the ability of the MERA to give
accurate ground state properties on arbitrarily large (or infinite)
lattice systems for a non-integrable model in @xmath spatial dimensions.
The benchmark results included accurate calculations of critical
exponents, expected values of local observables, two-points correlators
and energy gaps. Finally, Chapter 8 applied ER to study the spin- @xmath
kagome lattice Heisenberg model (KLHM), a long-standing problem in
condensed matter physics. The results of this Chapter, which is the
first demonstration of ER to study an open problem in condensed matter
physics and a problem beyond the reach of quantum Monte-Carlo, offers
convincing evidence that the ground-state of the infinite KLHM is a
honeycomb valence bond crystal. In particular, the energy of the MERA
approximation to the ground-state of the infinite system, which serves
as an exact upper bound to the true ground energy, is significantly
better than any such bound previously produced.

### 9.2 Future Work and Outlook

Entanglement renormalization offers a non-perturbative means to
investigate quantum many-body systems, as such ER has a diverse range of
applications that remain to been explored or further developed.

Firstly one could consider extensions to the research of Chapter 6 (see
also [ GMF08 , PEV09 , MRGF09 ] ) which made a connection between the
MERA and conformal field theory (CFT). The procedure to compute the
local scaling operators (and their corresponding scaling dimensions) of
a critical theory, as described Chapter 6 , could be generalised to
obtain a class of non-local scaling operators. Thus it might be possible
to obtain a complete set of the scaling operators which characterise a
CFT. It also remains to generalise the ER algorithm to the study of
types of conformally invariant systems other than the 1 @xmath infinite
chains previously considered. These may include systems with a boundary,
homogeneous systems with a defect (or several defects), an interface
between two different critical systems, or a Y-intersection of three
spin chains.

There is much potential for the use of ER to study 2 @xmath quantum
systems. In particular ER may have a big impact in the areas of
frustated magnets, systems of interacting fermions and topologically
ordered systems, as these are problems for which previously there has
often not been any satisfactory investigative techniques. The results in
Chapter 8 for the kagome lattice Heisenberg model are a demonstration of
the potential of the method for frustrated magnets. Entanglement
renormalization could be similarly applied to investigate many other
models of magnetism that remain not well understood; these may include
@xmath models, ring exchange models and quantum dimer models. In
particular, it is possible that ER could be used to study the existance
of a spin-liquid phase in a 2 @xmath magnetic system, a problem that is
of much interest to the condensed matter community. Recent developments
have led to a generalisation of the ER optimisation algorithm to allow
the investigation of systems of interacting fermions [ CEVV10 , CV09 ,
PBE10 , BPE09 ] . At present most of the studies of fermions with ER
have been tests to benchmark the algorithm, and there remains a wide
range of interesting fermionic models that could potentially be
investigated with ER. In regards to topological order, previous studies
also have shown that ER can be used to characterise the infra-red fixed
point of topologically ordered systems [ AV08 , KRV09 ] . Further
research could utilise ER to investigate, for instance, the stability of
a topological phase under perturbation.

Prior to the further application of ER to study 2 @xmath lattice systems
it may be necessary to devise ways to improve the computational
efficiency of the algorithm, which typically scales as a large power of
the bond dimension @xmath . Significant reductions in computational cost
can come from incorporation of global or local symmetries into the
tensor network; research into the incorporation of global symmetries is
already well progressed [ SPV09 ] . It may also be possible to reduce
costs by introducing approximations into contraction of the MERA
tensor-network or to incorporate monte-carlo type sampling into the
algorithm.

In the long term, it is possible that entanglement renormalization, as a
tool for analysing many-body systems, may find applications beyond the
more immediate applications in condensed matter physics. Applications
could arise wherever quantum many-body effects are important; for
instance in areas such as string-theory, quantum gravity and quantum
chromodynamics. Entanglement renormalization allows the evaluation of
the continuum limit of a lattice model, hence may be useful for
analysing problems that would be difficult to analyze in the continuum
directly. Recent work on the holographic principle [ Swi09 ] might be a
first step in this direction.

## Appendix A The ground-state of free fermion models in two dimensions

### a.1 Particle conserving free-fermions

In this appendix we derive an expression for the ground-state
correlation matrix of free-fermion models on a 2 @xmath square lattice
(a thorough derivation of ground-state correlation matrices for 1 @xmath
free-fermion models can be found e.g. [ LRV04 ] ). The ground-state
covariance matrix is the starting point for the analysis of free
fermions with entanglement renormalization considered in Chapter 3 . We
begin with by considering nearest neighbour free-fermion models that
have only particle conserving terms on a 2 @xmath lattice of @xmath
sites

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

We now perform a 2 @xmath Fourier transform of the fermionic operators
@xmath into a new set of operators @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The inverse transformation is similarly defined

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

By exploiting the orthogonality properties of the (unitary) fourier
transform, it is seen that the hopping terms in Eq. A.1 become on-site
interaction terms in the fourier basis

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The on-site interaction term in Eq. A.1 , which may be interpreted as a
chemical potential, remains invariant under the fourier transform

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

On subsitution of Eqns. A.4 and A.5 , the original Hamiltonian of Eq.
A.1 is recast into diagonal form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

with disperion relation @xmath given as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The ground-state of Hamiltonian A.6 is defined as the state with all
negative energy modes, @xmath , occupied (the fermi sea) and the rest of
the fermionic modes empty. It follows that the ground-state correlation
matrix, in the fourier basis, is given by

  -- -- -- -------
           (A.8)
  -- -- -- -------

The inverse transformation relations of Eq. A.3 can be used to transform
the correlation matrix into the original (spatial) basis

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the fermi sea . In order to take the thermodynamic
limit of Eq. A.9 , we first define new variables

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, by definition, @xmath . The thermodynamic limit, @xmath , is now
taken

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the integral is taken over those modes within the fermi sea @xmath
. Explicitly, the integral should be evaluated over the region @xmath ,
where @xmath . In most cases the intergal in Eq. A.11 cannot be
evaluated analytically and one must resort to numerical integration to
obtain approximate values for the correlators. However, for the case of
half-filling ( @xmath ), the fermi-sea has a particularly simple form
and the integral may be carried out analytically as follows. Firstly, a
change of variables is made

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Expressed in the new variables, the integral of Eq. A.11 can be
evaluated

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with the function @xmath defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

### a.2 Non particle conserving free-fermions

We now consider more general quadratic models of fermions than was
initially considered with Hamiltonian A.1 . Specifically, we consider
Hamiltonians with non particle conserving terms of the form @xmath and
@xmath . The generic nearest neighbour Hamiltonian on an @xmath lattice
is written

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

This model of free-fermions depends on a parameter @xmath , with
represents the chemical potential, and another parameter @xmath , which
represents the anisotrophy. The free-fermion model of Eq. A.1
corresponds to setting the anisotrophy term to zero in the present
model. Similar to the derivation of last section, we shall first proceed
with a fourier transform of the fermionic operators @xmath . However, as
we shall see, the Hamiltonian of Eq. A.15 also requires an additional
Bogoliubov transformation to bring it into diagonal form. Applying the
Fourier transform of the fermionic operators defined Eq. A.2 , the non
particle conserving terms of Eq. A.15 transform as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

while the other terms in the Hamiltonian transform in the same manner as
Eqns. A.4 and A.5 . The Hamiltonian expressed in the Fourier basis
@xmath is given

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath defined the same as Eq. A.7 and @xmath defined

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

While the Fourier transform has eliminated most of the off-diagonal
couplings from the Hamiltonian, couplings of the form @xmath have been
introduced. We now require a Bogoliubov type transformation to fully
diagonalise the Hamiltonian of Eq. A.17 . The Bogoliubov transformation,
which acts independantly for every value @xmath , involves taking linear
combinations of the annihilation/creation operators @xmath to form new
fermionic operators @xmath and is defined

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath as a yet undefined function of @xmath . In order to
determine the function @xmath it is first assumed that that Hamiltonian
is diagonal in the Bogoliubov basis @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

and then one works backwards to match the coefficients of Eq. A.20 with
those of Eq. A.17 . Using Eq. A.19 to expand the @xmath term gives

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

On subsitution of this expression into the Hamiltonian of Eq. A.20 we
get

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.22)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have made use of the trigonometric identities

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.23)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

By matching the coefficients of Eq. A.17 with Eq. A.22 is seen that the
correct choice for the transform weights is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.24)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the dispersion relation @xmath may be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Hamiltonian of Eq. A.15 has now been tranformed into a diagonal form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that, due to the action of the Bogoliubov transformation which
mixes creation and annihilation operators, the dispersion in Eq. A.26 is
positive defined, unlike that of Eq. A.6 from the previous section. Now
that the correct transforms to diagonalise the free-fermion Hamiltonian
has been identified, we turn our attention to finding the ground-state
correlators. The ground-state correlation matrix is defined in the
@xmath basis as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this definition we can derive expressions for the ground-state
correlators @xmath in the original (spatial) basis

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
                          
              @xmath      (A.28)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The other correlation matrix @xmath is similarly derived

  -- -- -------- -- --------
        @xmath      
        @xmath      
        @xmath      
        @xmath      
        @xmath      
        @xmath      (A.29)
  -- -- -------- -- --------

Finally, for clarity, we restate the Fourier/Bogoliubov transform
weights

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.30)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath defined Eq. A.7 and @xmath defined Eq. A.18 . As with the
previous section one could take the thermodynamic limit to obtain
integral equations for A.28 and A.29 . However, as the resultant
integrals do not have an analytic solution, it is convenient to leave
these equations as summations.

## Appendix B The ground-state of harmonic lattice systems

In this appendix we diagonalise a nearest-neighbour harmonic lattice in
order to derive an expression for the ground-state covariance matrices
of the system. Similar derivations may also be found e.g. [ AEPW02 ,
PEDC05 , Skr05 ] . The ground-state covariance matrix is the starting
point for the real-space RG analysis considered in Sect. 4.4.2 of
Chapter 4 . We also offer a procedure for regularising the case of
zero-mass, which would otherwise be divergent. As introduced in Eq. 4.1
, we focus on Harmonic systems with Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Recall that operators @xmath and @xmath are the usual canonical
coordinates with commutation @xmath . By a Fourier transform of the
canonical coordinates

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

the Hamiltonian of Eq. B.1 is bought into diagonal form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is seen that Eq. B.3 represents a system of @xmath uncoupled
oscillators, each with an effective mass dependant on @xmath . It
follows that the ground-state in this basis is the product of the single
oscillator ground-states

  -- -- -------- -- -------
        @xmath      
        @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -- -------- -- -------

The covariance matrices in the original (spatial) basis are derived by
using the inverse of the Fourier transforms of Eq. B.2 to obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

As we are interested in the systems of infinite extent, it is possible
to take the thermodynamic ( @xmath ) limit of Eq. B.5 , in which the
sums will be replaced by an integrals. However, in all but a particular
case, to be addressed shortly, the resulting integral equations cannot
be solved analytically. It is often more convenient, if one desires
correlators from the infinite system between sites at most @xmath sites
distant, to use the finite @xmath equations B.5 with @xmath to in order
to compute approximate correlators for the infinite system. For the
@xmath case it is possible to evaluate the integral equations exactly;
taking the thermodynamic limit of Eq. B.5 with @xmath gives

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.6)
     @xmath               (B.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The integral for the @xmath -quadrature evaluates as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Unfortunately, the integral for the @xmath -quadrature in Eq. B.7 is
divergent , @xmath , for all @xmath . One can proceed by regularizing
the integrals with a small momentum cut-off @xmath ; that is only modes
with @xmath are integrated. The limit as @xmath is then investigated. To
evaluate the @xmath -quadrature integral of Eq. B.7 first the
substitution @xmath is made

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The integrand in Eq. B.9 is known to have a finite series expansion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Eq. B.10 one may split the integral of Eq. B.9 into a convergent
quantity @xmath (which contains the correlations) and a divergent
constant @xmath (which is independent of @xmath ). Thus the integral of
Eq. B.9 is evaluated to give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

with spatial correlators @xmath defined

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the constant @xmath (which divergent in @xmath ) defined

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

By using the regularized expression for correlators of Eq. B.11 ,
quantities such as the difference between correlators are seen to remain
finite in the limit of @xmath taken to zero and may be evaluated exactly

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly it can be shown that, although the entanglement entropy of a
block of @xmath modes diverges in the massless case, the difference in
entropy between two blocks is also convergent in the limit as @xmath is
taken to zero. Thus, for instance, in the zero-mass system we may still
make sense of how the entropy of a block of @xmath modes changes along
the RG flow as was demonstrated Fig. 4.8 .