This thesis describes the design and implementation of several
instruments for digitizing and processing analogue astronomical signals
collected using radio telescopes.

Modern radio telescopes have significant digital signal processing
demands that are typically best met using custom processing engines
implemented in Field Programmable Gate Arrays. These demands essentially
stem from the ever-larger analogue bandwidths that astronomers wish to
observe, resulting in large data volumes that need to be processed in
real time.

We focused on the development of spectrometers for enabling improved
pulsar ² ² 2 Pulsars are rapidly rotating neutron stars that emit
periodic broad band electromagnetic radiation. science on the Allen
Telescope Array, the Hartebeesthoek Radio Observatory telescope, the
Nançay Radio Telescope, and the Parkes Radio Telescope. We also present
work that we conducted on the development of real-time pulsar timing
instrumentation.

All the work described in this thesis was carried out using generic
astronomy processing tools and hardware developed by the Center for
Astronomy Signal Processing and Electronics Research (CASPER) at the
University of California, Berkeley. We successfully deployed to several
telescopes instruments that were built solely with CASPER technology,
which has helped to validate the approach to developing radio astronomy
instruments that CASPER advocates.

Adventures in Radio Astronomy Instrumentation and Signal Processing by
Peter Leonard McMahon Submitted to the Department of Electrical
Engineering in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
Master of Science in Electrical Engineering at the University of Cape
Town July 2008

Supervisor: Professor Michael Inggs Co-supervisors: Dr Dan Werthimer,
CASPER ¹ ¹ 1 Center for Astronomy Signal Processing and Electronics
Research , University of California, Berkeley Dr Alan Langman, Karoo
Array Telescope

Plagiarism Declaration

I know the meaning of plagiarism and declare that all the work in this
document, save for that which is properly acknowledged, is my own.
