### 7.1 Quiver gauge theories

Our starting point is an @xmath gauge theory in @xmath d with product
gauge group @xmath , an arbitrary number of bifundamental @xmath in the
representation @xmath under the @xmath -th gauge groups, and a
superpotential @xmath .

We want to show now that the @xmath central @xmath s in @xmath become
global symmetries in the IR. It is easy to see that the diagonal @xmath
does not couple to any matter field. The rest of the @xmath s, due to
triangle anomalies in the quiver, are divided into anomalous and
non-anomalous symmetries ¹ ¹ 1 Such anomalies were not discussed in § I
because they can occur only in even spacetime dimensions. . The gauge
coupling of the non-anomalous @xmath s vanishes in the IR and the
anomalous @xmath gauge fields become massive by mixing with closed
string fields (due to the cancellation of the anomaly via the
Green-Schwarz mechanism). To see which symmetries are anomalous consider
the @xmath generated by @xmath where @xmath are the generators of the
central @xmath . The condition for the cancellation of such triangle
anomalies @xmath is just

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Modding out by the global symmetries we see that in the IR the gauge
group becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

##### 7.1.1 Classical vacuum moduli space

The classical VMS @xmath is determined by the following equations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.1.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

which are the F-term and D-term equations respectively.

In the Abelian case the moduli space @xmath is straightforward to
describe. The first equation describes the space of F-term solutions,
which is by construction an affine algebraic set. For the theories we
study in this thesis, this is itself a toric variety, of dimension
@xmath . This is the same master space @xmath that was mentioned in § 3
and studied in detail in [ 48 ] .

Finally, the combination of imposing the second equation in ( 7.1.1 )
and identifying by the gauge symmetries may be described as a Kähler
quotient of @xmath by a subgroup ² ² 2 Notice that the subgroup by which
we mod is the crucial difference between the computations of the moduli
spaces of the @xmath d quivers, studied in § I , and the @xmath d
quivers that we discuss here. @xmath . This subgroup does not include
the diagonal @xmath that does not couple to the bifundamental fields. In
particular, this Kähler quotient precisely sets the @xmath in ( 7.1.1 )
equal to zero. To summarize,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the Kähler quotient is taken at level zero, implying that @xmath
is a Kähler cone. We will refer to this space as the Abelian mesonic
moduli space. For a stack of @xmath coincident D3 branes transverse to a
CY three-fold singularity, one expects the moduli space to be the @xmath
th symmetric product of the three-fold.

The moment maps associated to the @xmath global @xmath s can take any
non-vanishing values. In the physics literature this is often associated
with turning on FI parameters @xmath that contribute to the D-terms ³ ³
3 Strictly speaking, since the @xmath s are not gauged no FI parameters
can be turned on. The FI-like contributions to the D-terms come from
VEVs for fields. . We will use this terminology throughout this thesis.
The Kähler quotient in ( 7.1.4 ) should then be taken with respect to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.1.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Setting the values of the FI parameters picks a point in @xmath that
solves ( 7.1.5 ). On the gravity side, as we explain in § 7.2 , these FI
parameters correspond to the Kähler class of the resolved CY geometry
and the compactly-supported B-field periods.

As opposed to the @xmath d QCS theories discussed in § I , the field
theories that are dual to isolated CY three-fold singularities with
vanishing four-cycles are not identified with the minimal GLSM. This is
due to the fact that the moduli space in Type IIB is not completely
geometrical and contains also directions coming from flat form-fields.
Therefore, the matching between the field theory and the gravity moduli
space is not as obvious as before. It is then convenient to present the
@xmath moduli space of a field theory with the aid of a FI space. Since
@xmath , as may be seen by summing over the moment maps in ( 7.1.5 ),
this space is just @xmath . The additional phases, corresponding to the
non-vanishing moment maps, survive the Kähler quotient and are fibered
over the FI space to form @xmath . The structure of @xmath corresponds
(very loosely) to @xmath fibered over @xmath , where @xmath is obtained
from ( 7.1.4 ) with the corresponding moment map levels. As we will see
later on, in the corresponding resolved CY three-fold @xmath , @xmath of
the @xmath directions ⁴ ⁴ 4 Recall from [ 66 ] that @xmath . in the FI
space correspond to Kähler moduli, while the other @xmath are dual to
the compactly-supported B-field moduli. The fact that the latter are
periodic, as expected from the periodicity of the B-field in string
theory, is not obvious and we will show it later on in an example.

The FI space is expected to be divided into chambers , where each one of
them corresponds to the fully resolved geometry. These chambers are
separated by walls . Part of the walls correspond to singular @xmath
spaces. When crossing such a wall the @xmath moduli space undergoes a
form of small birational transformation called a flip [ 127 ] . Inside
each such chamber the Kähler classes vary linearly with respect to the
FI parameters and the @xmath spaces are isomorphic. These chambers,
however, are further divided, as we will show later on in this thesis,
by additional walls that correspond to critical values of the
compactly-supported B-field periods.

#### 7.2 Gravity backgrounds

##### 7.2.1 AdS@xmath backgrounds

In this subsection we want to discuss the Type IIB supergravity solution
obtained by placing @xmath D3 branes at the tip of CY three-fold @xmath
, which is a cone over a Sasaki-Einstein space @xmath . The
corresponding metric and five-form are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.2.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.2.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the warp factor @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here @xmath is four-dimensional Minkowski space, with volume form @xmath
, and @xmath is a constant given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The near-horizon limit corresponds to the small @xmath limit; thus, the
metric ( 7.2.6 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This is just the AdS @xmath metric. To fix the background one needs to
specify the flat NS-NS and R-R background fields. Turning on such fields
corresponds to exactly marginal deformations in the @xmath
superconformal field theories living on the boundary. For a
comprehensive discussion on such deformations we refer the reader to [
66 ] .

In the next subsection we want to review the supergravity backgrounds
that are obtained by resolving the CY cones. These backgrounds
correspond to non-vanishing VEVs of the scalar operators, which Higgses
the field theory.

##### 7.2.2 Symmetry-breaking backgrounds

The symmetry-breaking backgrounds of interest for us are analogous to
the backgrounds that were discussed in § 4.2 , thus we keep our
discussion in this subsection brief. The main emphasis will be placed on
the important differences that arise in the analysis of the form-field
moduli.

The crepant (partial) resolutions of the toric three-fold singularities
are described by the GKZ fan that lives in @xmath . A point inside each
of the polyhedral cones constructing the GKZ fan is a Kähler class on
the resolved CY @xmath . A CY metric on @xmath that approaches the given
cone metric asymptotically can always be found [ 83 , 84 , 85 ] . The
ten-dimensional metric in the resolved background is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.2.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath -flux still given by ( 7.2.6 ). Placing @xmath
spacetime-filling D3 branes at a point @xmath leads to the warp factor
equation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Here @xmath is the scalar Laplacian of @xmath acting on @xmath . Having
chosen a particular resolution and Kähler class, hence metric, we must
then find the warp factor @xmath satisfying ( 7.2.12 ) and this always
exists and is unique. A general discussion in the Type IIB context may
be found in [ 117 ] . The warped metric ( 7.2.11 ) describe a geometry
with two asymptotically AdS @xmath regions: one near @xmath that is
asymptotically AdS @xmath , where @xmath is the base of the unresolved
cone, and one near to the point @xmath , which is asymptotically AdS
@xmath , where @xmath is the base of the tangent cone at the stack of D3
branes.

Generally, the topology of @xmath allows one to turn on various
topologically non-trivial flat form-fields. The forms of interest sit in
compactly supported cohomology classes, and thus correspond to fixed
marginal couplings in the field theory in the UV. These form-field
moduli are discussed in [ 66 ] . In particular, we have the NS-NS
B-field, as well as the R-R two-form @xmath , which are harmonic
two-forms that are @xmath normalizable with respect to the unwarped
metric, and the four-form @xmath which is a harmonic @xmath normalizable
four-form with respect to the warped metric. The B-field modes, which
live in @xmath , are identified with @xmath FI parameters in the field
theory. The other @xmath FI parameters correspond to @xmath Kähler
moduli. The GKZ fan, which was discussed above, should match the @xmath
sub-space that is obtained by projecting the FI space on the Kähler
directions. Moreover, the Kähler moduli are naturally complexified by
noting that @xmath by Poincaré duality, and that this group classifies
the periods of @xmath through four-cycles in @xmath , which may either
be closed or have a boundary three-cycle on @xmath . More precisely,
taking into account large gauge transformations leads to the torus
@xmath . The pairing of the Kähler class with @xmath , and the B-field
with @xmath , is reflected by the complexification @xmath of the global
baryonic symmetry group in the field theory.

This supergravity background may be interpreted as a renormalization
group flow from the initial @xmath superconformal field theory to a new
SCFT in the IR as was first shown in [ 43 ] . There may be additional
light particles in the IR, namely Goldstone bosons associated to the
spontaneous breaking of non-anomalous baryonic symmetries.

### Chapter 8 The @xmath orbifold

We wish to discuss field theories dual to toric CY three-folds with
four-cycles in their resolutions. The simplest example of such a theory
is the @xmath orbifold theory. The space @xmath is defined as the
three-dimensional complex space @xmath under the identification

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.0.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The only fixed point under this identification is the origin, therefore
the near horizon geometry close to the point-like @xmath D3 branes is
smooth. More specifically, from ( 7.2.10 ) one sees that this is just
the AdS @xmath space.

#### 8.1 Field theory description

A stack of @xmath D3 branes propagating on the @xmath orbifold is dual
to a @xmath d SCFT described by the quiver in Figure 8.1 .

The field theory has a superpotential that reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This theory was studied in detail in [ 118 ] . In the UV the gauge group
is just @xmath containing a central @xmath which become global
symmetries in the IR. The diagonal @xmath decouples as no matter field
carries charge under it. In addition, any other combination of @xmath s
is anomalous as can be seen from ( 7.1.1 ). One may choose the following
orthogonal generators for these @xmath s

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are the generators of the corresponding @xmath s in the
quiver.

##### 8.1.1 The GLSM description

We can compute the moduli space in the usual way. At a generic point, by
making use of gauge rotations, we can set all the fields to be diagonal.
Then, the effective theory reduces to @xmath copies of the @xmath
theory. To compute the moduli space of the Abelian theory one can use
the forward algorithm of [ 115 , 116 ] . The key point is that the
algorithm takes the data of the matter content and the superpotential,
and produces the GLSM charge matrix @xmath . The kernel of this is the
@xmath matrix that encodes the toric diagram of the CY three-fold. We
refer the reader to [ 116 ] for more details.

Working in the GLSM description we may write the relations between the
@xmath fields and the GLSM fields, which are usually named @xmath
-fields, as follows

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Using the forward algorithm one can show that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now it is clear that, using the second and third rows in ( 8.1.5 ), one
can derive an expression for @xmath and @xmath , which corresponds to
internal points, in terms of the other @xmath -fields. Explicitly one
may write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the singular cone, for which @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are fixed by
@xmath . Moreover, each row @xmath in ( 8.1.5 ) encodes the charges of
the @xmath -fields under the GLSM @xmath gauge transformation. One can
use @xmath and @xmath to fix the phases of @xmath and @xmath . We are
then left with four degrees of freedom, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , and the constraint coming from the first row in the charge
matrix is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which after the corresponding gauge identification gives @xmath .
Indeed, taking the FI parameters to zero one can compute the @xmath
matrix by taking the null-space of @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The columns of the @xmath matrix are the coordinates in the toric
diagram, which is presented in Figure 8.2 . This is indeed the toric
diagram that describes the @xmath orbifold. Notice that the GLSM
description is non-minimal, and this results in multiplicities of the
lattice points in the toric diagram.

Note that each spacetime field is the product of an inner and an outer
@xmath -field.

##### 8.1.2 The non-conformal theory

In [ 113 ] the Higgsing of the @xmath field theory was studied, and two
possible RG flows that end at @xmath @xmath SYM theory were proposed. In
the first scenario, the RG flow is induced by giving diagonal VEVs to
two fields that connect different nodes in the quiver. In the second
case, the RG flow is composed of two steps. In the first step, an
interesting non-conformal theory appears after giving a VEV to one of
the fields and RG flowing to the VEV scale. This corresponds in the GLSM
language to giving a VEV to one external and one internal @xmath -field
as may be seen from ( 8.1.1 ). One of the gauge nodes in this theory
confines and by giving a VEV to a mesonic operator the theory seems to
flow to the @xmath @xmath SYM theory in the deep IR.

We want now to review how the non-conformal theory appears. For the sake
of simplicity we will discuss just diagonal VEVs that correspond to
keeping the D3 branes in one stack. Let us concentrate for the time
being on the VEV @xmath . This VEV breaks the anomalous global symmetry
@xmath and leaves @xmath untouched. After giving such a VEV we see from
the following part in the superpotential

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.1.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

that @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath become massive. At scales below
@xmath , these fields should be integrated out. The resulting quiver of
the effective theory is presented in Figure 8.3 .

The new effective superpotential reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.1.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We may look, for example, at node 2. Since it has @xmath , this theory
cannot be in a conformal fixed point. In [ 113 ] it was argued that node
2 in this theory confines. This is indeed expected if the dynamical
scale of node 2 is dominating. This will be consistent with the
supergravity analysis that will be presented later on in this thesis. In
the IR one can treat the field theory effectively as a copy of @xmath
SQCD coupled to a pair of singlets @xmath with the superpotential of the
non-conformal theory. The IR of the SQCD theory is described in terms of
mesons and baryons

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.1.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where Latin indices stand for @xmath while Greek indices stand for
@xmath . Note that the superpotential is then written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.1.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The baryons carry charge under the baryonic symmetry under which the
fields transform as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.1.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This, we claim, is a non-anomalous symmetry that was evolved from @xmath
during the RG flow.

As argued by Seiberg [ 114 ] , the theory has a quantum mechanically
modified moduli space given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.1.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the dynamically generated scale of the SQCD theory. In
addition, we have to impose the F-terms coming from the superpotential.
Thus, finally, the moduli space is given by the solutions to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.1.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Note that, since node 2 is confined, in the IR the relevant degrees of
freedom are mesons and baryons. As such, the superpotential appears
written in terms of the meson @xmath , and thus automatically generates
an F-term ensuring that the @xmath fields commute. Let us introduce a
Lagrange multiplier chiral field @xmath , so that we can write

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.1.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Vanishing VEVs for the entire set of fields is not a point on the moduli
space of this theory. As we explain now, a conformal fixed point can be
reached by considering non-vanishing VEVs that induce continuation of
the RG flow. In [ 113 ] the authors discussed the RG flow resulting from
a non-vanishing VEV for the mesonic operator @xmath only. This RG flow
ends at the @xmath @xmath SYM theory in the IR. It was then speculated
there that such RG flows might be dual to RG flows that are induced by
giving VEVs to two fields that connect different nodes in the quiver.
This was justified by the fact that these flows also end at @xmath
@xmath SYM theory in the IR. This speculation will be falsified later on
as it will be shown that the first RG flow corresponds to a choice of
critical value for the compactly supported B-field in the dual
supergravity background.

In this thesis, however, we will be interested in the flow that results
from giving VEVs to the baryons. After setting the only non-vanishing
VEV as @xmath and flowing to the new IR, the superpotential reduces to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.1.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We see that the theory in the IR is just @xmath @xmath SYM. We expect to
see a Goldstone boson and global string due to the fact that the
non-anomalous baryonic symmetry was broken.

It is interesting to notice, as was argued in [ 113 ] , that in the
gravity there is just one scale, the size of the four-cycle. Thus, as
expected, in the large @xmath limit in the field theory the scale in
which the massive fields are integrated out is also the scale in which
node 2 in the non-conformal theory confines. The strong coupling scale
for the confining is related to the energy scale @xmath set by the VEV
@xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.1.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath . For large t’Hooft coupling @xmath the scale @xmath and
@xmath are of the same order and we cannot distinguish between them.
Therefore, we cannot expect to see the moduli space of the non-conformal
theory and the emerging baryonic symmetry in the dual supergravity. But
in the far IR we can expect to see the Goldstone mode and global string
that correspond to the broken global baryonic symmetry. In the next
subsections we want to show that indeed these can be observed in the
dual supergravity background.

We want to start by describing the full moduli space of the @xmath
theory. It will prove useful to understand what are the moduli in the
supergravity that correspond to the VEVs that lead to the non-conformal
theory.

##### 8.1.3 @xmath theory - moduli space

From ( 8.1.5 ), the VMS equations are just

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.1.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where one needs to mod out by the corresponding @xmath transformations.
We now show that these equations can be written in three different
forms, in which two different internal @xmath -fields can be eliminated.
These correspond to three different chambers in the FI parameter space
of the field theory.

##### Chamber one

We rearrange ( 8.1.3 ) as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.1.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

such that it is obvious that @xmath and @xmath can be eliminated with
respect to the other @xmath -fields, and their corresponding phases can
be fixed. We have to take @xmath and @xmath to guarantee that solutions
to these fields always exist. We are left with the first line that
describes branes on the resolved @xmath where the Kähler class is
proportional to @xmath . In every case we must necessarily find this
geometry since the only CY resolution of the @xmath singularity is
@xmath . This can be easily seen from the pq-web in Figure 8.2 that
represents the resolution of the CY.

To obtain the pq-web one first needs to choose a triangulation of the
toric diagram. This corresponds to a specific resolution of the CY
space. For @xmath there is just one choice, as can be seen from Figure
8.2 , which also describes the fully resolved space. The pq-web is
obtained by replacing faces by vertices, lines by orthogonal lines, and
vertices by faces in the triangulation of the toric diagram. This allows
one to map the topology of the resolved space into a two-dimensional
diagram [ 125 , 126 ] . Indeed, the triangle in the pq-web represents
the compact divisor @xmath , which is in agreement with the GLSM
picture. The @xmath zero section is at @xmath in this chamber of the
gauge theory FI space.

If we take @xmath we see from ( 8.1 ) that some of the external @xmath
-fields and all the internal @xmath -fields obtain a non-vanishing VEV.
This corresponds to putting the D3 branes away from the four-cycle and
in the field theory to a VEV of a closed loop of fields in the quiver
that corresponds to a mesonic operator. This Higgses the @xmath gauge
group to @xmath and the theory flows to @xmath @xmath SYM in the IR.
Notice that in order to obtain the non-conformal theory we were
discussing, we need to blow-up the four-cycle by taking @xmath , put the
D3 branes on the blown-up four-cycle by setting @xmath , and take @xmath
or @xmath . The latter condition guarantees that just one internal point
has a non-vanishing VEV. On the other hand, setting @xmath and @xmath
results in an RG flow that ends at the @xmath @xmath SYM in the IR.

The position of the branes on the four-cycle is determined by @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , which are constrained by the first row in ( 8.1.3 ).
This is just a point on @xmath and all such points are equivalent, since
@xmath is homogeneous. Thus, these directions can be suppressed when
discussing the moduli space of the field theory. Therefore, the
interesting information on the moduli space of the field theory is just
the FI parameter space.

##### Chamber two

A straightforward manipulation of ( 8.1.3 ) leads to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.1.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

One can see that @xmath and @xmath may be eliminated and their phases
fixed. This can be achived if we restrict @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
The discussion is then along the same lines as in the previous
paragraph. This time, to obtain the non-conformal theory, we take @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath or @xmath . Again, since @xmath , the branes sit on
the blown-up cycle with the resolved geometry being the same as before.

##### Chamber three

A straightforward manipulation of ( 8.1.3 ) leads to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.1.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

One can see that @xmath and @xmath may be eliminated and their phases
fixed. This can be achived if we restrict @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
We see similar behaviour as for the other chambers that we just
described. To obtain the non-conformal theory we have to take @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath or @xmath , such that the branes again sit on the
blown-up cycle of the resolved geometry.

To conclude, giving VEVs to fields, such that no closed loop of fields
in the quiver has a non-vanishing VEV, results in a blown-up four-cycle,
and the D3 branes sit on the exceptional cycle @xmath in @xmath . Figure
8.4 (a) describes this part of the moduli space. The blue lines, which
are the borderlines of the different regions, correspond to the values
of the FI parameters @xmath and @xmath that bring us to the
non-conformal theory after RG flow to the VEV scale. Any other point in
the diagram corresponds to VEVs that induce RG flows that end at @xmath
@xmath SYM in the IR. In Figure 8.4 (b) we show the path that
corresponds to a constant Kähler class. Following this path it is easy
to see that the FI parameter that is “orthogonal” to the one that
represents the size of the cycle is periodic . This will be consistent
with interpreting this on the gravity side with the period of the
B-field through the @xmath fibre of @xmath . We will also see that the
non-conformal theory corresponds in the supergravity to a resolved
background with one of the three critical values of the B-field period,
as the diagram suggests.

#### 8.2 Gravity description

The gravity background corresponding to the resolved orbifold @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.2.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

This is the usual Calabi ansatz, which works for the canonical line
bundle over any Kähler-Einstein manifold. It is natural to introduce the
vielbein

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.2.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The metric then becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Substituting @xmath in ( 7.2.11 ) one obtains the metric of the
ten-dimensional Type IIB background. The warp factor @xmath is given by
( 7.2.12 ). As usual, we may solve ( 7.2.12 ) by writing

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the @xmath are the relevant harmonics, @xmath denotes collectively
the angular coordinates in the internal manifold, and @xmath stands for
the particular point where the stack of D3 branes sits. We refer the
reader to [ 113 ] for the explicit solution for this warp factor.

##### 8.2.1 Gravity moduli: B-field and @xmath

As discussed in § 7.2 , the classical gauge theory has a large VMS. One
thus expects to find massless scalar fields associated with these flat
directions in field space. We are now interested in discussing the
form-field moduli in the resolved background. As we reviewed, it is
possible to turn on flat form-fields in the resolved background that
restrict to trivial classes on the UV boundary. In this subsection we
want to discuss the B-field and @xmath R-R two-form. The B-field moduli
will become an important factor in the following discussion. The @xmath
R-R four-form will not be discussed here; however fluctuations in this
direction will become important later on in this section.

The B-field and @xmath moduli correspond to harmonic two-forms that are
@xmath normalizable with respect to the unwarped metric. For the
resolved @xmath , @xmath , thus we are looking for one such two-form.
Let us define @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.2.28)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

We may consider the following closed four-form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The condition @xmath boils down to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The solution to this equation which vanishes at infinity is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

@xmath being an integration constant.

We may now compute the square @xmath norm of the form, which is finite

  -- -- -- ----------
           (8.2.32)
  -- -- -- ----------

In turn, we have that @xmath may be written, as expected, as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We may now consider the following ansatz for the supergravity zero modes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

From the supergravity equations of motion one can see that the scalar
fields @xmath and @xmath are decoupled [ 66 ] . Given the properties of
@xmath , it is straightforward to see that the @xmath and @xmath fields
satisfy free field equations of motion in the Minkowski space
directions.

It is convenient to choose the normalization factor to be @xmath . With
this choice the above calculations show that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Since @xmath , this shows that @xmath is then an @xmath harmonic form
representing the generator of this group. Here @xmath is the total space
of @xmath . An exact sequence shows that @xmath maps to @xmath times the
generator of @xmath , where the @xmath is the same as in @xmath .
Indeed, a simple calculation shows that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

##### 8.2.2 The periodicity of @xmath and @xmath

Consider a Euclidean fundamental string running along @xmath . Its
(Euclidean) action is

  -- -- -- ----------
           (8.2.37)
  -- -- -- ----------

where @xmath is some UV cut-off and @xmath is the string tension. In
fact, this cut-off is not required since the integral is convergent.

Under a shift

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

the partition function will not change. Thus, we have that @xmath is a
periodic variable of period @xmath (and so is @xmath , had we considered
a D1 string, upon changing @xmath ).

We identify this B-field period, up to a constant factor, with the FI
parameter in the field theory that corresponds to the closed path in
Figure 8.4 . Recall that supersymmetry pairs the B-field with @xmath ,
and the latter corresponds to a fibre over the FI parameter space in the
field theory.

##### 8.2.3 D3 branes on the resolved cone and global strings

A spontaneously broken global symmetry in a field theory generally leads
to Goldstone bosons and global strings. The first corresponds to the
flat directions given by acting with a broken symmetry generator. In
supergravity the Goldstones are fluctuations of R-R fields, and are
hence pseudo-scalars. Their scalar supersymmetric partners come from
metric and B-field fluctuations.

In [ 66 ] the authors have shown the existence of massless scalar fields
on @xmath associated with linearized deformations of the B-field and R-R
field moduli, and argued that such modes can be obtained also from
fluctuations of the metric. In general @xmath such modes are coming from
B-field and @xmath fluctuations and @xmath from @xmath and metric
fluctuations. Thus, it was argued that the dual field theory then
includes corresponding massless particles.

The linearized fluctuations just discussed may be associated with the
Goldstone bosons and their supersymmetric partners. However, as
discussed in [ 66 ] , these modes cannot be interpreted as Goldstone
bosons when the corresponding broken symmetries are anomalous, since
these symmetries do not survive in the quantum theory.

In the @xmath field theory all the baryonic global symmetries are
anomalous. The supergravity backgrounds constructed from resolved cones
are dual to field theories in which these symmetries are ‘‘broken’’ ¹ ¹
1 They are really already broken by quantum effects. . However, for
three values of the B-field there is an emerging non-anomalous baryonic
symmetry during the RG flow as we argued in the previous section. We
claimed that the supergravity solution is dual to a field theory in
which this symmetry is broken. We want to argue that the corresponding
Goldstone boson and its supersymmetric partner originate from specific
fluctuations in the R-R four-form and metric respectively. Since the
fluctuations in the metric are somewhat involved, as explained in [ 66 ]
, we will discuss just the fluctuations for the R-R four-form in detail
in the next subsection.

As discussed in [ 119 ] , the breaking of a global @xmath symmetry
results in global strings around which the Goldstone boson has a
monodromy. Global strings in the Minkowski space associated with the
broken global symmetry were discussed in the AdS/CFT context for the
conifold case in [ 71 ] . It was shown that a D3 brane wrapping the
two-cycle in the bottom of the resolved cone sources fluctuations that
contain the Goldstone boson. Furthermore, this boson has a monodromy
around the string-like wrapped D3 brane in the Minkowski space.

Coming back to the @xmath theory, we will show that a global string,
obtained by wrapping a D3 brane on a two-cycle, appears in supergravity
just for three critical values of the B-field, as expected from the
field theory analysis. For other values of the B-field the massless
fields are still there but the wrapped D3 brane is not SUSY, and this
suggests that indeed these fields cannot be interpreted as Goldstone
bosons in these cases. This is expected since for non-critical values of
the B-field the only “broken” baryonic symmetries are anomalous.

We now wish to discuss the wrapped D3 brane in greater detail. Notice
that the blown-up four-cycle, being a @xmath , contains a topologically
non-trivial @xmath . So we may consider a D3 brane wrapping this
two-cycle by taking the world-volume of the brane to be @xmath . This
brane, having half of its world-volume on the Minkowski space and half
in the internal space, is not sensitive to the warp factor. Thus, its
energy at @xmath is a constant, proportional to @xmath . From the
Minkowski space point of view, it looks like a string.

Notice that if we were considering a D5 brane wrapping the four-cycle,
similar arguments show that the tension of this brane blows up in the
IR. This shows that in the IR of the field theory the corresponding
string is infinitely massive and therefore completely decoupled. It is
interesting that such D5 branes source @xmath fluctuations. Such a
fluctuation that solves the supergravity equations, and corresponds to a
massless field in @xmath , should have an interpretation in the field
theory. One might consider this as the fluctuation that contains the
Goldstone boson coming from the broken emerging baryonic symmetry.
However, since in this case the global string, namely a D5 brane wrapped
on four-cycle, is not part of the field theory spectrum, we do not want
to interpret it as such. Similarly, if we consider the R-R four-form
fluctuation for non-critical B-field period discussed above, since in
such a background the D3 brane wrapping the two-cycle is not SUSY the
global string is absent, and the interpretation of the corresponding
massless field is not clear to us.

To determine the criteria under which the D3 brane wrapping the
two-cycle in the resolved cone is SUSY we follow [ 120 ] . In their
notations, the two supersymmetry parameters @xmath are Majorana-Weyl
spinors of positive ten-dimensional chirality, and may be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are the spinors in the internal four-dimensional
and external six-dimensional space, respectively.

The conditions for the D3 brane to preserve the supersymmetry of the
background are given in (3.6) and (3.7) of [ 120 ] , which are
reproduced here for convenience

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The four-dimensional gamma matrices @xmath are real, the six-dimensional
ones @xmath are antisymmetric and purely imaginary, and underlined
indices represent an orthonormal frame. @xmath here stands for the
gauge-invariant two-form that lives on the D3 brane. The D3 brane
wrapped over a two-cycle corresponds to @xmath and @xmath . In addition,
from the discussion after (3.7) in [ 120 ] , @xmath in our case.

We want to rephrase the conditions in terms of the geometrical objects
@xmath and @xmath introduced in [ 120 ] . For the branes which are
strings in the @xmath d Minkowski space the second equation in ( 8.2.40
) reduces to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Here @xmath is the pull back to the two-cycle and @xmath denotes that
just the two-forms inside the brackets should be considered. The warped
background of interest is a special case with @xmath structure ² ² 2
Read section 5 in [ 120 ] for more details in which, from (5.2) in [ 120
] , @xmath and @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The @xmath phase parametrizes the embedding of a @xmath family of @xmath
algebras inside the bulk @xmath superalgebra. Following for example [
121 ] , it is easy to see that in the presence of a non-trivial warp
factor, @xmath takes a fixed value such that @xmath is purely imaginary
³ ³ 3 Note that in [ 121 ] @xmath . However, there the authors are
working in Euclidean signature in which @xmath , while here we have
@xmath . . Therefore the equations in ( 8.2.42 ) reduce to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

respectively. Here @xmath is the almost complex structure with respect
to which the six-dimensional metric @xmath is Hermitian and @xmath is a
@xmath -form constructed from the spinor as explained in [ 120 ] . The
two equations in ( 8.2.44 ) are easily translated to the SUSY conditions
that read

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.45)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The second condition is equivalent to demanding that the two-cycle is
holomorphically embedded. In addition, we see that we have to set @xmath
to have a supersymmetric brane wrapped over the two-cycle. Going back to
the first equation in ( 8.2.40 ), this condition is satisfied for half
of the background spinors, so our strings are one-half BPS.

The @xmath condition reduces to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.46)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we used ( 8.2.36 ) and denoted the quantized period of @xmath as
@xmath . From ( 8.2.38 ) and using the fundamental string tension @xmath
, we see that @xmath . Thus, we find that @xmath for @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . We would like to identify these three special @xmath -field
values with the three values of the @xmath -field implied by the gauge
theory analysis.

Before we turn our attention to the R-R four-form fluctuations that are
sourced by this wrapped brane, we want to point out that an E4 brane
wrapping the blown-up four-cycle is another interesting brane that one
might consider. We studied in [ 3 ] the SUSY conditions for such a brane
and concluded that the brane is SUSY for three values of the B-field
period. As we explained in § 4.5 this instanton does not generate a
non-perturbative superpotential due to the wrong number of zero modes.
However, this brane might contribute to higher F-terms. As discussed in
[ 122 , 123 ] , instantons with four zero modes generate quantum
deformations to the moduli space that correspond to the @xmath
corrections in the corresponding gauge field theories. In our case we
indeed observe such corrections in the field theory; however, these
corrections are relevant in the middle of the RG flow. More precisely,
these corrections are relevant at the scale of the given VEV and not in
the far IR, which is what we argued our supergravity solution
corresponds to. This seems consistent as the volume of the E4 brane
blows-up due to the warp factor. Since the contribution of the E4 brane
to the F-term is proportional to @xmath , where @xmath is the warped
volume of the four-cycle, one expects such contributions to indeed
vanish.

##### 8.2.4 The fluctuation containing the Goldstone mode

We now intend to examine further the global string we have found.
Specifically, we want to study the linearized backreaction in the
background due to the presence of this probe D3 brane. To linearized
order this probe sources fluctuations in the R-R four-form potential
containing the term @xmath , where @xmath is a two-form in @xmath and
@xmath is a closed two-form in the resolved cone. The latter is
proportional to the volume form of the two-cycle in the bottom of the
resolved cone wrapped by the D3 brane. The linearized equations of
motion that should be satisfied are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.47)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The self-duality condition is satisfied by taking

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.48)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then, the equations of motion reduce to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.49)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are the Hodge duals with respect to the unwarped
Minkowski and resolved orbifold metrics, respectively.

##### Solving for @xmath

From [ 113 ] we learn that the warp factor is a function of @xmath and
@xmath when the @xmath D3 branes sit at the bottom of the resolved cone.
We start with the ansatz

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.50)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The @xmath condition reduces to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.2.52)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We have two equations and two functions, and together with the right
boundary conditions these equations are expected to have a solution. We
take the boundary conditions to be @xmath and @xmath with @xmath when
@xmath goes to infinity. Since the warp factor behaves as @xmath when
@xmath goes to infinity, the equations ( 8.2 ) and ( 8.2 ) reduce to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 (8.2.53)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.2.54)
  -- -------- -- ----------

These equations have decaying solutions when @xmath and @xmath is a
constant. Therefore for large @xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.55)
  -- -------- -- ----------

On the other hand, when taking @xmath it is straightforward to see that
the equations are solved for constant @xmath and @xmath , and thus the
corresponding two-form is proportional to that in ( 8.2.33 ).

These are indeed the boundary conditions that one expects from the
discussion in [ 66 ] . From the discussion there we learn that @xmath .
The following exact sequence

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.2.56)
  -- -------- -- ----------

together with the fact that @xmath shows that the two-forms in @xmath
restrict to trivial two-form classes in @xmath . Recall that the pull
back of the Thom class ⁴ ⁴ 4 The Thom class is represented by a form in
@xmath that gives 1 when integrated over the fibre. to the zero section
@xmath is the Euler class, which in our case is just @xmath , where
@xmath is the two-cycle inside @xmath . Thus, the pull back of the
@xmath normalizable two-form with respect to the warped metric on @xmath
is also a two-form in this class. This then shows that the @xmath part
in this fluctuation is sourced electrically by a D3 brane wrapping the
@xmath .

Following [ 71 ] we want to show that the R-R four-form fluctuations
just discussed contain the Goldstone boson. We start by introducing the
field @xmath by dualizing the two-form @xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.57)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Substituting this back into ( 8.2.48 ), the fluctuation in the five-form
field strength reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.58)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and thus the fluctuation of the four-form potential is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.59)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For the conifold [ 71 ] it was argued that @xmath in ( 8.2.59 ) is the
Goldstone boson for the broken baryonic @xmath . To show that, the
authors demonstrated that the fluctuation couples through the
Wess-Zumino term to the E4 condensate that corresponds to the VEV of the
baryonic operator. Moreover, it was shown that the asymptotic behaviour
of ( 8.2.59 ) in the UV corresponds to a VEV for the baryonic current in
the field theory.

For the broken emerging baryonic symmetry these checks cannot be
repeated due to the fact that the gravity solution does not capture the
intermediate non-conformal theory. Nevertheless, we want to interpret
the @xmath massless field as the Goldstone boson coming from the broken
emerging baryonic symmetry. This is strongly suggested by the presence
of a global string for critical B-field values. The massless field
@xmath has a monodromy around this global string ⁵ ⁵ 5 For a more
elaborate discussion on this type of global string we refer the reader
to [ 71 ] . since the wrapped D3 brane electrically sources @xmath .
This is exactly the sector that is expected to appear whenever a global
symmetry is broken.

The global string we have found is crucial for the interpretation of the
massless field as a Goldstone boson. For generic B-field VEV this global
string is not supersymmetric and thus the massless field cannot be
interpreted as a Goldstone boson. This is of course expected from the
field theory analysis as for generic B-field no non-anomalous baryonic
symmetries emerge during the RG flow. Adding this to the fact that the
baryonic symmetries in the UV are anomalous, it is clear that the
discussed symmetry-breaking sector should not be observed. We summarize
our findings in the next chapter and comment on similar results that
were obtained by studying other examples in our original paper.

### Chapter 9 Final comments and summary

In this part of the thesis we studied the moduli space of field theories
that are dual to D3 branes probing toric CY three-folds that contain
four-cycles in their resolution. We have shown that there is a
remarkable agreement between the moduli space in the field theory and
supergravity in the orbifold example. One new result is the fact that
the directions in the moduli space of the field theory which are dual to
the B-field moduli are indeed periodic. This was demonstrated for the
orbifold in this manuscript and for two more examples in the original
paper that this thesis is based on [ 3 ] . For a general resolved CY
space @xmath , one expects @xmath such directions.

The main aim of this part of the thesis was to show that there is extra
information in the field theory moduli space that singles out critical
values of the compactly-supported background B-field. In the @xmath
example, these critical values of the B-field were identified with the
blue lines in the FI parameter space in Figure 8.4 . In the field theory
these critical values correspond to RG flows that result in intermediate
non-conformal phases. This seems to falsify the speculation in [ 113 ] ,
made for the @xmath orbifold, arguing that such RG flows are induced by
giving different VEVs that also end with @xmath @xmath SYM theory in the
deep IR.

We claimed that some of the surviving anomalous baryonic symmetries in
the UV become non-anomalous during the RG flow, depending on the B-field
in the background. To make our claim more rigorous it will be very
important to understand what is the exact mechanism that explains this
result. Here and in [ 3 ] we focused on the fully resolved geometries.
However, there are non-conformal phases that appear when the geometry is
just partly resolved. The identifications of the corresponding VEVs with
critical values of the B-field seems to generalize to those cases too.
It will be interesting to study this in more detail.

One can consider giving non-vanishing VEVs to mesonic operators in the
confined theories. This was done in [ 113 ] for the @xmath orbifold. It
seems to us that such VEVs correspond to moving the branes from the
bottom of the resolved cone. However, this should be studied more
carefully. More interesting scenarios seem to appear when one keeps the
branes at the bottom of the cone by choosing vanishing VEVs for mesonic
operators and non-vanishing VEVs for baryonic operators in the confined
theory. In this case the emerging baryonic symmetry is broken, and the
existence of the confined theory leaves a trace in the IR in the form of
a Goldstone boson and global string.

The next thing we did was to look to see if we could find critical
values of the B-field from the supergravity analysis. Indeed we have
shown that just for three critical values of the B-field in the
supergravity background one can wrap D3 branes on the blown-up @xmath .
Those D3 branes source fluctuations in the R-R four-form that we suggest
contain the Goldstone boson from the broken emergent symmetry. These D3
branes are also global strings, and the Goldstone has monodromy around
them as expected for a broken global symmetry. For generic B-field VEV
we do not see those global strings and thus the zero mode for generic
B-field value cannot be interpreted as a Goldstone boson. This is an
important difference, and is a strongly supportive argument in favour of
interpreting the mode coming from the four-form at critical B-field
values as a Goldstone boson. With these results we completed a field
theory and a supergravity analysis that showed that three B-field VEVs
are special and generate different RG flows in the @xmath case.

We repeated this analysis in [ 3 ] for the Sasaki-Einstein five-manifold
@xmath , which is a @xmath fibration over @xmath . There we made a
distinction between two different types of D3 branes that wrap
two-cycles and form global strings in the Minkowski space. The first
type corresponds to D3 branes that source fluctuations that contain the
Goldstone bosons coming from the broken non-anomalous baryonic
symmetries in the UV. There are @xmath such branes corresponding with
the @xmath baryonic symmetries in the field theory [ 66 ] . The second
type of D3 branes, we suggest, source fluctuations that contain the
Goldstone bosons coming from broken emerging non-anomalous baryonic
symmetries. In general, one expects to see @xmath such D3 branes. These
branes can be wrapped just for critical values of the @xmath B-field
moduli, as explained.

There are several interesting directions for future work. As we have
mentioned in the main text, one should go beyond the supergravity
analysis to study the intermediate non-conformal theory, which is not
captured by the supergravity solution. In fact, this is a general issue
that repeats itself in other known non-conformal theories with gravity
duals. Another direction that was not discussed in this thesis is the
computation of condensates of the baryonic operators. Such condensates,
which correspond to Euclidean D3 branes in string theory, were studied
in general CY backgrounds in [ 66 ] . The formula that they derive
implies that indeed the world-volume action of the Euclidean D3 brane
depends on the B-field moduli. This is of course expected from the field
theory since the spectrum of the operators that obtain VEVs, for
critical and non-critical B-field periods, is different. However, more
work should be done to make this map precise. An additional interesting
research avenue concerns the generalization of our findings to more
complicated geometries. In this thesis and in [ 3 ] we confined
ourselves to the @xmath orbifold and @xmath examples in which the moduli
space, together with the critical B-field VEVs, seem to match nicely
with the supergravity results. As we have shown in [ 3 ] , when there
are more four-cycles in the resolved geometry the structure of the
moduli space becomes much richer. This was demonstrated in [ 3 ] for the
@xmath orbifold. In this example the resolved supergravity background is
not known and the interpretation of the structure of the critical walls
in the moduli space cannot be easily understood. It will be important to
develop methods with which the string theory dual can be investigated
without dependence on the explicit supergravity solution. As a final
remark, besides being of great theoretical interest, Calabi-Yau cones
with vanishing four-cycles are interesting for model building. This was
recently investigated in [ 129 ] . We hope that our study will
contribute to the exploration of such constructions in the future.

### Appendix A Un-Higgsing in QCS theories

At present there is no known general method for constructing QCS
theories for orbifolds @xmath as a projection of the ABJM theory (For
recent work on orbifolds of the ABJM theory, see [ 40 ] ). This leads us
to construct an un-Higgsing algorithm where one starts with a QCS theory
for a singularity @xmath , and then enlarges the quiver in a specific
way, corresponding to “blowing up” @xmath . We begin with a discussion
of the known constraints on QCS theories, and then describe a general
un-Higgsing algorithm.

##### a.0.1 Calabi-Yau, toric and tiling conditions

We begin by reviewing the conditions which should be satisfied by a QCS
theory on M2 branes probing a non-compact toric Calabi-Yau four-fold. In
order that the VMS is Calabi-Yau, we require that for each node in the
quiver the number of arrows entering and leaving the node should be
equal. Notice this is the same condition as gauge anomaly cancellation
in the @xmath d YM parent. The superpotential satisfies the toric
condition if each chiral multiplet appears precisely twice in @xmath :
once with a positive sign and once with a negative sign. This ensures
that the solution to the F-term equations is a toric variety. The last
condition that we want to impose is the so-called tiling condition . All
known quiver theories related to toric Calabi-Yaus, in both @xmath and
@xmath dimensions, obey this condition due to their brane-tiling/dimer
model description [ 42 , 12 , 14 ] . This leads to the elegant condition

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (A.0.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the number of nodes, @xmath is the number of fields and
@xmath is the number of terms in the superpotential. Whenever the rule
is broken in the resulting theory the dimension of its VMS is no longer
four.

##### a.0.2 The un-Higgsing algorithm

The un-Higgsing procedure for quiver gauge theories was studied in [ 41
] in the context of D3 branes probing complex cones over del Pezzo
surfaces. Here we wish to systematize this method and use it as a guide
for constructing QCS theories living on M2 brane world-volumes. As we
will explain shortly, the un-Higgsing process for theories with toric
Calabi-Yau four-folds as VMS is quite restrictive. The basic idea is
that by adding one gauge node at a time we can obtain theories whose
VMSs contain the original toric diagram as a sub-diagram; thus this will
be a QCS form of “blow-up”.

Let us begin with the simplest case: un-Higgsing by adding one field to
the quiver. This step is shown schematically in Figure A.1 (a). The
gauge nodes which sit on the circumference of the dotted circle are
those in the original theory which is being un-Higgsed. The gauge node
sitting inside the circle is that being added to the theory. We have
indicated the original node in red, indexed by @xmath , and the new node
in blue, indexed by @xmath . We shall say that @xmath participates in
the un-Higgsing process, because it will be attached to @xmath , while
all other nodes in the original theory are non-participatory.

Next, we add to the original quiver a bifundamental field @xmath charged
under @xmath ; this is an arrow connecting node @xmath to node @xmath .
The key point in un-Higgsing is that we must be able to Higgs the new
theory to the original one by letting @xmath acquire a non-zero VEV. To
continue to satisfy the toric condition, the field @xmath must be added
simultaneously to a positive and a negative term which already appears
in the superpotential, and no extra terms should be introduced. In order
to exhaust all possiblities for constructing new consistent theories the
@xmath index should run over all values between @xmath and @xmath ,
where @xmath is the number of gauge nodes in the original quiver.
Moreover, the field @xmath must be inserted to all possible pairs of
negative and positive terms in the superpotential.

However, notice that after adding @xmath to the quiver, the Calabi-Yau
condition mentioned in the previous subsection is broken: the number of
arrows that enter node @xmath or node @xmath is not equal to the number
of those that leave. To remedy this we need to relocate the heads and
tails of arrows in the original quiver between node @xmath and node
@xmath . For example, for a three-noded quiver with nodes @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath we can do this by changing the tail of @xmath to
@xmath . Finally, we assign CS levels to nodes @xmath and @xmath such
that their sum is equal to the original CS level ¹ ¹ 1 We refer the
reader to [ 1 , 27 ] for a discussion on the Higgsing of QCS theories.
of node @xmath .

Next we turn to more complicated un-Higgsing possibilities. Adding more
than one field forces us to add terms to the superpotential, instead of
simply adjoining the fields to existing terms, as was the case above;
otherwise, it would be impossible to obtain the original quiver by
Higgsing. The only possibility is that after introducing such new terms
to the superpotential, some of the fields will become massive after the
Higgsing and will be integrated out. Therefore, we see immediately that
it is not possible to un-Higgs the theory by adding only two fields:
insertion of a term that contains two fields is not a valid un-Higgsing
step as these fields would be integrated out even before Higgsing
because we would be adding a quadratic mass term.

Hence, let us move on to consider introducing three new fields. In
accordance with the labelling in Figure A.1 (b), the three fields are
denoted @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is the field which we
wish to Higgs in order to reproduce the original theory in the IR. Since
the three fields should disappear from the IR theory after Higgsing,
there must be a cubic term in the superpotenital which contains all
three. This new cubic term should be gauge invariant, and thus the
fields which we add must form a closed loop. Notice that after Higgsing
@xmath we are left with a term that contains two fields: @xmath and
@xmath . Those fields should be integrated out in the IR as they give
rise to a quadratic mass term.

To satisfy the toric condition, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath should also
appear in other terms in the superpotential and have opposite sign with
respect to the cubic term. Furthermore, we must satisfy ² ² 2 A priori ,
violating this condition is not a problem. However, in all cases that we
have studied the resulting theory will then have a five
complex-dimensional VMS. the tiling condition ( A.0.1 ). Now, since we
have added one node and three fields, we must add two terms to the
superpotential. The cubic term mentioned above is one of them. What
about the other? There are two options: to add a new term or to split
one of the existing terms into two. The first option would just be the
cubic term with opposite sign, which would simply cancel in the Abelian
theory and hence is ineffective. We must therefore take the second
option and split an existing term, inserting @xmath and @xmath
separately into the two split terms. This guarantees that after
integrating out these fields the split terms are united. To see this in
more detail, suppose the original superpotential contains a term @xmath
, where @xmath and @xmath are monomials in bifundamental fields; that
is: @xmath . Then our procedure would change this superpotential to
@xmath . When @xmath acquires a VEV (say @xmath for convenience), the
equation of motion for @xmath becomes @xmath , and the first and third
terms cancel while the middle term becomes @xmath , as required.
Finally, @xmath can be added to an arbitrary term with the opposite sign
to the cubic term.

In order to exhaust all possibilities we split terms, insert fields,
assign CS levels and vary @xmath and @xmath in all possible combinations
(notice that @xmath could equal @xmath for the case of adjoint fields).
Furthermore, we insert the cubic term both with positive and negative
signs and allow relocation of heads or tails of arrows involving nodes
@xmath and @xmath in ways that satisfy the Calabi-Yau condition, as in
the case of adding one field.

The next possibility is un-Higgsing by introducing four new fields. As
shown in Figure A.1 (d) and (e), this can be done in two different ways.
Let us discuss (d) first. Notice that the only way this can be achieved
is by insertion of two new cubic terms into the superpotential: @xmath .
However, this violates the Calabi-Yau condition on both nodes @xmath and
@xmath . Since the field to be Higgsed is @xmath , we can transform
heads and tails of arrows between nodes @xmath and @xmath only and
cannot fix the Calabi-Yau condition on node @xmath . Therefore this
un-Higgsing step is allowed only when @xmath is equal to @xmath . The
same analysis can be applied for (e), and the result is the same. With
this constraint, since we have introduced four new fields, one gauge
node, and two new terms to the superpotential, the tiling condition is
violated. In the theories that we have checked this results in
five-dimensional VMSs. We hence cannot introduce four fields.

The final un-Higgsing process involves the insertion of five new fields.
Careful examination implies that this can be done by introducing two
cubic terms into the superpotential with opposite signs. If we use the
notation of Figure A.1 (c), we can write the terms as follows: @xmath (
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath can be equal). Notice that by Higgsing @xmath
we obtain two terms in the superpotential that contain two fields each,
and therefore four fields should be integrated out. By a similiar
analysis to the above, after satisfying the tiling condition by
splitting terms in the superpotential it can be seen that @xmath and
@xmath should appear in different split negative terms. Similarly,
@xmath and @xmath should appear in different split positive terms.

Finally, note that five fields is the maximum number of fields that can
be introduced if one wants to obtain the original theory by Higgsing
only one field. This concludes the discussion of our un-Higgsing
algorithm.

### Appendix B The warp factor for resolutions of @xmath and @xmath

We are interested in studying supergravity backgrounds corresponding to
M2 branes localized on the space @xmath , which will be the resolution
of either @xmath or @xmath . After placing @xmath spacetime-filling M2
branes at a point @xmath in the resolved space @xmath we must solve the
Green’s equation ( 4.2.41 ) for the warp factor @xmath . Using the
explicit form of the Laplacian we can write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.0.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since we can choose coordinates such that the metrics we are considering
are formally identical and given by ( 4.1.5 ), the Laplacian in both
cases can be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.0.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the angular Laplacian @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.0.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.0.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As we show in ( B.1.21 ) in the next subsection, we can expand the delta
function in terms of eigenfunctions of the Laplacian such that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.0.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we denote collectively the angular coordinates as @xmath , and
define @xmath and @xmath . Then, the equation for the warp factor reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.0.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have defined for simplicity

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.0.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We can now expand @xmath in eigenfunctions of the angular Laplacian.
Since @xmath is just a fixed point (not a variable), we can write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.0.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then the radial equation we have to solve reduces to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.0.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the angular eigenvalue of @xmath , to which we now turn.

#### b.1 Angular eigenfunctions in @xmath

We want to consider ( B.0.3 ) with fixed @xmath and construct
eigenfunctions of such an operator. For this we first concentrate on
each of the @xmath operators. For each @xmath , these look like

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.1.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Note that these angular Laplacians are the same as those for the
conifold. As such, many technical details and results can be borrowed
from [ 70 ] .

We consider the following function @xmath . It is obvious that

  -- -- -- ----------
           (B.1.11)
  -- -- -- ----------

Therefore it is interesting to consider the following eigenfunctions

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.1.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This equation has two solutions, given in terms of hypergeometric
functions

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.1.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.1.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have introduced a labelling for the quantum numbers
distinguishing the eigenfunctions. If @xmath solution ( B.1.13 ) is
non-singular while if @xmath it is ( B.1.14 ) that is the non-singular
solution. Both have eigenvalue under each @xmath operator given by
@xmath . Given these results, we can consider the functions

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.1.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the multi-index @xmath stands for @xmath and where @xmath is just
a normalization factor such that the norm of @xmath is one. It is now
clear that @xmath , with

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.1.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We now note that the @xmath are also eigenfunctions of the singular
cone. Indeed, we can consider the Laplacian on the unit @xmath , namely
@xmath . Then @xmath , with

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.1.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore, the @xmath are also normalized eigenfunctions for the @xmath
operator. Being eigenfunctions of a Hermitian operator, these satisfy

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.1.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and therefore

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.1.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we use @xmath to generically parametrize the angular coordinates
and @xmath stands for the angular part of the metric. One can check very
easily that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.1.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore, if we denote @xmath and @xmath and use the completeness
relation we have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.1.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

#### b.2 Angular eigenfunctions in @xmath

Since @xmath is a @xmath orbifold of @xmath along @xmath it is clear
that the local computation of the previous subsection will not be
changed. Thus, we just have to take care of global issues. Recall that
the wavefunctions in @xmath are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.2.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Since now @xmath , it is clear that the well-behaved @xmath will be
those for which @xmath is even; that is, @xmath . Therefore, dropping
the tilde, the angular wavefunctions in @xmath are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.2.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

such that @xmath , with

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.2.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

#### b.3 The warp factor for @xmath

We now want to use the results derived so far to compute explicitly the
warp factor for the resolution of the @xmath space. We will consider the
stack of branes to be sitting on the exceptional locus, where both the
@xmath fibre and the @xmath sphere shrink to zero size. This means that
@xmath , which in turn implies that @xmath and @xmath in ( B.1.15 )
vanish. Then, under these assumptions, the multi-index @xmath takes the
values @xmath . Indeed, we will assume the branes are located at the
north pole of each of the two two-spheres. As such, we should consider
also @xmath . Therefore, for such cases the angular eigenfunctions
@xmath and @xmath coincide and reduce, for each sphere, to Legendre
polynomials @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, from ( B.0.9 ) we see that the equation to solve reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.3.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We are interested in the simplified case in which, say, only @xmath .
Under such assumption, also the @xmath sphere shrinks to zero, so that
we can also consider @xmath . Then the corresponding angular
wavefunctions are @xmath . Also from ( 4.1.6 ) and ( B.0.7 ) we see that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.3.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

After substituting these back to ( B.3.25 ) the two solutions read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.3.27)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath . Since @xmath , for large @xmath only the @xmath solutions
decay at infinity, and these are therefore the solutions of interest.

We can now state the result for the warp factor, which turns out to be

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.3.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we collect all normalization factors in @xmath .

#### b.4 The warp factor for @xmath

We will compute the warp factor for @xmath M2 branes in arbitrary
location. As was shown above, the equation to solve is ( B.0.9 ) where
now we should use ( 4.5.81 ) for @xmath . We will be interested in the
simpler case in which @xmath . Moreover, as we explain in the main text,
the interesting contribution is that coming from @xmath . Under this
simplification, the equation to solve now reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.4.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Solving for @xmath and @xmath we obtain

  -- -- -- ----------
           (B.4.30)
  -- -- -- ----------

Indeed, the leading term for large @xmath corresponds to @xmath , and in
this limit

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.4.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------