We consider a number of aspects of the problem of defining time
observables in quantum theory. Time observables are interesting
quantities in quantum theory because they often cannot be associated
with self-adjoint operators. Their definition therefore touches on
foundational issues in quantum theory.

Various operational approached to defining time observables have been
proposed in the past. Two of the most common are those based on pulsed
measurements in the form of strings of projection operators and
continuous measurements in the form of complex potentials. One of the
major achievements of this thesis is to prove that these two operational
approaches are equivalent.

However operational approaches are somewhat unsatisfying by themselves.
To provide a definition of time observables which is not linked to a
particular measurement scheme we employ the decoherent, or consistent,
histories approach to quantum theory. We focus on the arrival time, one
particular example of a time observable, and we use the relationship
between pulsed and continuous measurements to relate the decoherent
histories approach to one based on complex potentials. This lets us
compute the arrival time probability distribution in decoherent
histories and we show that it agrees with semiclassical expectations in
the right limit. We do this both for a free particle and for a particle
coupled to an environment.

Finally, we consider how the results discussed in this thesis relate to
those derived by coupling a particle to a model clock. We show that for
a general class of clock models the probabilities thus measured can be
simply related to the ideal ones computed via decoherent histories.

\makededication

\department

Theoretical Physics \dedication For my parents, to whom I owe everything
and
For Laura, whose love and support made this possible. but more than
all(as all your more than eyes
tell me)there is a time for timelessness E.E. Cummings
