# Abstract (English)

During the Sixties of the last century the search for a mathematically
rigorous formulation of quantum field theory has begun. One of the first
and most prominent successes in this area is due to the algebraic and
axiomatic approach proposed by Haag and Kastler (refer to [ HK64 ] ).
This formalism allows the definition of quantum field theory over
Minkowski spacetime in a precisely specified mathematical context,
namely the algebraic one, and the natural implementation of the notions
of causality and Lorentz covariance in such theory.

We specify that this approach does not produce a new theory with respect
to the original formulation of quantum field theory on Minkowski
spacetime. On the contrary it gives rise to equivalent results, yet
presenting two significant advantages: in first place the theory is
formulated in a precise mathematical context, that allows to motivate
rigorously the results one obtains, and in second place the approach
proves suitable to remarkable extensions. As a matter of fact over the
years the original ideas of Haag and Kastler were significantly
developed and went through an enlargement of their range of
applicability, while largely preserving their original identity, until
the formulation of quantum field theory on curved spacetimes.

Almost 40 years after the work made by Haag and Kastler, Brunetti,
Fredenhagen and Verch ( [ BFV03 ] ) proposed a new approach to quantum
field theories on curved spacetimes named generally covariant locality
principle . On one hand this approach is to be considered as
complementary to the original one since it does not add new axioms to
the theory and allows the natural recovering of the algebraic and
axiomatic approach by Haag and Kastler. On the other hand it has the
merit of highlighting the common aspects of quantization procedures on
different spacetimes (namely the underlying functorial structure) and
the distinguishing features (namely state spaces). Furthermore the
functorial structure of this approach naturally implements covariance in
quantum field theories, as it is expected by each physical theory
according to general relativity.

In this thesis the generally covariant locality principle is presented
in a general setting. It postulates that each quantum field theory be
formulated as a locally covariant quantum field theory (sometimes
denoted by the acronym LCQFT ). Without pretending to be exhaustive, we
may say that a LCQFT consists of a covariant functor mapping each
globally hyperbolic spacetime to an algebra and each isometric embedding
between two globally hyperbolic spacetimes to an injective homomorphism
between the algebras associated to such spacetimes. Other two properties
can be required to a LCQFT : causality , which, simplifying, means that
elements coming from two algebras associated to spacetimes isometrically
embedded in causally separated subregions of a common spacetime commute,
and the time slice axiom , which requires that each homomorphism
associated to an isometric embedding whose image includes a Cauchy
surface of its codomain be surjective.

We repeat that general covariance is implemented in the theory as a
consequence of the covariance property of the functor giving rise to a
locally covariant quantum field theory . Following what was shown by
Brunetti, Fredenhagen and Verch, we present the proof of the fact that,
starting from a LCQFT fulfilling both causality and the time slice axiom
, it is possible to recover the Haag-Kastler scheme, involving nets of
local algebras and covariant automorphisms associated to isometries of
the underlying spacetime. This fact makes it possible to interpret a
proper subalgebra of the algebra provided by a LCQFT on a given
spacetime as the algebra of physical observables associated to that
spacetime.

The approach to quantum field theory suggested by the generally
covariant locality principle is completely independent of the specific
physical model considered from time to time, yet we must check the
possibility of realizing a locally covariant quantum field theory
fulfilling both causality and the time slice axiom in each situation of
physical interest in order to have a physically relevant principle. In
this thesis the results obtained in [ BFV03 ] for the Klein-Gordon field
are recovered and the cases of the Proca and the electromagnetic fields
are discussed. We take the chance to remind that the case of the Dirac
field was handled in [ San10b ] .

As we will see, the construction of a locally quantum field theory for a
bosonic field actually relies only on the possibility of building a
symplectic space of solutions for the classical field equations for each
globally hyperbolic spacetime and on the specification of a symplectic
map for each isometric embedding between two globally hyperbolic
spacetimes, the domain and codomain of the symplectic map being the
symplectic spaces associated to the domain and codomain of the given
embedding. As for the causality property and the time slice axiom of a
LCQFT built in this way, again the problem is reduced at a classical
level to a matter of support for solutions of Cauchy problems for the
field equations and to the surjectivity of the symplectic maps.

The main purpose of this thesis is to study a particular type of
dynamics proposed by [ BFV03 ] named relative Cauchy evolution (briefly
RCE ). The distinctive feature of the RCE relies in its ability of
highlighting the sensitivity of a locally covariant quantum field theory
to fluctuations of the metric of the underlying spacetime. In particular
our aim is to study a relation between the RCE and the stress-energy
tensor for the LCQFTs built for the Klein-Gordon field, the Proca field
and the electromagnetic field. The interest in such relation arises from
the intention of including the expectation value of the stress-energy
tensor of a given quantum field in the right hand side of the Einstein’s
equation (for further details on the semiclassical Einstein’s equation
we refer to [ Wal94 ] ).

Following the definition recently proposed by Fewster and Verch in [
FV11 ] , only for those locally covariant quantum field theories
fulfilling the time slice axiom , we define the relative Cauchy
evolution as an automorphism on the algebra associated to a given
globally hyperbolic spacetime induced by a local perturbation of the
spacetime metric. The definition of the RCE suggests its interpretation
as a dynamical reaction of the quantum field theory to a fluctuation of
the metric of the underlying spacetime. We will re-examine some
properties of the RCE with particular attention to its insensitivity to
perturbations of the metric induced by diffeomorphisms and to the fact
that, consequently, the functional derivative of the RCE with respect to
the spacetime metric has null divergence.

In [ BFV03 ] the relative Cauchy evolution for the Klein-Gordon field is
thoroughly analyzed. In particular Brunetti, Fredenhagen and Verch were
successful in showing that in this case a particular relation between
the RCE and the stress-energy tensor holds. Here we re-examine this case
as an example and we have as our goal to extend to the cases of the
Proca and the electromagnetic fields the relation between the RCE and
the stress-energy tensor proved in [ BFV03 ] for the Klein-Gordon field
(for the similar problem in the case of the Dirac field we refer again
to [ San10b ] ). In this way the meaning of the RCE in relation to the
stress-energy tensor is extended from the case of the Klein-Gordon field
to the Proca and the electromagnetic fields. In particular this fact
motivates the insertion of the expectation value of the stress-energy
tensor on the right hand side of the Einstein equation for the Proca and
the electromagnetic fields too.

###### Contents

-    Introduction
-    1 Mathematical preliminaries
    -    1.1 Differential geometry
        -    1.1.1 Manifolds and tensor bundles
        -    1.1.2 Vector bundles, connections and inner products
        -    1.1.3 Differential forms on a manifold
        -    1.1.4 Integration on a manifold
    -    1.2 Lorentzian geometry
        -    1.2.1 Lorentzian manifolds
        -    1.2.2 Globally hyperbolic spacetimes
    -    1.3 Wave equations
        -    1.3.1 Linear differential operators
        -    1.3.2 Normally hyperbolic equations and Cauchy problems
        -    1.3.3 Distributions on manifolds
        -    1.3.4 Fundamental solutions and Green operators
    -    1.4 Algebras and states
        -    1.4.1 C*-algebras, Weyl systems and CCR representations
        -    1.4.2 States and representations
    -    1.5 Category theory
-    2 The generally covariant locality principle
    -    2.1 Locally covariant quantum field theory
        -    2.1.1 The categories @xmath and @xmath
        -    2.1.2 Formulation of the generally covariant locality
            principle
        -    2.1.3 Recovering the Haag-Kastler framework
    -    2.2 Construction of a locally covariant quantum field theory
        -    2.2.1 From classical field theory…
        -    2.2.2 …to quantum field theory
    -    2.3 Examples
        -    2.3.1 The Klein-Gordon field
        -    2.3.2 The Proca field
        -    2.3.3 The electromagnetic field
-    3 Relative Cauchy evolution
    -    3.1 Definition and some properties
        -    3.1.1 Procedure to define the relative Cauchy evolution
        -    3.1.2 Functional derivative of the relative Cauchy
            evolution
    -    3.2 Relative Cauchy evolution for concrete fields
        -    3.2.1 Quasi-free Hadamard states
        -    3.2.2 Relative Cauchy evolution for the Klein-Gordon field
        -    3.2.3 Relative Cauchy evolution for the Proca field
        -    3.2.4 Relative Cauchy evolution for the electromagnetic
            field
-    Conclusions

## Introduction

In the mid Sixties Haag and Kastler proposed an algebraic approach to
quantum field theory on Minkowski spacetime ( [ HK64 ] ). Although it is
equivalent to the original formulation of quantum field theory arising
from the Wightman axioms ( [ SW64 ] ), this approach proved to be very
successful since it provided a mathematically precise framework for
quantum field theories which could be easily applied on curved
spacetimes.

In this context a further milestone ahead was unveiled by Brunetti,
Fredenhagen and Verch in [ BFV03 ] . To wit they formulated the
generally covariant locality principle (in the following denoted by GCLP
), postulating that each quantum field theory on an arbitrary globally
hyperbolic spacetime must be provided by a locally covariant quantum
field theory ( LCQFT ), i.e. a covariant functor from the category of
globally hyperbolic spacetimes to the category of algebras. The result
is a formulation of quantum field theory that naturally exhibits the
covariance property required by general relativity, this being a direct
consequence of the functorial structure of each LCQFT.

As suggested in [ BFV03 ] , one can require two additional properties to
a LCQFT:

-    causality , which, roughly speaking, means that we require that
    elements of the algebras, which are associated via a fixed LCQFT to
    globally hyperbolic spacetimes embedded in causally separated
    subregions of another globally hyperbolic spacetime, must commute;

-   the time slice axiom , which requires that each morphism of the
    category of algebras must be surjective if it is obtained applying a
    given LCQFT to a morphism of the category of globally hyperbolic
    spacetimes, whose image includes a Cauchy surface of the target
    spacetime.

Causality forces the absence of causal relations between observables
localized in causally separated subregions of a globally hyperbolic
spacetime. This simply means that we do not admit causal effects between
events not connected by causal curves. As for the time slice axiom, we
can interpret it as a sort of causal determinacy, in analogy with the
classical case. As much as we know everything about a classical
dynamical system once suitable initial data on a Cauchy surface of a
globally hyperbolic spacetime are assigned, likewise the whole algebra
of observables associated to a quantum field on a globally hyperbolic
spacetime is contained in the algebra of observables associated to a
suitable neighbourhood of a Cauchy surface.

In [ BFV03 ] it was shown that, on each globally hyperbolic spacetime,
an arbitrary causal LCQFT automatically gives rise to a quantum field
theory satisfying the Haag-Kastler axioms ( [ HK64 ] ). Hence we may
regard the GCLP as a natural criterion to realize on curved spacetimes
the approach to quantum field theory originally proposed by Haag and
Kastler. Moreover we may borrow the interpretation of the Haag-Kastler
axioms saying that a proper subalgebra of the algebra assigned by a
fixed LCQFT applied to any but fixed globally hyperbolic spacetime is
the algebra of the quantum observables admitted by the physics on the
given spacetime.

The GCLP proved to be very successful. A number of results in various
topics about quantum field theories on curved spacetimes were proved in
this framework. For example LCQFTs fulfilling both causality and the
time slice axiom were built for free field models of physical interest
(namely Klein-Gordon, Dirac, Proca and electromagnetic fields) and
questions about what it is meant for a theory to produce the same
physics in all spacetimes arose. A few references are [ BFV03 , BGP07 ,
San10b , Dap11 , FV11 ] .

Indeed this is not the whole story for quantum field theories on curved
spacetimes. In fact at this point we are not able to get physical
predictions from the algebra of observables. What we need is a notion of
state to be evaluated on the observables in order to get predictions
exactly as we do in quantum mechanics. This issue is not touched by the
GCLP, nor we discuss it in this thesis. Yet we feel worth to say that
relevant results were obtained also in this sector. For example it is
known that there exist states for quantum field theories on globally
hyperbolic spacetimes which satisfy properties that are known to hold
for the vacuum states of quantum field theories on Minkowski spacetime
(e.g. the Hadamard condition and the Reeh-Schlieder property). Some
references for these topics are [ Kay91 , Rad96 , SV01 , SVW02 , FV03 ,
FP03 , San10a , Dap11 ] .

Another interesting application of the GCLP consists in the realization
of a particular form of dynamics known as relative Cauchy evolution (
RCE ). The RCE is an algebraic automorphism that can be defined on each
globally hyperbolic spacetime and for each LCQFT fulfilling the time
slice axiom. Its relevance relies in the fact that it accounts for the
effects that a fluctuation of the spacetime metric produces on the
algebra provided by the LCQFT on a given globally hyperbolic spacetime.

The study of the RCE is interesting in first place because indeed we
want to deal with a stable theory, which is to say that it would be
unlikely to have a quantum field theory on a globally hyperbolic
spacetime with observables that are so much sensitive to small changes
in the spacetime metric that they disappear (or maybe appear) only
because of a small change in the spacetime geometry. In the second place
the interest in the analysis of the reaction of a quantum field theory
to fluctuations of the spacetime metric comes from the attempt to solve
the semiclassical Einstein’s equation (we only give a sketch of the
problem). Up to now our quantum field theories (and this is the case of
the GCLP too) are settled on spacetimes which are given once and for
all. Yet, as far as we know, the spacetime where we live is a solution
of the Einstein’s equation. To simplify the situation assume that in the
whole universe there is nothing but a quantum field. Then one should
insert the expectation value of the stress-energy tensor associated to
such field on the RHS of the Einstein’s equation (the equation that
arises is the above mentioned semiclassical Einstein’s equation, see [
Wal94 ] for further reference). When one tries to solve the
semiclassical Einstein’s equation, serious difficulties emerge: As the
solution develops, the quantum field given at the beginning is affected
by the new geometry of the spacetime where it lives. Hence we have a
back-reaction effect, namely the quantum field, whose stress-energy
tensor appears on the RHS of the semiclassical Einstein’s equation, is
affected by the solution of such equation. If the quantum field theory
is too much sensitive to a change in the spacetime structure
(essentially a change in the metric), it may happen that the
stress-energy tensor appearing on the RHS of the semiclassical
Einstein’s equation loses its meaning while we solve the equation (as a
matter of fact it happens that we no longer have any equation to solve).
Being able to properly control the RCE means that the algebra of
observables provided by a given LCQFT on some globally hyperbolic
spacetime is not severely distorted by a small change in the spacetime
metric, hence we can expect that the stress-energy tensor associated to
the quantum field preserves its meaning while we solve the semiclassical
Einstein’s equation, i.e. it still describes the stress-energy tensor
associated to the quantum field taken into account even when the
spacetime geometry has changed due to the fact that we are solving the
Einstein’s equation.

Now that we have given a sketch of the topics we are going to deal with
and we have presented the motivation that pushed us to their study, we
would like to briefly summarize the content of the thesis.

In Chapter 1 we present almost all the mathematical tools that will be
needed for the next chapters. We devote Section 1.1 to introduce some
notions in differential geometry, namely manifolds and vector bundles.
Particular attention is devoted to differential forms and integration
over manifolds. In Section 1.2 we specialize to the case of Lorentzian
manifolds, being interested in the notion of global hyperbolicity. With
these concepts at hand, in Section 1.3 we turn our attention to the
discussion of wave equations on globally hyperbolic spacetime. In first
place we define what we mean by wave equation (or normally hyperbolic
equation to be more precise) and in second place we present a theorem
about the existence and uniqueness of solutions for Cauchy problems
associated to normally hyperbolic equations, we introduce Green
operators and we study some of their properties. In Section 1.4 we
completely change the subject in order to deal with algebras and states.
We are mainly interested in unital C*-algebras (in particular Weyl
systems and CCR representations, which are special C*-algebras that
bestly fit the canonical commutation relations) and states defined on
them. We conclude the first chapter with Section 1.5 , where we recall
some basic concepts from category theory.

The main discussion begins with Chapter 2 . In Section 2.1 the generally
covariant locality principle (GCLP) is formulated defining the notion of
locally covariant quantum field theory (LCQFT) and a physical
interpretation of the principle is provided, interpretation that is
essentially borrowed from that of the Haag-Kastler axioms (refer to [
HK64 ] ). We conclude this section showing that it is possible to
rigorously recover the Haag-Kastler axioms (hence their interpretation)
once that a LCQFT fulfilling the causality condition and the time slice
axiom is given. We devote Section 2.2 to show a procedure to build a
LCQFT starting from the assignment of a proper normally hyperbolic
equation involving sections in a general vector bundle over a globally
hyperbolic spacetime. Such procedure essentially consists in the
construction of a covariant functor describing the theory of the
classical field and in the quantization of this theory via composition
with a properly defined covariant functor which embodies the
quantization scheme. Section 2.3 concludes the second chapter presenting
the realization of LCQFTs for three models of physical interest, namely
the Klein-Gordon field, the Proca field and the electromagnetic field.
While the Klein-Gordon field is a mere specialization of the general
procedure presented in Section 2.2 , the other two require significant
modifications due to the fact that their classical dynamics is not ruled
by a normally hyperbolic equation.

We conclude the thesis with Chapter 3 discussing the relative Cauchy
evolution (RCE). In Section 3.1 we define the RCE for a LCQFT fulfilling
the time slice axiom and we study its insensitivity to fluctuations of
the perturbed spacetime metric produced by diffeomorphisms. After that
we introduce the functional derivative of the RCE with respect to the
spacetime metric as a section in the symmetrized tensor product of two
copies of the tangent bundle and we show that its divergence (with
respect to the Levi-Civita connection) is null. These properties, namely
symmetry and null divergence, are hints for a strict relation between
the functional derivative of the RCE and the stress-energy tensor
associated to some quantum field. The study of this relation for the
specific cases of the Klein-Gordon, the Proca and the electromagnetic
fields concludes the thesis. Specifically in Section 3.2 , after a brief
summary of some of the properties satisfied by quasifree Hadamard
states, we present the calculation originally performed in [ BFV03 ] to
prove that a strict relation between the RCE and the quantized
stress-energy tensor holds for the Klein-Gordon field and we show that
an identical relation holds for the Proca and the electromagnetic fields
too.

## Chapter 1 Mathematical preliminaries

We devote the present chapter to the introduction of the main
mathematical tools which will be indispensable for the discussion in the
following chapters. All the topics presented here are discussed very
briefly and the interested reader is invited to refer to the specific
literature of each sector. For this scope at the beginning of all
sections we provide some reference for the subject discussed.

The first section is devoted to the definition of manifolds, vector
bundles and connections, differential forms and integration. In the
second section we present few arguments concerning Lorentzian geometry.
Then the third section is devoted to some basic topics about wave
equations on globally hyperbolic spacetimes: we present a theorem about
existence and uniqueness of solutions to such equations with proper
initial data and then we will introduce the advanced and retarded Green
operators together with their properties. In the fourth section of this
chapter we turn our attention to the mathematical ingredients that will
be essential in the construction of the algebraic approach to quantum
field theory, specifically C*-algebras and states. Finally the last
section presents some very useful concepts of category theory that will
be widely applied in the next chapters.

### 1.1 Differential geometry

This section is a very concise (and far from complete) recollection of
the notions in differential geometry that are unavoidable for our
discussion. Besides the efforts spent in making this section self
sufficient, almost all topics are presented in a manner that is too
brief to be clear for a reader that approaches to them for the first
time. For this reason the author strongly encourages the reader to refer
to any book concerning differential geometry (for example [ Jos95 ] or [
Boo86 ] ) to clarify the omissions to which we are forced.

#### 1.1.1 Manifolds and tensor bundles

We begin defining manifolds. These objects will provide the playground
for the entire thesis. The notion of manifold that we present is not the
more general one. To be precise we define smooth connected Hausdorff
manifolds with a countable basis of open subsets. This is a sufficiently
wide class of manifolds and at the same time it incorporates a number of
properties we are interested in.

###### Definition 1.1.1.

A @xmath -dimensional manifold @xmath is a connected Hausdorff
topological space with a countable basis of open subsets such that for
each point @xmath there exists a triple @xmath , called coordinate
neighborhood (or local chart ), where @xmath is an open neighborhood of
@xmath in @xmath , @xmath is an open neighborhood of 0 in @xmath and
@xmath is a homeomorphism. There are two other requirements:

-   there exists a (smooth) atlas , which is a collection @xmath of
    coordinate neighborhoods in @xmath , where @xmath is an index set,
    such that @xmath is an open covering of @xmath and the map, called
    transition chart ,

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    is a diffeomorphism for each @xmath , @xmath such that @xmath ;

-   there exists a maximal atlas , i.e. an atlas that contains each
    coordinate neighborhood @xmath such that the transition maps @xmath
    and @xmath are diffeomorphisms for each @xmath with @xmath .

We would like to make some remarks concerning this definition. In the
first place each atlas of a manifold is contained in a maximal one, so
that it is sufficient to find an atlas and then the maximal atlas is
automatically obtained. This implies that a connected Hausdorff space
with a countable basis becomes a manifold if it possesses an atlas, even
if not maximal. Secondly we observe that the topology of each manifold
defined here is such that it is also a paracompact space and this
implies that for each of our manifolds there exists a partition of unity
(cfr. [ Boo86 , Chap. V, Sect. 4, p. 193] ).

Now that we have a notion of manifold, we would like to define “regular”
functions between manifolds (continuous functions are already defined
since manifolds are topological spaces).

###### Definition 1.1.2.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two manifolds and let @xmath be a continuous
function from @xmath to @xmath . We say that @xmath is a @xmath
-function if for each @xmath , each coordinate neighborhood @xmath of
@xmath in @xmath and each coordinate neighborhood @xmath of @xmath in
@xmath , the function

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

is of class @xmath (in the sense of functions between open subsets of
Euclidean spaces).

Moreover @xmath is a smooth function if it is a @xmath -function for
each @xmath and we say that @xmath is a diffeomorphism if it is a
homeomorphism which is smooth together with its inverse.

Given a manifold @xmath and a notion of smooth function, for each @xmath
it is possible to introduce a vector space @xmath , called tangent space
that proves very useful when one wants to speak of “derivatives” at the
point @xmath of real valued functions defined on @xmath .

###### Definition 1.1.3.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional manifold and let @xmath . Consider
the set @xmath of smooth curves @xmath , where @xmath is an open
interval of @xmath containing 0, such that @xmath . We say that two
curves @xmath , @xmath are equivalent (and we write @xmath ) if there
exists a coordinate neighborhood @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath ¹ ¹ 1
Here the composition @xmath is to be intended in a proper sense: @xmath
denotes the composition of @xmath with a function @xmath from an open
interval @xmath of @xmath containing 0 (eventually smaller than the
domain @xmath of @xmath ) to @xmath defined by @xmath for each @xmath .
, where @xmath denotes the usual derivative of a function from an open
interval of @xmath containing 0 to an open subset of a Euclidean space.
Then we define the tangent space @xmath as the quotient of @xmath with
respect of the equivalence relation @xmath .

It is possible to show that @xmath is actually a @xmath -dimensional
@xmath -vector space and that its elements act as “derivatives” on real
valued functions defined on neighborhoods of @xmath . To be precise by
“derivative” we mean the following: let @xmath be a smooth real valued
function defined at least on a neighborhood of @xmath and let @xmath be
an element of the tangent space @xmath ; we define the application of
@xmath to @xmath as the real number @xmath where @xmath is any of the
curves in the equivalence class @xmath . To see how this works refer to
[ Ish99 , Chap. 2] : there the tangent space is seen both as a “set of
derivatives” and as a set of equivalence classes of curves (as in the
above definition) and the equivalence of this two approaches is
thoroughly analyzed.

###### Remark 1.1.4.

Thanks to the @xmath -vector structure of @xmath , it is possible to
introduce the cotangent space @xmath as its dual: We define the elements
of @xmath as linear maps from @xmath to @xmath . We obtain again a
@xmath -dimensional @xmath -vector space and then we can build via
tensor products a new @xmath -dimensional @xmath -vector space called
tensor space of type @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By convention we set @xmath . Finally we build the tensor space via
direct sum:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is again a real vector space (this time @xmath ) and it can be even
shown that @xmath is an associative algebra generated by @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath .

Once that we have the notion of tangent space, we can define the tangent
bundle @xmath of a manifold @xmath as the disjoint union on the manifold
of the tangent spaces at each point:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly we define the cotangent bundle @xmath , the tensor bundle of
type @xmath @xmath and the tensor bundle @xmath . Notice that @xmath is
simply @xmath .

At this point @xmath are merely sets. Hereafter we will endow them with
a far richer structure.

Our knowledge about tangent spaces allows us to introduce a notion of
differential at a point that can be patched on the entire manifold
giving rise to the so called pushforward. This new differential at a
fixed point indeed reduces to the usual differential when the manifolds
involved are open subsets of Euclidean spaces endowed with the trivial
atlas (the canonical identification of each tangent space at a point of
an open subset of a Euclidean space with the same Euclidean space is
understood).

###### Definition 1.1.5.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two manifolds. Consider a smooth map @xmath and
a point @xmath . We define the differential of @xmath at @xmath as the
map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the equivalence class in the appropriate tangent
space that has @xmath as representative.

We define the push-forward through @xmath as the map @xmath such that
@xmath for each @xmath .

Moreover we say that @xmath is:

-   an immersion if @xmath and @xmath is injective for each @xmath ;

-   a submersion if @xmath and @xmath is surjective for each @xmath ;

-   an embedding if it is an immersion and @xmath maps @xmath
    homeomorphically onto its image @xmath (endowed with the topology
    induced by that of @xmath ), i.e. the map

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    is a homeomorphism.

It is possible to show that the definition of differential at a point is
well posed and it is easy to see that it reduces to the usual notion of
differential when @xmath and @xmath are open subsets of Euclidean
spaces, as anticipated. For this reason often the push-forward through
@xmath is also called differential and is denoted with @xmath . Instead
the name “push-forward” is due to the fact that in some sense @xmath
“pushes” through @xmath each element @xmath to an element @xmath in such
a way that if @xmath then @xmath .

Embeddings allow us to recognize submanifolds.

###### Definition 1.1.6.

Let @xmath be a manifold and let @xmath be a a manifold whose underlying
set is included in @xmath . We say that a manifold @xmath is a
submanifold of @xmath if the inclusion map @xmath , @xmath is an
embedding from @xmath to @xmath .

###### Remark 1.1.7.

An important example of submanifold of a given @xmath -dimensional
manifold @xmath is the following. Suppose that @xmath is a connected
open subset of @xmath . We can endow @xmath with the topology induced by
the topology of @xmath and we immediately recognize that @xmath is a
connected Hausdorff topological space with a countable basis of open
subsets. We can define a coordinate neighborhood for @xmath taking a
coordinate neighborhood @xmath for @xmath : We take @xmath as open
subset of @xmath (notice that this is also an open subset of @xmath and
we use the fact that @xmath is a homeomorphism from @xmath to @xmath to
deduce that we can take @xmath as open subset of @xmath . Then we define
@xmath , @xmath and we observe that @xmath is a homeomorphism (it is
bijective by construction and it is continuous with its inverse as a
consequence of the same property for @xmath ). Hence @xmath is a
coordinate neighborhood for @xmath (if it happens that @xmath is not a
neighborhood of 0, a translation in @xmath is sufficient to satisfy also
this requirement). Applying this construction to all the elements of the
maximal atlas of @xmath , we obtain the maximal atlas of @xmath end we
recognize that @xmath is actually a @xmath -dimensional manifold. The
inclusion map @xmath is smooth because the coordinate neighborhoods for
@xmath are the restrictions (in the sense of the construction above) of
the coordinate neighborhoods for @xmath and the transition charts of
@xmath are smooth by definition of manifold. For each @xmath , @xmath is
injective because each curve contained in a neighborhood of @xmath in
@xmath is mapped through @xmath to the same curve in the same
neighborhood of @xmath , regarded now as a neighborhood with respect to
the topology of @xmath . This shows that @xmath is an immersion.
Consider now the map @xmath , @xmath . If on the image @xmath we
consider the topology that is induced by the topology of @xmath , we
realize that the topological space @xmath coincides with the topological
space @xmath , hence it is trivial to check that @xmath is a
homeomorphism because it is nothing but the identity map of @xmath .
Then we realize that the @xmath -dimensional manifold @xmath constructed
above is also a submanifold of @xmath . Moreover @xmath is a
diffeomorphism as a consequence of the fact that all the transition
charts for @xmath are diffeomorphisms (this being a consequence of the
existence of a maximal atlas for @xmath ). Moreover notice that @xmath
is an open map because @xmath is an open subset of @xmath : Take an open
subset @xmath of @xmath and note that trivially @xmath ; since the
topology on @xmath is induced by that of @xmath , we find an open subset
@xmath of @xmath such that @xmath ; we deduce that @xmath is also an
open subset of @xmath and we conclude that @xmath maps open subsets of
@xmath to open subsets of @xmath , i.e. it is an open map.

A special case of this situation is the following. Let @xmath and @xmath
be @xmath -dimensional manifolds and suppose that @xmath is an embedding
whose image @xmath is an open subset of @xmath . Notice that @xmath is
also connected: We can find a curve contained in @xmath connecting two
arbitrary points @xmath and @xmath of @xmath composing @xmath with a
curve @xmath in @xmath that connects the preimages of @xmath and @xmath
(the existence of @xmath follows from the hypothesis of connectedness of
@xmath ). Applying the construction given above to the connected open
subset @xmath of @xmath , we realize that @xmath becomes a @xmath
-dimensional manifold that is a submanifold of @xmath . Since @xmath is
an embedding, we have that @xmath is a homeomorphism. Now also @xmath is
a manifold so that we can ask whether @xmath has some more regularity
beyond the continuity of itself and its inverse. To this end consider a
point @xmath . We take a coordinate neighborhood @xmath of @xmath in
@xmath and a coordinate neighborhood @xmath of @xmath in @xmath . We
recognize immediately that @xmath is also a coordinate neighborhood of
@xmath in @xmath because @xmath , being an open neighborhood of @xmath
in the topology of @xmath , is also an open neighborhood of @xmath in
the topology of @xmath . Recalling Definition 1.1.2 , we have that
@xmath is smooth by hypothesis and that @xmath because @xmath and @xmath
coincide on @xmath . Hence @xmath is smooth too and the arbitrariness in
the choice of the point @xmath and of the coordinate neighborhoods
implies that @xmath is smooth. On the one hand @xmath is injective for
each @xmath because @xmath is injective. On the other hand @xmath must
be also surjective otherwise @xmath . Then the inverse function theorem
implies that @xmath is a diffeomorphism. Using the inclusion map @xmath
(that is actually an embedding, as we saw above), we can decompose
@xmath in @xmath . In particular this implies that @xmath is an open map
because @xmath is a homeomorphism and @xmath is an open map as seen
above.

Exploiting the definition of the cotangent space as dual of the tangent
space, we can introduce a “dual” of the notion of push-forward.

###### Definition 1.1.8.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two manifolds and let @xmath be a smooth
function. We call pull-back through @xmath the map @xmath defined as the
pointwise dual of the push-forward @xmath , i.e. for each @xmath , each
@xmath and each @xmath we require that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the dual pairings between the vector spaces @xmath and @xmath and
between the vector spaces @xmath and @xmath are taken into account.

The reader should bear in mind that the dual pairing between @xmath and
@xmath is actually part of the definition of @xmath as the vector space
dual to @xmath (recall the definition of cotangent space in Remark 1.1.4
).

###### Remark 1.1.9.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two manifolds and let @xmath be a smooth
function. An extension of the notions of push-forward and pull-back is
possible using the tensor structure of @xmath :

-   the push-forward @xmath through @xmath is defined by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for each @xmath and each @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath on
    the RHS ² ² 2 Here, and in the rest of this thesis, the acronym
    “LHS” stands for “left hand side”, while the acronym “RHS” stands
    for “right hand side”. is the push forward through @xmath from
    @xmath to @xmath ;

-   the pull-back @xmath through @xmath , defined by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for each @xmath and each @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath on
    the RHS is the pull-back through @xmath from @xmath to @xmath .

We can enlarge the notion of push-forward and pull-back much more if we
suppose that @xmath is a diffeomorphism: in such case the smooth map
@xmath is bijective and we have at our disposal also the smooth
bijective map @xmath , hence we can push forward through @xmath all the
elements of @xmath to @xmath and we can pull back through @xmath all the
elements of @xmath to @xmath . This allows us to define a new
push-forward and a new pull-back through @xmath :

-   the push-forward @xmath through @xmath is defined by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for each @xmath , each @xmath and each @xmath , where on the RHS
    @xmath denotes the push-forward through @xmath from @xmath to @xmath
    , while @xmath denotes the pull-back through @xmath from @xmath to
    @xmath ;

-   the pull-back @xmath through @xmath is defined by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for each @xmath , each @xmath and each @xmath , where on the RHS
    @xmath denotes the push-forward through @xmath from @xmath to @xmath
    , while @xmath denotes the pull-back through @xmath from @xmath to
    @xmath .

In this way both @xmath and @xmath are extended to the whole tensor
bundles over the appropriate manifolds. It turns out that this new
@xmath and @xmath are inverses of each other.

###### Remark 1.1.10.

Suppose that @xmath is a @xmath -dimensional manifold. Then our
knowledge about push-forwards and pull-backs through smooth functions
between manifolds allows us to recognize a manifold structure in @xmath
. We give a sketch of how this is done for the case of @xmath (all other
cases are similar). First of all we need a topology on tangent spaces.
The fact that @xmath is a @xmath -dimensional @xmath -vector space
allows us to naturally identify it with @xmath . Using this
identification we can also induce on each @xmath the usual topology of
@xmath . @xmath becomes a topological space when endowed with the
topology naturally induced by the disjoint union. Then we notice that
this topology is Hausdorff and it admits a countable basis of open
subsets as a consequence of the topologies on @xmath and on each of the
tangent spaces @xmath . Moreover @xmath is connected because @xmath and
all its tangent spaces are connected. Now we choose @xmath . Since
@xmath is the disjoint union over @xmath of the tangent spaces @xmath ,
@xmath is of the form @xmath for some @xmath and some @xmath . We
consider a coordinate neighborhood @xmath and we keep in mind that
@xmath is a diffeomorphism (this follows from the maximality of the
atlas of @xmath ). Then we take @xmath and we realize that this is
indeed a neighborhood of @xmath in the topology of @xmath . Furthermore
@xmath for each @xmath since @xmath is an open neighborhood of each
@xmath with respect to the topology of @xmath , hence @xmath . With the
identification of each @xmath with @xmath , we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath by definition of @xmath . We take @xmath and the above
identification implies @xmath (notice that on @xmath we consider the
topology induced by the disjoint union otherwise the identification is
not a homeomorphism). Considering @xmath as a map from @xmath to @xmath
, we easily conclude that @xmath is a homeomorphism. Therefore @xmath is
a coordinate neighborhood of @xmath in @xmath . All transition maps are
immediately diffeomorphisms (in the sense of functions between Euclidean
spaces) and the maximal atlas of @xmath is easily built starting from
the maximal atlas of @xmath .

From this observation we can deduce that @xmath and @xmath are
diffeomorphisms between the manifolds @xmath and @xmath if @xmath is a
diffeomorphism. We show this fact in the case of @xmath , but the same
proof works for any other tensor bundle of type @xmath . As a matter of
fact it suffices to show that both @xmath and @xmath are smooth
functions between the manifolds @xmath and @xmath since, as we had
already observed in Remark 1.1.9 , @xmath and @xmath are inverses of
each other. We focus on @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is an open subset
of @xmath . Then @xmath is of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is an open subset of @xmath and @xmath is an open subset of
@xmath for each @xmath . Then we have that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

@xmath is an open subset of @xmath because @xmath is continuous. Since
for each @xmath the map @xmath is linear between the finite dimensional
topological vector spaces @xmath and @xmath , it must be continuous too.
Then it follows that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

is an open subset of @xmath for each @xmath . We conclude that @xmath
has exactly the shape of an open subset of @xmath and this implies that
@xmath is continuous. Similarly we see that @xmath is continuous and
hence both @xmath and @xmath are homeomorphisms. Finally the smoothness
of these maps easily follows from the smoothness of @xmath and @xmath .

#### 1.1.2 Vector bundles, connections and inner products

Till this point we have spoken of @xmath as a manifold. However it is
possible to recognize a richer structure on it. This structure is a
special case of that presented in the next definition.

###### Definition 1.1.11.

A vector bundle of rank @xmath over a manifold of dimension @xmath is a
triple @xmath , where @xmath , called total space , and @xmath , called
base , are manifolds of dimension respectively @xmath and @xmath and
@xmath , called projection , is a smooth surjective map such that the
following conditions hold:

-   for each @xmath the set @xmath , called fiber , carries the
    structure of an @xmath -dimensional @xmath -vector space;

-   for each @xmath there exists a pair @xmath , called local
    trivialization at @xmath of @xmath , where @xmath is an open
    neighborhood of @xmath in @xmath and @xmath is a diffeomorphism such
    that

    -   @xmath for each @xmath , where @xmath denotes the projection on
        the first factor of the Cartesian product,

    -   for each @xmath the map @xmath , defined by @xmath for each
        @xmath , is linear and bijective.

Note that the projection @xmath is an open map, i.e. it maps open sets
to open sets. This property is a consequence of the fact that the
projection on an argument of a Cartesian product is always an open map.

Usually we will denote vector bundles only with their total space.
However the choice of a base space and a projection is always
understood.

The vectorial structure of each fiber allows us to construct other
vector bundles using the vectorial operations (for example duality,
tensor product, direct sum) fiberwise, provided that the vector bundles
involved share the same base manifold. For example we can define the
dual vector bundle @xmath of the vector bundle @xmath simply taking the
dual spaces (in the usual sense of vector spaces) of the original
fibers. Notice that the direct sum @xmath of the vector bundles @xmath
and @xmath is called Whitney sum .

###### Remark 1.1.12.

bear in mind that each tensor bundle of type @xmath can be endowed with
a vector bundle structure. For example, in the case of the tangent
bundle @xmath this is done considering @xmath as total space, @xmath as
base, the projection @xmath naturally induced by the disjoint union of
tangent spaces as the projection, and @xmath as local trivializations
(identification of @xmath with @xmath is understood), where @xmath is
the maximal atlas of @xmath and @xmath . Then from now on, when we speak
of @xmath , we refer to it as endowed with their natural vector bundle
structure.

Notice that each tensor bundle of type @xmath is the dual of the tensor
bundle of type @xmath and also the Whitney sum of @xmath copies of
@xmath and @xmath copies of @xmath .

We can define maps between vector bundles that respect the vector bundle
structures.

###### Definition 1.1.13.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two vector bundles. We call vector bundle
homomorphism the pair @xmath where @xmath is a smooth function from the
base manifold @xmath to the base manifold @xmath and @xmath is a smooth
function from the total space @xmath to the total space @xmath such that
the following conditions hold:

-    compatibility with projections : @xmath ;

-    fiberwise linearity : @xmath is fiberwise a vector space
    homomorphism, i.e. the map

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    is linear for each @xmath .

Then we say that @xmath is a vector bundle isomorphism if it is a
bijective vector bundle homomorphism whose inverse is still a vector
bundle homomorphism such that @xmath .

In the next remark we show a construction that allows to build a vector
bundle whose total space and base space are submanifolds of the total
space and the base space of a given vector bundle. We didn’t include
such construction immediately after the definition of vector bundles
because we wanted to show also that the inclusion maps of the base space
and of the total space as submanifolds give rise to a vector bundle
homomorphism.

###### Remark 1.1.14.

Suppose that a vector bundle @xmath of rank @xmath over a @xmath
-dimensional manifold @xmath is given and assume that @xmath is a
connected open subset of @xmath . In Remark 1.1.7 we saw that it is
possible to use the manifold structure of @xmath to to make @xmath a
@xmath -dimensional manifold itself. We also recognized that the new
manifold @xmath is a submanifold of @xmath and that the inclusion map
@xmath is an embedding of @xmath into @xmath . Now we consider the
subset @xmath of the @xmath -dimensional manifold @xmath . Since @xmath
is an open subset of @xmath and @xmath is continuous, @xmath is an open
subset of @xmath . One can check by contradiction that @xmath is
connected exploiting the following properties: @xmath is an open map,
@xmath is locally trivial and @xmath is connected. Since @xmath is
connected Then it is possible to apply Remark 1.1.7 to the connected
open subset @xmath of the manifold @xmath . In this way we obtain a new
@xmath -dimensional manifold (which is actually a submanifold of @xmath
) that we denote with @xmath . We define the map @xmath , @xmath and we
note that its image is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hence @xmath is surjective. Since the topologies and the atlases of the
manifolds @xmath and @xmath are inherited via restriction from the
topologies and the atlases of @xmath and respectively @xmath , it
follows that @xmath is continuous and also smooth. Then @xmath is our
candidate to become a new vector bundle of rank @xmath . The first thing
to be checked is that @xmath is an @xmath -dimensional vector space for
each @xmath : this fact is trivial because @xmath and @xmath is of
course an @xmath -dimensional vector space. It remains only the problem
of the existence of local trivializations in neighborhoods of arbitrary
points of @xmath , but this difficulty is easily overcome in the
following manner. Consider a point @xmath and take a local
trivialization @xmath of @xmath at @xmath . We note that @xmath is an
open neighborhood of @xmath in the topology of @xmath and that we can
define the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which satisfies

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

for each @xmath and is such that the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

is linear for each @xmath . These properties follow from the properties
of @xmath . Hence we have proved that for each point of @xmath there
exists a local trivialization. This implies that @xmath is a vector
bundle in its own right. We will usually denote it simply with its total
space @xmath as it is customary for vector bundles.

Side by side with this construction, we can also introduce the inclusion
maps @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath . At this point we think @xmath
and @xmath as @xmath -dimensional manifolds and we keep in mind that
@xmath is a submanifold of @xmath . By definition of submanifold @xmath
is an embedding, hence, in particular, a smooth map. The same is true
for @xmath . We note that @xmath and for each @xmath we realize that the
map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

is a vector space isomorphism. These facts imply that @xmath is a vector
bundle homomorphism which is fiberwise a vector space isomorphism.

The following remark focuses the attention on vector bundle
homomorphisms. It provides a procedure to restrict certain vector bundle
homomorphisms to vector bundle isomorphisms.

###### Remark 1.1.15.

Let @xmath and @xmath be vector bundles of rank @xmath over @xmath
-dimensional manifolds @xmath and @xmath and consider a vector bundle
homomorphism @xmath from @xmath to @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is an
embedding of @xmath into @xmath whose image @xmath is open in @xmath and
that @xmath is fiberwise a vector space isomorphism. The first step is
the application of the last part of Remark 1.1.7 from which we deduce
that @xmath is a @xmath -dimensional submanifold of @xmath and that the
map @xmath , @xmath is a diffeomorphism such that @xmath . In particular
we note that @xmath is a connected open subset of @xmath , hence it is
possible to apply Remark 1.1.14 obtaining the new vector bundle @xmath .
Defining the map @xmath , @xmath , we can check that it is continuous
with respect to the topologies of @xmath and @xmath because @xmath is
continuous with respect to the topologies of @xmath and @xmath and the
topology on @xmath , whose underlying set is an open subset of @xmath ,
is induced by that of @xmath . Moreover @xmath is smooth because @xmath
is smooth and the atlas of @xmath is nothing but the restriction of the
atlas of @xmath . We can even draw more accurate conclusions noting that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath and that for each @xmath the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

is linear. This shows that @xmath is a vector bundle homomorphism. We
assumed that @xmath is a vector space isomorphism for each @xmath ,
hence @xmath is exactly defined as the restriction of @xmath to its
image (for this reason from now on we will denote the vector bundle
@xmath with @xmath ). This shows that @xmath is a bijective smooth
function and that @xmath is a bijective vector bundle homomorphism. Some
work with local trivializations and coordinate neighborhoods shows that
for each @xmath there exists an open neighborhood @xmath of @xmath in
@xmath such that the Jacobian determinant of @xmath (locally trivialized
and written in local coordinate) at @xmath is not null. Hence also
@xmath is a smooth function between the manifolds @xmath and @xmath as a
consequence of the inverse function theorem. It is easy to check that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and that for each @xmath the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

coincides with the inverse of @xmath (hence, in particular, it is a
vector space homomorphism). Then we conclude that @xmath is a vector
bundle homomorphism from the vector bundle @xmath to the vector bundle
@xmath and that it is the inverse of @xmath so that @xmath is a vector
bundle isomorphism. Remark 1.1.14 provides a vector bundle homomorphism
@xmath from @xmath to @xmath which is fiberwise a vector space
isomorphism. This gives us the opportunity to decompose the original
vector bundle homomorphism @xmath : We already know that @xmath and it
can be directly checked that @xmath , hence we deduce that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Now we want to introduce a particular class of smooth functions from a
manifold to the total space of a vector bundle whose base is such
manifold. The peculiarity of such maps resides in their compatibility
with the projection of the vector bundle.

###### Definition 1.1.16.

Let @xmath be a vector bundle over a manifold @xmath . A @xmath -section
in @xmath is a @xmath -function @xmath from the base manifold @xmath to
the total space manifold @xmath such that @xmath .

A (smooth) section in @xmath is a @xmath -section in @xmath for each
@xmath or, equivalently, is a smooth function @xmath from the base
manifold @xmath to the total space manifold @xmath such that @xmath .

The space of @xmath -sections @xmath is the set comprised by all @xmath
-sections in @xmath , the space of (smooth) sections @xmath is the set
comprised by all the smooth sections in @xmath and finally the space of
smooth sections with compact support @xmath (or @xmath ) is the set
comprised by all the smooth sections in @xmath with compact support.

Note that if @xmath is a smooth section on a vector bundle, we will
often simply say that @xmath is a section. On the contrary for @xmath
-sections we will never omit the prefix @xmath . We observe that the
fiberwise vector structure of each vector bundle induces a vector
structure on the set of sections in such vector bundle. This fact
motivates the word “space” (in the sense of vector space) used to denote
the set of @xmath -sections, the set of sections and the set of
compactly sections defined above.

###### Remark 1.1.17.

Let @xmath and @xmath be vector bundles over the manifolds @xmath and
respectively @xmath and let @xmath be a section in @xmath . Consider a
vector bundle homomorphism @xmath from @xmath to @xmath , where @xmath
is an embedding of the manifold @xmath into the manifold @xmath whose
image @xmath is an open subset of @xmath and @xmath is fiberwise a
vector space isomorphism. Then we can apply Remark 1.1.15 and use the
vector bundle isomorphism @xmath from @xmath to @xmath to define the
function @xmath from @xmath to @xmath . This is undoubtedly a smooth map
because it is a composition of smooth maps and we can ask whether it is
a section in the vector bundle @xmath . The answer is positive because

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that, when @xmath is a vector bundle isomorphism form @xmath to
@xmath , we can directly use it to obtain the section @xmath in @xmath
from a section @xmath in @xmath and its inverse @xmath to obtain the
section @xmath from a section @xmath in @xmath . With an abuse of
language we say that @xmath and @xmath are respectively the push-forward
of @xmath and the pull-back of @xmath through @xmath .

From Remark 1.1.9 we can deduce that, given a diffeomorphism @xmath
between the manifolds @xmath and @xmath , @xmath can be recognized as a
vector bundle homomorphism between the tangent bundles @xmath and @xmath
(intended as vector bundles) and similarly @xmath can be recognized as a
vector bundle homomorphism between the tangent bundles @xmath and @xmath
. Moreover we can extend them to tensor bundles of arbitrary type
respectively over @xmath and @xmath and realize that @xmath and @xmath
are inverses of each other so that are both vector bundle isomorphisms.
These observations allow us to push forward and pull back sections in
tensor bundles of any type through diffeomorphisms of the base manifolds
exactly as we do with vector bundle isomorphisms.

###### Example 1.1.18.

A simple example of a space of sections is provided by the set @xmath of
smooth real valued functions over the manifold @xmath . As a matter of
fact in such case we can identify each @xmath with the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

(still called @xmath ) which is immediately recognized as a section in
the trivial tensor bundle @xmath .

We take the chance to introduce some nomenclature: Sections in the
tangent bundle of a manifold are usually called vector fields , while
sections in the cotangent bundle are known as 1-forms . Moreover
sections in each tensor bundle of type @xmath are generally called
tensor fields .

In a vector bundle there is no natural notion of differentiation, so
that we must provide such notion together with the vector bundle in
order to be able to do calculus.

###### Definition 1.1.19.

Let @xmath be a manifold and let @xmath be a vector bundle over @xmath .
A (linear) connection on @xmath is a map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
              @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

that satisfies the following properties:

-   @xmath -linearity in the first argument : for each @xmath , @xmath ,
    each @xmath , @xmath and each @xmath it holds

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   @xmath -linearity in the second argument : for each @xmath , @xmath
    , each @xmath and each @xmath , @xmath it holds

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    Leibniz rule in the second argument : for each @xmath , each @xmath
    and each @xmath it holds that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath is the section in @xmath defined by @xmath for each
    @xmath .

The properties required allow us to think a connection @xmath as a map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or also as a map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We want to stress that on a given vector bundle there may be several
possible inequivalent connections. This is indeed the case also for
tensor bundles of each type. A concrete example of a connection on the
trivial tensor bundle @xmath is provided by the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

defined in the statement of the Leibniz rule for a connection (the
identification of @xmath with the space of sections @xmath presented in
Example 1.1.18 is understood).

Notice that there is a natural way to induce a connection on a vector
bundle built through fiberwise vectorial operations (e.g. duality,
tensor product and Whitney sum) starting from the connections on the
original vector bundles. Examples are provided by the following formulas
(we put superscripts on @xmath to indicate the vector bundle on which
the connection is defined):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are vector bundles over a manifold @xmath
endowed with connections @xmath and respectively @xmath , @xmath is an
arbitrary vector field over @xmath and @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
arbitrary sections respectively in @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

Now we want to define an object that characterizes the behavior of each
connection on a given vector bundle. To do this we need the following
construction. Suppose that @xmath is a connection over the vector bundle
@xmath and fix a point @xmath . We denote with @xmath the dimension of
@xmath and with @xmath the rank of @xmath . There exists a neighborhood
@xmath of @xmath such that @xmath is a coordinate neighborhood of @xmath
in @xmath and @xmath is a local trivialization at @xmath of @xmath . On
the one hand, using the coordinate neighborhood, we can obtain a set of
local vector fields (i.e. sections in @xmath ) @xmath that are pointwise
linearly independent: This is done pushing forward through the
diffeomorphism @xmath the vector fields @xmath on @xmath (identified
with @xmath ) that are defined by @xmath for each @xmath and each @xmath
, where @xmath is the standard orthonormal base of @xmath . On the other
hand, once chosen an orthonormal base @xmath of @xmath , we obtain a set
of sections @xmath in @xmath that are pointwise linearly independent
setting @xmath for each @xmath and each @xmath . That done, we can
define the Christoffel symbols.

###### Definition 1.1.20.

Let @xmath be a connection over the vector bundle @xmath . With the
construction given above, we can define the Christoffel symbols @xmath
of the connection @xmath in a neighborhood @xmath of a point @xmath in
@xmath imposing @xmath (summation over @xmath is implied).

Consider a vector bundle @xmath over a manifold @xmath endowed with a
connection @xmath and fix a smooth curve @xmath and @xmath . We can
consider the following problem: Determine @xmath from @xmath to @xmath
satisfying

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the vector tangent to @xmath in @xmath . Written in
local coordinates such problem reduces to a system of linear first order
ordinary differential equations, hence the solution exists and is unique
once that @xmath is given. In particular we obtain @xmath . This allows
us to give the next definition.

###### Definition 1.1.21.

Let @xmath be a vector bundle and let @xmath be a connection on it. For
each smooth curve @xmath we define the parallel transport along @xmath
as the linear function @xmath that maps each @xmath to @xmath as above.

We underline that in general the parallel transport depends upon the
choice of the curve connecting its endpoints, but, once that a curve is
chosen, the connection gives us a way to “connect” different fibers of
the vector bundle through parallel transport.

We want to present another object that characterizes a connection on a
vector bundle. However its definition requires a new tool.

###### Definition 1.1.22.

Let @xmath be a manifold. We call Lie bracket the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

uniquely determined by the following condition:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We take the chance to state the properties of the Lie bracket: it is
@xmath -bilinear, antisymmetric and satisfies the Jacobi identity , i.e.
for each @xmath , @xmath , @xmath it holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we are in position to properly define the curvature of a connection
on a vector bundle.

###### Definition 1.1.23.

Let @xmath be a vector bundle endowed with a connection @xmath . We call
curvature of the connection @xmath the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

###### Remark 1.1.24.

From its definition, we deduce that @xmath is @xmath -bilinear and
antisymmetric in the first two arguments and @xmath -linear in the last
argument. Therefore, denoting with @xmath the antisymmetrized tensor
product, we can interpret @xmath as a map from @xmath to @xmath .
Moreover its value at each point @xmath depends only on the values of
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath in an arbitrary neighborhood of @xmath so
that we are allowed to think @xmath as a section in the vector bundle
@xmath .

@xmath can be locally written in components following a procedure
analogous to that used to define Christoffel symbols (see before
Definition 1.1.20 ): For a fixed point @xmath , we can find an open
neighborhood @xmath of @xmath in @xmath , a set of pointwise linearly
independent local vector fields @xmath over @xmath and a set of
pointwise linearly independent local sections @xmath in @xmath , where
we set @xmath and @xmath , and we can define @xmath imposing @xmath .
Using this definition it is possible to obtain the expression of @xmath
in terms of the Christoffel symbols and their derivatives @xmath along
the local vector fields.

Now we define inner products on vector bundles. This additional
structure allows us to to pick out a specific connection on the tangent
bundle of a manifold that has particular importance for General
Relativity.

###### Definition 1.1.25.

Consider a vector bundle @xmath over the manifold @xmath . We call inner
product on @xmath a section @xmath in @xmath that fulfils the following
requirements:

-    (fiberwise) symmetry : for each @xmath and each @xmath , @xmath it
    holds that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    (fiberwise) non degeneracy : for each @xmath we have the
    implication

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Inner products on @xmath are called metrics on @xmath . Riemannian
metrics are those whose signature is of type @xmath at any point, while
Lorentzian metrics have signature of type @xmath .

In some situations it is customary to define Lorentzian metrics with the
requirement that their signature is of type @xmath . We can pass from
our definition to this one simply taking @xmath in place of @xmath .

Usually we will denote @xmath with @xmath and, if there is no risk of
misunderstanding, we will also omit @xmath in our notation so that
@xmath becomes @xmath . In the case of a metric we will write @xmath in
place of @xmath .

###### Remark 1.1.26.

Notice that each inner product on @xmath is automatically a (fiberwise)
non degenerate, symmetric, bilinear form from @xmath to the trivial
vector bundle @xmath . From another point of view, we could define inner
products on a vector bundle @xmath as (fiberwise) non degenerate
sections in the vector bundle @xmath , where @xmath denotes the
symmetrized tensor product. In this way the set of inner products on
@xmath becomes a subset of the vector space @xmath , which becomes a
Fréchet space when endowed with the usual topology of @xmath sections.

With the usual procedure we can locally rewrite in components an inner
product @xmath on a vector bundle @xmath . We must only fix @xmath ,
consider a local trivialization of @xmath in an open neighborhood @xmath
of @xmath , find a set @xmath of pointwise linearly independent sections
in @xmath and set @xmath for each @xmath , where @xmath . The property
of fiberwise symmetry implies that @xmath , while non degeneracy implies
that @xmath is an invertible @xmath matrix. This holds for each @xmath .
We denote by @xmath the inverse of @xmath for each @xmath .

Using an inner product on a vector bundle @xmath we can define the so
called musical isomorphisms between @xmath and its dual @xmath .

###### Definition 1.1.27.

Let @xmath be a vector bundle endowed with an inner product @xmath . We
define

-   the lowering isomorphism :

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

-   the rising isomorphism :

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

The raising isomorphism and the lowering isomorphism are collectively
called musical isomorphisms .

As suggested by their names, @xmath and @xmath are both vector bundle
isomorphisms.

We anticipated that we can uniquely determine a specific connection on
the tangent bundle of a manifold endowed with a metric.

###### Theorem 1.1.28.

Consider a manifold @xmath endowed with a metric @xmath . Then there
exists a unique connection @xmath on @xmath that satisfies the following
requirements:

-   @xmath is metric, i.e. for each @xmath , @xmath , @xmath it holds
    that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   @xmath is torsion free, i.e. for each @xmath , @xmath it holds that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

This connection @xmath on @xmath is called Levi-Civita connection .

From the requirements singling out the Levi-Civita connection among all
possible connections on @xmath , we can determine the Christoffel
symbols of the Levi-Civita connection (this fact actually guarantees
uniqueness of the Levi-Civita connection). This is done by fixing a
point @xmath and choosing a coordinate neighborhood of @xmath and a set
of pointwise orthonormal (with respect to the metric on @xmath ) local
vector fields @xmath ( @xmath ): we easily find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath denotes @xmath . Note that the symmetry @xmath implies that
the Christoffel symbols of the Levi-Civita connection satisfy

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We stress that each time that we will encounter a connection on the
tangent bundle of a manifold endowed with a metric, such connection will
be the Levi-Civita one.

Till now we have dealt with the curvature of a connection on an
arbitrary vector bundle. In the special case of the tangent bundle
@xmath of a manifold @xmath endowed with a metric @xmath we can define
other associated objects, namely the Ricci tensor @xmath and the scalar
curvature @xmath . We define them locally starting from the local
definitions of @xmath and @xmath : @xmath and @xmath .

We present here the expressions of the curvature and of the Ricci tensor
for the Levi-Civita connection on a manifold endowed with a metric:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.1.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

#### 1.1.3 Differential forms on a manifold

In this subsection we discuss a specific class of tensor fields over an
arbitrary manifold @xmath , called differential forms. A much more
detailed discussion in this topic can be found in [ Boo86 , Chap. V] .

Let @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional manifold and fix @xmath . For @xmath
, we consider @xmath . We would like to pick out a subspace @xmath ,
specifically the one consisting of such elements that are skew-symmetric
when intended as @xmath -linear maps from @xmath ( @xmath times) to
@xmath . To recognize these elements we need a new tool, the alternating
map.

###### Definition 1.1.29.

Let @xmath be a manifold and consider @xmath and @xmath . We define the
alternating map at @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

setting for each @xmath , each @xmath , @xmath , @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a permutation of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is
its sign.

Using the alternating map @xmath defined just above, we can introduce
alternating tensor bundles of type @xmath over a manifold @xmath .

###### Definition 1.1.30.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional manifold and consider @xmath and
@xmath . An alternating tensor of type @xmath over a manifold @xmath at
@xmath is an element @xmath such that @xmath . The alternating tensor
space of type @xmath , denoted by @xmath , is the set of all alternating
tensors of type @xmath over a manifold @xmath at @xmath and the
alternating tensor bundle of type @xmath , denoted by @xmath , is the
disjoint union over @xmath of @xmath .

By convention we set @xmath for each @xmath and @xmath .

It turns out that @xmath is a real vector space for each @xmath and each
@xmath and that @xmath is a vector bundle for each @xmath . It can be
shown that @xmath for each @xmath and that @xmath .

Once that a point @xmath is fixed, it is possible to define a new
algebra in a way similar to that followed for the definition of the
tensor algebra @xmath . The underlying set of such algebra is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The vector structure on @xmath is naturally induced by the direct sum
@xmath , while the algebraic structure requires the introduction of a
new operation, the so called wedge product.

###### Definition 1.1.31.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional manifold and consider @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . The wedge product @xmath is the map from @xmath
defined by the formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath and each @xmath .

It can be shown that @xmath can be naturally extended to an operation on
@xmath (still called wedge product and denoted by @xmath ) that is
binary, internal, bilinear and associative. This allows us to conclude
that @xmath is an associative algebra. The fact that @xmath ( @xmath
times) implies that @xmath is generated by @xmath and @xmath .

In addition to such pointwise algebraic structure, it is possible to
define a new vector bundle @xmath through the disjoint union of @xmath
over @xmath . @xmath is called alternating tensor bundle . As a by
product of this construction we obtain an extension of the wedge product
to an operation on the alternating tensor bundle. In particular we have
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The above preparation allows us to define @xmath -forms.

###### Definition 1.1.32.

We say that a @xmath -form over @xmath (also called differential form of
order @xmath over @xmath ) is a section in the alternating tensor bundle
of order @xmath @xmath . The space of @xmath -forms over @xmath is
denoted by @xmath . We define the space of differential forms over
@xmath @xmath as the direct sum of all the non trivial spaces of @xmath
-forms.

Notice that @xmath and that @xmath for each @xmath . We easily recognize
that @xmath is a vector spaces for each @xmath . This fact motivates the
word “space” (intended in the sense of vector space) used in the last
definition.

Previously we defined the wedge product pointwisely. It is possible to
extend this operation from the alternating tensor spaces at each point
to the space of differential forms @xmath simply imposing @xmath for
each @xmath and each @xmath , @xmath . It turns out that @xmath is an
associative algebra, known as exterior algebra of @xmath .

As a consequence of its definition, @xmath is a subspace of @xmath for
each @xmath . This fact guarantees that the observations made about
push-forwards and pull-backs through a diffeomorphism of sections in
tensor bundles of any type (see Remark 1.1.9 ) applies also in this
case, hence we can push forward and pull back any @xmath -form using a
diffeomorphism.

We take the chance to state some useful properties of the wedge product.

###### Proposition 1.1.33.

Let @xmath and @xmath be manifolds. Then for each @xmath , @xmath the
wedge product @xmath fulfils the following properties:

-   @xmath for each @xmath and each @xmath ;

-   @xmath f @xmath for each @xmath , each @xmath and each @xmath ;

-    if @xmath is a smooth function, for each @xmath and each @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where the wedge on the LHS is defined on @xmath , while the wedge on
    the RHS is defined on @xmath .

As a consequence of the last theorem we can conclude that, for each
diffeomorphism @xmath , the vector bundle isomorphism @xmath induces an
algebraic isomorphism between the exterior algebras @xmath and @xmath .
Notice that one can similarly consider the vector bundle isomorphism
@xmath and conclude that this induces an algebraic isomorphism between
the exterior algebras @xmath and @xmath . Moreover these algebraic
isomorphisms are inverses of each other.

Thanks to the following theorem it is possible to define a new operation
on the exterior algebra of @xmath that is a sort of special case of the
push-forward of a real valued smooth function (also called differential,
see Definition 1.1.5 ).

###### Proposition 1.1.34.

For each manifold @xmath there exists a unique @xmath -linear map @xmath
, called exterior derivative , fulfilling the following properties:

-    the exterior derivative coincides with the differential on @xmath ,
    i.e. @xmath for each @xmath ;

-    for each @xmath and each @xmath it holds that

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

-   @xmath .

Moreover the exterior derivative satisfies another property: For each
smooth map @xmath from a manifold @xmath to a manifold @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Notice that the last property of the exterior derivative may also be
read in this way if @xmath is a diffeomorphism:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the following we will denote the exterior derivative simply with
@xmath , omitting the subscript referred to the manifold. Notice that
there is no risk of confusion between exterior derivative and
differential because they coincide in the only situation in which they
may be confused, that is @xmath

Using the exterior derivative, we can introduce a classification of
@xmath -forms and then define the de Rham cohomology groups that will be
used to introduce an hypothesis when we will discuss the electromagnetic
field.

###### Definition 1.1.35.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional manifold and consider @xmath . We
say that @xmath is closed if @xmath while we say that it is exact if
there exists @xmath such that @xmath . We also denote with @xmath the
space of closed @xmath -forms over @xmath and with @xmath the space of
exact @xmath -forms over @xmath .

We call @xmath -th de Rham cohomology group of @xmath the quotient space
@xmath

Notice that @xmath and @xmath are actually vector spaces because @xmath
is linear on @xmath and @xmath is the kernel of @xmath when restricted
to @xmath , while @xmath is the image of @xmath through @xmath .
Moreover since @xmath , @xmath . Hence @xmath is a well defined vector
space.

In a @xmath -dimensional manifold @xmath , @xmath -forms are of
particular importance because we can use them to define the
orientability and the orientation of a manifold. These notions will
become relevant in the next subsection.

###### Definition 1.1.36.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional manifold. We say that @xmath is
orientable if there exists a @xmath -form @xmath over @xmath which is
nowhere null. If @xmath is orientable and @xmath is a choice of a
nowhere null @xmath -form over @xmath , we say that @xmath fixes an
orientation on @xmath and we call @xmath an oriented manifold .

Let @xmath and @xmath be two orientable manifolds and let @xmath be an
embedding. Choose a nowhere null @xmath -form @xmath over @xmath and a
nowhere null @xmath -form @xmath over @xmath so that @xmath and @xmath
are oriented. We say that @xmath is orientation preserving if there
exists a strictly positive real valued smooth function @xmath on @xmath
such that @xmath .

Notice that on a given orientable manifold @xmath there are different
possible choices of nowhere null @xmath -forms that induce the same
orientation. It turns out that there are exactly two classes of such
forms, each one comprised by all the nowhere null @xmath -forms that
differ for a strictly positive factor @xmath , such that each element of
a class induce the same orientation on @xmath . Usually an oriented
manifold @xmath is denoted by @xmath , where @xmath is one of the above
mentioned classes of nowhere null @xmath -forms.

Once that an orientation @xmath on @xmath is chosen, for each point
@xmath it is possible to find a base @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath
for each @xmath . We say that such base is oriented . If @xmath is also
endowed with a metric @xmath , @xmath defines an inner product on the
vector space @xmath for each @xmath . This allows us to choose @xmath
-orthonormal bases of @xmath for any point @xmath in @xmath . The next
theorem puts together the choice of an orientation @xmath and the
presence of a metric to provide a univocal way to choose a @xmath -form
in @xmath .

###### Theorem 1.1.37.

Let @xmath be an oriented @xmath -dimensional manifold endowed with a
metric @xmath . Then there exists a unique nowhere null @xmath -form
@xmath , called volume form over @xmath induced by @xmath , such that
for each @xmath @xmath takes the value @xmath on each oriented
orthonormal base of @xmath .

It turns out that for each local coordinate neighborhood @xmath of
@xmath the following equation holds on every point of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the base of @xmath (identified with @xmath ) defined by
@xmath for each @xmath and each @xmath , where @xmath is an oriented
orthonormal base of @xmath endowed with a (non necessarily positive
definite) inner product with the same signature of @xmath .

The volume form @xmath provided by the last theorem will become very
useful in the next subsection when we will introduce a notion of
integral on a manifold. An example of volume form is the standard
measure @xmath of @xmath that appears in eq. ( 1.1.4 ) above.

Before we proceed with the next subsection, we want to introduce two new
operators. The first one is the Hodge dual. The detailed procedure used
to define it can be found in [ Jos95 , Sect. 2.1, pp. 87-90] .

Consider an oriented @xmath -dimensional manifold @xmath endowed with a
metric @xmath . Let @xmath be the volume form over @xmath induced by
@xmath . Since @xmath defines a non degenerate inner product on each
cotangent space @xmath , we can use it, together with the volume form,
to choose an orthonormal base @xmath of @xmath for each @xmath such that
@xmath . Notice that a base of @xmath is provided by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We are ready to define the Hodge dual.

###### Definition 1.1.38.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional oriented manifold endowed with a
metric @xmath and let @xmath be the volume form over @xmath induced by
@xmath . For each @xmath and each @xmath , we define the Hodge dual
@xmath as the unique linear map from @xmath to @xmath satisfying the
following condition for each element of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath @xmath are chosen in such a way that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an oriented base of @xmath .

It can be shown that this definition is well posed so that for each
@xmath and each @xmath we have at our disposal the operator @xmath . If
we consider @xmath , we can take @xmath for each @xmath . It turns out
that the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

is a smooth section in @xmath that we denote with @xmath . Then the
Hodge dual naturally defines an operator @xmath from @xmath to @xmath .
This can be done for each @xmath so that the Hodge dual is defined as an
operator on @xmath .

###### Remark 1.1.39.

From the last definition it is possible to deduce a formula for the
components of the Hodge dual of a @xmath -form. Let @xmath and consider
a point @xmath and a coordinate neighborhood @xmath of @xmath in @xmath
. On @xmath we choose the oriented orthonormal basis @xmath and we
denote the totally antisymmetric symbol with @xmath . Then the
components of @xmath in @xmath in the basis of @xmath are given by the
formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are the components of @xmath at @xmath in the basis of
@xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath is the inverse of the matrix @xmath , whose coefficients are
given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There are some other very important properties of the Hodge dual. We
recollect them in the following theorem.

###### Proposition 1.1.40.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional oriented manifold endowed with a
metric @xmath with signature @xmath . The Hodge dual @xmath satisfies
the following properties:

-    for each @xmath , each @xmath and each @xmath it holds that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    for each @xmath , each @xmath and each @xmath , @xmath it holds
    that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath denotes the inner product of the vector bundle @xmath
    induced by the metric @xmath .

Moreover, if @xmath is an oriented manifold endowed with a metric @xmath
with signature @xmath and @xmath is an orientation preserving embedding
such that @xmath , we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The last theorem has three very important consequences:

-   For each @xmath and each @xmath @xmath is a vector space isomorphism
    whose inverse @xmath can be extended to @xmath because it coincides
    with @xmath (up to a @xmath factor). Hence @xmath is a vector bundle
    isomorphism.

-   It is easy to show that @xmath , where @xmath is in @xmath .

-   We can use the wedge product and the Hodge dual to completely
    characterize the inner product @xmath induced by the metric @xmath
    on @xmath and we note that the section @xmath coincides with the
    section @xmath for each @xmath , @xmath .

As anticipated, we conclude this subsection with the introduction of the
codifferential.

###### Definition 1.1.41.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional oriented manifold endowed with a
metric @xmath with signature @xmath . For each @xmath we call
codifferential the map @xmath defined by

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

We say that a @xmath -form @xmath is coclosed when @xmath .

Notice that, as a consequence of the property @xmath , it follows also
that @xmath . Moreover, if @xmath is an orientation preserving embedding
from the oriented manifold @xmath to the oriented manifold @xmath and if
@xmath is endowed with a metric @xmath of signature @xmath , while
@xmath is endowed with a metric @xmath with signature @xmath such that
@xmath , then it holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 1.1.4 Integration on a manifold

In the last subsection we discussed some questions about the calculus of
differential forms. In particular, considering a @xmath -dimensional
manifold @xmath , we used the space @xmath of @xmath -forms over @xmath
to introduce the orientability of a manifold. This concept allows us to
define a notion of integral on a manifold. The precise procedure to
define the integral on a manifold is shown in detail, for example, in [
Boo86 , Chap. VI] . Here we briefly present such construction
restricting to smooth functions.

Suppose that @xmath is an orientable @xmath -dimensional manifold and
that we have chosen a nowhere null @xmath -form @xmath that defines an
orientation @xmath on @xmath so that @xmath becomes an oriented
manifold. It is possible to express any other @xmath -form @xmath over
@xmath as a product @xmath , where @xmath . We say that a function of
@xmath is integrable if it has compact support, i.e. if it belongs to
@xmath , and moreover a @xmath -form over @xmath is said to be
integrable if it can be expressed as a product @xmath , with an
integrable function @xmath . This definition of integrable @xmath -form
does not depend on the choice of the particular @xmath -form @xmath used
to define the orientation @xmath on @xmath . Notice that in our
simplified treatment the set of integrable @xmath -forms coincides
exactly with the space of @xmath -forms with compact support, denoted by
@xmath .

The integral of an integrable @xmath -form is defined in first place on
a particular subset of @xmath constituted by those @xmath -forms @xmath
whose support is contained in some coordinate neighborhood @xmath :
using the local coordinates, we write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , and then we set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the standard measure on @xmath . It can be shown that
this definition is independent of the choice of @xmath (provided that
only coordinate neighborhoods having transition charts with positive
Jacobian determinant are considered). In second place such definition is
extended to any integrable @xmath -form @xmath with the help of a
particular partition of unity that reduces @xmath to a finite sum of
@xmath -forms of the type considered in first place. Again it is
possible to prove that this definition does not depend on the particular
choices made.

The next theorem recollects some properties of the integral.

###### Theorem 1.1.42.

Let @xmath be an orientable @xmath -dimensional manifold. Let @xmath be
a @xmath -form over @xmath defining an orientation @xmath on @xmath .
The construction above defines the integral of integrable @xmath -forms
over @xmath , specifically the map @xmath . Such map fulfils the
following properties:

-   @xmath -linearity: for each @xmath , @xmath and each @xmath , @xmath
    it holds that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    if @xmath can be expressed as @xmath with some non negative real
    valued smooth function @xmath , we have @xmath and @xmath if and
    only if @xmath ;

-    if @xmath is an orientation preserving embedding between the
    oriented @xmath -dimensional manifolds @xmath and @xmath , the
    following equation holds for each @xmath :

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Till now we considered only the integration on an orientable @xmath
-dimensional manifold @xmath of @xmath -forms. However we would like to
integrate also functions of @xmath as in the case of ordinary integrals
on Euclidean spaces. In the general case this cannot be done because a
measure on an arbitrary orientable manifold is missing. As a matter of
fact, once that an orientation @xmath on @xmath is chosen, each @xmath
provides a possible measure on @xmath and it is not possible for us to
make a particular choice that reduces to the standard measure @xmath
when @xmath . Nevertheless, when @xmath is endowed with a metric @xmath
and an orientation @xmath has been chosen, we are able to pick out the
volume form @xmath exploiting Theorem 1.1.37 . Using @xmath we are able
to evaluate in an unambiguous way the integrals of functions in @xmath .
Moreover it can be shown that, when @xmath is an open subset of the
vector space @xmath endowed with the usual inner product of Euclidean
spaces as metric, @xmath reduces to the ordinary measure @xmath .

In the development of the thesis we will make extensive use of Stokes’
theorem on manifolds. Before we are ready to present its statement, we
must introduce a slight extension of the notion of manifold. This
extension requires the introduction of the half plane, i.e. the
following subset of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We also take the chance to define the boundary of @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 1.1.43.

A @xmath -dimensional manifold (with boundary) @xmath is a connected
Hausdorff topological space with a countable basis of open subsets such
that for each point @xmath there exists a triple @xmath , called
coordinate neighborhood (or local chart ), where @xmath is an open
neighborhood of @xmath in @xmath , @xmath is an open subset of @xmath
and @xmath is a homeomorphism. Moreover there are other two
requirements:

-   there exists a (smooth) atlas , which is a collection @xmath of
    coordinate neighborhoods in @xmath , where @xmath is an index set,
    such that @xmath is an open covering of @xmath and the map, called
    transition chart ,

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    is a diffeomorphism for each @xmath , @xmath such that @xmath ;

-   there exists a maximal atlas , i.e. an atlas that contains each
    coordinate neighborhood @xmath such that the transition maps @xmath
    and @xmath are diffeomorphisms for each @xmath with @xmath .

For a detailed discussion about manifolds with boundary the reader is
referred to [ Boo86 , Chap. VI, Sect. 4]

For a @xmath -dimensional manifold with boundary @xmath , it makes sense
to define a subset @xmath , called boundary of @xmath . Such subset
consists of the points of @xmath that are preimages of points of @xmath
through some coordinate neighborhood. It turns out that @xmath is a
@xmath -dimensional manifold with topology and differentiable structure
induced by those of @xmath and that the inclusion map @xmath is an
embedding. Notice that @xmath is a manifold in the ordinary sense and
that @xmath itself is actually a manifold in the ordinary sense if
@xmath is empty.

Everything we said till this point about manifolds can be extended to
manifolds with boundary in an almost straightforward way. The only
situation in which it is possible to face some troubles is the
definition of the tangent space at a point of the boundary. A possible
approach to such problem is presented in [ Boo86 , p. 254] . Once that
such problem is overcome we can indeed define differential forms on
these new type of manifolds.

Suppose we are dealing with an oriented manifold with boundary and we
want to make an integral on its boundary submanifold. In order to give
sense to integrals on the boundary we need a notion of orientability of
the boundary and the choice of a specific orientation. The following
theorems answers to our question.

###### Theorem 1.1.44.

Let @xmath be an oriented manifold with non empty boundary @xmath . Then
@xmath is itself an orientable manifold and the orientation @xmath of
@xmath determines uniquely an orientation @xmath on @xmath .

Consider an oriented @xmath -dimensional manifold @xmath , a point
@xmath and a coordinate neighborhood @xmath of @xmath . We have that
@xmath and that each @xmath can be classified as inward pointing ,
outward pointing or tangent to @xmath if its last component in the basis
induced by the chosen coordinate neighborhood is respectively positive,
negative or null. Such classification turns out to be independent of the
particular coordinate neighborhood and of the orientation of @xmath .
The orientation @xmath provided by the last theorem can be characterized
in the following way: if @xmath is a point of the boundary @xmath and
@xmath is outward pointing, a base @xmath of @xmath is oriented if and
only if @xmath is an oriented base of @xmath .

If @xmath is an oriented @xmath -dimensional manifold with non empty
boundary @xmath and @xmath is endowed with a metric @xmath , we
immediately have an orientation @xmath on @xmath provided by the last
theorem and a metric @xmath obtained via pull-back of @xmath through the
inclusion map @xmath of @xmath into @xmath (remember that @xmath is
actually an embedding). Then we have a volume form on the boundary
@xmath , that we denote by @xmath , that provides a precise notion of
integral on the boundary.

We are now able to state Stokes’ theorem on an arbitrary manifold with
boundary. A thorough discussion about this topic can be found, for
example, in [ Boo86 , Chap. VI, Sect. 5] .

###### Theorem 1.1.45.

Let @xmath be an oriented @xmath -dimensional manifold with (eventually
empty) boundary @xmath , let @xmath denote the orientation of @xmath
determined by @xmath and let @xmath be the inclusion map (actually an
embedding). For each @xmath we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Notice that, if @xmath is empty, then the RHS is always null. For us
this will always be the case since we will always consider manifolds as
defined in Definition 1.1.1 , which is to say manifolds with empty
boundary.

With the help of the Hodge dual, defined in the previous subsection, we
can introduce an inner product between @xmath -forms with compact
support on an oriented manifold endowed with a metric. With such notion
we can prove that the codifferential @xmath is formally adjoint to the
exterior derivative @xmath .

###### Proposition 1.1.46.

Let @xmath be an oriented @xmath -dimensional manifold endowed with a
metric @xmath and let @xmath be the Hodge dual. For each @xmath consider
the set

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

We have that the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath                     
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

defines a non degenerate inner product on the vector space @xmath .

The integrand @xmath in the definition above may be rewritten as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then we can express @xmath for @xmath , @xmath as the integral of the
section @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Notice that, if @xmath is a Riemannian metric, then @xmath is even a
scalar product and so @xmath is a pre-Hilbert space.

As announced @xmath allows us to establish a particular relation between
the exterior derivative and the codifferential. Such a relation is a
direct consequence of Stokes’ theorem.

###### Proposition 1.1.47.

Let @xmath be an oriented @xmath -dimensional manifold with empty
boundary endowed with a metric @xmath with signature @xmath . Then the
codifferential @xmath is formally adjoint to the exterior derivative
@xmath , i.e. for each @xmath , each @xmath and each @xmath the
following equation holds:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Fix @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath has empty boundary,
Stokes’ theorem implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recalling the definition of the codifferential (cfr. Definition 1.1.41
), we see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence we deduce that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from which it follows

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then the definition of @xmath allows us to conclude the proof. ∎

### 1.2 Lorentzian geometry

This section is devoted to the presentation of some notions concerning
Lorentzian geometry and in particular global hyperbolicity. The
interested reader should refer to [ O’N83 ] for a deeper insight in this
subject.

#### 1.2.1 Lorentzian manifolds

###### Definition 1.2.1.

We call Lorentzian manifold a pair @xmath where @xmath is an orientable
@xmath -dimensional manifold and @xmath is a Lorentzian metric on @xmath
.

Notice that we have included the requirement of orientability in the
definition of Lorentzian manifold. This is indeed not necessary if one
wants to study Lorentzian manifolds in general, however in the
development of this thesis we will often make use of Stokes’ theorem,
which requires the orientability of the manifold to hold.

We take the chance to introduce some notions which prove to be very
helpful in the discussion of the causal structure of a Lorentzian
manifold.

###### Definition 1.2.2.

Consider a Lorentzian manifold @xmath . For each point @xmath and each
tangent vector @xmath we say that @xmath is

-   @xmath -timelike if @xmath ,

-   @xmath -lightlike if @xmath ,

-   @xmath -causal if @xmath ,

-   @xmath -spacelike if @xmath .

Note that, if there is no risk of misunderstanding (e.g. when we
consider only one metric on a specified manifold), we often do not make
explicit the metric so that, for example, we simply speak of timelike
tangent vectors, instead of @xmath -timelike tangent vectors. Anyway in
this section such omission is not adopted in order to underline the
dependence on the metric of the objects that we define.

With the definitions given above we can define a new property of
Lorentzian manifolds, called time orientability. This concept is
associated to the idea of finding some “preferred direction” on our
manifold that can be interpreted as a direction of “time progress” in
accordance with the given metric.

###### Definition 1.2.3.

We say that a Lorentzian manifold @xmath is time orientable if there
exists a vector field @xmath over @xmath such that @xmath is @xmath
-timelike for each @xmath . We call time orientation of the time
orientable Lorentzian manifold @xmath each one of the connected
components of the set of everywhere @xmath -timelike vector fields over
@xmath .

Then we call oriented and time oriented Lorentzian manifold a quadruple
@xmath where

-   @xmath is a time orientable Lorentzian manifold,

-   @xmath is an orientation on @xmath ,

-   @xmath is a time orientation on @xmath .

With the last two definition we are able to introduce a classification
of the curves in an oriented and time oriented Lorentzian manifold
@xmath .

###### Definition 1.2.4.

Consider a Lorentzian manifold @xmath and a @xmath curve @xmath , where
@xmath is an interval.

We define the vector @xmath tangent to the curve @xmath in the point
@xmath along the curve in the following way: If @xmath such that @xmath
, we consider the curve @xmath defined for @xmath in a sufficiently
small interval containing 0 and we set @xmath (for the meaning of @xmath
see Definition 1.1.3 ).

We say that @xmath is @xmath -timelike , @xmath -lightlike , @xmath
-causal or @xmath -spacelike if @xmath is such for each @xmath along
@xmath .

If @xmath is time orientable, @xmath is an orientation of @xmath and
@xmath is a time orientation of @xmath (so that @xmath is an oriented
and time oriented Lorentzian manifold) and if the curve @xmath is @xmath
-causal we say that it is:

-   @xmath -future directed if @xmath for each @xmath along @xmath ,

-   @xmath -past directed if @xmath for each @xmath along @xmath .

This definition extends to piecewise @xmath curves considering
separately each @xmath piece.

It may happen that we omit the explicit indication of the metric and the
time orientation chosen on the manifold when we deal with curves.
Clearly such omission will be done only if there is no possibility of
misunderstanding. For example, when we deal with an oriented and time
oriented Lorentzian manifold @xmath and there is no other oriented and
time oriented Lorentzian manifold with the same underlying manifold
@xmath but with different metric or time orientation, you may find the
expression “future directed timelike curve”, instead of “ @xmath -future
directed @xmath -timelike curve”.

Now we define some particular subsets of @xmath . These subsets, as we
will see, are very helpful in the characterization of the causal
structure of @xmath .

###### Definition 1.2.5.

Consider an oriented and time oriented Lorentzian manifold @xmath , a
subset @xmath and a point @xmath . We define:

-   the @xmath -chronological future of the point @xmath in @xmath ,
    denoted by @xmath , as the subset of @xmath constituted by the
    points @xmath such that there exists a @xmath -future directed
    @xmath -timelike curve starting from @xmath and ending in @xmath
    which is entirely contained in @xmath ;

-   the @xmath -causal future of the point @xmath in @xmath , denoted by
    @xmath , as the subset of @xmath constituted by @xmath and the
    points @xmath such that there exists a @xmath -future directed
    @xmath -causal curve starting from @xmath and ending in @xmath which
    is entirely contained in @xmath .

We also define the @xmath -chronological past of the point @xmath in
@xmath , denoted by @xmath , and the @xmath -causal past of the point
@xmath in @xmath , denoted by @xmath , with the substitution of the word
“future” with the word “past” in the definitions of @xmath and @xmath .

We extend the definitions of these subsets from arbitrary points @xmath
to arbitrary subsets @xmath taking the union over the points in @xmath ,
e.g. we define the @xmath -chronological future of the subset @xmath in
@xmath as @xmath , and we denote the unions @xmath and @xmath with
@xmath and respectively with @xmath .

Finally we define the Cauchy development of @xmath in @xmath as the
subset @xmath comprised by the points @xmath such that every
inextensible @xmath -future directed (or equivalently @xmath -past
directed) @xmath -causal curve in @xmath passing through @xmath meets
@xmath .

We invite the reader to bear in mind that, when there is no risk of
ambiguity, we may write @xmath in place of @xmath . Moreover in our
notation we always omit the subset @xmath in when @xmath is the entire
manifold so that we write @xmath in place of @xmath .

The notions of causal future and causal past allow us to define future
compact and past compact subsets.

###### Definition 1.2.6.

Let @xmath be an oriented and time oriented Lorentzian manifold and let
@xmath be a subset of @xmath . We say that @xmath is

-   @xmath -past compact if @xmath is compact for each @xmath ;

-   @xmath -future compact if @xmath is compact for each @xmath .

Past compact and future compact subsets will play an important role in
the next section, when we will study the properties of Green operators.

When dealing with Lorentzian manifolds, we can establish the notion of
causal separation. We will use such notion when we will introduce the
generally covariant locality principle in Chapter 2 .

###### Definition 1.2.7.

Let @xmath be a Lorentzian manifold. We say that two subsets @xmath and
@xmath of @xmath are @xmath -causally separated (or simply causally
separated , when there is no risk of misunderstanding) if there is no
@xmath -causal curve on @xmath that connects a point of @xmath and a
point of @xmath .

Sometimes we may say that @xmath is @xmath -causally separated from
@xmath , meaning that there is no point of @xmath that can be connected
through some causal curve to a point of @xmath . Obviously this is
equivalent to saying that @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -causally
separated.

###### Remark 1.2.8.

We can give a condition that is equivalent to causal separation on an
oriented and time oriented Lorentzian manifold @xmath . We can show that
@xmath and @xmath are @xmath -causally separated if and only if @xmath
(or equivalently @xmath ). This follows from the fact that the points of
@xmath are by definition connected to points of @xmath through some
@xmath -causal curve in @xmath . Hence the intersection @xmath consists
exactly of those points of @xmath that are connected to points of @xmath
through some @xmath -causal curve in @xmath . Then @xmath means that
there are not points of @xmath that are connected to points of @xmath
through some @xmath -causal curve in @xmath , i.e. @xmath is @xmath
-causally separated from @xmath or, equivalently, @xmath and @xmath are
@xmath -causally separated.

Now we introduce the notion of causal compatibility and the notion of
causal convexity. Loosely speaking causal compatibility means that the
causal future (or past) of a point in a subset @xmath of an oriented and
time oriented Lorentzian manifold coincides with the intersection with
@xmath of the causal future (or past) of such point taken in the whole
manifold. Instead causal convexity requires that each pair of points in
a subset can be connected by a causal curve contained in such subset.

###### Definition 1.2.9.

Let @xmath be an oriented and time oriented Lorentzian manifold and let
@xmath be a subset of @xmath . We say that @xmath is

-   @xmath -causally compatible if @xmath for each @xmath ;

-   @xmath -causally convex if each @xmath -future (or equivalently
    @xmath -past) directed @xmath -causal curve in @xmath that starts
    and ends in @xmath is entirely contained in @xmath .

We observe that, since each @xmath -future/past directed @xmath -causal
curve that is contained in @xmath can be directly seen also as a @xmath
-future/past directed @xmath -causal curve contained in @xmath , it
always holds the inclusion @xmath for each @xmath . Hence the real
condition of causal compatibility is the other inclusion.

###### Remark 1.2.10.

It is easily seen that causal convexity implies causal compatibility.
Suppose that @xmath is an @xmath -causally convex subset of @xmath .
Once that a point @xmath is fixed, we can consider a point @xmath in
@xmath (or in @xmath ). Because of causal convexity each @xmath -future
(or respectively @xmath -past directed) @xmath -causal curve in @xmath
from @xmath to @xmath is entirely contained in @xmath . From the
definition of causal future (respectively causal past) at least one such
curve exists and this implies that @xmath falls in @xmath as required by
causal compatibility.

###### Remark 1.2.11.

Each causally compatible connected open subset of an oriented and time
oriented Lorentzian manifold can be interpreted as an oriented and time
oriented Lorentzian manifold in its own right. For example take the
@xmath -dimensional oriented and time oriented Lorentzian manifold
@xmath and let @xmath be a causally compatible connected open subset of
@xmath . Then undoubtedly @xmath can be seen as a @xmath -dimensional
submanifold of @xmath (cfr. Remark 1.1.7 ) and hence a @xmath
-dimensional manifold in its own right. Moreover it becomes an oriented
and time oriented Lorentzian manifold when endowed with @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath , where for @xmath we mean the class of nowhere null @xmath
-forms over @xmath that includes the restrictions to @xmath of the
nowhere null @xmath -forms over @xmath contained in @xmath . We denote
the oriented and time oriented Lorentzian manifold @xmath with @xmath .

Notice that @xmath for each @xmath as a direct consequence of the
definition of causal future/past.

Since causal convexity implies causal compatibility, the same
conclusions hold also for causally convex subsets of oriented and time
oriented Lorentzian manifolds.

#### 1.2.2 Globally hyperbolic spacetimes

Now we present the notion of global hyperbolicity. Such concept is the
key hypothesis for a theorem that states existence and uniqueness of
global solutions for a wave equation with proper initial data on an
oriented and time oriented Lorentzian manifold. Hence global
hyperbolicity will be an unavoidable request throughout the rest of the
thesis.

###### Definition 1.2.12.

Let @xmath be an oriented and time oriented Lorentzian manifold. A
subset @xmath is said to be @xmath -globally hyperbolic if the following
conditions hold:

-   @xmath fulfils the @xmath -causality condition , i.e. there are no
    closed @xmath -causal curves in @xmath ;

-   @xmath is a compact subset of @xmath for each @xmath , @xmath with
    respect to the topology naturally induced on @xmath by the topology
    of @xmath .

We call globally hyperbolic spacetime each oriented and time oriented
Lorentzian manifold @xmath such that @xmath is a @xmath -globally
hyperbolic subset.

Originally global hyperbolicity of (oriented and) time oriented
Lorentzian manifolds required a stricter condition then that of
causality, which is called strong causality condition . Such condition
requires that there are no “almost closed” @xmath -causal curves. A
precise statement of the strong causality condition on an (oriented and)
time oriented Lorentzian manifold @xmath is the following: For each
point @xmath and for each open neighborhood @xmath of @xmath in @xmath
there exists an open neighborhood @xmath of @xmath in @xmath such that
each @xmath -future directed (or equivalently @xmath -past directed)
@xmath -causal curve which starts and ends in @xmath must be entirely
contained in @xmath . However this stricter requirement is equivalent to
the causality condition in the present context as was shown by Bernal
and Sanchez in [ BS07 ] .

###### Remark 1.2.13.

Globally hyperbolic connected open subsets of oriented and time oriented
Lorentzian manifolds can be considered as globally hyperbolic spacetimes
in their own right. To see this, consider an oriented and time oriented
Lorentzian manifold @xmath and a @xmath -globally hyperbolic open subset
@xmath of @xmath . From Remark 1.2.11 we have that @xmath is itself an
oriented and time oriented Lorentzian manifold and that @xmath for each
@xmath . Since per hypothesis @xmath is @xmath -globally hyperbolic, it
follows also that @xmath is @xmath -globally hyperbolic too. Therefore
@xmath is itself a globally hyperbolic spacetime.

###### Definition 1.2.14.

Let @xmath be an oriented and time oriented Lorentzian manifold and let
@xmath be a subset of @xmath . @xmath is achronal in @xmath if it is met
at most once by each @xmath -future directed (or equivalently @xmath
-past directed) @xmath -timelike curve in @xmath . @xmath is acausal in
@xmath if it is met at most once by each @xmath -future directed (or
equivalently @xmath -past directed) @xmath -causal curve in @xmath .

We say that @xmath is a Cauchy surface of @xmath if each inextensible
@xmath -future directed (or equivalently @xmath -past directed) @xmath
-timelike curve in @xmath passing through @xmath meets @xmath exactly
once.

Obviously each acausal subset is also achronal and each Cauchy surface
is achronal. It can be proved that a Cauchy surface @xmath is a closed
achronal topological hypersurface met by each inextensible causal curve
at least once [ O’N83 , Chap. 14, Lem. 29, p. 415] , hence its Cauchy
development @xmath coincides with @xmath .

With the last definition we have at our disposal all the material needed
to state a very important theorem that provides two handy conditions
that are equivalent to global hyperbolicity.

###### Theorem 1.2.15.

Let @xmath be an oriented and time oriented Lorentzian manifold. Then
the following conditions are equivalent:

-   @xmath is globally hyperbolic;

-    there exists a Cauchy surface @xmath of @xmath ;

-    there exists a diffeomorphism from the manifold @xmath to the
    manifold @xmath , where @xmath is a @xmath -dimensional manifold,
    such that the push-forward of the metric @xmath through such
    diffeomorphism takes the form @xmath , where @xmath is a smooth
    strictly positive function of @xmath , @xmath is a Riemannian metric
    on @xmath for each @xmath and the family of Riemannian metrics
    @xmath varies smoothly with @xmath . Moreover we have that for each
    @xmath @xmath is the image through the diffeomorphism of a smooth
    spacelike Cauchy surface of @xmath .

We do not include the proof of this theorem here, however we give some
references. That the second condition implies the first is proved in [
O’N83 , Chap. 14, Cor. 39, p.422] . Moreover in [ BS05 ] Bernal and
Sanchez showed that the third condition follows from the first one. With
these facts the proof is completed since the implication from the third
condition to the second one is trivial.

The next proposition shows that causal convexity entails global
hyperbolicity for open subsets of an arbitrary globally hyperbolic
spacetime.

###### Proposition 1.2.16.

Let @xmath be a globally hyperbolic spacetime and let @xmath be a subset
of @xmath . Then if @xmath is @xmath -causally convex, it is also @xmath
-globally hyperbolic.

###### Proof.

We suppose that @xmath is @xmath -causally convex and we try to show
that @xmath is also @xmath -globally hyperbolic. Since @xmath is a
globally hyperbolic spacetime, the @xmath -causality condition is
fulfilled by the entire set underlying @xmath , hence it is fulfilled
also by @xmath . Then we must only check the other condition for global
hyperbolicity. To this end we fix @xmath , @xmath . Since causal
convexity implies causal compatibility (cfr. Remark 1.2.10 ), we have
that @xmath for each @xmath . It follows that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Since @xmath is globally hyperbolic, we deduce that @xmath is compact
with respect to the topology of @xmath . If we can show that it is also
contained in @xmath , then it is compact also with respect to the
topology induced on @xmath by the topology of @xmath and we also have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This would complete the proof. Consider then an arbitrary point @xmath
in @xmath . Recalling the definitions of causal future and causal past,
we find a @xmath -future directed @xmath -causal curve @xmath in @xmath
from @xmath to @xmath and a @xmath -past directed @xmath -causal curve
@xmath in @xmath from @xmath to @xmath . Reversing @xmath and pasting
the result with @xmath , we obtain a @xmath -future directed @xmath
-causal curve @xmath in @xmath from @xmath to @xmath . Since @xmath and
@xmath are points of @xmath and @xmath is causally convex, we deduce
that @xmath is entirely contained in @xmath . Since @xmath is in the
image of @xmath , it turns out that @xmath and so the inclusion @xmath
actually holds.∎

###### Remark 1.2.17.

Once that a globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath is provided, we can
build a wide class of @xmath -causally convex connected open subsets of
@xmath that include a Cauchy surface of @xmath . Applying Theorem 1.2.15
to @xmath , we obtain a diffeomorphism @xmath that factorizes @xmath
into @xmath such that @xmath is a smooth spacelike Cauchy surface of
@xmath for each @xmath . Then we can consider @xmath for an arbitrary
@xmath and define @xmath . We immediately deduce that @xmath is a
connected open subset of @xmath that includes @xmath for each @xmath ,
which are all smooth spacelike Cauchy surfaces for @xmath . It remains
only to check that @xmath is @xmath -causally convex. Consider a @xmath
-future directed @xmath -causal curve @xmath which starts and ends in
@xmath . Using the factorization of @xmath in @xmath and noting that the
projection @xmath on the first argument of the Cartesian product @xmath
is continuous, we deduce that @xmath is continuous. If, by
contradiction, along @xmath there is a point @xmath that is outside
@xmath , then we find @xmath such that one of the following inequalities
holds:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

Consider for example the first case (the other one is similar). As a
consequence of the intermediate value theorem, we find @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is to say that @xmath meets twice the smooth spacelike Cauchy
surface for @xmath of the form @xmath . Exploiting [ O’N83 , Chap. 14,
Lem. 42, p. 425] , we find that @xmath is acausal because it is a
spacelike Cauchy surface. Then we have found a contradiction, hence
@xmath is contained in @xmath and so @xmath is actually @xmath -causally
convex.

Indeed there are more powerful constructions that allow us to obtain
subsets with good topological and causal properties starting from a
globally hyperbolic spacetime. The next proposition is devoted to the
recollection of some results that go in this direction.

###### Proposition 1.2.18.

Let @xmath be a globally hyperbolic spacetime.

-    If @xmath is a Cauchy surface for @xmath and @xmath is a compact
    subset of @xmath , then both @xmath and @xmath are compact subsets
    of @xmath .

-    If @xmath and @xmath are compact subsets of @xmath , then @xmath is
    a compact subset of @xmath too.

-    If @xmath and @xmath are two non empty subsets of @xmath , then
    @xmath is a @xmath -causally convex open subset of @xmath .
    Furthermore if @xmath and @xmath are relatively compact in @xmath ,
    @xmath is relatively compact in @xmath too.

-    If @xmath is a compact subset of @xmath , then there exists a
    @xmath -causally convex relatively compact connected open subset
    @xmath of @xmath including @xmath .

###### Proof.

The proof of the first three points can be found in [ BGP07 , Cor.
A.5.4, p. 175] , [ BGP07 , Lem. A.5.7, p. 176] and [ BGP07 , Lem.
A.5.12, p. 178] . However for the third point the thesis of Bär, Ginoux
and Pfäffle is that @xmath is @xmath -globally hyperbolic and @xmath
-causally compatible in place of @xmath -causally convex. Anyway we can
directly check that @xmath is @xmath -causally convex in the following
manner. Suppose that @xmath is a @xmath -future directed @xmath -causal
curve in @xmath starting from @xmath and ending in @xmath . Then each
point @xmath along @xmath is contained in @xmath . Since @xmath , we
find @xmath such that @xmath and, since @xmath , we find @xmath such
that @xmath . From [ O’N83 , Chap. 14, Cor. 1, p. 402] we deduce that
the following implication holds: if @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath .
Hence @xmath and @xmath so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This inclusion implies that @xmath is completely included in @xmath .

The proof of the fourth point is obtained modifying in a proper way [
BGP07 , Lem. A.5.13, p. 178] . As a first step we apply Theorem 1.2.15
to @xmath and we find a diffeomorphism @xmath that factorizes @xmath in
@xmath so that @xmath is a smooth spacelike Cauchy surface for @xmath
for each @xmath . The projection @xmath on the first factor of the
Cartesian product is a continuous map so that @xmath is continuous. Then
the image of the compact subset @xmath of @xmath through @xmath is
compact in @xmath , so that we easily find @xmath and @xmath in @xmath
such that @xmath for each @xmath . Now we take @xmath and, applying the
first point, we conclude that it is a compact subset of @xmath . Hence
we can easily find a relatively compact connected open subset @xmath of
@xmath including @xmath . Since @xmath is a smooth spacelike Cauchy
surface for @xmath , it is easy to check that @xmath . But @xmath is
closed since the topology of @xmath is Hausdorff, while @xmath is open
by construction and @xmath . Then it follows that @xmath : A point
@xmath in @xmath is connected to a point @xmath of @xmath via a @xmath
-past directed @xmath -causal curve @xmath in @xmath starting at @xmath
and ending at @xmath ; we can find a neighborhood @xmath of @xmath
included in @xmath so that we can deform @xmath in a way that it becomes
timelike in @xmath ; hence we obtain a new @xmath -past directed @xmath
-causal curve @xmath that starts in a point @xmath of @xmath and ends in
@xmath and we notice that it cannot be a null curve, i.e. causal, but
nowhere timelike, so that we can make a fixed endpoint deformation of
@xmath (cfr. [ O’N83 , Chap. 10, Prop. 46, p. 294] ) to obtain a @xmath
-past directed @xmath -timelike curve @xmath that starts in @xmath and
ends in @xmath . Returning to our main proof, we conclude that @xmath .
We immediately deduce also that @xmath . Take now @xmath and applying
again the first point, we find that it is a compact subset of @xmath .
Hence we can easily find a relatively compact open subset @xmath of
@xmath including @xmath . Keeping in mind that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and that @xmath is a Cauchy surface for @xmath , we easily check that
@xmath and that @xmath . With a procedure similar to that applied above,
we conclude that @xmath , hence in particular @xmath . We can apply the
second point to the relatively compact open subsets @xmath and @xmath of
@xmath and conclude that @xmath is a @xmath -causally convex relatively
compact open subset of @xmath . Since by the way we noticed that @xmath
is included in both @xmath and @xmath , we deduce that @xmath . The
proof is completed if we can show that @xmath is connected. To this end
take two arbitrary points @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . Then we can find
a @xmath -future directed @xmath -causal curve @xmath in @xmath that
goes from @xmath to some point @xmath in @xmath and a @xmath -past
directed @xmath -causal curve @xmath in @xmath that goes from some point
@xmath in @xmath to @xmath . Since @xmath is open, @xmath . This fact,
together with the inclusion @xmath shown above, implies that @xmath .
Hence both @xmath and @xmath start and end in @xmath . By construction
@xmath is causally convex and so @xmath and @xmath are completely
included in @xmath . In our construction we choose @xmath to be
connected, hence we can find a curve @xmath from @xmath to @xmath which
is included in @xmath (and therefore in @xmath too). Pasting @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , we obtain a curve that goes from @xmath to @xmath
and the proof of the fourth point is complete. ∎

### 1.3 Wave equations

In this section we face the problem of the existence and uniqueness of
global solutions to a given wave equation on a globally hyperbolic
spacetime @xmath with compactly supported smooth initial data on a
Cauchy surface @xmath of @xmath . The discussion here involves smooth
sections in an arbitrary @xmath -vector bundle @xmath over @xmath . The
results that we recall without proof can be found in [ BGP07 , Chap. 3]
. For a complete discussion on the existence and uniqueness of (local)
solutions to wave equations on time oriented Lorentzian manifolds the
reader is referred to [ BGP07 ] .

#### 1.3.1 Linear differential operators

Since we are going to speak of wave equations in vector bundles over
manifolds, we must previously introduce some notions about linear
differential operator that will allow us to recognize which differential
equations are wave equations in which are not.

###### Definition 1.3.1.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional manifold and let @xmath and @xmath
be two vector bundles over @xmath respectively of rank @xmath and @xmath
. A linear differential operator @xmath of order at most @xmath from
@xmath to @xmath is a @xmath -linear map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

that can be locally written in the following way: For each @xmath there
exists an open coordinate neighborhood @xmath of @xmath in @xmath on
which both @xmath and @xmath are locally trivialized by the maps @xmath
and @xmath and there exists a family of local sections @xmath such that
on @xmath we can write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for each section @xmath , where @xmath is a multi-index, @xmath , @xmath
are the local coordinates on @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A linear differential operator @xmath of order @xmath is a linear
differential operator of order at most @xmath , but not of order at most
@xmath .

At this point our aim is to identify a specific class of linear
differential operators of order 2, but to do this we need to introduce
another tool.

###### Definition 1.3.2.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional manifold and let @xmath and @xmath
be two vector bundles over @xmath respectively of rank @xmath and @xmath
. Consider a linear differential operator @xmath of order @xmath from
@xmath to @xmath . We say that the principal symbol @xmath of the linear
differential operator @xmath is the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

locally defined in a way that is based on Definition 1.3.1 : For each
@xmath there exists a coordinate neighborhood @xmath of @xmath in @xmath
on which both @xmath and @xmath are locally trivialized by the maps
@xmath and @xmath and there exists a family of local smooth sections
@xmath such that on @xmath eq. ( 1.3.1 ) holds for each section @xmath ;
hence for each @xmath , each @xmath and each @xmath we set

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where @xmath are the components of @xmath in the basis @xmath of @xmath
obtained via pull back through @xmath from the orthonormal basis @xmath
of @xmath .

###### Example 1.3.3.

The formulation of the last definitions may appear very abstract (at
least this was the impression of the author when he saw them for the
first time), but they are much more concrete and close to the usual idea
of partial derivative than it seems. However to realize this fact we
must restrict ourselves to a more customary situation. Consider for
example @xmath and @xmath and @xmath . In this case there are a global
coordinate neighborhood for @xmath and global trivializations for @xmath
and @xmath , while @xmath reduces to @xmath so that we can identify it
with @xmath . Moreover a section @xmath in @xmath is nothing but an
@xmath -valued smooth function defined on @xmath . In this situation one
recognizes that partial derivatives of order at most @xmath and their
linear combinations with @xmath -valued smooth functions defined on
@xmath as coefficients are undoubtedly linear differential operators
from @xmath to @xmath of order at most @xmath . If there is a partial
derivative of order @xmath with non null coefficient, the operator is
exactly of order @xmath . The local sections @xmath in this case are
actually global and coincide with the @xmath -valued smooth functions
defined on @xmath that we used as coefficients. The principal symbol is
simply a function from @xmath to @xmath that maps each @xmath to a
linear combination of the coefficients @xmath corresponding to the
derivatives of highest order weighted with products of the components of
@xmath with powers that equal the order of the partial derivatives along
each direction. For example,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

is a linear differential operator from @xmath to @xmath of order 4,
where @xmath , whose principal symbol is the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

defined by

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

We conclude this subsection with the notion of formal selfadjointness.

###### Definition 1.3.4.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional oriented manifold endowed with a
metric @xmath and let @xmath be a vector bundle over @xmath of rank
@xmath endowed with an inner product that we denote with @xmath . A
linear operator @xmath is said to be formally selfadjoint if for each
@xmath , @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is volume form over @xmath induced by @xmath . If the
equation above holds with a minus sign at the RHS then @xmath is
formally antiselfadjoint .

Indeed we will apply the last definition to linear differential
operators, but more in general it can be applied to operators acting
linearly on smooth sections in a vector bundle.

#### 1.3.2 Normally hyperbolic equations and Cauchy problems

We are ready to pick out a particular class of linear differential
operators of order 2 which are at the core of the theory of wave
equations on globally hyperbolic spacetimes. Probably the reader has
some notion of what it is generally meant as a wave equation. However,
in the present context, for wave equation we intend a class of linear
differential equations of second order that may be a little bit larger
then what it is usually intended. In order to avoid misunderstanding, we
take the chance to define our notion of wave equation (to be more
precise, of normally hyperbolic equation).

###### Definition 1.3.5.

Let @xmath be a Lorentzian manifold and let @xmath be a vector bundle
over @xmath of rank @xmath . A normally hyperbolic operator @xmath on
@xmath over @xmath is a linear differential operator of order 2 from
@xmath to @xmath whose principle symbol @xmath is of metric type , i.e.
for each @xmath and each @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the raising isomorphism induced by the metric @xmath
(see Definition 1.1.27 ).

A normally hyperbolic equation (or wave equation ) on a vector bundle
@xmath over a Lorentzian manifold @xmath is a linear differential
equation of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a normally hyperbolic operator on @xmath over @xmath and
@xmath is a smooth section in @xmath over @xmath to be determined, while
@xmath is given.

###### Example 1.3.6.

Consider the Minkowski spacetime, i.e. the manifold @xmath endowed with
a metric @xmath that is everywhere represented by the matrix @xmath ,
and the vector bundle @xmath . Recalling our Example 1.3.3 , we see that
the Klein-Gordon operator on Minkowski spacetime

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the inverse of the matrix @xmath and @xmath is a
parameter (the mass of the Klein-Gordon field), is a linear differential
operator from @xmath to @xmath of order 2. Its principal symbol is
provided by the function that maps each @xmath to

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

hence we recognize that the Klein-Gordon operator in Minkowski spacetime
is a normally hyperbolic operator.

Maybe the most common prototype of wave equation is the d’Alembert
equation. The d’Alembert operator

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

induced by a connection @xmath on a vector bundle @xmath over a
Lorentzian manifold @xmath is indeed a normally hyperbolic operator on
@xmath over @xmath (for a proof of this fact refer to [ BGP07 , Ex.
1.5.2, p. 34] ) and hence the d’Alembert equation is a normally
hyperbolic equation on @xmath over @xmath .

However there exist many other normally hyperbolic equations. For
example notice that each equation involving the d’Alembert operator
defined above together with other linear differential terms of order at
most 1 is still a normally hyperbolic equation.

It can be even shown that each normally hyperbolic operator @xmath on a
vector bundle @xmath over a Lorentzian manifold @xmath can be written as
the sum of the d’Alembert operator @xmath associated to some connection
@xmath on @xmath with a section @xmath in @xmath (cfr. [ BGP07 , Lem.
1.5.5, p. 35] ). In this case the connection @xmath is called @xmath
-compatible .

These observations are made to underline that the typical wave equations
are indeed included in our class of normally hyperbolic equation, but
there are also other (although quite similar) partial differential
equations that fall in our class.

We have defined all the ingredients needed to state a theorem about the
existence and uniqueness of solutions for a non homogeneous normally
hyperbolic equation.

###### Theorem 1.3.7.

Consider a globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath and a vector bundle
@xmath over @xmath . Let @xmath be a spacelike smooth Cauchy surface of
@xmath , let @xmath be a unit @xmath -future directed @xmath -timelike
vector field over @xmath normal to @xmath and let @xmath be a normally
hyperbolic operator on @xmath . Denote the @xmath -compatible connection
with @xmath . Then for each @xmath and each @xmath , @xmath there exists
a unique solution @xmath to the Cauchy problem

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover we have @xmath , where @xmath .

The proof of the last theorem is based on the determination of the so
called fundamental solutions. Even if we do not discuss here such proof,
it is useful for us to introduce fundamental solutions in view of the
construction of Green operators. We face these problems after having
introduced the necessary material, specifically distributions on
manifolds. To such topic we devote the next subsection.

#### 1.3.3 Distributions on manifolds

To introduce the notion of fundamental solution we cannot restrict to
sections over vector bundles. We need to introduce “sections” in a
broader sense. Distributions on manifolds are the right tools for our
aims. Before we define such objects we need to provide a notion of
convergence in @xmath This requires some preparation.

Let @xmath be a manifold with a Riemannian metric @xmath and let @xmath
be a vector bundle over @xmath endowed with a connection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and a positive definite inner product @xmath . Use again @xmath to
denote the Levi-Civita connection on @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Notice that @xmath and @xmath induce (via duality and tensor product) a
connection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and respectively a positive definite inner product @xmath on each @xmath
. Putting together the connections and the inner products on @xmath and
@xmath we can obtain (via tensor product) a connection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and respectively an inner product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

on each vector bundle @xmath . For each @xmath , @xmath induces a norm
@xmath on the fiber @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath . Then we can use the collection @xmath of fiberwise
norms and the connection in @xmath to define a family of seminorms on
the space @xmath : For each compact subset @xmath of @xmath we set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath means the application of the connection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to the @xmath -section @xmath .

###### Definition 1.3.8.

Let @xmath be a manifold endowed with a metric @xmath and let @xmath be
a vector bundle over @xmath endowed with a connection @xmath and an
inner product @xmath . Endow @xmath with the Levi-Civita connection
still denoted by @xmath . Following the construction above we define a
notion of convergence in @xmath : We say that a sequence @xmath
converges to @xmath if there exists a compact subset @xmath of @xmath
such that @xmath and @xmath are contained in @xmath for each @xmath and
the sequence @xmath converges to zero.

Notice that, since we always consider compact subsets, it can be proved
that different choices of inner products (provided that they are
positive definite) and connections yield equivalent seminorms, hence the
notion of convergence the we defined on @xmath does not depend on the
choices made in the preparatory construction.

Now we can speak of distributions on manifolds.

###### Definition 1.3.9.

Consider a manifold @xmath , a vector bundle @xmath over @xmath and a
finite dimensional @xmath -vector space @xmath . A @xmath -valued
distribution in @xmath is a linear map @xmath that is continuous with
respect to the convergence in @xmath .

@xmath denotes the vector space of @xmath -valued distributions in
@xmath .

In the definition given above the choice of a norm on the vector space
@xmath is implied. However @xmath , hence all norms are equivalent and
hence the definition does not depend on the choice of the norm on @xmath
.

###### Remark 1.3.10.

Consider an oriented manifold @xmath endowed with a metric @xmath , two
vector bundles @xmath and @xmath over @xmath and a finite dimensional
@xmath -vector space @xmath . There is a procedure to extend any linear
differential operator @xmath to a linear differential operator in
distributional sense , that is a linear map from @xmath to @xmath which
we still denote with @xmath .

The first thing to be done is to define the formal adjoint of @xmath ,
denoted by @xmath . Precisely, there exists a unique linear differential
operator @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath and each @xmath , where the dual pairing between the
proper vector bundles is taken into account and @xmath is the volume
form induced by @xmath on @xmath . Notice that the canonical
identification @xmath implies @xmath , where for @xmath we mean the
formal adjoint of @xmath defined repeating the procedure just shown.

At this point we are ready to extend @xmath to a linear operator from
@xmath to @xmath , that we denote again with @xmath . This is the linear
differential operator in distributional sense that extends the
“original” @xmath . Such extension is obtained imposing

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath and each @xmath .

Note that, in the case @xmath , the “new” @xmath acts exactly as the
“original” @xmath on sections of @xmath (to be precise, we should say
that, for each @xmath , there exists a unique section @xmath that
generates the image through the “new” @xmath of the distribution
generated by @xmath and that such @xmath coincides with the image
through the “original” @xmath of @xmath ). This fact is a consequence of
the identity @xmath shown above.

Before proceeding with the next subsection, we want to make some remarks
about formally selfadjoint linear differential operators and their
extensions in distributional sense.

###### Remark 1.3.11.

Assume that @xmath is a vector bundle over an oriented manifold @xmath
endowed with a metric @xmath and consider an inner product on @xmath .
Suppose that @xmath is a formally selfadjoint linear differential
operator. Considering the musical isomorphisms defined using the inner
product on @xmath (cfr. Definition 1.1.27 ), we realize that the
condition of formal selfadjointness (cfr. Definition 1.3.4 ) can be
rewritten in the following form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the volume form induced by @xmath on @xmath . In the
present situation the formal adjoint of @xmath is given by @xmath . We
can check this fact verifying that, because of the formal
selfadjointness of @xmath , @xmath satisfies the formula, given in our
last remark, that defines uniquely the formal adjoint of a linear
differential operator: for each @xmath and each @xmath we have

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

At this point we have @xmath . Now identify @xmath and @xmath through
the musical isomorphisms and we deduce @xmath . Then, after the
identification of @xmath with @xmath as done before, formal
selfadjointness of @xmath means that the formal adjoint of @xmath
coincides with @xmath . This fact trivially leads also to the
coincidence of the extensions of @xmath and @xmath as linear
differential operators in distributional sense.

#### 1.3.4 Fundamental solutions and Green operators

Once that we are given a globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath , a vector
bundle @xmath over @xmath , a normally hyperbolic operator @xmath on
@xmath and a vector space @xmath , applying Remark 1.3.10 , the
distributional extension @xmath of the “original” @xmath . For our
current scope, that is the determination of global fundamental solutions
for each point of @xmath , we need to consider a different vector space
each time and hence we have to define a “new” @xmath for each @xmath .
The reason that induces us to do this will become clear in the next
definition.

###### Definition 1.3.12.

Consider a globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath , a vector bundle @xmath
over @xmath and a linear differential operator @xmath on @xmath over
@xmath . Then for each @xmath we consider the linear differential
operator in distributional sense @xmath (obtained from the given @xmath
exploiting Remark 1.3.10 ) and we call fundamental solution for @xmath
at the point @xmath each of the distributions of @xmath that solve the
equation @xmath in distributional sense, where @xmath is the @xmath
-valued delta distribution at @xmath on @xmath over @xmath defined by
@xmath for each @xmath .

Now the reason for which we consider a different “new” @xmath for each
@xmath becomes clear: once that @xmath is fixed, we have to consider
@xmath as target vector space for the space of distributions in which we
search fundamental solutions in order to get compatibility between the
RHS and the LHS of the distributional equation @xmath .

We have defined fundamental solutions at a given point. Now we have the
problem of their existence and, in case, their uniqueness. The next
theorem provides us a tool that ensures uniqueness under certain
hypotheses.

###### Lemma 1.3.13.

Consider a globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath , a vector bundle @xmath
over @xmath , a vector space @xmath and a normally hyperbolic operator
@xmath on @xmath over @xmath . Then each solution @xmath of the equation
@xmath (in distributional sense) with past compact or future compact
support must identically vanish.

We stress that this lemma guarantees uniqueness only for fundamental
solutions with past compact or future compact support. Nothing is
implied for fundamental solutions with different supports.

The hypothesis of global hyperbolicity in this lemma can be weakened
without modifying the thesis. We keep such hypothesis also here since
anyway throughout our discussion it will always be assumed being
indispensable for many essential results, e.g. the next theorem, in
which a relaxation of the hypothesis of global hyperbolicity leads to
the loss of the result of existence for global fundamental solutions
with past compact or future compact support.

In the statement of the next theorem, besides existence for global
fundamental solutions with past compact or future compact support, we
have included uniqueness too, which is a direct consequence of Lemma
1.3.13 .

###### Theorem 1.3.14.

Consider a globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath , a vector bundle @xmath
over @xmath and a normally hyperbolic operator @xmath on @xmath over
@xmath . Then for each @xmath there exists exactly one fundamental
solution for @xmath at @xmath with past compact support (we denote it
with @xmath ) and exactly one fundamental solution for @xmath at @xmath
with future compact support (we denote it with @xmath ). Such
fundamental solutions satisfy the following properties:

-   @xmath and @xmath ;

-    for each @xmath the maps @xmath , denoted by @xmath , are (smooth)
    sections in @xmath over @xmath and satisfy the differential equation

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Beyond Lemma 1.3.13 , the proof of this last result requires Theorem
1.3.7 and another theorem (not included here) that guarantees the
linearity and continuity of the map that associates to each proper
initial data the corresponding solution of the Cauchy problem presented
in Theorem 1.3.7 . Such theorem can be found in [ BGP07 , Thm. 3.2.12,
p. 86] . Both Theorem 1.3.7 and the omitted theorem are applied to
@xmath in place of @xmath . The hypotheses of these theorems require
that @xmath is normally hyperbolic. Indeed this follows from the
hypothesis of normal hyperbolicity of @xmath .

Now we can use fundamental solutions and their properties to define a
pair of operators that will allow us to obtain the full set of solutions
of the homogeneous Cauchy problems with compactly supported initial data
starting from the space of compactly supported sections. We begin with a
definition.

###### Definition 1.3.15.

Consider a globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath , a vector bundles
@xmath over @xmath and a linear differential operator @xmath . We call
advanced Green operator for @xmath each map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

that is linear and fulfils the following requirements for each @xmath :

-   @xmath ;

-   @xmath ;

-   @xmath .

Similarly, we call retarded Green operator for @xmath each map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

that is linear and fulfils the same requirements with @xmath replaced by
@xmath .

Theorem 1.3.14 implies existence and uniqueness of both an advanced
Green operator and a retarded Green operator for a normally hyperbolic
operator (we call them respectively the advanced Green operator and the
retarded Green operator since they are unique). We present such result
in the following corollary.

###### Corollary 1.3.16.

Consider a globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath , a vector bundle @xmath
over @xmath and a normally hyperbolic operator @xmath on @xmath over
@xmath . Then two families @xmath and @xmath of fundamental solutions
for @xmath with past compact and, respectively, future compact support
define advanced and retarded Green operators @xmath and @xmath for
@xmath in the following way: @xmath and @xmath for each @xmath .

Also the converse is true, i.e. advanced and retarded Green operators
@xmath and @xmath for @xmath define two families @xmath and @xmath of
fundamental solutions for @xmath with past compact and, respectively,
future compact support through the formulas given above applied in
reverse sense.

In particular it follows that uniqueness for fundamental solutions with
past/future compact support implies uniqueness for Green operators.

The existence of two families of fundamental solutions with the proper
support properties is assured by Theorem 1.3.14 applied to @xmath ,
which is normally hyperbolic because we supposed that @xmath is normally
hyperbolic. As for uniqueness of Green operators, if we assume that
there exist two pairs of Green operators, we can obtain two pairs of
families of fundamental solutions with the right support properties.
Then Lemma 1.3.13 implies the coincidence of the new families with the
original ones and this fact in turn implies the coincidence of the Green
operators used to build such families of fundamental solutions.

We devote the last part of this section to the presentation of some
properties related to the Green operators. The first one is an extension
of the second property in Definition 1.3.15 . Its validity is
essentially based on Lemma 1.3.13 .

###### Lemma 1.3.17.

Consider a globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath , a vector bundle @xmath
over @xmath , a normally hyperbolic operator @xmath on @xmath over
@xmath and denote with @xmath and @xmath its advanced and retarded Green
operators. Then for all @xmath such that @xmath it holds that:

-    if @xmath has past compact support, @xmath ;

-    if @xmath has future compact support, @xmath .

###### Proof.

Fix @xmath with past compact support such that @xmath . Then @xmath is
in the domain of @xmath and hence we can consider @xmath . From the
first property in Definition 1.3.15 we deduce @xmath and this identity
can be rewritten in the form @xmath . We observe that @xmath and that
@xmath is past compact (this follows from Proposition 1.2.18 ). Since
@xmath has past compact support by hypothesis, we deduce that @xmath has
past compact support. Consider the distribution @xmath generated by the
section @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the volume form on @xmath and the dual pairing
between @xmath and @xmath is taken into account. We obtain @xmath in
distributional sense: for each @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore Lemma 1.3.13 entails that @xmath is the null distribution.
Since the only section that generates the null distribution is the null
section, we conclude that @xmath vanishes everywhere, which is to say
@xmath . The proof of @xmath for @xmath with future compact support is
similar. ∎

Before the definition of Green operators, we have anticipated that they
allow us to build the full space of solutions of the homogeneous Cauchy
problems for a normally hyperbolic equation with compactly supported
initial data. Now we see how this is obtained.

###### Definition 1.3.18.

Consider a globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath , a vector bundle @xmath
over @xmath and a linear differential operator @xmath admitting advanced
and retarded Green operators @xmath and @xmath . We call causal
propagator for @xmath the operator @xmath .

The support properties of the advanced and retarded Green operators
explain the reason why the operator @xmath is called causal propagator
for @xmath : one may say that @xmath “propagates” each compactly
supported section @xmath to the causal future and past of its support
providing a section @xmath whose support is contained in @xmath .

###### Corollary 1.3.19.

Consider a globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath , a vector bundle @xmath
over @xmath and a normally hyperbolic operator @xmath on @xmath over
@xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be the advanced and retarded Green
operators for @xmath . Then the space of solutions @xmath of the
homogeneous Cauchy problems associated to @xmath with compactly
supported initial data coincides with the image through the causal
propagator @xmath of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Before starting with the main part of the proof, we notice that we can
find a spacelike smooth Cauchy surface @xmath of @xmath since @xmath is
a globally hyperbolic spacetime (see Theorem 1.2.15 ). We set a unit
future directed timelike vector field @xmath over @xmath which is normal
to @xmath .

We begin from the inclusion @xmath . Fix @xmath and define @xmath and
@xmath . @xmath , @xmath : @xmath is compact because it is closed and
contained in @xmath which is compact too (cfr. Proposition 1.2.18 ). The
first defining property of Green operators (see Definition 1.3.15 )
implies trivially that @xmath . Moreover @xmath and @xmath by
construction, where @xmath and @xmath are proper initial data for a
homogeneous Cauchy problem associated to @xmath . Hence @xmath .

Now we turn our attention to the converse inclusion, i.e. @xmath . Fix
@xmath . Since @xmath is a solution of a homogeneous Cauchy problem
associated to @xmath with compactly supported initial data, we find
proper initial data that generate such solution simply imposing @xmath
and @xmath . As above @xmath , @xmath because from 1.3.7 it follows that
there exists a compact subset @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath .
Therefore we have that @xmath is the unique solution of the following
homogeneous Cauchy problem:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is easy to find a compact subset @xmath of @xmath that includes the
supports of @xmath and @xmath and a relatively compact open subset
@xmath of @xmath that includes @xmath . We define the open subsets
@xmath and @xmath of @xmath ( @xmath are open subsets of @xmath as it is
shown in [ FV11 , Lem. A.8, p. 48] , while @xmath are closed subsets of
@xmath as it is shown in [ BGP07 , Lem. A.5.1, p. 173] ) and we consider
the open covering @xmath of @xmath . Associated to such open covering,
we can choose a partition of unity @xmath . We set @xmath and @xmath .
From Theorem 1.3.7 we deduce that @xmath because @xmath includes the
supports of @xmath and @xmath . Hence @xmath and therefore @xmath . In
particular this implies that @xmath is supported in

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is relatively compact in @xmath , @xmath is compact (cfr.
Proposition 1.2.18 ) and hence @xmath . Consider now @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we applied Lemma 1.3.17 taking into account that @xmath has past
compact support and @xmath has future compact support as a consequence
of their definitions. This completes the proof. ∎

The next proposition provides a characterization of the kernel of the
causal propagator. The proof is based on the defining properties of
Green operators.

###### Proposition 1.3.20.

Consider a globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath , a vector bundle @xmath
over @xmath and a linear differential operator @xmath admitting advanced
and retarded Green operators @xmath and @xmath . Then we have that the
kernel of the causal propagator @xmath coincides with the image through
@xmath of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The inclusion @xmath is a trivial consequence of the second defining
property of Green operators (cfr. Definition 1.3.15 ). To prove the
converse inclusion, consider @xmath such that @xmath . We have to find
@xmath such that @xmath to prove that @xmath falls in @xmath . We do
this in the following way: First we notice that @xmath implies @xmath .
From this it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The set on the RHS of the last inclusion is compact owing to Proposition
1.2.18 , hence @xmath has compact support. Moreover @xmath because of
the first property in Definition 1.3.15 . Hence we have found a section
of the type required: @xmath . ∎

The last proposition of this subsection establishes a relationship that
holds between the Green operators for a normally hyperbolic operator and
the Green operators for its formal adjoint (that is automatically
normally hyperbolic).

###### Proposition 1.3.21.

Consider a globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath , a vector bundle @xmath
over @xmath and a normally hyperbolic operator @xmath on @xmath over
@xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be the advanced and retarded Green
operators for @xmath and @xmath and @xmath be the advanced and retarded
Green operators for @xmath , the formal adjoint of @xmath (cfr. Remark
1.3.10 ), which is automatically normally hyperbolic. Then we have that
@xmath is formally adjoint to @xmath , which is to say

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath and each @xmath , where the dual pairing between @xmath
and @xmath is taken into account and @xmath is the volume form on @xmath
.

###### Proof.

For each @xmath and each @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

In the last calculation we have used the first defining property of
Green operators and we have exploited the relation of formal adjointness
between @xmath and @xmath noting that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is compact due to Proposition 1.2.18 . ∎

### 1.4 Algebras and states

To define a quantum field theory in a proper way, we need essentially
two different types of ingredients. On the one hand there are algebras,
whose elements play the role of abstract “quantum observables”. On the
other hand there are states, which contain all the information
pertaining to the physical system that they are expected to describe.
The quantum field theory of a physical system concretely arises only
from the interaction of such building blocks. By this we mean that a
physical prediction is obtained taking the expectation value of an
observables on a given state. This section is devoted to a brief
presentation of both these ingredients with particular attention to the
algebras that are needed for the quantization of bosonic fields.

#### 1.4.1 C*-algebras, Weyl systems and CCR representations

In this subsection we recollect the essential algebraic equipment that
we will use in the next chapters to build quantum field theories. As for
Section 1.3 , most of the theorems are stated without proofs, however
these can be found in [ BGP07 , Chap. 4, Sects. 1-2] .

We begin giving the definition of an algebra. We take the chance to
specify some particular types of algebras which are enriched with some
additional structures such as *-algebras and C*-algebras

###### Definition 1.4.1.

An associative @xmath -algebra (or simply an algebra ) @xmath is a
@xmath -vector space @xmath endowed with a map @xmath , called
multiplication , that maps @xmath to an element of @xmath denoted by
@xmath and that fulfils the following properties:

-   @xmath -bilinearity : for each @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and each
    @xmath , @xmath it holds that

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

-    associativity : @xmath for each @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

A *-algebra @xmath is an algebra endowed with a map @xmath , called
involution , that maps @xmath to an element of @xmath denoted by @xmath
and that fulfils the following properties:

-    involutive property : @xmath for each @xmath ;

-   @xmath -antilinearity : @xmath for each @xmath , @xmath and each
    @xmath , @xmath ;

-    relation between multiplication and involution : @xmath for each
    @xmath , @xmath .

A C*-algebra @xmath is a *-algebra endowed with a norm @xmath defined on
the underlying vector space such that it becomes a Banach space and the
following properties hold:

-    submultiplicativity : @xmath for each @xmath , @xmath ;

-    the involution is an isometry : @xmath for each @xmath ;

-    C*-property : @xmath for each @xmath .

In the following we will always write @xmath when we consider an element
of the algebra @xmath . This means that we are considering the element
@xmath of the underlying @xmath -vector space @xmath , that in turn is
the element @xmath of the set on which the @xmath -vector structure is
defined giving rise to @xmath .

A very important example (at least in the context of quantum field
theory) of C*-algebra is provided by the space @xmath of linear and
continuous operators on a Hilbert space @xmath with the composition of
the operators as multiplication and the assignment of the adjoint as
involution.

We find it useful to define subalgebras of given algebras.

###### Definition 1.4.2.

Consider an algebra @xmath . A subalgebra @xmath of @xmath is a subspace
@xmath of the vector space @xmath underlying @xmath that is closed with
respect to the multiplication of @xmath so that the multiplication of
@xmath restricted to @xmath becomes an associative @xmath -bilinear
internal operation on @xmath giving rise to the algebra @xmath .

If @xmath is also a *-algebra, we say that @xmath is a sub-*-algebra of
@xmath if it is a subalgebra of @xmath and its underlying vector space
@xmath is closed with respect to the involution of @xmath so that it can
be endowed with the involution of @xmath restricted to @xmath thus
becoming a *-algebra itself.

Finally if @xmath is a C*-algebra, we say that @xmath is a
sub-C*-algebra of @xmath if it is a sub-*-algebra of @xmath and its
underlying vector space is a closed subspace of the Banach space
underlying @xmath so that @xmath becomes a C*-algebra in its own right
when endowed with the norm of @xmath .

Notice that in each of the cases seen above a subalgebra of an algebra
@xmath is itself an algebra constituted by a subspace of the vector
space underlying @xmath which is closed with respect to all the
operations that can be performed in @xmath and which is endowed with the
restrictions of all the structures defined on @xmath .

###### Remark 1.4.3.

We can obtain the smallest subalgebra @xmath (of a desired type)
including a subset @xmath of an algebra @xmath (of that type) simply
taking the intersection of all the subalgebras of @xmath (of that type)
that include @xmath . In such situation we call set of generators the
chosen subset @xmath and generated subalgebra the subalgebra @xmath that
we have obtained. Indeed it can happen that @xmath is such that @xmath .

It will be important for us to consider C*-algebras that contain
particular elements called unities.

###### Definition 1.4.4.

An element @xmath of an algebra @xmath is called a unit of @xmath if
@xmath for each @xmath . Each algebra possessing a unit is said to be
unital .

###### Remark 1.4.5.

Notice that each algebra @xmath has at most one unit. This is
immediately seen assuming that both @xmath and @xmath are units of
@xmath because from this assumption it follows that @xmath .

Moreover in each *-algebra @xmath since for each @xmath it holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and similarly @xmath . Then @xmath is a unit of @xmath and uniqueness of
units implies @xmath .

The last observation concerning units that we make is related to their
norm: if @xmath denotes the unique unit of a C*-algebra @xmath whose
underlying vector space is not trivial, we have @xmath . To see how this
works we consider the C*-property and we remember that the involution is
an isometry, hence @xmath . The last equation implies that @xmath is
either 0 or 1. In the first case we have @xmath . 0 must be the only
element of @xmath in order to be a unit of @xmath . This contradicts the
hypothesis, therefore it must be @xmath .

Now we define maps between algebras that are compatible with the
structures defined on such algebras.

###### Definition 1.4.6.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two algebras. A map @xmath is an algebraic
homomorphism if it is compatible with the vector structures and
multiplications of @xmath and @xmath , i.e. for each @xmath , @xmath and
each @xmath , @xmath the following conditions hold:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the first equation involves the @xmath -vector structure on the
LHS and the @xmath -vector structure on the RHS, while the second
equation involves the @xmath -multiplication on the LHS and the @xmath
-multiplication on the RHS. A map @xmath is an algebraic isomorphism if
it is a bijective algebraic homomorphism (its inverse is automatically
an algebraic homomorphism and hence an algebraic isomorphism). A map
@xmath is an algebraic automorphism if it is an algebraic isomorphism.

If @xmath and @xmath are also *-algebras, a map @xmath is a
*-homomorphism if it is an algebraic homomorphism compatible with the
involutions of both @xmath and @xmath , i.e. @xmath for each @xmath ,
where the LHS involves the @xmath -involution and the RHS involves the
@xmath -involution. A map @xmath is a *-isomorphism if it is a bijective
*-homomorphism (its inverse is automatically a *-homomorphism and hence
a *-isomorphism). A map @xmath is a *-automorphism if it is a
*-isomorphism.

The upcoming proposition provides a condition that ensures continuity
for *-homomorphisms between unital C*-algebras.

###### Proposition 1.4.7.

Let @xmath and @xmath be unital C*-algebras and consider a
*-homomorphism @xmath . Then if @xmath is unit preserving, for each
@xmath we have @xmath , in particular @xmath can be seen as a linear and
continuous operator between the Banach spaces @xmath and @xmath with
operator norm @xmath . If @xmath is also injective, for each @xmath we
have that @xmath , in particular @xmath can be seen as an isometry
between the Banach spaces @xmath and @xmath .

###### Remark 1.4.8.

As a particular case of this proposition, we consider a surjective
*-homomorphism @xmath from a unital C*-algebras @xmath to a C*-algebra
@xmath . We notice that @xmath and that for each @xmath it holds that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is such that @xmath ( @xmath exists as a consequence of the
surjectivity of @xmath ). Then we recognize @xmath to be the unique unit
of @xmath . Hence as a matter of fact @xmath is a unital C*-algebra and
@xmath is unit preserving so that we can apply the last proposition. We
conclude that @xmath can be seen as a continuous linear operator between
the Banach spaces @xmath and @xmath with operator norm @xmath . If
@xmath is also a *-isomorphism, due to the additional hypothesis of
injectivity, @xmath becomes an isometric isomorphism between the Banach
spaces @xmath and @xmath .

The next step in our path towards the construction of a quantum field
theory for a bosonic field is the introduction of Weyl systems. Before
we do that, we need to define symplectic spaces and symplectic maps.

###### Definition 1.4.9.

Let @xmath be a real vector space. We call (non degenerate) symplectic
form each map @xmath that satisfies the following conditions:

-   bilinearity: for each @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and each @xmath ,
    @xmath it holds that

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

-   antisymmetry: @xmath for each @xmath , @xmath ;

-   non degeneracy: if @xmath is such that @xmath for each @xmath then
    @xmath .

A symplectic space is a pair @xmath , where @xmath is a real vector
space and @xmath is a symplectic form on @xmath .

Given two symplectic spaces @xmath and @xmath , we say that @xmath is a
symplectic map if it is linear and it is compatible with the symplectic
forms @xmath and @xmath , i.e. @xmath for each @xmath , @xmath .

###### Remark 1.4.10.

Note that each symplectic map @xmath between to arbitrary symplectic
spaces @xmath and @xmath is injective. We can see this taking @xmath
such that @xmath and showing that @xmath . Indeed this is true because
@xmath for each @xmath and @xmath is non degenerate.

Now that we know what a symplectic space is, we are ready to define Weyl
systems.

###### Definition 1.4.11.

Let @xmath be a symplectic space. A Weyl system associated to @xmath is
a pair @xmath where @xmath is a unital C*-algebra and @xmath is a Weyl
map , i.e. a map that fulfils the following requirements for each @xmath
, @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

###### Remark 1.4.12.

The three requirements that each Weyl map @xmath must satisfy entail
that @xmath . We show for example the first equality, the proof of the
other being almost identical. We proceed in the following way. In the
first step we exploit the second requirement, in the second step we
exploit the third requirement keeping in mind that each symplectic form
is antisymmetric and in the third and last step we apply the last
requirement:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For a concrete example of Weyl system associated to an arbitrary
symplectic space we refer the reader to [ BGP07 , Ex. 4.2.2, p. 116] .
Such example shows that there exists at least one Weyl system for each
symplectic space.

The requirements that define the Weyl map are such that they reproduce
the canonical commutation relations of bosonic quantum fields in an
exponentiated form, thus eliminating all the potential mathematical
complications that can arise when we try to construct a quantum field
theory starting from an algebra of bosonic fields satisfying the
canonical commutation relations in their original form. This is the
reason why we are interested in Weyl systems. To be more precise we are
interested in a particular class of Weyl systems that we are going to
define.

###### Definition 1.4.13.

Let @xmath be a symplectic space. A CCR representation of @xmath is a
Weyl system @xmath associated to @xmath such that @xmath is a set of
generators for the unital C*-algebra @xmath . In such situation @xmath
is called CCR algebra .

Once we are given a Weyl system @xmath associated to a symplectic space
@xmath , we can easily find a CCR representation of @xmath considering
the Weyl system associated to @xmath consisting of the sub-C*-algebra
generated by @xmath and the Weyl map @xmath .

This construction ensures that the existence of a CCR representation for
each symplectic space is a consequence of the existence of a Weyl system
for that symplectic space. The next proposition states uniqueness for
CCR representations of symplectic spaces in an appropriate sense.

###### Proposition 1.4.14.

Let @xmath be a symplectic space and consider two CCR representation
@xmath and @xmath of @xmath . Then there exists a unique *-isomorphism
@xmath such that @xmath .

Since @xmath is a unital C*-algebra, we can apply Remark 1.4.8 and
conclude that @xmath is actually unit preserving and can be interpreted
as an isometric isomorphism between the Banach spaces @xmath and @xmath
. This proposition implies that a CCR representation associated to some
symplectic space is unique up to *-isomorphisms.

We conclude this section with two propositions that will be essential
when we will try to build quantum field theories in the next chapters.

###### Proposition 1.4.15.

Let @xmath be a CCR algebra. Then each unit preserving *-homomorphism
from @xmath to a unital C*-algebra @xmath is injective.

We obtain a particular case of this proposition applying Proposition
1.4.7 to @xmath : Each unit preserving *-homomorphism from @xmath to a
unital C*-algebra @xmath is injective and can be seen as an isometry
between the Banach spaces @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proposition 1.4.16.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two symplectic spaces and let @xmath be a
symplectic map. Denoting with @xmath and @xmath two CCR representations
of @xmath and respectively of @xmath , we have that there exists a
unique injective *-homomorphism @xmath such that @xmath .

We want to stress that the *-homomorphism @xmath provided by the theorem
is automatically unit preserving because

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath and @xmath are both unital C*-algebras, applying
Proposition 1.4.7 , we deduce that @xmath is also an isometry between
the Banach spaces @xmath and @xmath .

#### 1.4.2 States and representations

In this subsection we focus on states and representations for a given
C*-algebra. In particular we show that a given state on each C*-algebra
induces a representation of the C*-algebra itself on some Hilbert space.
A more detailed discussion on this topic can be found in [ BB09 , Sect.
1.4] .

We start defining states on a C*-algebra.

###### Definition 1.4.17.

Let @xmath be a C*-algebra. We call linear functional on @xmath each
@xmath that is linear and continuous. The norm of a linear functional
@xmath on @xmath is defined by the following formula:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We say that @xmath is positive if @xmath for each @xmath .

A state @xmath on @xmath is a positive linear functional with norm 1,
i.e. @xmath We denote the set of states on @xmath with @xmath .

One of the most common examples of state is the following. Consider the
C*-algebra @xmath of linear and continuous operators on a Hilbert space
@xmath and let @xmath denote a norm 1 element of @xmath . Then for each
@xmath a state is provided by the following map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the scalar product of @xmath .

Positive linear functionals on a C*-algebra enjoy several properties
(especially if the C*-algebra is unital). We present some of these
properties in the following proposition.

###### Proposition 1.4.18.

Let @xmath be a C*-algebra and let @xmath be a positive linear
functional on @xmath . Then the following conditions hold:

-    the map

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    is a positive semidefinite Hermitian sesquilinear form on @xmath ;

-    the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality holds for this form, i.e. for each
    @xmath , @xmath we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    for each @xmath , @xmath if and only if @xmath for each @xmath .

If @xmath possesses a unit @xmath then we have some other properties:

-   @xmath for each @xmath ;

-   @xmath .

###### Proof.

We immediately realize that the form in the first condition of the
statement is sesquilinear (antilinear in the first argument and linear
in the second) and positive semidefinite. The only complication comes
when we want to check that it is also Hermitian. To prove this fact, fix
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath and define @xmath . Then we find that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we deduce that @xmath must be real for each @xmath . This condition
for @xmath and @xmath implies that the form is actually Hermitian.

The Cauchy-Schwarz inequality is satisfied by each positive semidefinite
Hermitian sesquilinear form. Anyway we show how to proceed in this case
since part of the proof has already been done. In fact the last equation
implies also the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality: If @xmath , then @xmath must
be non negative for each @xmath and hence @xmath must be zero, otherwise
we can make the choice

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In both cases we conclude that the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality holds.

If we take @xmath such that @xmath , from the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality
it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath . Then @xmath . The converse implication is trivial.

Now we suppose that @xmath has a unit. The first property easily follows
from hermiticity:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the second property we proceed in the following way: For each @xmath
we find

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

if @xmath then @xmath , otherwise we deduce @xmath and then the thesis
follows bearing in mind that @xmath . ∎

If we are dealing with states, we have some other properties that will
be very helpful when we will try to find a representation for each
C*-algebra with the assignment of a state.

###### Proposition 1.4.19.

Let @xmath be a unital C*-algebra and let @xmath be a state on @xmath .
Then the following properties hold:

-   @xmath for each @xmath ;

-    for each @xmath , @xmath we have @xmath .

###### Proof.

We start from the first point. For each @xmath , using Proposition
1.4.18 , we obtain

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

For the second point we fix @xmath , @xmath . Consider the case @xmath .
From the first statement it follows that @xmath for each @xmath and,
choosing @xmath , we obtain @xmath so that the thesis holds in such
case. Secondly we consider the case @xmath and we define the map @xmath
by setting

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is immediately recognized as a positive linear functional on
@xmath and, applying Proposition 1.4.18 , we deduce that @xmath , hence
@xmath is also a state. Then we conclude that @xmath , that is exactly
our thesis. ∎

We have discussed states in sufficient detail for our scope. It is time
to turn our attention to representations of C*-algebras on Hilbert
spaces.

###### Definition 1.4.20.

Let @xmath be a C*-algebra and let @xmath be a Hilbert space. A
representation of @xmath on @xmath is a *-homomorphism @xmath from
@xmath to the C*-algebra @xmath of linear and continuous operators on
@xmath . Such a representation is said to be faithful if @xmath is
injective.

Let @xmath be a representation of the C*-algebra @xmath on the Hilbert
space @xmath . We say that a subset @xmath of @xmath is invariant under
@xmath if the following condition holds:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We say that @xmath is irreducible if the only invariant closed subspaces
of @xmath are @xmath and @xmath itself.

Moreover two representations @xmath and @xmath of @xmath on the Hilbert
spaces @xmath and respectively @xmath are said to be unitarily
equivalent if there exists a unitary operator @xmath such that @xmath
for each @xmath .

Before we state the main theorem of this subsection, we still need to
define another ingredient.

###### Definition 1.4.21.

Let @xmath be a C*-algebra, let @xmath be a vector space and let @xmath
be a representation. A vector @xmath is said to be cyclic for the
representation @xmath if @xmath is a dense subspace of @xmath .

We are ready to state the main theorem of this subsection.

###### Theorem 1.4.22.

Let @xmath be a unital C*-algebra and let @xmath be a state on @xmath .
Then there exists a triple @xmath , where @xmath is a Hilbert space with
scalar product denoted by @xmath , @xmath is a unit preserving
continuous representation of @xmath on @xmath and @xmath is a unit
cyclic vector for the representation @xmath such that for each @xmath it
holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This triple @xmath is unique (up to unitary equivalence) and it is
called the GNS triple for @xmath induced by @xmath .

###### Proof.

In Proposition 1.4.18 we have seen that @xmath defines a positive
semidefinite Hermitian sesquilinear product on @xmath . If we consider
the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we easily realize that this is a closed vector subspace of @xmath
applying the first part of Proposition 1.4.18 . Then we can consider the
quotient

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which becomes a Banach space when endowed with the quotient norm @xmath
defined by the formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consider now two equivalence classes @xmath , @xmath and choose @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , @xmath . With this choice of representatives we
evaluate @xmath . For convenience we define @xmath and @xmath and we
immediately realize that @xmath , @xmath . We find that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and, applying again Proposition 1.4.18 , we deduce

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

because @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . This shows that the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

is well defined. It is immediate to check that it is a positive
semidefinite Hermitian sesquilinear form. Now we show that it is also
positive definite. Consider @xmath such that @xmath . By definition of
@xmath , this means that we have @xmath for each @xmath . Then @xmath
coincides with @xmath , that is the zero element of @xmath . We conclude
that @xmath is a scalar product on @xmath , so that @xmath becomes a
pre-Hilbert space when endowed with @xmath . This can be completed and
we obtain an Hilbert space @xmath . We denote its scalar product with
@xmath and we remind the reader that the pre-Hilbert space @xmath is
isometrically isomorphic to a certain subspace @xmath of @xmath ,
therefore the composition of the inclusion map of @xmath in @xmath with
the isometrical isomorphism @xmath from @xmath to @xmath is an isometry.
We denote this isometry with @xmath .

Consider now @xmath and @xmath and choose two representatives @xmath ,
@xmath . For convenience we define @xmath and we notice that @xmath .
From Proposition 1.4.19 we deduce that @xmath . Then @xmath falls in
@xmath and we conclude that @xmath . This shows that for each @xmath ,
the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

is well defined. @xmath is also linear, as one immediately recognizes.
For each @xmath we show that @xmath is also continuous on @xmath endowed
with the norm induced by @xmath . We fix @xmath for each @xmath and we
apply again the last part of Proposition 1.4.19 . Then we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This means exactly the continuity of @xmath with respect to the norm
induced by @xmath . Moreover its norm as a linear and continuous
operator on @xmath is controlled from above by @xmath : we write that
@xmath .

Recalling the isometry @xmath and the isometrical isomorphism @xmath ,
for each @xmath we define @xmath . We have that @xmath is a linear and
continuous operator from @xmath to @xmath with norm @xmath . Since
@xmath is complete, we can find a unique linear and continuous extension
of @xmath defined on the closure of @xmath , i.e. @xmath . We denote
such linear and continuous operator on @xmath with @xmath and we find
that @xmath . In this way we the map @xmath is automatically defined.
@xmath is linear as the reader can directly check from its definition.
Moreover @xmath shows that @xmath is continuous. We must only check that
for each @xmath , @xmath the following equations hold:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and then we have a continuous representation of @xmath on @xmath . Fix
@xmath and @xmath . To simplify the inspection of these equations we
give an expression of @xmath . From the definition of @xmath as the
unique linear and continuous extension of @xmath , we find a Cauchy
sequence @xmath that converges to @xmath such that @xmath converges to
@xmath in @xmath and for each @xmath we choose a representative @xmath
of the equivalence class @xmath . Therefore we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This formula allows us to easily check the first equation above. For the
second equation we must also keep in mind that the involution of @xmath
is the map @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath is the adjoint of @xmath with
respect to the scalar product @xmath of @xmath , that is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore the condition that we must actually check is the following:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is easily seen to hold using eq. ( 1.4.1 ).

Now we have to find a cyclic unit vector in @xmath that satisfies the
condition of the statement. Using the unit of @xmath , we define @xmath
. This is indeed an element of @xmath . We fix @xmath and we try to
evaluate @xmath . In first place we use eq. ( 1.4.1 ) with @xmath . As a
consequence of the definition of @xmath the formula becomes simpler:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence we have that @xmath and, since @xmath is dense in @xmath , @xmath
is indeed cyclic. Moreover we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , as it can be checked via direct inspection, the last
equation for @xmath implies that @xmath .

We have built a triple @xmath with the properties required in the
statement. To complete the proof we must show that such triple is unique
up to a unitary transformation. To this end suppose that we have another
triple @xmath of the same type and for convenience we denote with @xmath
the dense subspace @xmath of @xmath and with @xmath the dense subspace
@xmath of @xmath . If we have @xmath , @xmath such that @xmath , then it
holds also that @xmath . To check this fact fix an arbitrary @xmath and,
using the density of @xmath in @xmath , choose a sequence @xmath that
converges to @xmath in @xmath . By definition of @xmath , for each
@xmath we also find @xmath such that @xmath . Using @xmath and @xmath to
denote the scalar products of @xmath and respectively @xmath and bearing
in mind the properties fulfilled by each of the triples, we deduce that
for each @xmath , @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
              
  -- -------- --

Hence we find that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This holds for each @xmath . Therefore the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath                     
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

is well defined. Moreover @xmath is trivially linear and, from the
considerations made above, we deduce that for each @xmath , @xmath the
following equation holds:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular this implies that @xmath is a linear and continuous
operator from the dense subspace @xmath of the Hilbert space @xmath to
the other Hilbert space @xmath . Then there exists a unique linear and
continuous extension @xmath of @xmath defined on the closure of @xmath ,
i.e. @xmath . With the help of our last equation we show that @xmath is
unitary. Fix @xmath , @xmath . We find Cauchy sequences @xmath , @xmath
that converge to @xmath and respectively @xmath in @xmath such that
@xmath and @xmath converge to @xmath and, respectively, @xmath in @xmath
. Then for each @xmath we find @xmath , @xmath such that @xmath and
@xmath . Recalling that the scalar product is always continuous in both
its arguments, we obtain:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Since the last equation holds for each @xmath , @xmath , we deduce that
@xmath is unitary as required. The only property that must still be
checked is the following:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By construction @xmath coincides with @xmath on @xmath and so @xmath for
each @xmath . From this it follows that for each @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and, since @xmath is dense in @xmath and @xmath is continuous in its
second argument, it follows that @xmath for each @xmath , which is to
say @xmath . This fact provides us the equation that leads to the
conclusion of the proof:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As a preliminary step, we observe that for each @xmath , @xmath it holds

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
  -- -------- -------- --

Consider @xmath and @xmath . As usual we find a Cauchy sequence @xmath
that converges to @xmath in @xmath and for each @xmath we find @xmath
such that @xmath . Then, reminding of the continuity of @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since this holds for each @xmath and each @xmath , the proof is
complete. ∎

### 1.5 Category theory

This section concludes the preliminary part of the thesis. We devote it
to the presentation of some notions from category theory that will be
extensively used in the next chapters. This is essentially due to the
fact that it is possible to construct a quantum field theory as a
covariant functor between to appropriate categories. As a matter of fact
we only need very few notions of category theory so that, despite of its
brevity, the current section, unlike the previous ones, is totally self
contained and sufficient for our scopes. Anyway as general reference
about this topic we suggest [ ML98 ] .

We start defining what it is meant for a category.

###### Definition 1.5.1.

A category @xmath consists of a set of objects @xmath , a set of
morphisms @xmath from @xmath to @xmath for each pair of objects @xmath
and a map, called composition law ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for each triple of objects @xmath . The following axioms (we call them
category axioms ) are assumed to hold:

-    identity law : for each @xmath the set @xmath must contain at least
    an element @xmath such that, for each @xmath , each @xmath and each
    @xmath , it holds that

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

-    associative law : for each @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , each
    @xmath , each @xmath and each @xmath it holds that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Let @xmath be a category. A subcategory @xmath of @xmath is a category
such that @xmath , @xmath for each @xmath , @xmath . Moreover we require
that:

-   for each object @xmath of @xmath the identity morphism of @xmath
    coincides with the identity morphism of @xmath ;

-   for each @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , each @xmath and each @xmath the
    composition @xmath in @xmath coincides with the composition @xmath
    in @xmath .

We say that @xmath is a full subcategory of @xmath if it is a
subcategory of @xmath and @xmath for each @xmath , @xmath .

###### Example 1.5.2.

Examples of categories are:

the category whose objects are sets, whose morphisms are functions
between pairs of sets and whose composition law is provided by the
composition of functions;

the category whose objects are topological spaces, whose morphisms are
continuous functions between pairs of topological spaces and whose
composition law is provided by the composition of functions;

the category whose objects are groups, whose morphisms are homomorphisms
between pairs of groups and whose composition law is provided by the
composition of functions.

One easily checks the validity of the category axioms in these cases.
One may even note that the second category and the third category are
(non full) subcategories of the first one.

Now we define covariant and contravariant functors.

###### Definition 1.5.3.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two categories. A covariant functor @xmath from
@xmath to @xmath is a map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

together with a collection of maps

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that the following requirements, called covariant axioms , are
fulfilled:

-   the composition of morphisms is preserved, i.e. for each @xmath ,
    @xmath , @xmath , each @xmath and each @xmath we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where on the LHS we have the @xmath -composition law, while ton the
    RHS we have the @xmath -composition law;

-   the identity map of an object @xmath of @xmath is mapped to the
    identity map of the corresponding object @xmath of @xmath , i.e. for
    each @xmath we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

A contravariant functor @xmath from @xmath to @xmath is a map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

together with a collection of maps

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that the following requirements, called contravariant axioms , are
fulfilled:

-   the composition of morphisms is reversed, i.e. for each @xmath ,
    @xmath , @xmath , each @xmath and each @xmath we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where on the LHS we have the @xmath -composition law, while ton the
    RHS we have the @xmath -composition law;

-   the identity map of an object @xmath of @xmath is mapped to the
    identity map of the corresponding object @xmath of @xmath , i.e. for
    each @xmath we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

We sometimes denote a covariant functor @xmath from a category @xmath to
a category @xmath with @xmath (the direction of the upper arrow denotes
that the composition is preserved). On the contrary, for a contravariant
functor @xmath from @xmath to @xmath we write @xmath (here the direction
of the upper arrow denotes that the composition is reversed).

###### Example 1.5.4.

We show an example of a covariant functor. Consider the category @xmath
of topological spaces and the category @xmath of sets. We define @xmath
imposing @xmath for each @xmath , where @xmath is the underlying set of
@xmath and @xmath is its topology, and imposing @xmath for each @xmath ,
@xmath and each @xmath . It is immediate to check that @xmath satisfies
the covariant axioms. Notice that covariant functors like @xmath are
called forgetful functors , since they “forget” of some structure or
property possessed by the objects and morphisms of the starting
category.

###### Definition 1.5.5.

Let @xmath be a covariant functor from a category @xmath to a category
@xmath and let @xmath be a covariant functor from @xmath to a category
@xmath . The composition of @xmath and @xmath is the covariant functor
whose map between the objects @xmath is the composition of the maps
@xmath and @xmath and whose maps between the morphisms are defined in
the following way: for each @xmath , @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

composing the maps

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The composition of contravariant functors is a covariant functor defined
similarly, the only difference being that we must compose the maps

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

to obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally the composition of a covariant functor with a contravariant
functor (or vice versa) is the contravariant functor defined as above
paying attention to the reversal in the direction of the morphisms
caused by a contravariant functor.

One can easily check that the definition above is well posed and that
the composed functors are actually covariant in the first two cases and
contravariant in last case. The composition of functors gives us the
opportunity to present a new example of category, the “category of
categories”, whose objects are categories, whose morphisms are covariant
and contravariant functors and whose composition law is the composition
of functors.

To conclude this section we want to introduce another notion from
category theory, specifically that of natural transformation.

###### Definition 1.5.6.

Let @xmath and @xmath be categories and let @xmath and @xmath be
covariant functors from @xmath to @xmath . A covariant natural
transformation @xmath from @xmath to @xmath is a collection of morphisms
of the category @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that the following condition, called covariant naturality axiom ,
is verified:

  for each @xmath , @xmath and each @xmath we have that

    -- -------- --
       @xmath   
    -- -------- --

Otherwise let @xmath and @xmath be contravariant functors from @xmath to
@xmath . A contravariant natural transformation @xmath from @xmath to
@xmath is again a collection of morphisms of the category @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that the following condition, called contravariant naturality axiom
, is verified:

  for each @xmath , @xmath and each @xmath we have that

    -- -------- --
       @xmath   
    -- -------- --

For each @xmath we say that @xmath is the @xmath -component of the
natural transformation @xmath (whether @xmath is covariant or
contravariant).

A covariant (contravariant) natural isomorphism @xmath is a covariant
(respectively contravariant) natural transformation such that each of
its components is an isomorphism between the appropriate objects (i.e. a
bijective morphism whose inverse is a morphism).

For natural transformations we introduce a notation (similar to the one
introduced for functors) that allows us to easily distinguish the
covariant case from the contravariant one: a covariant natural
transformation @xmath from @xmath to @xmath will be denoted by @xmath ,
whereas a contravariant natural transformation @xmath from @xmath to
@xmath will be denoted by @xmath .

## Chapter 2 The generally covariant locality principle

This chapter is divided in three sections. In the first one, following [
BFV03 ] , we present an approach to quantum field theory on curved
spacetimes known as generally covariant locality principle (abbreviated
by the acronym GCLP ) and we study the properties of locally covariant
quantum field theories (or LCQFT ), that are quantum field theories
formulated following the scheme provided by the GCLP. Our main goal is
to show that this family of quantum field theories automatically
satisfies the Haag-Kastler axioms, originally stated in [ HK64 ] . Hence
on the one hand the GCLP recovers exactly the algebraic approach to
quantum field theory suggested by Haag and Kastler, while on the other
hand it has the advantage of emphasizing the common features of the
quantization procedures on different spacetimes and elegantly accounts
for the covariance property required by general relativity for any
theory to be physical.

In the second section we show how a LCQFT can be constructed starting
from the Cauchy problem for a classical field over a globally hyperbolic
spacetime. Here we follow an approach similar to that in [ BFV03 , Sect.
4.3] .

We conclude this chapter showing some examples of concrete locally
covariant quantum field theories. Specifically we study the cases of the
Klein-Gordon field, of the Proca field and of the electromagnetic field.

### 2.1 Locally covariant quantum field theory

Locally covariant quantum field theories are defined in terms of
covariant functors between appropriate categories. The first part of
this section is devoted to a detailed presentation of such categories.

#### 2.1.1 The categories @xmath and @xmath

We start defining both @xmath and @xmath . In the subsequent remarks we
study in detail some properties of their morphisms and then we check
that they actually satisfy the category axioms stated in Definition
1.5.1 .

###### Definition 2.1.1.

The category @xmath is defined in the following way:

-   Objects are @xmath -dimensional globally hyperbolic spacetimes
    @xmath ;

-   The set of morphism @xmath between the objects @xmath and @xmath
    encompasses all the orientation ( @xmath ) and time orientation (
    @xmath ) preserving isometric embeddings @xmath whose images @xmath
    are @xmath -causally convex open subsets of @xmath ;

-   The composition law is provided by the usual composition of
    functions.

@xmath is the category whose objects are unital C*-algebras, whose set
of morphisms @xmath between the objects @xmath and @xmath comprises all
the injective unit preserving *-homomorphisms @xmath and whose
composition law is again the usual composition of functions.

Before the check of the category axioms for @xmath and @xmath , we
devote few lines to some comments on their morphisms.

###### Remark 2.1.2.

Dealing with @xmath , consider @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We have that
@xmath is a @xmath -causally convex open subset of @xmath . It is also
connected because it is the image through @xmath of @xmath , which is
connected being a manifold. Then, recalling Remark 1.2.11 , we can
consider the oriented and time oriented Lorentzian manifold @xmath . If
we consider the diffeomorphism @xmath (see the end of Remark 1.1.7 ) and
we recall that @xmath is isometric and preserves orientation and time
orientation, we can introduce on @xmath the (fiberwise) symmetric and
(fiberwise) non degenerate section of @xmath @xmath , the set of @xmath
-forms @xmath and the vector field @xmath . Hence we recognize that
@xmath is a Lorentzian metric on @xmath , that @xmath is orientable and
@xmath is a choice of an orientation and that @xmath is a time
orientable Lorentzian manifold and @xmath is a choice of a time
orientation. Therefore we can define the oriented and time oriented
Lorentzian manifold @xmath that we denote with @xmath and it immediately
turns out that @xmath . So we will usually write @xmath in place of
@xmath . There is even more: applying Proposition 1.2.16 , we realize
that @xmath is an @xmath -globally hyperbolic connected open subset of
@xmath and then, applying Remark 1.2.13 , we deduce that @xmath is
itself a @xmath -dimensional globally hyperbolic spacetime, i.e. an
object of @xmath in its own right, and we can easily recognize that the
following two maps are actually morphisms of @xmath :

-   @xmath becomes a bijective morphism from @xmath to @xmath whose
    inverse @xmath is a morphism from @xmath to @xmath ;

-   the inclusion map @xmath of @xmath into @xmath becomes a morphism
    from @xmath to @xmath : This is a consequence of a more general fact
    that holds for each object @xmath of @xmath and each @xmath
    -causally convex connected open subset @xmath of @xmath ,
    specifically that the inclusion map @xmath of @xmath in @xmath is
    actually a morphism from @xmath to @xmath (to check this fact note
    that Remark 1.1.7 implies that @xmath is a submanifold of @xmath and
    that the inclusion map @xmath is an embedding and apply Proposition
    1.2.16 and Remark 1.2.13 to obtain the globally hyperbolic spacetime
    @xmath ).

Using these two facts we can decompose each @xmath in two morphisms
@xmath and @xmath (which is bijective and whose inverse is a morphism
from @xmath to @xmath ) according to the formula @xmath .

###### Remark 2.1.3.

As anticipated, we make some observations also on the morphisms of
@xmath . Recalling Proposition 1.4.7 and bearing in mind that all the
objects of @xmath are unital C*-algebras, we see that each morphism of
this category can also be seen as an isometry between the Banach spaces
underlying its domain and its codomain. We can use this fact to obtain
results similar to that found for the morphisms of @xmath . Specifically
consider two objects @xmath and @xmath and a morphism @xmath of @xmath .
We consider the vector spaces @xmath and @xmath that underlie @xmath and
respectively @xmath and we focus on the image @xmath of @xmath , which
is trivially a vector space because @xmath is linear. On a side we
consider the sub-C*-algebra @xmath of @xmath generated by @xmath (cfr.
Remark 1.4.3 ). Since @xmath is compatible with the multiplications and
the involutions of @xmath and @xmath , it follows that @xmath endowed
with the restriction of the product and of the involution of @xmath is a
*-algebra with unit @xmath and the map @xmath , defined by @xmath , is a
*-isomorphism from @xmath to the *-algebra @xmath . We have seen that
@xmath is an injective isometry between the Banach spaces @xmath and
@xmath . This allows us to recognize that @xmath is a closed subspace of
@xmath . Consider in fact a sequence @xmath of elements of the vector
space @xmath that converges to @xmath with respect to the norm of @xmath
and take the sequence @xmath in @xmath : since @xmath is a Cauchy
sequence in @xmath (as a consequence of being convergent) and @xmath is
an isometry, it follows that @xmath is a Cauchy sequence in @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But @xmath is a Banach space and hence we find the limit @xmath of the
sequence @xmath with respect to the norm of @xmath . Hence, bearing in
mind that @xmath is in particular continuous between the Banach spaces
@xmath and @xmath , we have the following situation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The uniqueness of the limit in @xmath implies that @xmath , hence in
particular @xmath . This proves that @xmath is actually a closed
subspace of @xmath . Then the unital *-algebra @xmath endowed with the
restriction of the norm of @xmath defines a unital sub-C*-algebra of
@xmath (cfr. Definition 1.4.2 ) that we denote with @xmath . Since
@xmath is by definition the smallest sub-C*-algebra of @xmath including
@xmath and the vector space underlying @xmath coincides exactly with
@xmath , we conclude that @xmath . It also turns out that we have at our
disposal two new morphisms of @xmath :

-   @xmath , which is in particular a unit preserving *-isomorphism
    between unital C*-algebras and hence, from Remark 1.4.8 , an
    isometric isomorphism between the Banach spaces @xmath and @xmath
    too;

-   the inclusion map @xmath of @xmath in @xmath , which is recognized
    to be an injective unit preserving *-homomorphism between the unital
    C*-algebras @xmath and @xmath : This is a consequence of a more
    general fact that holds for each C*-algebra @xmath and each
    sub-C*-algebra @xmath of @xmath , specifically that the inclusion
    map @xmath of the vector space @xmath underlying @xmath in the
    vector space @xmath underlying @xmath is recognized to be an
    injective unit preserving *-homomorphism between the C*-algebras
    @xmath and @xmath .

Using the construction above, we can decompose each morphism @xmath of
@xmath in the morphisms @xmath and @xmath (which is also a
*-isomorphism) according to the formula @xmath .

Now we are ready to check that @xmath and @xmath are actually
categories.

###### Remark 2.1.4.

We begin from @xmath . If we take @xmath , @xmath , @xmath in @xmath and
@xmath , @xmath , we immediately realize that @xmath is a smooth map and
an immersion as a consequence of the same properties for @xmath @xmath
and @xmath . To prove that it is also an embedding with open image, in
first place we must show that @xmath is an open subset of @xmath . This
is true because @xmath is an open subset of @xmath and @xmath is an open
map from @xmath to @xmath (see the end of Remark 1.1.7 ). After that one
applies Remark 1.1.7 to @xmath , obtains a @xmath -dimensional
submanifold of @xmath and realizes that @xmath is an embedding because
@xmath can be written as the composition of @xmath and @xmath , which
are both diffeomorphisms. Then we must check @xmath is isometric and
preserves orientation and time orientation. This can be directly checked
exploiting the same properties that are assumed to hold for both @xmath
and @xmath . Now the question is whether the image of @xmath through
@xmath is a causally convex subset of @xmath or not. We try to give an
answer fixing @xmath , @xmath . We take a causal curve @xmath in @xmath
connecting @xmath and @xmath and we check that it is entirely contained
in @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath are obviously in @xmath , that is
@xmath -causally convex by hypothesis, it follows that @xmath is
contained in @xmath . Then we can use the isometric diffeomorphism
@xmath to construct @xmath . This is an @xmath -causal curve in @xmath
due to the fact that @xmath is an isometric diffeomorphism and it
connects the points @xmath and @xmath of @xmath . But @xmath and @xmath
are also points of @xmath since @xmath , @xmath . Then by the same
argument applied to @xmath in place of @xmath , we obtain that @xmath is
entirely contained in @xmath . From this we conclude that @xmath is
contained in @xmath and hence this subset of @xmath is indeed @xmath
-causally convex. This proves that @xmath is actually an element of
@xmath and so the law of composition is well defined. We must still
check that the category axioms hold. For each @xmath it is easy to check
that the identity morphism is provided by the function @xmath , @xmath
and so also the identity law is verified. As for the associativity of
the composition law, it holds because the ordinary composition of
functions is always associative.

Now we focus on @xmath . Here the situation is even simpler. Taking
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , we immediately realize
that @xmath makes sense and gives an injective unit preserving
*-homomorphism. In order to show the strategy of proof for the last
statement, we explicitly prove that @xmath is actually compatible with
the involutions of @xmath and of @xmath . Fix @xmath . Since both @xmath
and @xmath are *-homomorphisms between the appropriate algebras by
hypothesis, it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For each @xmath , we recognize the map @xmath , @xmath to be the
identity morphism of @xmath . As before, the associativity of the
composition law is trivial.

At this point we have at hand all the material needed to state the
generally covariant locality principle.

#### 2.1.2 Formulation of the generally covariant locality principle

  The generally covariant locality principle (briefly GCLP ) imposes
  that each quantum field theory on each globally hyperbolic spacetime
  must be formulated as a locally covariant quantum field theory ( LCQFT
  ).

Since we have not yet defined what it is meant for a LCQFT, the
statement of the GCLP is still an empty box. We fill this box with the
next definition and we take the chance to state two additional
properties that can be required to a LCQFT. Later we will see that the
fulfilment of these additional properties allows us to completely
recover the Haag-Kastler axioms starting from the GCLP.

###### Definition 2.1.5.

We call locally covariant quantum field theory (or LCQFT ) any covariant
functor @xmath from the category @xmath to the category @xmath .

A locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath is said to be causal if
the following condition (called causality condition ) holds for each
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , each @xmath and each @xmath such that @xmath
and @xmath are @xmath -causally separated subsets of @xmath :

  the elements of the image through the morphism @xmath of the object
  @xmath commute with the elements of the image through the morphism
  @xmath of the object @xmath , i.e.

    -- -- --
          
    -- -- --

  where @xmath is the zero element of the C*-algebra @xmath .

Moreover @xmath is said to fulfil the time slice axiom if the following
condition holds for each @xmath , @xmath and each @xmath such that
@xmath contains a smooth spacelike Cauchy surface for @xmath :

  the morphism @xmath is surjective, i.e.

    -- -------- --
       @xmath   
    -- -------- --

###### Remark 2.1.6.

Even if a precise discussion on the physical meaning of the generally
covariant locality principle could be conducted after the recovering of
the algebraic quantum field theory framework proposed by Haag and
Kastler (cfr. [ HK64 ] ) simply borrowing the interpretation of the
Haag-Kastler axioms, we want to make some considerations on the last
definition (as a matter of fact on the GCLP) from now.

The first thing that we notice is that the functorial structure of any
locally covariant quantum field theory implements a sort of geometrical
locality in quantum field theory. We realize this fact considering a
LCQFT @xmath , an arbitrary globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath and a
@xmath -causally convex connected open subset @xmath of @xmath . From
the last part of Remark 2.1.2 we deduce that @xmath , hence we consider
@xmath , which is a morphism of @xmath from @xmath to @xmath , and we
focus on its image @xmath @xmath . Recalling Remark 2.1.3 , we realize
that @xmath @xmath is a unital sub-C*-algebra of the unital C*-algebra
@xmath . This is exactly what we mean by geometrical locality: A
causally convex connected open subset of a globally hyperbolic
spacetime, when intended as a globally hyperbolic spacetime in its own
right, is associated by a LCQFT @xmath to a unital C*-algebra whose
image (through the morphism of @xmath obtained via @xmath from the
inclusion map of @xmath in @xmath ) is a unital sub-C*-algebras of the
unital C*-algebra associated via @xmath to the entire globally
hyperbolic spacetime.

This geometrical locality allows us to introduce a physical
interpretation. We assume that, given a LCQFT @xmath and a globally
hyperbolic spacetime @xmath , for each @xmath -causally convex
relatively compact connected open subset @xmath of @xmath , the unital
sub-C*-algebra @xmath of the full unital C*-algebra @xmath is the
mathematical representation of the quantum observables that could be
measured on @xmath . Notice that this interpretation cannot be applied
to the full algebra @xmath because @xmath cannot be compact (if it were,
it would violate the causality condition, cfr. [ O’N83 , Chap. 14, Lem.
13, p. 407] ). By this assumption we mean that we consider as physical
observables only those that can be measured on “small” regions of the
spacetime (precisely @xmath -causally convex relatively compact
connected open subsets of @xmath ). Such choice is done because it
doesn’t appear physically sensible to deal with an observable on a too
large region since we are not able to realize an experimental apparatus
that makes measurements for an observable “everywhere in space and
time”, or anyway on a region to much extended “in space” or “in time”
(or both). The entire algebra of quantum observables on a given globally
hyperbolic spacetime is obtained as the unital sub-C*-algebra of @xmath
generated by all the observables that we classified as physical. We use
this interpretation to explore the physical meaning of some properties
of a locally covariant quantum field theory.

Returning to the definition of a LCQFT, we notice that it is nothing but
a covariant functor from @xmath to @xmath , which is to say that the
GCLP simply states that each quantum field theory must be formulated as
a covariant functor that assigns a unital C*-algebra to each globally
hyperbolic spacetime and an injective unit preserving *-homomorphism
between the appropriate unital C*-algebras to each orientation and time
orientation preserving isometric embedding between globally hyperbolic
spacetimes whose image is a causally convex open subset of the target
spacetime. The physical sense that we obtain in light of our
interpretation is the following: For each globally hyperbolic spacetime
and each “sufficiently small” region, we have a unital sub-C*-algebra
that represents the quantum observables on that region and all these
unital sub-C*-algebras generate the entire algebra of observables on the
given globally hyperbolic spacetime. The power of the GCLP resides in
this fact, that is the possibility of discussing a quantum field theory
on all the globally hyperbolic spacetimes at once.

This functorial structure automatically incorporates in quantum field
theory the notion of general covariance under the transformations
induced by a group of isometric diffeomorphisms of the globally
hyperbolic spacetime. We will see this in detail when the Haag-Kastler
axioms will be recovered. In our interpretation this means that we
expect to find a representation of the group of isometric
diffeomorphisms in terms of a group of automorphisms on the algebra of
observables and that we require that such representation satisfies
covariance (as intended in the language of category theory).

To give a physical interpretation of the property of geometrical
locality encountered before, we proceed in the following way. Let @xmath
and @xmath be @xmath -causally convex relatively compact connected open
subsets of @xmath such that @xmath . We can consider the globally
hyperbolic spacetime @xmath and we immediately recognize that @xmath is
a @xmath -causally convex connected open subsets of @xmath , so that we
can also consider the globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath , which
coincides with @xmath as it is easily seen. Hence we can consider the
inclusion map @xmath and we realize that this is a morphism of @xmath
from @xmath to @xmath . This leads us to the conclusion that @xmath is a
unital sub-C*-algebra of the unital C*-algebra @xmath . This suggests
that a sort of isotony holds for the algebras of observables associated
to proper regions of a globally hyperbolic spacetime: If @xmath is
smaller than @xmath , then we expect that the algebra of observables on
@xmath is a subalgebra of the algebra of observables of @xmath (and both
are trivially subalgebras of the complete algebra of observables
associated to the given globally hyperbolic spacetime).

Now we turn our attention to the causality condition. We begin observing
that the causality condition makes sense because of the functorial
structure of each LCQFT @xmath : Taking three objects @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath and two morphisms @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath and
@xmath are @xmath -causally separated, we can evaluate the commutator of
an element of @xmath with an element of @xmath because, owing to the
functorial structure, both @xmath , @xmath are unital sub-C*-algebras of
@xmath .

From a physical point of view the causality condition imposes some
restrictions to the causal structure of a LCQFT @xmath . We can sketch
the typology of such restrictions considering the globally hyperbolic
spacetime @xmath and two @xmath -causally convex relatively compact
connected open subsets @xmath and @xmath of @xmath that are @xmath
-causally separated. As usual we interpret @xmath and @xmath as been
globally hyperbolic spacetimes in their own right (denoted respectively
by @xmath and @xmath ) and we take into account the inclusion maps
@xmath and @xmath (which are actually morphisms of @xmath respectively
from @xmath and from @xmath to @xmath ). The causality condition imposes
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In light of our interpretation of the unital sub-C*-algebras associated
to proper regions as the algebras of the quantum observables on these
regions, the last equation means that the observables associated to
(causally convex relatively compact connected open) subsets which are
causally separated should be measurable independently. From physical
considerations this property is expected to hold for each quantum field
theory: we hardly admit a physical theory in which there are observables
associated to causally separated regions that cannot be measured
independently. Hence we may see the causality condition as a restriction
on the possible correlations between observables localized in proper
domains which are causally separated.

The time slice axiom seems to be a condition on the causal structure of
a LCQFT too. Consider a LCQFT @xmath and a globally hyperbolic spacetime
@xmath . From Theorem 1.2.15 we deduce that there exists a smooth
spacelike Cauchy surface @xmath for @xmath . If we choose a causally
convex connected open subset @xmath of @xmath including @xmath , taking
into account the globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath and the morphism
@xmath of @xmath , we see that the time slice axiom imposes that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To give an interpretation of the time slice axiom in terms of quantum
observables, we must consider a @xmath -causally convex relatively
compact connected open subset @xmath of @xmath and we think to it as
being itself a globally hyperbolic spacetime denoted by @xmath .
Applying Remark 1.2.17 to @xmath , we obtain for @xmath an @xmath
-causally convex connected open subset @xmath of @xmath that includes a
Cauchy surface of @xmath . The closure of @xmath in @xmath is included
in the closure of @xmath in @xmath , which is compact in @xmath by
hypothesis. Therefore @xmath is relatively compact in @xmath . This
proves the existence of @xmath -causally convex relatively compact
connected open subsets of @xmath that include Cauchy surfaces of @xmath
. We choose a subset with these properties and we denote it with @xmath
. We recognize that @xmath is also @xmath -causally convex and that the
globally hyperbolic spacetimes @xmath and @xmath coincide so that we can
consider the inclusion map @xmath as a morphism of @xmath from @xmath to
@xmath . In the present situation the time slice axiom imposes that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This relation means that, when @xmath is a proper subset of some
globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath and @xmath is a proper subset of
@xmath including a Cauchy surface of @xmath , the quantum observables
over @xmath exhaust all the quantum observables that are admitted by the
physics on @xmath , even if @xmath is larger. Then the time slice axiom
forces the physics over a proper subset @xmath of a globally hyperbolic
spacetime to be completely determined by the physics over a proper
neighborhood @xmath of a Cauchy surface for @xmath .

The functorial approach of the GCLP allows us to introduce a notion of
equivalence between LCQFTs.

###### Definition 2.1.7.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two LCQFTs. We say that @xmath and @xmath are
equivalent if there exists a covariant natural isomorphism @xmath .

The reader can easily check that this is an equivalence relation on the
set of LCQFTs. Such equivalence can be interpreted as physical
indistinguishability. Suppose that @xmath and @xmath are LCQFTs and that
@xmath is covariant natural isomorphism from @xmath to @xmath and fix
two globally hyperbolic spacetimes @xmath , @xmath and a morphism @xmath
of @xmath . We have that @xmath and @xmath may be identified through the
unit preserving *-isomorphism @xmath (similarly we can identify @xmath
and @xmath through the unit preserving *-isomorphism @xmath ) and that
the injective unit preserving *-homomorphisms @xmath and @xmath satisfy
the following relation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, with the above identifications, also @xmath and @xmath are
identified. This identification in our interpretation means that the
quantum observables admitted by the physics described by the theory
@xmath on some globally hyperbolic spacetime are exactly the same as
those admitted by the physics described by the theory @xmath on the same
globally hyperbolic spacetime, that is to say that the physics described
by @xmath is exactly the same as the physics described by @xmath on each
globally hyperbolic spacetime.

#### 2.1.3 Recovering the Haag-Kastler framework

In this subsection we check that our approach to quantum field theory
through the generally covariant locality principle leads us to the
complete recovery of the Haag-Kastler axioms for each globally
hyperbolic spacetime. By this we mean that each locally covariant
quantum field theory applied to an arbitrary globally hyperbolic
spacetime gives rise to a quantum field theory for that spacetime in the
formulation suggested by Haag-Kastler in their seminal paper [ HK64 ] .
We underline that, this formulation of quantum field theory, known as
algebraic quantum field theory , although being equivalent to the
traditional formulation, has the advantage of being stated in a rigorous
mathematical framework, specifically that of C*-algebras.

A relevant part of the problem of recovering the algebraic approach to
quantum field theory has already been discussed in Remark 2.1.6 even if
we did not stress this fact there. In the next theorem we will complete
this discussion so that it will become evident by comparison with [ HK64
] that the Haag-Kastler axioms are recovered on each globally hyperbolic
spacetime once that a LCQFT is given.

We begin with a definition.

###### Definition 2.1.8.

Let @xmath be a LCQFT and let @xmath be a globally hyperbolic spacetime.
We define the set @xmath of all @xmath -causally convex non empty
relatively compact connected open subsets of @xmath and the family
@xmath consisting of the unital sub-C*-algebras @xmath , called local
algebras , of the unital C*-algebra @xmath for @xmath . Moreover we
define @xmath as the unital sub-C*-algebra of @xmath generated by the
family @xmath .

Notice that the elements of @xmath are exactly those subsets of @xmath
that we used in our interpretation of the GCLP (cfr. Remark 2.1.6 ) to
pick out the physically acceptable observables on the globally
hyperbolic spacetime @xmath . There we did not specified the exclusion
of the empty set, however it appears obvious from a physical point of
view that it does not make sense to speak of the physics on a region
with no events.

In that context we already noticed that, for each @xmath , @xmath is
actually a globally hyperbolic spacetime, so that we can consider the
unital C*-algebra @xmath and the morphism @xmath of the category @xmath
. Then we can actually define @xmath as above and we recognize that it
is a unital sub-C*-algebra of the larger unital C*-algebra @xmath . This
shows that the family @xmath is well defined. In our interpretation we
also specified that we cannot consider @xmath as an algebra of
observables because @xmath cannot be compact otherwise @xmath would
violate the causality condition (cfr. [ O’N83 , Chap. 14, Lem. 13, p.
407] ). For the same reason @xmath is not included in the family @xmath
.

When we define @xmath as the sub-C*-algebra of @xmath generated by the
family @xmath , we intend that @xmath is the sub-C*-algebra of @xmath
generated by the subset

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of @xmath (refer to 1.4.3 for the notion of generated sub-C*-algebra).
That this definition actually makes sense is assured by the fact that
all elements of @xmath are sub-C*-algebras of @xmath .

With the last definition we are ready to formulate the theorem that
recovers the Haag-Kastler axioms starting from a LCQFT applied to an
arbitrary globally hyperbolic spacetime.

###### Theorem 2.1.9.

Let @xmath be a LCQFT and let @xmath be a globally hyperbolic spacetime.
Consider @xmath , @xmath and @xmath as defined above. Then the
Haag-Kastler axioms (cfr. [ HK64 ] ) are fully recovered. Specifically
the following properties hold:

-    isotony : for each @xmath , @xmath such that @xmath , @xmath is a
    sub-C*-algebra of @xmath ;

-    common unit : all the elements of @xmath have a common unit;

-    algebra of observables : @xmath is the closure in @xmath of the
    union of the family @xmath ;

-    covariance : if @xmath is a group of orientation and time
    orientation preserving isometric diffeomorphisms of @xmath , then
    there exists a representation of @xmath in terms of *-automorphisms
    on @xmath such that, for each @xmath and each @xmath , the
    *-automorphism @xmath associated to @xmath satisfies the condition

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    local commutativity : if @xmath is causal then, for each @xmath ,
    @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -causally separated,
    we have that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    time slice axiom : if @xmath fulfils the time slice axiom, @xmath
    is a smooth spacelike Cauchy surface for @xmath and @xmath is a
    connected open subset of @xmath such that its Cauchy development
    @xmath is relatively compact, then for each @xmath such that @xmath
    we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We start from isotony. Suppose that @xmath and @xmath are elements of
@xmath such that @xmath . In Remark 2.1.6 we showed that @xmath is a
unital sub-C*-algebra of the unital C*-algebra @xmath . If we consider
the morphisms @xmath and @xmath of the category @xmath , we immediately
recognize that @xmath . Since @xmath is a covariant functor, we have
that @xmath . We deduce that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since both @xmath and @xmath are unital sub-C*-algebras of @xmath , the
inclusion @xmath implies that @xmath is a unital sub-C*-algebra of
@xmath .

Now we turn our attention to the units of the elements of the family
@xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be two arbitrary elements of @xmath .
Applying Remark 2.1.2 , we can consider the globally hyperbolic
spacetimes @xmath and @xmath and the morphisms @xmath and @xmath of
@xmath . Using @xmath , we obtain the corresponding morphisms @xmath and
@xmath of @xmath that map each element of the unital C*-algebra @xmath
and respectively @xmath into an element of the unital C*-algebra @xmath
. Denoting with @xmath the unit of @xmath , with @xmath the unit of
@xmath and with @xmath the unit of @xmath and keeping in mind that all
morphisms of @xmath are unit preserving, i.e. they map the unit of their
domain algebra to the unit of their codomain algebra, we conclude that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From Remark 2.1.3 we notice that @xmath and @xmath are respectively the
units of @xmath and @xmath , so that the last equation means that the
unit of @xmath coincides with the unit of @xmath .

@xmath is defined as the sub-C*-algebra of @xmath that is generated by
the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consider @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . Then @xmath is in @xmath for some
@xmath and @xmath is in @xmath for some @xmath . Since both @xmath and
@xmath are relatively compact, we have that @xmath is compact and so we
can apply the fourth point of Proposition 1.2.18 to @xmath so that we
find @xmath including @xmath . In particular both @xmath and @xmath are
included in @xmath and hence isotony implies that @xmath and @xmath are
also elements of @xmath . Then we can take linear combinations, products
and involutions with them and we will always get elements of @xmath
since it is a C*-algebra. But @xmath is included in @xmath too, so
linear combination, product and involution are internal operations on
@xmath . Therefore @xmath is a vector space endowed with two internal
operations that are our candidates for being a multiplication and an
involution. They are actually such because they fulfil the properties
that qualify them as a multiplication and an involution on the larger
vector space @xmath . Hence we can think of @xmath as a unital *-algebra
(its unit being @xmath as a consequence of what we have seen above).
When we endow @xmath with the norm of @xmath , we realize that it lacks
only of closure in @xmath to become a unital C*-algebra itself. So we
close @xmath in @xmath and we denote with @xmath the unital C*-algebra
that we obtain. By construction @xmath , hence @xmath by definition of
@xmath as the sub-C*-algebra of @xmath generated by @xmath . We want to
prove that @xmath . To this end pick @xmath . By construction @xmath is
the limit in the norm of @xmath of a sequence @xmath of elements of
@xmath that is Cauchy with respect to the norm of @xmath . Yet @xmath
and the norm of @xmath is exactly the restriction of the norm of @xmath
because @xmath is a sub-C*-algebra of @xmath . We deduce that @xmath is
also a Cauchy sequence in @xmath . But, being a C*-algebra, @xmath is
also a Banach space and so we find a limit @xmath . Then @xmath
converges to both @xmath and @xmath in @xmath and hence @xmath . We
conclude that @xmath , therefore @xmath .

As for covariance, we proceed in the following way. First of all we
notice that the group @xmath consists of bijective morphisms of @xmath
from @xmath to @xmath whose inverses are morphisms too: In order to
recognize that @xmath is a morphism of @xmath we must only check that
its image is @xmath -causally convex, but this is trivial because @xmath
; bijectivity of @xmath is assumed by hypothesis and its inverse @xmath
is automatically a morphism of @xmath . At this point we can use the
LCQFT @xmath to map each @xmath to a morphism of @xmath . From @xmath we
obtain its inverse morphism so that @xmath is a bijective morphism of
@xmath from @xmath to @xmath whose inverse is a morphism too:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

Fix @xmath and @xmath . Observe that @xmath : It is a relatively compact
open subset of @xmath because it is the preimage of the relatively
compact open subset @xmath of @xmath through the continuous map @xmath ,
it is connected because @xmath is continuous and @xmath is connected and
finally it is @xmath -causally convex because @xmath is smooth and
isometric and @xmath is @xmath -causally convex. As usual, we can
consider the globally hyperbolic spacetimes @xmath and @xmath and the
morphisms @xmath and @xmath of @xmath . If we define the map @xmath ,
@xmath , as a consequence of the properties of @xmath , we recognize
that @xmath is an orientation and time orientation preserving isometric
diffeomorphism from @xmath to @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Then it follows that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

are inverses one of the other. In particular we have that @xmath is
surjective:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is easy to check that @xmath and hence we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Above we observed that @xmath for each @xmath . A similar argument
applied to @xmath tells us also that @xmath for each @xmath . This
observation, together with the last formula, implies that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Applying the third point of this theorem and bearing in mind that @xmath
is continuous with respect to the norm of @xmath , we draw the following
conclusion:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The last equation implies that for each @xmath we can define the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and realize that it is a *-automorphism on the unital C*-algebra @xmath
satisfying @xmath . This defines a map @xmath from the group @xmath to
the group of the *-automorphisms on the unital C*-algebra @xmath (the
algebra of observables). In order to recognize this map as a
representation of the group @xmath , we must still check that @xmath for
each @xmath , @xmath . Fix @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . From covariant
functoriality we deduce @xmath . For an arbitrary @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

because @xmath and therefore @xmath actually holds for each @xmath ,
@xmath .

We have already faced the problem of local commutativity when we gave an
interpretation of the causality condition in terms of local observables.
Anyway we briefly recollect the proof here for completeness. For this
scope assume that @xmath is causal and fix @xmath and @xmath in @xmath
such that they are causally separated in @xmath . In the category @xmath
we can consider the objects @xmath and @xmath and the morphisms @xmath
and @xmath . In the present situation we apply the causality condition
(cfr. Definition 2.1.5 ) and we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is exactly our thesis because of Definition 2.1.8 .

To prove the last part of the theorem we assume that @xmath fulfils the
time slice axiom. Let @xmath be a spacelike (hence acausal due to [
O’N83 , Chap. 14, Lem. 42, p. 425] ) Cauchy surface for @xmath and let
@xmath be a connected open subset of @xmath such that @xmath is
relatively compact in @xmath . For convenience we write @xmath in place
of @xmath . In first place we must check that @xmath is in @xmath ,
otherwise our thesis doesn’t make sense. From [ FV11 , Lem. A.9, p. 48]
we deduce that @xmath is an open subset of @xmath . Now we show that
@xmath is @xmath -causally convex. Take a @xmath -future directed @xmath
-causal curve @xmath in @xmath starting from @xmath and ending in @xmath
and assume by contradiction that @xmath is not entirely contained in
@xmath . Then we find a point @xmath along @xmath such that there exists
an inextensible @xmath -future directed @xmath -timelike curve @xmath in
@xmath passing through @xmath which doesn’t meet @xmath . Hence we can
use proper pieces of @xmath and @xmath to easily build an inextensible
@xmath -future directed @xmath -causal curve in @xmath passing through
@xmath (or otherwise @xmath ) which doesn’t meet @xmath . This
undoubtedly violates the hypothesis that both @xmath and @xmath are in
@xmath . Therefore @xmath is actually @xmath -causally convex. We still
need to show that @xmath is connected. Suppose that @xmath and @xmath
are points in @xmath . Because of the definition of @xmath , it is not
hard to find two @xmath -causal curves @xmath and @xmath in @xmath
connecting respectively @xmath to some point @xmath and @xmath to some
point @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . Since trivially @xmath
, we deduce from @xmath -causally convexity that both @xmath and @xmath
are included in @xmath . @xmath is connected by hypothesis and so we
find a curve @xmath connecting @xmath and @xmath . If we paste @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath we obtain a curve connecting @xmath to @xmath and this
proves that @xmath is actually connected. With this preparatory results
and the hypothesis that @xmath is relatively compact, we can conclude
that @xmath is an element of @xmath and hence the thesis makes sense.
Now we take also @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath and we start the real
proof. As usual we can consider the globally hyperbolic spacetimes
@xmath and @xmath and the morphisms @xmath and @xmath that immerse these
spacetimes in @xmath . We make a useful observation: @xmath is a Cauchy
surface for @xmath . This is seen in the following way: @xmath is a
subset of a Cauchy surface @xmath for @xmath , hence each inextensible
@xmath -future directed @xmath -timelike curve in @xmath meets @xmath at
most once; take now an arbitrary inextensible @xmath -future directed
@xmath -timelike curve @xmath in @xmath ; in @xmath we can extend @xmath
to an inextensible @xmath -future directed @xmath -timelike curve @xmath
in @xmath ; undoubtedly @xmath passes through some point in @xmath ,
hence we deduce that it meets @xmath (remember that @xmath is the Cauchy
development of @xmath in @xmath ), therefore it meets @xmath exactly
once; now we restrict @xmath to @xmath and we realize that such
restriction @xmath is a @xmath -future directed @xmath -timelike curve
in @xmath that meets @xmath exactly once and extends @xmath ; but @xmath
was inextensible by our assumption, hence @xmath and @xmath coincide so
that @xmath meets @xmath exactly once, proving that @xmath is a Cauchy
surface for @xmath . To proceed we introduce the subset @xmath . We
realize at once that @xmath is an open subset of @xmath . Furthermore we
see that @xmath , hence @xmath is relatively compact in @xmath since
both @xmath is such. If we take a @xmath -future directed @xmath -causal
curve @xmath in @xmath starting at @xmath and ending at @xmath , we
recognize that @xmath must be included in both @xmath and @xmath because
they are @xmath -causally convex. This implies that @xmath is @xmath
-causally convex too. Now pick too arbitrary points @xmath and @xmath of
@xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath fall in @xmath , it is easy to find two
@xmath -future directed @xmath -causal curves @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath connecting respectively the point @xmath to some point @xmath and
the point @xmath to some point @xmath . By hypothesis @xmath , hence
also @xmath . Then both @xmath and @xmath are contained in @xmath as a
consequence of @xmath -causal convexity. @xmath is connected by
hypothesis and so we find @xmath (automatically included in @xmath )
connecting @xmath and @xmath . Then pasting @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,
we connect @xmath and @xmath , therefore @xmath is also connected. With
this we have shown that @xmath . Essentially this is the situation: We
have a globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath with a Cauchy surface @xmath
included in @xmath , with @xmath . Being @xmath -causally convex, @xmath
is also @xmath -causally convex and so we can consider both the globally
hyperbolic spacetimes @xmath and @xmath . We realize immediately that
@xmath and so the morphism @xmath immerses @xmath in @xmath . As we said
above, the image @xmath includes the Cauchy surface @xmath for @xmath .
Then it is possible to apply the time slice axiom obtaining

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There is still another morphism of @xmath at our disposal: @xmath . It
is easy to check that @xmath and hence, via covariant functoriality, we
deduce @xmath . Applying @xmath to both sides of our last equation, we
get

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Remembering the inclusion @xmath and applying isotony, we conclude the
proof:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

###### Remark 2.1.10.

We warn the reader that one of the properties required by the
Haag-Kastler axioms is not included in our theorem, specifically we did
not show that the unital C*-algebra @xmath is primitive, i.e. there
exists a faithful irreducible representation of @xmath on a Hilbert
space. Hence the conclusion that the Haag-Kastler framework is
completely recovered via the last theorem is not correct at all. Anyway,
we will see later that the concrete locally covariant quantum field
theories that we construct satisfy also this property (see the upcoming
Remark 2.2.9 ).

### 2.2 Construction of a locally covariant quantum field theory

In this section we deal with the problem of building concrete locally
covariant quantum field theories for situations of physical interest. In
the first part we will show a procedure that leads to the construction
of a causal LCQFT fulfilling the time slice axiom starting from the wave
equation of a classical field represented by a section in an arbitrary
vector bundle over some globally hyperbolic spacetime. To do this we
will need to specialize some more the category @xmath of globally
hyperbolic spacetimes. As a matter of fact Definition 2.1.1 contains all
the knowledge that is required to state the generally covariant locality
principle without specifying anything about the physical problem to
which we want to apply such principle, except the fact that it takes
place over a globally hyperbolic spacetime. This is the approach
followed by Brunetti, Fredenhagen and Verch in [ BFV03 ] when they
proposed the GCLP, as well as by other authors even in the more recent
papers on this topic (e.g. [ FV11 , Dap11 ] ). This choice is done to
underline that the consequences of the GCLP (specifically Theorem 2.1.9
in the present case) do not depend upon any of the properties of the
specific quantum field that one may consider, except for the fact that
it is set over a globally hyperbolic spacetime. This is one of the
strong points of the GCLP.

Following Fewster and Verch [ FV11 ] , we could even enlarge the
category @xmath in order to take into account a very wide range of
physical situations (not only quantum fields, but also classical
dynamical systems too, such as classical fields or mechanical systems).
There is not a precise way to define the new target category: which is
the more convenient setting for a theory actually depends upon the type
of physical problem the theory deals with (e.g. C*-algebras for quantum
fields and symplectic spaces for classical fields). The key point is
that there exists a common mathematical framework in which it is
possible to formulate all those theories: they are recognized to be
covariant functors from the category @xmath (eventually with some more
data concerning the specific problem under consideration) to a
convenient category that fit the physical problem in the best way. It is
the functorial approach that unifies all these physical theories and for
all of them it is possible to speak of causality and time slice axiom,
although this must be done in a way that is adapted to the mathematical
framework chosen to describe the physical system we are interested in.

During the construction of a LCQFT we will encounter a relevant example
of what we are saying. Specifically, we will see that a classical field
is comfortably described by a covariant functor from @xmath (with some
structure that pertains to the field itself, essentially the wave
equation governing its dynamics) to the category having symplectic
spaces as objects and symplectic maps as morphisms.

#### 2.2.1 From classical field theory…

We want to describe a classical field over some @xmath -dimensional
globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath that is modeled by a smooth section
@xmath in a vector bundle @xmath of rank @xmath over @xmath satisfying
the normally hyperbolic equation @xmath on each point of @xmath , where
@xmath is endowed with an inner product denoted by @xmath and @xmath is
a formally selfadjoint normally hyperbolic operator on @xmath over
@xmath .

As we anticipated above, we are going to build a functor from a slightly
modified version of @xmath to a proper category that we define right
now.

##### Categories

###### Definition 2.2.1.

The category @xmath is defined in the following way:

-   objects are triples @xmath , where @xmath is a @xmath -dimensional
    globally hyperbolic spacetime, @xmath is a vector bundle of rank
    @xmath over @xmath endowed with an inner product denoted by @xmath
    and @xmath is a formally selfadjoint normally hyperbolic operator on
    @xmath over @xmath ;

-   morphisms between two arbitrary objects @xmath and @xmath are vector
    bundle homomorphisms @xmath compatible with the inner products
    @xmath and @xmath and the formally selfadjoint normally hyperbolic
    operators @xmath and @xmath (we will explain the meaning of these
    conditions immediately after this definition), where @xmath is a
    morphism of @xmath from @xmath to @xmath ;

-   the composition law is the ordinary composition of vector bundle
    homomorphisms, i.e. the composition of function for both members of
    the pairs.

We also define @xmath as the category whose objects are symplectic
spaces @xmath , whose morphisms between two arbitrary objects @xmath and
@xmath are symplectic maps @xmath and whose composition law is the usual
composition of functions.

Before proceeding, we want to specify the meaning of the condition of
compatibility with the inner products and with the normally hyperbolic
operators that is required to the morphisms of @xmath . This completes
the definition of @xmath . We also take the chance to underline some
particular properties of the vector bundle homomorphisms we are going to
deal with.

The condition of compatibility with inner products means that each
vector bundle homomorphism that we take into account must be fiberwise
an isometry with respect to the vector space non degenerate inner
products induced on each fiber by the inner products on the vector
bundles. To be precise, we require that each vector bundle homomorphisms
@xmath from @xmath to @xmath satisfies the following condition:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath and each @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath is the manifold
underlying @xmath . This ensures that @xmath is fiberwise isometric,
hence, in particular, @xmath is an injective vector space homomorphism
for each @xmath because of the non degeneracy of inner products. This
observation has a relevant consequence: for each @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This fact implies that @xmath is a vector space isomorphism for each
@xmath (however @xmath is not a vector bundle isomorphism unless @xmath
is bijective).

The condition of compatibility with the formally selfadjoint normally
hyperbolic operators is slightly more involved. First of all notice that
we are in position to apply Remark 1.1.15 : @xmath is an embedding whose
image is an open subset of its codomain and @xmath is fiberwise a vector
space isomorphism. Then we obtain the new vector bundle @xmath of rank
@xmath over the @xmath -dimensional manifold @xmath and the vector
bundle isomorphism @xmath obtained from the restriction of @xmath to
@xmath . Now we take @xmath and, using the vector bundle isomorphism
@xmath and Remark 1.1.17 , we introduce the section

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is a homeomorphism, it holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so it turns out that @xmath is a compactly supported section because
@xmath is compact in @xmath . Using the fact that @xmath is null outside
a compact subset of @xmath , we can define the smooth compactly
supported section @xmath via the formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This defines a map between the vector spaces @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Notice that such map is trivially linear and that it transforms the
support through @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This construction was made to be in a position that allows us to
correctly state the condition of compatibility with the normally
hyperbolic operators @xmath and @xmath : for each @xmath it holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Till now, we have used @xmath simply to define the extension map @xmath
. However such map could be also defined directly using simply @xmath
and @xmath . The real reason that prompted us to the construction of
@xmath is that it gives us the opportunity to build a new object of
@xmath . Consider the globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath (cfr. Remark
2.1.2 ) and the vector bundle @xmath . On @xmath we put the restriction
of the inner product of @xmath as inner product and automatically we
find that @xmath is fiberwise an isometry. We define @xmath on in a way
that @xmath automatically satisfies the condition of compatibility with
@xmath and @xmath : @xmath is the linear operator from @xmath to itself
defined by the formula

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In this way @xmath is well defined because @xmath is a vector bundle
isomorphism (see Remark 1.1.17 ) and one can easily check that @xmath is
a formally selfadjoint normally hyperbolic operator on @xmath over
@xmath (such properties are directly inherited from the same properties
that are known to hold for @xmath ). As we anticipated, the definition
of @xmath is given in such a way that automatically @xmath becomes
compatible with @xmath and @xmath : noting that

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.2.3)
  -- -- -- ---------

for each @xmath and each @xmath and choosing @xmath for any @xmath in
eq. ( 2.2.2 ), we read

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath . Then we have built the object @xmath of @xmath . Since
@xmath is a morphism of @xmath from @xmath to @xmath whose inverse is
also a morphism, we recognize @xmath to be a morphism of @xmath from
@xmath to @xmath whose inverse @xmath is a morphism too. The situation
of eq. ( 2.2.3 ) holds whenever we deal with a vector bundle
isomorphism, in particular we can define similarly @xmath .

In Remark 1.1.14 we showed that there is also a vector bundle
homomorphism @xmath from @xmath to @xmath . We already know from our
discussion on the category @xmath that @xmath is a morphism of @xmath
from @xmath to @xmath . If we show that @xmath is compatible with the
inner products of @xmath and @xmath and with the normally hyperbolic
operators @xmath and @xmath , we can conclude that @xmath is a morphism
of @xmath . Both requirements actually hold because of the definitions
of @xmath , of the inner product on @xmath as the restriction of the
inner product of @xmath and of the normally hyperbolic operator @xmath .
We explicitly check the compatibility with @xmath and @xmath . Notice
that for each @xmath and each @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

For each @xmath , exploiting eq. ( 2.2.3 ), we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For each @xmath and each @xmath we also have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We insert our last equation in the previous one, we exploit the
compatibility property of @xmath with @xmath and @xmath and we recall
the definitions of @xmath and @xmath . In this way we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath . This shows that @xmath is compatible with @xmath and
@xmath and hence it is actually a morphism of @xmath . Using @xmath and
@xmath , we can decompose the original morphism @xmath according the
formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Having explicated the meaning of all the requirements in Definition
2.2.1 , we can ask whether @xmath and @xmath are actually categories.
This question is faced in the subsequent remark.

###### Remark 2.2.2.

We check that @xmath is actually a category. The first thing to be done
is to verify that the composition law is well defined. To this end
consider three objects @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , a morphism @xmath
from @xmath to @xmath and a morphism @xmath from @xmath to @xmath . As
we have seen in Remark 2.1.2 , @xmath is still a morphism of @xmath .
Since @xmath and @xmath are smooth maps, using coordinate charts of the
manifolds @xmath , @xmath , @xmath we immediately realize that also
@xmath is a smooth map. Let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be the projection
maps respectively of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We know that @xmath
and that @xmath . Then, applying the associativity of the composition of
functions, we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As for fiberwise linearity, consider a point @xmath . Taking into
account the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

we can easily check that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence @xmath is linear being the composition of linear maps. This
shows that @xmath is a vector bundle homomorphism from @xmath to @xmath
. We check its compatibility with the inner products of the vector
bundles involved exploiting the same property that is assumed to hold
for both @xmath and @xmath : for each @xmath and each @xmath , @xmath we
have

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

As for the compatibility with the normally hyperbolic operators, for
each @xmath it holds that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are the extension maps obtained applying the
discussion that led to eq. ( 2.2.1 ) to @xmath with @xmath and
respectively to @xmath with @xmath . In the same way from @xmath with
@xmath , we obtain the extension map @xmath . Our scope now is to show
that @xmath : for each @xmath and each @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

while

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

hence the equation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

holds as expected. Inserting such equation in eq. ( 2.2.4 ), we conclude
that for each @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is actually a morphism of @xmath . This proves that the
composition law is well defined. To conclude, we have to check the
category axioms. If we take an arbitrary object @xmath , the identity
law is satisfied by the vector bundle homomorphism @xmath , where @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath , @xmath . The associativity of the composition law
is trivial because this property is inherited from the associativity of
the ordinary composition of functions.

Turning our attention to @xmath , we take three objects @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath , a morphism @xmath from @xmath to @xmath and a morphism
@xmath from @xmath to @xmath and we consider the function @xmath . We
obtain a linear map between the vector spaces @xmath and @xmath that
preserves the symplectic forms because both @xmath and @xmath are
symplectic maps:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence we realize that @xmath is a morphism from @xmath to @xmath and
this proves that the composition law is well defined. For each object
@xmath , the identity law is satisfied by the morphism @xmath from
@xmath to itself defined by @xmath for each @xmath . Also in this case
the associativity of the composition law follows from same property of
the composition of functions.

##### Functor

We begin now the construction of a covariant functor that maps each
object of @xmath to an object of @xmath . In our intention the object of
@xmath should describe the physical problem that we deal with (in this
case a wave equation describing a field over a globally hyperbolic
spacetime) and the corresponding object of @xmath should be the solution
for such problem (all the dynamical configurations of the field, i.e.
the solutions of all the Cauchy problems with compactly supported
initial data related to the wave equation mentioned above). We may say
that the object of @xmath describes the system we want to study, while
the corresponding object of @xmath contains all the knowledge about the
dynamics of that system. In the following we will make extensive use of
the results in Subsection 1.3.4 .

Assume that we are given an object @xmath of @xmath . Applying Corollary
1.3.16 , we obtain the advanced and retarded Green operators @xmath and
@xmath for @xmath . With them we can introduce the causal propagator
@xmath for @xmath and Corollary 1.3.19 tells us that the space of the
solutions for all the homogeneous Cauchy problems with compactly
supported initial data associated to @xmath is given by the vector space
@xmath . Moreover Proposition 1.3.20 provides an important information
on the structure of the kernel of the causal propagator @xmath ,
precisely @xmath . We also notice that in the current situation @xmath
is supposed to be formally selfadjoint, i.e. @xmath (cfr. Remark 1.3.11
). It follows in particular that @xmath is a normally hyperbolic
operator too and that its advanced and retarded Green operators are
exactly @xmath and @xmath . Hence Proposition 1.3.21 in the present
situation means that @xmath and @xmath are the formally adjoints of each
other. As a consequence of this fact, we see that @xmath is formally
antiselfadjoint. All these observations will be exploited soon.

###### Lemma 2.2.3.

Consider the situation presented above and bear in mind that @xmath .
Taking into account the vector space @xmath , the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath in @xmath are such that @xmath and @xmath and
@xmath is the standard volume form on @xmath , is well defined,
bilinear, antisymmetric and non degenerate, i.e. @xmath is a symplectic
form on @xmath and hence @xmath is a symplectic space, as a matter of
fact an object of @xmath .

###### Proof.

We check that @xmath is well defined. Fix @xmath and @xmath in @xmath
and take @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath
and @xmath . Exploiting twice the antiselfadjointness of @xmath , we
deduce that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

Till this point we have shown that @xmath is well defined. Bilinearity
follows directly from the linearity of the causal propagator, fiberwise
bilinearity of the inner product in @xmath and the linearity of the
integral. As for antisymmetry, we take @xmath and @xmath in @xmath .
Then we find @xmath and @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath .
With this ingredients we evaluate @xmath bearing in mind that @xmath is
antiselfadjoint and that the inner product of @xmath is fiberwise
symmetric:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We are left with the proof of non degeneracy. Suppose that we have
@xmath such that @xmath for each @xmath . This means that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath . But this implies that @xmath . Hence @xmath is
actually non degenerate. ∎

The last theorem provides the first part of our candidate covariant
functor, specifically the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath                     
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

The second part should consist of a map

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

for each pair of objects @xmath and @xmath of @xmath . To build such map
we need a preliminary result.

###### Lemma 2.2.4.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two objects of @xmath and let @xmath be a
morphism between these objects. Denote the advanced/retarded Green
operators for @xmath and @xmath respectively with @xmath and @xmath and
consider the maps @xmath defined in eq. ( 2.2.1 ) and the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Then we have @xmath .

###### Proof.

We start showing that the map @xmath is well defined. Consider a section
@xmath . By @xmath we mean the function from @xmath to @xmath defined by
@xmath for each @xmath . The domain and the codomain of @xmath are
manifolds, hence we can ask whether this function is continuous and, in
this case, whether it is also smooth. Both questions have positive
answer because of the topologies and the atlases of @xmath and @xmath ,
which are open subsets of @xmath and respectively @xmath , are induced
via restriction from those of @xmath and @xmath (cfr. Remark 1.1.7 for
@xmath and Remark 1.1.15 for @xmath ). We have recognized @xmath to be a
smooth map from @xmath to @xmath . But the remark cited above tells us
also that @xmath is a vector bundle over the manifold @xmath . Hence we
can also ask whether @xmath is a section in @xmath and again we get a
positive answer because @xmath is defined as the restriction of @xmath :

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

From Remark 1.1.17 applied to the section @xmath and the vector bundle
isomorphism @xmath , we finally obtain the section in @xmath we were
looking for:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This proves that the definition of @xmath makes sense.

Our strategy to prove the thesis of this lemma consists in showing that
@xmath is an advanced/retarded Green operator for @xmath (cfr.
Definition 1.3.15 ), so that it must coincide with @xmath because
Corollary 1.3.16 assures uniqueness. We consider only the case of the
advanced Green operator, the other case being similar.

To show that @xmath is the advanced Green operator for @xmath we do not
check that it fulfils the requirements of Definition 1.3.15 , but we
prefer to show that it generates exactly one fundamental solution @xmath
for @xmath (in this case @xmath , but we will not use such property)
with @xmath -future compact support for each point @xmath in @xmath
according to the formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we succeed in our scope, via Corollary 1.3.16 we obtain an advanced
Green operator for @xmath from the collection of fundamental solutions
with future compact support @xmath for @xmath . This operator is defined
through a formula identical to the one written above, but intended in
the opposite sense, hence we find that @xmath is exactly this operator.
In particular it follows that @xmath is an advanced Green operator for
@xmath .

Now we fix @xmath . Together with the normally hyperbolic operator
@xmath (normal hyperbolicity of @xmath follows from the hypothesis that
@xmath is normally hyperbolic even if @xmath ), we consider also its
distributional version (still denoted by @xmath ) as it is defined
following the procedure shown in Remark 1.3.10 using @xmath as target
vector space for the space of distributions (see the discussion before
Definition 1.3.12 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Indeed the hypothesis of formal selfadjointness implies that @xmath also
for the operators in distributional sense (cfr. Remark 1.3.11 ), but
this fact is not necessary for our conclusions and hence in this proof
we will distinguish between @xmath and @xmath as it would have been
without the hypothesis of formal selfadjointness. We note that for each
@xmath it holds

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

due to the compatibility of @xmath with @xmath and @xmath and the fact
that @xmath is the advanced Green operator for @xmath . This means that
@xmath is a fundamental solution for @xmath at @xmath (cfr. Definition
1.3.12 ). The support of the distribution @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But @xmath means that @xmath , that is @xmath , where @xmath is the
unique fundamental solution for @xmath at @xmath with future compact
support generated by the advanced Green operator @xmath for @xmath
according to Corollary 1.3.16 . On the one hand we deduce that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

On the other hand the support of @xmath is of the form

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

From the comparison of the last two equations we conclude that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Theorem 1.3.14 gives us an important information about the support of
@xmath , namely the inclusion

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

therefore we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consider now a point @xmath . We recognize that @xmath and @xmath are
both in @xmath and moreover @xmath falls in @xmath . Hence we find a
@xmath -past directed @xmath -causal curve @xmath in @xmath starting at
@xmath and ending at @xmath . Since we assumed that @xmath is a morphism
of @xmath , @xmath is @xmath -causally convex and so @xmath is entirely
included in @xmath . Then we can consider the curve @xmath . Since
@xmath is isometric and preserves time orientation, we deduce that
@xmath is a @xmath -past directed @xmath -causal curve in @xmath
starting from @xmath and ending in @xmath . This implies that @xmath .
Then we have the inclusion

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By assumption, @xmath is a globally hyperbolic spacetime and so @xmath
is a compact subset of @xmath for each @xmath . Hence @xmath is @xmath
-future compact and then @xmath is @xmath -future compact too being a
closed subset of @xmath . This shows that @xmath is a fundamental
solution for @xmath at @xmath with @xmath -future compact support for
each @xmath . Uniqueness follows from Lemma 1.3.13 . Hence our strategy
of proof can be carried out without difficulties and the thesis is
proved. ∎

Now we are ready to face the main problem, that is. the determination of
a function that maps each morphism between two objects of @xmath to a
morphism between the corresponding two objects of @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.2.5.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two objects of @xmath and denote with @xmath
and @xmath the corresponding objects of @xmath provided by Lemma 2.2.3 .
Consider a morphism @xmath of @xmath from @xmath to @xmath . Denote with
@xmath and @xmath the causal propagators for @xmath and @xmath
respectively. Then the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is such that @xmath , is well defined, linear and
compatible with @xmath and @xmath , i.e. @xmath is a symplectic map from
@xmath to @xmath , which is to say that @xmath is a morphism of @xmath
between the objects @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Fix @xmath and consider @xmath and @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath .
In order to have @xmath well defined we must show that @xmath . Because
of the linearity of the causal propagator and of the extension map (see
how @xmath was defined in eq. ( 2.2.1 )), this is equivalent to prove
that @xmath falls in the kernel of @xmath , where @xmath denotes @xmath
. We know that @xmath and that @xmath . Hence we find @xmath such that
@xmath . Then, exploiting the compatibility of @xmath with @xmath and
@xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have just found @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath . This implies that
@xmath falls in @xmath .

Linearity of the causal propagators and of the extension map assures
that @xmath is linear too.

Consider now @xmath and @xmath in @xmath and evaluate @xmath . We find
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . Then,
exploiting the definition of @xmath , we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the standard volume element of @xmath . Notice that the
argument of the last integral is null at least outside @xmath because of
the definition of @xmath . Moreover the restriction to @xmath of the
vector bundle @xmath is the vector bundle @xmath (cfr. Remark 1.1.15 ),
whose inner product is the restriction of the inner product of @xmath
(see few lines before eq. ( 2.2.2 )). This gives us the opportunity to
write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Exploiting the definition of @xmath , we find that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recalling that @xmath is an isometric embedding, we also have @xmath
and, as a consequence of the fact that @xmath is a morphism of @xmath
from @xmath to @xmath (we noted this fact few lines after eq. ( 2.2.3
)), we deduce that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We apply Lemma 2.2.4 and, recalling the definition of @xmath given in
Lemma 2.2.3 , we conclude the proof:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

∎

Now we have the second part of our candidate covariant functor: for each
pair of objects @xmath and @xmath of @xmath there exists a map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
              @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

defined in accordance with Lemma 2.2.5 . To complete the theory of the
classical field under consideration, it remains only to check that
@xmath is actually a covariant functor. The next theorem answers to this
question.

###### Theorem 2.2.6.

The map @xmath defined in accordance with Lemma 2.2.3 , together with
the collection of maps

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

defined few lines above, gives rise to a covariant functor @xmath from
the category @xmath to the category @xmath . Moreover @xmath possesses
the following properties:

-    causality : for each @xmath , @xmath , @xmath in @xmath , each
    morphism @xmath of @xmath from @xmath to @xmath and each morphism
    @xmath from @xmath to @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath are @xmath
    -causally separated subsets of @xmath , it holds that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for each @xmath and each @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are
    the symplectic spaces obtained applying @xmath respectively to
    @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath are the symplectic maps
    obtained applying @xmath respectively to @xmath , @xmath ;

-    time slice axiom : for each @xmath , @xmath in @xmath and each
    morphism @xmath of @xmath from @xmath to @xmath such that @xmath
    contains a smooth spacelike Cauchy surface @xmath for @xmath , it
    holds that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath , @xmath are the symplectic spaces obtained applying
    @xmath respectively to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is the symplectic
    map obtained applying @xmath to @xmath . In particular @xmath is
    bijective and its inverse @xmath is a morphism of @xmath from @xmath
    to @xmath .

###### Proof.

We must check that @xmath satisfies the covariant axioms of Definition
1.5.3 . Consider three objects @xmath , @xmath and @xmath of @xmath , a
morphism @xmath from @xmath to @xmath and a morphism @xmath from @xmath
to @xmath . Our aim is to show that the composition is preserved by
@xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For each @xmath , where @xmath , we find @xmath such that @xmath . This
allows us to evaluate the LHS of our last equation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the RHS we have

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Recalling eq. ( 2.2.5 ) and comparing our last two equations, we deduce
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath , that is exactly what we wanted to prove. Now we
consider the identity morphism @xmath of @xmath . We immediately realize
that such morphism is provided by the identity maps of the sets @xmath
and @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The identity morphism @xmath , for @xmath , is provided by the identity
map of the set @xmath too:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We want to show that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We consider @xmath and, taking @xmath such that @xmath , we obtain

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

This equation holds for each @xmath . We deduce that @xmath maps the
identity morphisms of @xmath to the identity morphisms of @xmath . We
have shown that @xmath is actually a covariant functor from @xmath to
@xmath .

We turn our attention to the causality property. Let @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath be objects of @xmath and suppose that @xmath is a morphism from
@xmath to @xmath and that @xmath is a morphism from @xmath to @xmath .
Moreover assume that @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -causally separated
subsets of @xmath . We denote with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath the
symplectic spaces associated respectively to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
via @xmath and with @xmath and @xmath the symplectic maps associated
respectively to @xmath and @xmath . Consider two elements @xmath and
@xmath . We surely find @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath such that
@xmath . This allows us to evaluate @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Notice that @xmath is a compact subset of @xmath and therefore @xmath is
a compact subset of @xmath included in @xmath . Similarly @xmath is a
compact subset of @xmath included in @xmath . Due to the support
property of the advanced and retarded Green operators for @xmath (see
Definition 1.3.15 ), we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We assumed that @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -causally separated subsets
of @xmath , therefore, via Remark 1.2.8 , we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These observations give us the opportunity to evaluate @xmath :

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

because the support of the integrand is empty. This shows that causality
holds.

We are left only with the check of the time slice axiom. Consider two
objects @xmath and @xmath of @xmath and suppose that @xmath is a
morphism from @xmath to @xmath whose image @xmath includes a smooth
spacelike Cauchy surface @xmath for @xmath . We denote with @xmath and
@xmath the symplectic spaces obtained through @xmath from @xmath and
respectively @xmath and we impose @xmath . @xmath is codomain of @xmath
, hence the inclusion @xmath is trivial and we must prove the converse
inclusion to complete the proof. To this end consider @xmath . We look
for a section @xmath such that @xmath . We observe that @xmath is
obtained from a compactly supported section in @xmath through the causal
propagator @xmath . Hence, exploiting the support properties of the
Green operators, we find a compact subset @xmath of @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The problem is that, in general, @xmath is not included in @xmath .
Anyway we can go around this obstacle with the following procedure. We
note that @xmath is a compact subset of @xmath (intended as a
topological space in its own right with the topology induced by the
topology of @xmath ) because of Proposition 1.2.18 . Take a @xmath
-future directed @xmath -timelike unit vector field @xmath over @xmath
normal to @xmath (such vector field actually exists because @xmath is
spacelike). Considering @xmath as a @xmath -dimensional submanifold of
@xmath and introducing the vector bundle @xmath , we can define two
compactly supported sections over @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath                     
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the @xmath -compatible connection in @xmath . Since
@xmath and @xmath fall in @xmath , we can use them to formulate a well
posed Cauchy problem for the normally hyperbolic operator @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Theorem 1.3.7 tells us that the Cauchy problem stated above admits
exactly one solution @xmath whose support is contained in

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By construction @xmath satisfies that Cauchy problem and therefore
@xmath for uniqueness, in particular @xmath and @xmath have the same
support. Since @xmath is a compact subset of @xmath , it is also a
compact subset of @xmath included in @xmath . This fact gives us the
chance to find a compact subset @xmath of @xmath that contains @xmath
and that is included in @xmath . Since @xmath is compact, we can also
find a relatively compact open subset @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath
. Using @xmath , we can introduce a covering of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is an open covering because @xmath are open subsets of @xmath (see
[ FV11 , Lem. A.8, p. 48] ) and @xmath are closed subsets of @xmath (see
[ BGP07 , Lem. A.5.1, p. 173] ). Then we can introduce a partition of
unity subordinate to such covering:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then we define @xmath and @xmath and we have @xmath . As a consequence
of our construction

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

and therefore @xmath is everywhere null. This implies that @xmath .
Since we know that @xmath , we deduce that @xmath . In particular this
relation implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the closure of @xmath in @xmath . Since @xmath is
relatively compact in @xmath , @xmath is compact in @xmath . Applying
Proposition 1.2.18 , we deduce that @xmath is a compact subset of @xmath
and therefore @xmath is a section in @xmath with compact support. We are
able to find more information about its support:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We prove this inclusion: Consider @xmath ; we find a @xmath -future
directed @xmath -causal curve @xmath in @xmath from @xmath to @xmath and
a @xmath -past directed @xmath -causal curve @xmath in @xmath from
@xmath to @xmath ; reversing the direction of @xmath and pasting the
result with @xmath , we obtain a @xmath -future directed @xmath -causal
curve @xmath in @xmath from @xmath to @xmath ; both @xmath and @xmath
fall in @xmath because @xmath by construction; since @xmath is @xmath
-causally convex by hypothesis, @xmath must be entirely contained in
@xmath , in particular @xmath . At this point we have a section @xmath
with support included in @xmath . We use it to define a compactly
supported section in @xmath via restriction:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we check that @xmath is exactly the one we were looking for. First
of all @xmath has compact support so that @xmath has compact support
too, hence we can apply @xmath to it and we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Now we observe that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and Proposition 1.2.18 implies that @xmath has @xmath -past compact
support, while @xmath has @xmath -future compact support. This fact
allows us to apply Lemma 1.3.17 to obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This completes our proof because, setting @xmath , we have @xmath ,
hence in particular @xmath and this fact, for the freedom in the choice
of @xmath , implies the inclusion @xmath . The last part of the
statement of the time slice axiom follows directly because each
symplectic map is automatically injective (cfr. Remark 1.4.10 ) and the
time slice axiom assures that @xmath is also surjective, hence the
inverse @xmath exists and it is trivial to check that it is a symplectic
map too. ∎

#### 2.2.2 …to quantum field theory

In the last subsection we built the theory of a classical field over
some @xmath -dimensional globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath modeled by
a smooth section @xmath in a vector bundle @xmath of rank @xmath over
@xmath satisfying the normally hyperbolic equation @xmath on each point
of @xmath , where @xmath is endowed with an inner product denoted by
@xmath and @xmath is a formally selfadjoint normally hyperbolic operator
on @xmath over @xmath . Now we want to use this result to build the
quantum field theory that corresponds to this situation. Most of the
work has already been done in the previous subsection and in Subsection
1.4.1 . Here we simply put the pieces of the puzzle together. We start
building a new covariant functor from the category @xmath to the
category @xmath and then we compose it with @xmath . As we will see,
this will give us a covariant functor @xmath that is actually a locally
covariant quantum field theory fulfilling both the causality condition
and the time slice axiom. As a consequence of our Theorem 2.1.9 , on
each globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath the LCQFT @xmath provides the
quantum field theory (in the sense of the Haag-Kastler approach) of the
field under consideration.

###### Lemma 2.2.7.

Consider a map @xmath that associates to each symplectic space @xmath
its unique (up to *-isomorphisms) CCR representation @xmath in
accordance with Definition 1.4.13 and for each pair of symplectic spaces
@xmath and @xmath , whose corresponding CCR representations are
respectively @xmath and @xmath , consider a map @xmath that associates
to each symplectic map @xmath from @xmath to @xmath the unique injective
unit preserving *-homomorphism @xmath from @xmath to @xmath in
accordance with Proposition 1.4.16 and the subsequent observation. Then
@xmath is a covariant functor from the category @xmath to the category
@xmath .

###### Proof.

Consider a symplectic space @xmath . Shortly after Definition 1.4.11 ,
we observed that there exists at least one Weyl system associated to
each symplectic space. We consider the unital sub-C*-algebra @xmath of
the Weyl algebra under consideration generated by the image of the Weyl
map. This gives rise to a CCR representation @xmath of @xmath as it can
be directly checked via Definition 1.4.13 . @xmath is unique up to
*-isomorphism as a consequence of Proposition 1.4.14 . Then a map of the
type required in the statement is obtained imposing @xmath . Note that
we have just defined @xmath as a map from @xmath to @xmath .

Consider now a pair of symplectic spaces @xmath and @xmath , let @xmath
and @xmath denote respectively @xmath and @xmath and suppose that @xmath
is a symplectic map from @xmath to @xmath . Applying Proposition 1.4.16
and the subsequent observation, we obtain a unique injective unit
preserving *-homomorphism @xmath satisfying @xmath . Then we define a
map @xmath as required by the statement setting @xmath . Note that we
have just defined @xmath as a map from @xmath to @xmath .

At this point @xmath is a good candidate to become a covariant functor
from @xmath to @xmath , but we have still to check the covariant axioms.
We begin checking that @xmath preserves the composition. To this end we
consider three objects @xmath , @xmath and @xmath of @xmath and we
denote the images of these objects through @xmath respectively with
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Moreover we take a morphism @xmath of
@xmath from @xmath to @xmath and a morphism @xmath of @xmath from @xmath
to @xmath . @xmath is undoubtedly a morphism of @xmath from @xmath to
@xmath . Then we can consider the following morphisms of @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We also have that these morphisms satisfy the following relations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Surely @xmath is a morphism of @xmath from @xmath to @xmath such as
@xmath and, exploiting the first two equations, we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proposition 1.4.16 tells us that there exists a unique injective
*-homomorphism @xmath from @xmath to @xmath such that @xmath , hence
@xmath and then @xmath preserves the composition of morphisms. To
conclude we check that @xmath maps the identity morphisms to the
identity morphisms. To this end we consider the object @xmath of @xmath
and its image @xmath through @xmath . It is easy to check that the
identity morphism @xmath of @xmath is provided by the identity map
@xmath of the set @xmath and that the identity morphism @xmath of @xmath
is provided by the identity map @xmath of the set @xmath . Together with
@xmath , we can consider another morphism of @xmath from @xmath to
itself, specifically @xmath . On the one hand we have

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

which means exactly

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

while on the other side, exploiting the definition of @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Applying Proposition 1.4.16 as we did above, we find that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

which is to say that @xmath maps identity morphisms to identity
morphisms. This completes the proof. ∎

At this point we have the covariant functors @xmath and @xmath and we
can compose them in accordance with Definition 1.5.5 to obtain a new
covariant functor. We present the result in the next theorem.

###### Theorem 2.2.8.

Consider the covariant functor @xmath defined in Theorem 2.2.6 and the
covariant functor @xmath defined in Lemma 2.2.7 . Then @xmath is a
locally covariant quantum field theory that fulfils the causality
condition and the time slice axiom.

###### Proof.

The composition of covariant functors yields a covariant functor (see
Definition 1.5.5 ), hence @xmath is a covariant functor from the
category @xmath to the category @xmath . Besides the richer content of
the category @xmath compared to @xmath (recall the discussion at the
beginning of this section), nonetheless we recognize @xmath to be a
LCQFT (cfr. Definition 2.1.5 ) in light of the discussion at the
beginning of this section at page 2.2 .

Now we check that @xmath fulfils the causality condition of Definition
2.1.5 . To this end consider three objects @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath , a morphism @xmath from @xmath to @xmath and a morphism @xmath
from @xmath to @xmath and suppose that @xmath and @xmath are @xmath
-causally separated subsets of @xmath . Denote the symplectic spaces
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath respectively with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
and the symplectic maps @xmath and @xmath respectively with @xmath and
@xmath . Moreover denote the CCR representations @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath respectively with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and the injective
unit preserving *-homomorphisms @xmath and @xmath respectively with
@xmath and @xmath . Theorem 2.2.6 tells us that @xmath satisfies the
causality property, i.e.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for each @xmath and each @xmath . We want to show that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Exploiting the definitions of @xmath and @xmath (cfr. Lemma 2.2.7 ), we
find

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This fact, together with the properties of the Weyl map @xmath (cfr.
Definition 1.4.11 ) and eq. ( 2.2.6 ), allows us to evaluate the
commutator above:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The last relation implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath and each @xmath because @xmath is the set of generators
of @xmath , @xmath is the set of generators of @xmath (by Definition of
CCR representation), both @xmath and @xmath are continuous (cfr.
Proposition 1.4.7 ) and also the sum and the multiplication of @xmath
are continuous. This means that @xmath fulfils the causality condition
as we stated it in Definition 2.1.5 .

As for the time slice axiom, consider two objects @xmath and @xmath of
@xmath and a morphism @xmath between @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath
contains a smooth spacelike Cauchy surface @xmath for @xmath . We denote
the symplectic spaces @xmath and @xmath respectively with @xmath and
@xmath and the symplectic map @xmath with @xmath . Moreover we denote
the CCR representations @xmath and @xmath respectively with @xmath and
@xmath and the injective unit preserving *-homomorphism @xmath with
@xmath . From Theorem 2.2.6 we know that @xmath satisfies the version of
the time slice axiom for covariant functors from @xmath to @xmath , i.e.
@xmath , and our aim is to show that @xmath is surjective, which is to
say that @xmath satisfies the time slice axiom as a LCQFT. As we noted
in Theorem 2.2.6 , in the present situation @xmath is bijective and its
inverse @xmath is a symplectic map from @xmath to @xmath . Via the
functor @xmath we obtain the injective unit preserving *-homomorphism
@xmath and then the covariant axioms imply that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

This means that @xmath is bijective and its inverse is @xmath . In
particular @xmath is surjective, as we wanted to show.∎

###### Remark 2.2.9.

Since we recognized @xmath to be a LCQFT, we are allowed to apply
Theorem 2.1.9 . This gives us the opportunity to recover the
Haag-Kastler framework for the description of the quantum theory of the
field we are dealing with. Therefore the functor @xmath gives actually a
quantum field theory (in its axiomatic definition by Haag and Kastler)
for the field under consideration on each globally hyperbolic spacetime.
At this point however this conclusion is not true at all because, as we
noted in Remark 2.1.10 , we have not yet shown that on each globally
hyperbolic spacetime the unital C*-algebra obtained through a LCQFT is
primitive, i.e. it admits a faithful irreducible representation on a
Hilbert space. Anyway we can see that this property holds for the LCQFT
@xmath that we have built right now. Actually this is a property of our
functor @xmath because it maps objects of @xmath to CCR representations
and each CCR algebra is primitive: Each unital C*-algebra admits an
irreducible representation @xmath on a Hilbert space @xmath (cfr. [ BR02
, Lem. 2.3.23, p. 59] ) and @xmath is indeed a unit preserving
*-homomorphism from the unital C*-algebra to the unital C*-algebra of
bounded operators on @xmath ; in our case the unital C*-algebra is also
a CCR representation, therefore, applying Proposition 1.4.15 , we see
that @xmath must be injective too, i.e. faithful, and hence we have just
found a faithful irreducible representation @xmath on a Hilbert space
for each CCR representation.

### 2.3 Examples

In the last section we have shown how to build a locally covariant
quantum field theory that describes a field over an arbitrary globally
hyperbolic spacetime which is ruled at a classical level by a wave
equation on that spacetime written in terms of a normally hyperbolic
operator acting on sections in a proper vector bundle. More precisely,
Subsection 2.2.1 was devoted to the construction of the field theory at
a classical level consisting of a covariant functor that provides the
solutions to all homogeneous Cauchy problems with compactly supported
initial data on a given globally hyperbolic spacetime. We also
established a causality property and a form of time slice axiom for such
functor (cfr. Theorem 2.2.6 ). After that, in Subsection 2.2.2 we
introduced a covariant functor that maps each symplectic space to a
unital C*-algebras, actually the unique (up to *-isomorphisms) CCR
representation of that symplectic space. We may regard this covariant
functor as a “quantization” functor because, when composed with the
covariant functor describing the classical theory, it gives rise to a
LCQFT which is causal and fulfils the time slice axiom (in the sense of
Definition 2.1.5 ). Theorem 2.1.9 and Remark 2.2.9 recover the
Haag-Kastler axioms and in this way they assure that this LCQFT actually
provides the quantum field theory (in its axiomatic definition made by
Haag and Kastler) for the field under consideration on each globally
hyperbolic spacetime.

In this section we want to show some realizations of LCQFTs in
situations of physical interest, specifically we discuss the real
Klein-Gordon field, the real Proca field and the electromagnetic field.
We will discuss these fields in terms of @xmath -forms. This is the
typical approach for the Maxwell equations, but it is quite unusual to
treat in this way the Klein-Gordon equation and the Proca equation.
Anyway we will see that the more familiar equations are equivalent to
those written in terms of @xmath -forms.

We want to show from now that the d’Alembertian operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

defined in terms of the exterior derivative @xmath (see Proposition
1.1.34 ) and the codifferential @xmath (see Definition 1.1.41 ), is a
formally selfadjoint normally hyperbolic operator for each @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.3.1.

Let @xmath be an orientable Lorentzian @xmath -dimensional manifold and
let @xmath be a choice of the orientation. Then for each @xmath the
d’Alembertian operator @xmath defined above is a formally selfadjoint
normally hyperbolic operator on @xmath over @xmath . Moreover the
following identities hold on @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

###### Proof.

@xmath reduces to @xmath for @xmath (see the comments immediately after
Definition 1.1.30 ) so that the statement of the proposition becomes
trivial. Then, without loss of generality, we can fix @xmath .

In first place we show that @xmath is a linear differential operator
from @xmath to itself. To this end we fix a section @xmath and a point
@xmath and we choose a coordinate neighborhood @xmath for @xmath in
@xmath . On @xmath we put the orientation @xmath and on @xmath we set
the inner product @xmath . Then we choose an oriented orthonormal basis
@xmath of @xmath and we define the local 1-forms @xmath through the
formula @xmath on each point of @xmath : @xmath is a basis of @xmath .
Now we are ready to express @xmath in local coordinates applying
Proposition 1.1.34 and the comments just after Definition 1.1.41 :

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

We rewrite @xmath using the base of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The result of the calculation gives a @xmath -form over @xmath whose
coefficients in the basis @xmath consist of (very long) linear
combinations of partial derivatives of @xmath up to the second order
with coefficients involving the metric (and its first order partial
derivatives) and the Levi-Civita symbol. This is sufficient to
understand that @xmath is actually a linear differential operator of
second order. To show that it is also normally hyperbolic we report the
final expression of the term involving second order partial derivatives
of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the inverse of the matrix @xmath whose coefficients are
defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From this we deduce that the principal symbol @xmath of @xmath is the
map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath . Noting that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we conclude that @xmath is normally hyperbolic.

Formal selfadjointness is deduced from Proposition 1.1.47 using the non
degenerate inner product on @xmath defined in Proposition 1.1.46 . For
each @xmath , @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and this means exactly that @xmath is formally selfadjoint.

The stated identities follow from @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

∎

#### 2.3.1 The Klein-Gordon field

This is the easiest of our examples because, as we will see, we can
apply completely the procedure of Section 2.2 .

We fix a value of the mass @xmath . The Klein-Gordon field of mass
@xmath on a 4-dimensional globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath is
described by a section @xmath in the trivial tensor bundle @xmath
(sometimes this bundle is called line bundle) that satisfies the
equation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The inner product of @xmath is provided by multiplication of real
numbers on each fiber. The operator @xmath is trivially formally
selfadjoint, hence Proposition 2.3.1 implies that @xmath is a formally
selfadjoint normally hyperbolic operator. These considerations allow us
to recognize @xmath as an object of @xmath . Consider a morphism @xmath
of @xmath from @xmath to another object @xmath . In this case the
situation is considerably simplified if compared to the general case of
a morphism of @xmath because now each fiber is nothing but the real line
and hence the fact that @xmath must be fiberwise an isometric
isomorphism of @xmath to itself, together with the condition of
compatibility with @xmath and @xmath (that are always of the form @xmath
), implies that @xmath .

Then, when we want to describe the Klein-Gordon field, we restrict our
category @xmath to a category @xmath whose objects are 4-dimensional
globally hyperbolic spacetimes @xmath with the line bundle @xmath as
vector bundle on which we set the inner product induced by fiberwise
multiplication of real numbers and the formally selfadjoint normally
hyperbolic operator @xmath , which is completely determined by the
metric and the orientation of @xmath . The morphisms that we consider
are the morphisms of @xmath between the objects of @xmath . This entails
that @xmath is a full subcategory of @xmath .

Due to the conditions of compatibility with the inner products and the
normally hyperbolic operators, a morphism of @xmath reduces to a map
from @xmath to @xmath that acts on each fiber as the identity: @xmath
for each @xmath and each @xmath . Hence for each @xmath the extension of
@xmath through @xmath is nothing but an “extended” push-forward through
@xmath of @xmath (refer to eq. ( 2.2.1 )):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

With these considerations we realize that the Klein-Gordon field is
simply a special case of our general discussion so that we can apply the
procedure of Section 2.2 obtaining first the covariant functor
describing the classical theory and then the quantization functor. By
composition of these covariant functors we obtain a locally covariant
quantum field theory for the Klein-Gordon field and Theorem 2.1.9 (see
Remark 2.2.9 for primitivity) assures that this LCQFT provides on each
globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath a unital C*-algebra satisfying the
Haag-Kastler axioms, hence it is actually the quantum field theory of
the Klein-Gordon field on @xmath .

###### Remark 2.3.2.

Our conclusion rely upon the assumption that the description we gave of
the Klein-Gordon field in terms of a 0-form @xmath over a globally
hyperbolic spacetime @xmath satisfying the equation @xmath is equivalent
to the usual formulation consisting of a real valued smooth function
@xmath over @xmath ruled by the equation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the Levi-Civita connection, @xmath is the inverse of the
matrix @xmath whose coefficients are defined by @xmath using a base
@xmath of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

Since @xmath , the Klein-Gordon field in our description is actually a
real valued smooth function, as it is in the usual approach. The
equivalence of the equations is a special case of a more general formula
by Lichnerowicz (cfr. [ Lic64 , eq. (3.4), p. 17] ) that we report here:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.3.3)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath denotes the Ricci tensor and @xmath denotes the
curvature of the Levi-Civita connection @xmath (see Subsection 1.1.2 for
their definitions). This formula for @xmath shows the exact coincidence
of eq. ( 2.3.1 ) and eq. ( 2.3.2 ).

###### Remark 2.3.3.

Notice that it is possible to consider also a non minimally coupled
version of the Klein-Gordon equation on a globally hyperbolic spacetime
@xmath , namely we can introduce a linear term that introduces a
coupling between the field and the scalar curvature:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a constant and @xmath is the scalar curvature of the
Levi-Civita connection on @xmath (see the end of Subsection 1.1.2 ).
Indeed @xmath is still a formally selfadjoint normally hyperbolic
operator since we added a linear term of 0-th order in the derivatives,
hence we can again apply the general construction of Section 2.2 .

#### 2.3.2 The Proca field

At a classical level we describe the Proca field of mass @xmath on a
4-dimensional globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath as a 1-form @xmath
satisfying the equation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

###### Remark 2.3.4.

The standard expression in index notation for the equation of the
minimally coupled Proca field on @xmath is the following:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the Levi-Civita connection. To check that our
formulation (eq. ( 2.3.4 )) is equivalent to the standard one (eq. (
2.3.5 )) we need to rewrite the standard equation in a convenient form.
The first step consists in the observation that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This result is obtained through the direct computation of @xmath and
using the expression of the Ricci tensor @xmath for the Levi-Civita
connection in terms of the Christoffel symbols (eq. ( 1.1.3 )). The
substitution of the last equation in eq. ( 2.3.5 ) gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and, recalling the Lichnerowicz formula, eq. ( 2.3.3 ), for @xmath , we
deduce that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover one can check that @xmath and hence

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

With this we conclude that eq. ( 2.3.4 ) and ( 2.3.5 ) are actually
equivalent.

The case of the Proca field is more involved if compared to the case of
the Klein-Gordon field. The difficulty arises at a classical level
because, although being a formally selfadjoint linear differential
operator of second order on @xmath (as one might easily check from eq. (
2.3.5 ) and exploiting the fact that @xmath and @xmath are formal
adjoints of each other), @xmath is not normally hyperbolic (another
glance at eq. ( 2.3.5 ) shows that the term @xmath breaks normal
hyperbolicity). This fact makes the results of Subsection 2.2.1
inapplicable to the current problem. Anyway one might observe that,
since the Proca field @xmath must satisfy eq. ( 2.3.4 ), then it follows
that it must also be coclosed, i.e. @xmath , because @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used the property @xmath . But then @xmath too and so the Proca
field @xmath satisfies also the equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There is no doubt that @xmath is a formally selfadjoint normally
hyperbolic operator and that we could apply the procedure of Subsection
2.2.1 if we consider this operator. The problem is that, proceeding in
this way, we do not describe the Proca field because equation @xmath
does not imply @xmath . However the system

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is absolutely equivalent to eq. ( 2.3.4 ) as one immediately realizes.
We already know how to obtain the solutions of all the Cauchy problems
with compactly supported initial data formulated using the first
equation of the system above. The trick that allows us to select only
those solutions that satisfy also the second equation can be found in [
Dap11 , p. 9] . Before we present it, a lemma is required.

###### Lemma 2.3.5.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional globally hyperbolic spacetime, let
@xmath and let @xmath . Consider the advanced/retarded Green operator
@xmath for the formally selfadjoint normally hyperbolic operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have that for each @xmath the following identities hold:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

###### Proof.

Fix @xmath and @xmath and consider @xmath . From the properties of
@xmath we know that @xmath so that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

From Proposition 2.3.1 we deduce that @xmath and hence we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that, exploiting the support properties of @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This inclusion implies that the support of @xmath is @xmath -past
compact because also @xmath is @xmath -past compact (cfr. Proposition
1.2.18 ). Then we can apply Lemma 1.3.17 to @xmath and conclude that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The proof for @xmath in place of @xmath is identical and we can proceed
similarly also if we consider the retarded Green operators in place of
the advanced ones. ∎

Now we are ready to show the trick. The first step consists in the
determination of the advanced and retarded Green operators for the
operator @xmath . Although we cannot apply Corollary 1.3.16 because the
operator is not normally hyperbolic, we can exploit the advanced and
retarded Green operators for @xmath to find advanced and retarded Green
operators for @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.3.6.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional globally hyperbolic spacetime and
let @xmath . Consider the formally selfadjoint linear differential
operator of second order

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an advanced/retarded Green operator for @xmath , where @xmath is the
advanced/retarded Green operator for the formally selfadjoint normally
hyperbolic operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover @xmath is formally adjoint to @xmath .

###### Proof.

Fix @xmath . We consider only the case of the advanced Green operator
(the other case being similar). First of all we notice that @xmath is
linear and that for each @xmath we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

exploiting the support property of the advanced Green operator @xmath .
Now fix an arbitrary @xmath and evaluate @xmath bearing in mind Lemma
2.3.5 and the properties of the Green operators:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The calculation is even simpler for @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Then we recognize that @xmath is an advanced Green operator for @xmath
(cfr. Definition 1.3.15 ).

To conclude the proof we must show that @xmath is formally adjoint to
@xmath , which is to say that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

for each @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath is the map defined in
Proposition 1.1.46 . Therefore fix @xmath and @xmath in @xmath and
evaluate @xmath . Recall that @xmath is formally adjoint to @xmath
because @xmath is formally selfadjoint (cfr. Proposition 1.3.21 ), hence
we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We know also that @xmath and @xmath are formal adjoints of each other
(see Proposition 1.1.47 ) and then we can proceed in our calculation:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

In the last step we exploit Lemma 2.3.5 :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

At this point we have the advanced and retarded Green operators for the
operator @xmath and we know that they are formal adjoints of each other.
We want to use them to determine the space @xmath of the solutions to
all homogeneous Cauchy problems for the operator @xmath with compactly
supported initial data. Then we want to exploit the reciprocal formal
adjointness of the Green operators for @xmath to define a symplectic
form on @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.3.7.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional globally hyperbolic spacetime and
let @xmath . Consider the operator @xmath and its advanced/retarded
Green operators @xmath provided by Proposition 2.3.6 . Denote with
@xmath the corresponding causal propagator. Then the space @xmath of the
solutions to all homogeneous Cauchy problems for the operator @xmath
with compactly supported initial data coincides with the image through
@xmath of @xmath , while the kernel of the causal propagator @xmath
coincides with the image through @xmath of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath                     
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the map defined in Proposition 1.1.46 and @xmath ,
@xmath are such that @xmath and @xmath , is well defined, bilinear, non
degenerate and antisymmetric, i.e. it is a symplectic form on @xmath ,
hence @xmath is a symplectic space.

###### Proof.

We start from the inclusion @xmath . Take @xmath and consider @xmath
such that @xmath . As a consequence of Lemma 2.3.6 we have that @xmath
is also an element of @xmath , where @xmath denotes the causal
propagator for @xmath . Therefore from Corollary 1.3.19 we deduce that
@xmath is the solution of a homogeneous Cauchy problem for the normally
hyperbolic operator @xmath with compactly supported initial data. Since
we have shown that eq. ( 2.3.4 ) is equivalent to eq. ( 2.3.6 ), it is
sufficient to prove that @xmath to conclude that the expected inclusion
holds. We try to evaluate @xmath exploiting Lemma 2.3.6 and Lemma 2.3.5
:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath                     
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

We turn our attention to the converse inclusion @xmath . To this end
take @xmath . Since eq. ( 2.3.4 ) is equivalent to eq. ( 2.3.6 ), @xmath
is also a coclosed solution of a homogeneous Cauchy problem for the
normally hyperbolic operator @xmath with compactly supported initial
data. Applying Corollary 1.3.19 , we find @xmath such that @xmath .
Consider now @xmath bearing in mind that @xmath and exploiting Lemma
2.3.6 and Lemma 2.3.5 :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This implies that @xmath .

Now we show that @xmath . The inclusion @xmath is a trivial consequence
of the properties of the Green operators @xmath and @xmath . To prove
the other inclusion take @xmath in @xmath . This implies that @xmath and
that @xmath is an element of @xmath , hence in particular

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Exploiting Proposition 1.2.18 , we realize that @xmath is a closed
subset of @xmath included in a compact subset of @xmath , hence it is
compact too. This shows that @xmath and, evaluating @xmath we see that
@xmath . Therefore we conclude that @xmath .

The proof of the last part of this proposition is identical to the proof
of Lemma 2.2.3 . ∎

We have associated a symplectic space @xmath to each triple @xmath ,
where @xmath is a globally hyperbolic spacetime, @xmath is endowed with
the inner product @xmath induced by @xmath (cfr. Proposition 1.1.40 )
and @xmath .

Before we proceed with the ingredients needed for the construction of a
covariant functor describing the classical theory of the Proca field, we
want to introduce the category that we use as domain.

###### Definition 2.3.8.

For @xmath , @xmath is the category whose objects are triples @xmath ,
where @xmath is a @xmath -dimensional globally hyperbolic spacetime,
@xmath is endowed with the inner product induced by @xmath and @xmath ,
whose morphisms are vector bundle homomorphisms @xmath from @xmath to
@xmath over some morphism @xmath from @xmath to @xmath of @xmath that
are compatible with the inner products and the linear differential
operators @xmath and @xmath of both the domain and the codomain (for the
meaning of this condition see the comments after Definition 2.2.1 and
bear in mind that now normal hyperbolicity does not hold). As for the
composition law, it is the usual composition of functions.

Except for the fact that the operators considered are not normally
hyperbolic, @xmath can be considered as a (possibly non full)
subcategory of @xmath . This claim becomes precise if we replace in all
the objects of this category the operator @xmath with the formally
selfadjoint normally hyperbolic operator @xmath because the condition of
compatibility with both @xmath and @xmath of domain and codomain entails
also compatibility with @xmath of domain and codomain. As a consequence
of this fact all the conclusion that we have drawn for the morphism of
@xmath hold also for the morphisms of @xmath (and maybe these morphisms
have even richer properties since the compatibility condition seems to
be more stringent).

Note that compatibility with @xmath trivially implies also compatibility
with the operators @xmath of both the domain and the codomain.

Now that we have specified the (restricted) class of morphisms that we
are going to take into account we can proceed further.

###### Proposition 2.3.9.

Let @xmath and @xmath be @xmath -dimensional globally hyperbolic
spacetimes, let @xmath be a morphism of @xmath from @xmath to @xmath and
let @xmath . Consider the advanced/retarded Green operators @xmath and
@xmath for @xmath and respectively @xmath provided by Lemma 2.3.6 .
Denote with @xmath and @xmath the symplectic spaces associated
respectively to the triples @xmath and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the extension map is defined in eq. ( 2.2.1 ) and the restriction
map is defined in Lemma 2.2.4 , and the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath                     
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is such that @xmath , is well defined, linear and
compatible with the symplectic forms @xmath and @xmath , i.e. it is a
symplectic map from @xmath to @xmath .

###### Proof.

The advanced/retarded Green operators @xmath and @xmath for @xmath and
respectively @xmath provided by Lemma 2.3.6 have the following
expressions:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since we know that @xmath is compatible with the operators @xmath and
@xmath , we can apply Lemma 2.2.4 to deduce that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

while the condition of compatibility with @xmath and @xmath trivially
implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath . From these facts we deduce that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for each @xmath . This shows the first part of the thesis.

The proof of the second part is identical to the proof of Lemma 2.2.5 :
we can proceed in the same way simply considering the Green operators
for @xmath and @xmath provided by Lemma 2.3.6 thanks to the result of
the first part of our proof. ∎

Exploiting Proposition 2.3.7 and Proposition 2.3.9 , we can introduce
the covariant functor describing the classical theory of the Proca field
as shown by the next theorem. In the following we choose the dimension
of the spacetimes @xmath and we drop the subscript @xmath since we fix
@xmath . However note that the theorem holds also for each @xmath and
each @xmath . The choices @xmath and @xmath are made for compatibility
with the physical problem.

###### Theorem 2.3.10.

Consider the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath                     
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

defined following Proposition 2.3.7 and for each pair @xmath , @xmath in
@xmath consider the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
              @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

defined in accordance with Proposition 2.3.9 , where @xmath and @xmath
respectively denote the symplectic spaces @xmath and @xmath . These maps
give rise to a covariant functor @xmath from @xmath to @xmath that
fulfils the following properties:

-    causality: for each @xmath , @xmath , @xmath in @xmath , each
    morphism @xmath from @xmath to @xmath and each morphism @xmath from
    @xmath to @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -causally
    separated, we have that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for each @xmath and each @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
    denote the symplectic spaces corresponding respectively to @xmath ,
    @xmath and @xmath , while @xmath and @xmath denote the symplectic
    maps corresponding respectively to @xmath and @xmath ;

-    time slice axiom: for each @xmath , @xmath in @xmath and each
    morphism @xmath from @xmath to @xmath such that @xmath includes a
    smooth spacelike Cauchy surface @xmath for @xmath , we have that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath and @xmath denote the symplectic spaces corresponding
    respectively to @xmath and @xmath , while @xmath denotes the
    symplectic map corresponding to @xmath .

###### Proof.

The check of the covariant axioms, as well as the proof of the causality
property, are identical to those in the proof of Theorem 2.2.6 . For the
proof of the time slice axiom again we can largely imitate the proof of
the above mentioned theorem. We must only remember to write the Cauchy
problem used to pick out the compact subset @xmath for the normally
hyperbolic operator @xmath in place of the operator @xmath (which is not
normally hyperbolic), otherwise we cannot apply Theorem 1.3.7 to deduce
uniqueness of the solution. The use of @xmath in place of @xmath does
not give rise to problems because sections @xmath satisfying @xmath also
satisfy @xmath (bear in mind the equivalence between eq. ( 2.3.4 ) and
eq. ( 2.3.6 )). At a certain point of the proof we should find an
identity of the type @xmath . This entails @xmath and hence also

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As we deduce from @xmath that @xmath is a section of @xmath with support
included in @xmath , in a similar manner we deduce from the equation
above that @xmath is a section of @xmath with support included in @xmath
. Towards the end we resorted to Lemma 1.3.17 . This is not directly
applicable in the present situation because @xmath is not normally
hyperbolic, however it holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the advanced/retarded Green operator for the
normally hyperbolic operator @xmath . Since we have just shown that
@xmath has compact support, we are again in position to apply Lemma
1.3.17 . A similar procedure applies to @xmath and this leads us to the
end of the proof. ∎

With the last theorem we have completed the classical theory of the
Proca field. Now we must proceed with the quantization of the classical
theory that can be done composing our functor @xmath with the functor
@xmath built in Lemma 2.2.7 . As we proved in Theorem 2.2.8 , the result
is a locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath that satisfies both
the causality condition and the time slice axiom. In turn this implies
that we can apply Theorem 2.1.9 and Remark 2.2.9 . Therefore on each
globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath provides the quantum field theory
of the Proca field according to the algebraic approach suggested by Haag
and Kastler.

Before we pass to the last example, we want to make some remarks about
the morphisms that are usually taken into account when dealing with the
realization of a LCQFT for a field of physical interest, such as the
Klein-Gordon field or the Proca field.

###### Remark 2.3.11.

In the discussion of the classical theory of a concrete field, for
example the Klein-Gordon field or the Proca field, it is usual to
consider only push-forwards and pull-backs as vector bundle
homomorphisms. For the case of the Klein-Gordon field we noted that
these two approaches are equivalent. We show now that push-forwards and
pull-backs are morphisms of @xmath so that our approach surely includes
the usual one.

Note that if @xmath is an orientation and time orientation preserving
isometric diffeomorphism from @xmath to @xmath , we realize immediately
that @xmath is a bijective morphism of @xmath between the objects @xmath
and @xmath whose inverse @xmath is a morphism of @xmath too: @xmath is
defined as the pull-back through @xmath (see. Remark 1.1.9 ) and @xmath
is indeed a vector bundle isomorphism from @xmath to @xmath (cfr. Remark
1.1.17 ) which is compatible with the inner products induced by the
metrics and with the operators @xmath and @xmath because @xmath is
isometric and the following identities hold (see Proposition 1.1.34 and
the comments after Definition 1.1.41 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

When @xmath is only an orientation and time orientation preserving
isometric embedding from @xmath to @xmath whose image @xmath is an open
subset of @xmath (i.e. a morphism of our category @xmath ), we can apply
the conclusions above to the diffeomorphism @xmath , @xmath and obtain a
morphism of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then we find a new morphism of @xmath from @xmath to @xmath defining the
vector bundle homomorphism

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

@xmath inherits all the properties of @xmath with the only exception
that it is not surjective and hence it is actually a morphism of @xmath
. As a matter of fact we have simply defined @xmath as the composition
of @xmath with @xmath , which are indeed morphisms of @xmath .

On the contrary one may find morphisms @xmath of @xmath which are not of
the form @xmath : For example consider the Minkowski spacetime as
globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath ; the vector bundle isomorphism
@xmath , where @xmath acts on each fiber as a fixed Lorentz
transformation @xmath for tensors of type @xmath , is a bijective
morphism of @xmath form @xmath whose inverse is a morphism too, but it
is not of the form @xmath because @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath , in
the present situation. This means that we are dealing with a potential
enlargement of the family of morphisms usually considered (that is
comprised by pull-backs and push-forwards through morphisms of @xmath ).

We take the chance to anticipate that for the upcoming example, the
electromagnetic field, we will be forced to reduce to usual approach,
that is our morphisms will be only pull-backs and push-forwards through
morphisms of @xmath .

#### 2.3.3 The electromagnetic field

Consider a globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath . The electromagnetic
field is usually described by a section @xmath (known as field strength)
in the vector bundle @xmath , i.e. a 2-form over @xmath , satisfying
Maxwell equations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If the second de Rham cohomology group is trivial, that is @xmath , then
all closed 2-forms over @xmath are also exact (cfr. Definition 1.1.35 ).
This means that we can find a 1-form @xmath over @xmath (called vector
potential) such that @xmath and the Maxwell equations reduce to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

that is a version of the Proca equation with @xmath (cfr. eq. ( 2.3.4
)). But when @xmath is such that @xmath is not trivial it happens that
there are closed 2-forms @xmath such that the equation @xmath cannot be
verified by any 1-form @xmath , hence we cannot deduce eq. ( 2.3.7 )
from Maxwell equations. This means that there exist field strengths
which are indeed solutions of the Maxwell equations, but are not
generated by a vector potential satisfying eq. ( 2.3.7 ).

The problem in dealing directly with the Maxwell equations is the
absence of a normally hyperbolic operator that allows us to apply the
theory about wave equations we presented in Section 1.3 . Then we are
induced to the choice of an approach based on the vector potential
@xmath and eq. ( 2.3.7 ) in place of the field strength and the Maxwell
equations, although the essential physical observable in our description
is still the field strength @xmath (not the vector potential @xmath ),
as it was in the approach based on the Maxwell equations. Indeed we
recover the Maxwell equations simply defining @xmath , but we
automatically exclude from our description all those field strengths
that are not closed. In conclusion we renounce to the description of all
the field strengths admitted by the Maxwell equations to obtain an
equation which seems to be more convenient. However, exactly as in the
case of the Proca field, @xmath is formally selfadjoint linear
differential operator of second order, but it fails to be normally
hyperbolic and hence we cannot automatically obtain advanced and
retarded Green operators on each globally hyperbolic spacetime. Moreover
now eq. ( 2.3.7 ) does not imply that @xmath because of the absence of
the mass term and hence the system

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is not equivalent to eq. ( 2.3.7 ), although solutions @xmath of the
system are solutions of eq. ( 2.3.7 ) too. Then we cannot attempt a
procedure similar to that followed for the Proca field to show that the
Green operators for @xmath are related to those for @xmath .

Luckily there is gauge equivalence that comes to our aid. We said that
the physical observable is the field strength @xmath . It may happen
that different vector potentials @xmath and @xmath satisfying eq. (
2.3.7 ) generate the same field strength @xmath , in which case they are
said to be gauge equivalent. Then from a physical point of view @xmath
and @xmath are indistinguishable since they generate the same
observable. Hence we do not want to have in our classical theory of the
electromagnetic field both @xmath and @xmath as distinguished dynamical
configurations of the vector potential. The next lemma puts together
these facts showing that eq. ( 2.3.7 ) and eq. ( 2.3.8 ) become
equivalent when we identify gauge equivalent configurations.

###### Lemma 2.3.12.

Let @xmath be a globally hyperbolic spacetime and consider @xmath . Then
the following conditions are equivalent:

-   @xmath satisfies the equation @xmath ;

-    there exists @xmath , which is gauge equivalent to @xmath , i.e.
    @xmath , that satisfies the equation @xmath and the Lorentz gauge
    condition @xmath .

Moreover consider the space @xmath of gauge inequivalent classes of
@xmath -forms satisfying @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the space @xmath of gauge inequivalent classes of @xmath -forms
satisfying @xmath and the Lorentz gauge condition,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Then the map @xmath defined by @xmath , where @xmath is a representative
of the class @xmath , @xmath , which is gauge equivalent to @xmath ,
satisfies @xmath and the Lorentz gauge condition and @xmath denotes the
class that has @xmath as representative, is a vector space isomorphism.

###### Proof.

Fix @xmath . If we suppose that there exists @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then we immediately deduce that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Conversely suppose that @xmath . Consider the equation @xmath . In [
Gin09 , Cor. 5, p. 78] we find a procedure that extends the result of
Theorem 1.3.7 stating the existence and uniqueness of the solution of a
Cauchy problem for a normally hyperbolic operator even when the initial
data are not compactly supported. We deduce that there exists @xmath
satisfying @xmath . We set @xmath and we check that @xmath fulfils the
requirements of the second condition in the statement of the
proposition. Indeed @xmath . Moreover, applying Proposition 2.3.1 , we
find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It remains to check only the Lorentz gauge condition:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we turn our attention to the definition of @xmath . Take @xmath and
consider two representatives @xmath and @xmath of @xmath . Then @xmath
and, applying the first part of this lemma, we find @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular we deduce that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

because @xmath and @xmath are gauge equivalent being representatives of
the same equivalence class of @xmath . Moreover trivially @xmath . This
proves that @xmath is well defined. Linearity can be directly checked
from the definition of @xmath . Consider now @xmath such that @xmath ,
where @xmath denotes the class of @xmath that has the null section as
representative (this is actually the zero element of the vector space
@xmath ). This means that each representative @xmath of the class @xmath
is gauge equivalent to each representative @xmath of the class @xmath .
In particular we choose the null section 0 as representative of @xmath
and we deduce that each representative @xmath of the class @xmath is
such that @xmath , i.e. @xmath is the zero element of the vector space
@xmath (we may write @xmath ). Then we conclude that @xmath is
injective. To conclude the proof take @xmath . We look for @xmath such
that @xmath . Take a representative @xmath . This in particular verifies
@xmath and therefore we can consider the class @xmath that has @xmath as
representative. Applying the definition of @xmath , we see that @xmath .
This shows that @xmath is also surjective and hence it is a vector space
isomorphism as expected. ∎

The last theorem gives us the opportunity to identify @xmath with @xmath
. This means that we can equivalently consider gauge inequivalent
classes of 1-forms satisfying @xmath or gauge inequivalent classes of
vector potentials satisfying both @xmath and @xmath as classical
observables of the electromagnetic field.

For the construction of a covariant functor describing the classical
theory of the electromagnetic field, we need to determine a symplectic
space comprised by all the gauge inequivalent classes of solutions for
homogeneous Cauchy problems with compactly supported initial data
associated to the operator @xmath . This must be done for each globally
hyperbolic spacetime. Unfortunately the lack of normal hyperbolicity and
the presence gauge invariance significantly alter the situation of
Subsection 2.2.1 so that we are forced to start the construction of the
classical theory from the beginning.

In first place we try to determine the vector space on which we will
define a symplectic form. The solution of this problem is suggested by [
Dim92 , Prop. 4, p. 228] . Note that from now on we say that @xmath is a
Lorentz 1-form if it is a 1-form satisfying the Lorentz gauge condition,
i.e. @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.3.13.

Let @xmath be a globally hyperbolic spacetime and define the space of
compactly supported coclosed @xmath -forms over @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Lorentz solution of a homogeneous Cauchy problem for the normally
hyperbolic operator @xmath with compactly supported initial data is
gauge equivalent to @xmath , where @xmath is the causal propagator for
the normally hyperbolic operator @xmath and @xmath is some element of
@xmath . Conversely, for each @xmath , @xmath is a Lorentz solution of a
homogeneous Cauchy problem for the normally hyperbolic operator @xmath
with compactly supported initial data.

It follows immediately that the space of gauge inequivalent classes of
Lorentz solutions of homogeneous Cauchy problems for the normally
hyperbolic operator @xmath with compactly supported initial data
coincides with the following subset of @xmath (for the definition of
@xmath refer to Lemma 2.3.12 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the class of @xmath that has @xmath among its
representatives.

###### Proof.

Consider a Lorentz solution @xmath of a homogeneous Cauchy problem for
the normally hyperbolic operator @xmath with compactly supported initial
data on a given Cauchy surface @xmath for @xmath . Then we find a
compact subset @xmath of @xmath including the support of the initial
data for the Cauchy problem and we take a relatively compact open subset
@xmath of @xmath including @xmath . We deduce that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an open covering of @xmath because @xmath are open subsets of @xmath
(see [ FV11 , Lem. A.8, p. 48] ) and @xmath are closed subsets of @xmath
(see [ BGP07 , Lem. A.5.1, p. 173] ) and we can introduce a partition of
unity subordinate to such covering:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Defining @xmath and @xmath , we see that @xmath . But @xmath includes
the support of the initial data for the solution @xmath so that @xmath
(this is a consequence of Theorem 1.3.7 , which can be applied because
@xmath is normally hyperbolic) and hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This means that @xmath and so @xmath . From @xmath and @xmath we deduce
that @xmath and @xmath . The first of these identities implies that
@xmath has compact support because we can apply Proposition 1.2.18 to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

noting that @xmath is a compact subset of @xmath since by construction
@xmath is a relatively compact subset of @xmath . A similar procedure
shows also that @xmath has compact support. Then, considering @xmath ,
we have a compactly supported 1-form that trivially satisfies @xmath .
We must only check that @xmath is gauge equivalent to @xmath . Applying
Lemma 2.3.5 , we see that @xmath . Evaluating @xmath and keeping in mind
that @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proposition 1.2.18 implies that @xmath has past compact support so that
we can exploit Lemma 1.3.17 to obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A similar procedure shows that @xmath and therefore we conclude @xmath ,
which means exactly that @xmath is gauge equivalent to @xmath .

Now take @xmath and consider @xmath . Trivially @xmath and by Lemma
2.3.5 we see that @xmath ( @xmath is a Lorentz 1-form). To see that
@xmath is also a solution of a homogeneous Cauchy problem for the
normally hyperbolic operator @xmath with compactly supported initial
data, we take a spacelike smooth Cauchy surface @xmath for @xmath (the
existence is assured by Theorem 1.2.15 ) and we define on it a @xmath
-future directed @xmath -timelike unit vector field @xmath over @xmath
normal to @xmath . Then we take @xmath as the restriction of @xmath to
@xmath and @xmath as the restriction of @xmath to @xmath , where @xmath
denotes the Levi-Civita connection. @xmath and @xmath are indeed
sections in the restriction of @xmath to @xmath and their supports are
compact because we know that @xmath has compact support and we can apply
Proposition 1.2.18 to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then we can consider the following Cauchy problem:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

By construction @xmath is a solution (actually the unique solution due
to Theorem 1.3.7 , which holds because @xmath is normally hyperbolic).
Since we have shown at the beginning of the proof that @xmath , we
conclude that @xmath is a Lorentz solution of a homogeneous Cauchy
problem for the normally hyperbolic operator @xmath with compactly
supported initial data. This completes the proof. ∎

We have a vector space @xmath . Now we need a symplectic form on it. A
new difficulty associated to the first de Rham cohomology group of
@xmath arises in this situation as we will see in the proof of the next
Lemma. To go around this obstacle we assume that @xmath following the
approach of [ Dap11 ] .

###### Lemma 2.3.14.

Let @xmath be a globally hyperbolic spacetime such that @xmath and
consider the vector space @xmath defined in Lemma 2.3.13 . The map

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath                     
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the causal propagator for the formally selfadjoint
normally hyperbolic operator @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are elements of
@xmath such that @xmath and @xmath are representatives of @xmath and
respectively @xmath and @xmath is defined in Proposition 1.1.46 , is
well defined, bilinear, antisymmetric and non degenerate, i.e. it is a
symplectic map on @xmath . Hence @xmath is a symplectic space.

###### Proof.

To show that @xmath is well defined, take @xmath and @xmath in @xmath .
Because of the definition of @xmath we find @xmath and @xmath in @xmath
such that @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath is compactly supported, we
can evaluate @xmath and indeed we get a real number. If we consider also
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath , we have @xmath
and we must check that it coincides with @xmath in order to have @xmath
well defined. Since @xmath and @xmath are both representatives of @xmath
, they are gauge equivalent, i.e. @xmath . Now the hypothesis @xmath
comes into play because it implies that we can find @xmath such that
@xmath . Similarly we find @xmath such that @xmath . bearing in mind
that @xmath is formally antiselfadjoint (because @xmath is formally
selfadjoint, cfr. Proposition 1.3.21 ) and that @xmath and @xmath are
formal adjoints of each other, we can tackle the evaluation of @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

where we exploited @xmath and @xmath . This shows that @xmath is well
defined. Notice that without the hypothesis @xmath this proof does not
work.

Bilinearity of @xmath easily follows from bilinearity of @xmath and
linearity of @xmath . As for antisymmetry, consider @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath . By definition of @xmath we find @xmath and @xmath in @xmath
such that @xmath and @xmath . Exploiting the definition of @xmath , the
antiselfadjointness of @xmath and the symmetry of @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It remains only to check that @xmath is non degenerate. To this end
consider @xmath such that @xmath for each @xmath . Taking @xmath such
that @xmath , we deduce that @xmath for each @xmath . In particular we
have @xmath for each @xmath and hence @xmath for each @xmath . Since
@xmath is non degenerate, we conclude that @xmath . This fact means that
@xmath is a representative of the zero class of @xmath , i.e. @xmath . ∎

At this point we are able to associate a symplectic space @xmath
comprised by all the gauge inequivalent classes of dynamical
configuration for the electromagnetic field on each globally hyperbolic
spacetime @xmath such that the first de Rham cohomology group of @xmath
is trivial.

This fact induces us to introduce of a special category @xmath for the
electromagnetic field.

###### Definition 2.3.15.

We define the category @xmath in the following way:

-   objects are triples @xmath , where @xmath is a globally hyperbolic
    spacetime with @xmath , @xmath is the vector bundle over @xmath that
    we consider, @xmath is the inner product on @xmath induced by the
    metric @xmath (refer to Proposition 1.1.40 for a characterization of
    this inner product) and @xmath is the linear differential operator
    on @xmath over @xmath governing the dynamics of the electromagnetic
    field;

-   morphisms from @xmath to @xmath are vector bundle homomorphisms of
    the form @xmath from @xmath to @xmath such that @xmath is a morphism
    of @xmath (note that @xmath entails @xmath ); ¹ ¹ 1 For the
    electromagnetic field we are forced to restrict our class of
    morphisms to that usually considered, i.e. only vector bundle
    homomorphisms that are push-forwards of morphisms of @xmath . For
    the precise definition of these morphisms and some comments refer to
    Remark 2.3.11 . This choice is done because push-forwards (and
    similarly pull-backs) have the property of being defined on @xmath
    -forms for arbitrary @xmath and moreover they intertwine with both
    @xmath and @xmath (see Proposition 1.1.34 and comments after
    Definition 1.1.41 ).

-   the composition law is simply the composition of functions.

This is a specialization of the category @xmath , actually a subcategory
(but not a full subcategory because we consider only push-forwards).
This statement is not at all correct because here @xmath is not normally
hyperbolic, but it becomes rigorous if we replace @xmath with the
normally hyperbolic operator @xmath . Then all the observations referred
to @xmath hold also for @xmath .

Applying Lemma 2.3.13 and Lemma 2.3.14 , we can define the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath                     
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

This is the first part of our candidate functor describing the classical
theory of the electromagnetic field. The second part comes from the next
lemma.

Before presenting the statement, we introduce some notation. From now on
the vector space that was denoted by @xmath in Lemma 2.3.12 will be
denoted by @xmath to keep trace of the manifold we are working on.
Similarly the equivalence class previously indicated with @xmath will be
denoted by @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.3.16.

Let @xmath be a morphism of @xmath from the object @xmath to the object
@xmath . Denote with @xmath and @xmath the symplectic spaces associated
to @xmath and respectively @xmath by the map @xmath defined few lines
above. Then the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath                     
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are the causal propagators for the formally
selfadjoint normally hyperbolic operator @xmath on @xmath over @xmath
and respectively on @xmath over @xmath and @xmath is such that @xmath ,
is well defined, linear and compatible with the symplectic forms @xmath
and @xmath , that is to say that @xmath is a symplectic map from @xmath
to @xmath .

###### Proof.

The first step of this proof is devoted to show that @xmath is well
defined. To this end take @xmath . By definition we find @xmath such
that @xmath . It follows that @xmath because

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath . This implies that @xmath is indeed an element of @xmath .
Suppose now that also @xmath is such that @xmath is a representative of
@xmath . Then we also have @xmath , and we must prove that this is equal
to @xmath for @xmath to be well defined. We know that @xmath and @xmath
are gauge equivalent, i.e. @xmath . Exploiting Lemma 2.3.5 , we deduce
that @xmath falls in the kernel of @xmath , which is the causal
propagator for the normally hyperbolic operator @xmath . Applying
Proposition 1.3.20 to @xmath , we find @xmath such that @xmath . We have
already seen one of the advantages of dealing with push-forwards of
isometric embeddings, that is @xmath . Besides this there are also the
identity @xmath and, above all, the possibility to give sense to @xmath
also for @xmath -forms with @xmath . From these observations it follows
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Exploiting Lemma 2.3.5 , we deduce that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

because @xmath has compact support as @xmath .

Linearity is a direct consequence of the definition of @xmath . We focus
on the compatibility with the symplectic forms @xmath and @xmath . To
this end we consider @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . Then we find @xmath
and @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . We are ready to
evaluate @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we used also the identity @xmath (cfr. Lemma 2.2.4 ). ∎

Now we have the second part of our candidate covariant functor. For each
pair of objects @xmath and @xmath of @xmath there exists a map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

defined in accordance with our last lemma, where @xmath and @xmath
respectively denote the symplectic spaces @xmath and @xmath . To
complete the classical theory of the electromagnetic field, it remains
only to check that @xmath is actually a covariant functor. The next
theorem answers to this question and provides also the causality
property and the time slice axiom for @xmath .

###### Theorem 2.3.17.

Consider the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath                     
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

defined in accordance with Lemma 2.3.13 and Lemma 2.3.14 and for each
pair of objects @xmath , @xmath of @xmath consider the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

defined in accordance with Lemma 2.3.16 , where @xmath and @xmath
respectively denote the symplectic spaces @xmath and @xmath . These maps
give rise to a covariant functor @xmath from the category @xmath to the
category @xmath . Moreover @xmath possesses the following properties:

-    causality : for each @xmath , @xmath , @xmath in @xmath , each
    morphism @xmath from @xmath to @xmath and each morphism @xmath from
    @xmath to @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -causally
    separated subsets of @xmath , it holds that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for each @xmath and each @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
    are the symplectic spaces obtained with the application of @xmath
    respectively to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , while @xmath and @xmath
    ;

-    time slice axiom : for each @xmath and @xmath in @xmath and each
    morphism @xmath from @xmath to @xmath such that @xmath includes a
    smooth spacelike Cauchy surface @xmath for @xmath , it holds that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath and @xmath are the symplectic spaces obtained with the
    application of @xmath respectively to @xmath and @xmath , while
    @xmath . In particular @xmath is bijective and its inverse @xmath is
    a morphism of @xmath from @xmath to @xmath .

###### Proof.

Whenever it is possible, this proof imitates that of Theorem 2.2.6 , the
main difference being due to the presence of the equivalence classes.
Once that this fact is kept in mind, the verification of the covariant
axioms and of the causality property is identical.

We must still check the time slice axiom. Since @xmath is codomain of
@xmath , the inclusion @xmath is trivial and we must prove the converse
inclusion to complete the proof. To this end consider @xmath . We look
for a section @xmath such that @xmath . We observe that @xmath has a
representative of the form @xmath for @xmath that we denote with @xmath
, hence, exploiting the support properties of the Green operators and
Proposition 1.2.18 , we deduce that @xmath is a compact subset of @xmath
. Then we start with the usual procedure (refer to the proof of Theorem
2.2.6 ) applied to the normally hyperbolic operator @xmath . Remember
that now we have @xmath , but also @xmath because we can exploit Lemma
2.3.5 .

This entails that we find a decomposition @xmath , where @xmath has
@xmath -past/future compact support. Moreover we have that @xmath and
@xmath are elements of @xmath with support included in @xmath . We use
them to define an element of @xmath via restriction:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Trivially @xmath because @xmath so that @xmath . Now we check that
@xmath is exactly the one we were looking for. First of all @xmath has
compact support so that @xmath has compact support too and hence we can
apply @xmath to it obtaining

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Now we exploit the @xmath -past/future compact support of @xmath to
apply Lemma 1.3.17 . Furthermore we bear in mind that @xmath has compact
support so that we can apply also Lemma 2.3.5 . In this way we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The last two equations together give

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This completes the proof because

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and in particular we deduce that @xmath . For the freedom in the choice
of @xmath , this fact implies the inclusion @xmath . The last part of
the statement of the time slice axiom follows directly because each
symplectic map is automatically injective (cfr. Remark 1.4.10 ) and the
time slice axiom assures that @xmath is also surjective, hence the
inverse @xmath exists and it is trivial to check that it is a symplectic
map too. ∎

Now that we have the covariant functor @xmath describing the classical
theory of the electromagnetic field and we know that it satisfies both
the causality condition and the slice axiom. We can proceed with the
quantization procedure composing @xmath with the covariant functor
@xmath defined in Lemma 2.2.7 . In this way we obtain a locally
covariant quantum field theory @xmath for the electromagnetic field
which is causal and fulfils the time slice axiom (cfr. Theorem 2.2.8 ).
Then Theorem 2.1.9 , together with Remark 2.2.9 , entails that, on each
globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath , @xmath provides the quantum field
theory of the electromagnetic field @xmath in accordance with the
Haag-Kastler axioms.

## Chapter 3 Relative Cauchy evolution

The current chapter is devoted to the presentation of the relative
Cauchy evolution (in the following often indicated by the acronym RCE )
as it has been recently defined in [ FV11 ] . We give a sketch of the
idea: Suppose that a locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath
fulfilling the time slice axiom is given (if the time slice axiom does
not hold, we cannot define the RCE at all). The assignment of a globally
hyperbolic spacetime @xmath induces via @xmath the assignment of a
unital C*-algebra @xmath (cfr. Definition 2.1.5 ). Consider now another
globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath with the same underlying manifold
that coincides with @xmath outside a compact subset in which the metric
of @xmath is a perturbation (in a proper sense) of the metric of @xmath
. Then also on @xmath we have a unital C*-algebra @xmath . The RCE
establishes the relation between the perturbed unital C*-algebra @xmath
and the original unital C*-algebra @xmath .

If the LCQFT @xmath we are dealing with satisfies also the causality
condition, as it was shown in Theorem 2.1.9 , via @xmath we can obtain
on each globally hyperbolic spacetime a quantum field theory according
to the axiomatic approach proposed by Haag and Kastler in [ HK64 ] .
Therefore, when @xmath is also causal, we may interpret the RCE as a
relation between the perturbed quantum field theory @xmath and the
original quantum field theory @xmath , namely it tells us how the
observables over @xmath are transformed when we change @xmath into
@xmath and then we go back to @xmath , i.e. when we perform a
fluctuation of the spacetime metric.

We conclude that we have at our disposal an instrument that makes it
possible to study the effects of fluctuations of the underlying metric
on the quantum theory of some field for which we are able to construct a
LCQFT fulfilling both the causality condition and the time slice axiom
(the causality condition being required only to give sense to the
interpretation in terms of observables, but not really indispensable for
the definition of the RCE). The importance of this tool relies in the
subsequent considerations. Till this point we dealt with quantum field
theories on fixed globally hyperbolic spacetimes. However we know that
the spacetime where we live is a solution of the Einstein’s equation,
hence it depends on the energy-matter content of the whole universe.
Indeed if we have a quantum field, we also expect to have its
contribution to the stress-energy tensor appearing on the RHS of the
Einstein equation and we may try to account for this contribution adding
the expectation value of the stress-energy tensor associated to the
quantum field. In this way the so-called semiclassical Einstein’s
equation arise (for a detailed discussion on this topic refer to [ Wal94
, Sect. 4.6, p. 85] ). What we expect from such equation is a
back-reaction effect: Quantum fields contribute to the stress-energy
tensor which affects the solution of the semiclassical Einstein’s
equation, hence the spacetime metric, giving rise to a sort of
perturbation of the quantum field itself.

When we are looking for solutions of the semiclassical Einstein’s
equation in the presence of a quantum field, we cannot forget of this
back-reaction effect. Our aim is to show that the RCE is the proper tool
to account for this effect when we deal with the Klein-Gordon field, the
Proca field or the electromagnetic field. This fact was originally
conjectured by Brunetti, Fredenhagen and Verch in [ BFV03 ] : They
supposed that the action of the functional derivative of the RCE with
respect to the spacetime metric agrees with the action of the quantized
stress-energy tensor and they showed that in any case the functional
derivative of the RCE is symmetric and divergence free (both these
properties are required to hold for any stress-energy tensor to be
consistent with the LHS of the Einstein’s equation). Moreover they
verified their conjecture in the case of the Klein-Gordon field.

In the first part of this chapter we define the RCE following [ FV11 ] .
Although it is equivalent to the definition originally proposed in [
BFV03 ] (for the proof of the equivalence refer to [ FV11 ] ), this
approach seems to be more practical in some respects. Then we define the
functional derivative of the RCE with respect to the spacetime metric
(with reference to [ BFV03 ] ) and we show that this object is symmetric
and divergence free. In the second part we deal with the Klein-Gordon
field, the Proca field and the electromagnetic field. In first place we
present the relation between the functional derivative of the RCE and
the stress-energy tensor found by Brunetti, Fredenhagen and Verch in the
case of the Klein-Gordon field and in second place we show that similar
results hold also for the Proca field and for the electromagnetic field.
In this way it is proved that the action of the functional derivative of
the RCE agrees with the action of the quantized stress-energy tensor not
only for the Klein-Gordon field, but also in the cases of the Proca
field and of the electromagnetic field, thus confirming the conjecture
that the functional derivative of the RCE behaves like the quantized
stress-energy tensor associated to the field.

### 3.1 Definition and some properties

#### 3.1.1 Procedure to define the relative Cauchy evolution

Following [ FV11 ] , we assume that a globally hyperbolic spacetime
@xmath is given and we consider a compactly supported section @xmath in
the symmetric tensor product of @xmath with itself. Then @xmath is
indeed a section in @xmath (cfr. Remark 1.1.26 ). If we assume that
@xmath is such that @xmath is a Lorentzian metric, then @xmath is a
Lorentzian manifold. We can also require that @xmath is such that @xmath
is time orientable. Since @xmath coincides with @xmath outside @xmath ,
there exists only one connected component of the set of everywhere
@xmath -timelike vector fields over @xmath which includes an element
that coincides with some element of @xmath outside @xmath , i.e. there
exists only one time orientation @xmath for the time orientable
Lorentzian manifold @xmath that agrees with @xmath outside the support
of @xmath . In this way we obtain the oriented an time oriented
Lorentzian manifold @xmath .

###### Definition 3.1.1.

Let @xmath be a globally hyperbolic spacetime. @xmath is said to be an
@xmath -globally hyperbolic perturbation of the metric @xmath if the
oriented and time oriented Lorentzian manifold @xmath built above is
actually a globally hyperbolic spacetime. In this case we denote the
globally hyperbolic spacetime generated by the perturbation with @xmath
.

We denote the set of the @xmath -globally hyperbolic perturbations of
the metric @xmath with @xmath and we endow such set with the topology
induced by the usual topology of @xmath . Moreover for each compact
subset @xmath of @xmath we define the subset @xmath of the @xmath
-globally hyperbolic perturbations of the metric @xmath with support
contained in @xmath .

Note that for each @xmath the set @xmath is not empty because it
contains at least the null section in @xmath . As a matter of fact one
can show that for each @xmath there exists a neighborhood of the null
section in @xmath which is included in @xmath . A similar conclusion
holds also for @xmath for each compact subset @xmath of @xmath .

Before we define the relative Cauchy evolution, a lemma showing that the
upcoming definition makes sense is required. The statement holds
choosing all the upper signs or, alternatively, all the lower signs when
@xmath and @xmath appear.

###### Lemma 3.1.2.

Let @xmath be a globally hyperbolic spacetime and consider a compact
subset @xmath of @xmath . We set @xmath . Then the following conclusions
hold true:

-    for each @xmath , @xmath is an @xmath -causally convex and @xmath
    -causally convex connected open subset of @xmath and the globally
    hyperbolic spacetimes @xmath and @xmath coincide;

-    there exists a smooth spacelike Cauchy surface @xmath for @xmath
    contained in @xmath which is also a smooth spacelike Cauchy surface
    for @xmath for each @xmath ;

-    the inclusion map @xmath can be seen as a morphism of @xmath from
    @xmath to @xmath and as a morphism of @xmath from @xmath to @xmath
    and its image includes a smooth spacelike Cauchy surface @xmath for
    both @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

We focus on @xmath (the other case being similar). First of all we note
that @xmath is a closed subset of @xmath (see [ BGP07 , Lem. A.5.1, p.
173] ) and hence @xmath is open.

Now we show that @xmath is @xmath -causally convex. By contradiction
suppose that there exists a @xmath -future directed @xmath -causal curve
@xmath starting at @xmath and ending at @xmath which is not entirely
contained in @xmath . Then we find a point @xmath along @xmath that
falls in @xmath . It follows directly that @xmath is a point of @xmath
in contrast with the hypothesis that @xmath .

We fix @xmath and we show that @xmath is also @xmath -causally convex.
Again by contradiction suppose that there exists a @xmath -future
directed @xmath -causal curve @xmath starting at @xmath and ending at
@xmath which is not entirely contained in @xmath . We deduce that @xmath
intersects @xmath . We consider the piece @xmath of @xmath starting from
@xmath and ending in a point @xmath of the boundary of @xmath so that
@xmath is outside @xmath , except for the point @xmath (which falls in
@xmath because it is closed). Since @xmath and @xmath agrees with @xmath
outside @xmath , we conclude that @xmath is also a @xmath -future
directed @xmath -causal curve from @xmath to @xmath . Then we deduce
that @xmath in contrast with the hypothesis @xmath .

To prove connectedness, we apply Theorem 1.2.15 to @xmath . In this way
we find a smooth spacelike Cauchy surface @xmath for @xmath and a
diffeomorphism @xmath . Then we define @xmath , where @xmath denotes the
projection upon the first argument of the Cartesian product @xmath . We
realize immediately that @xmath is continuous (actually smooth). Since
@xmath is compact, we find @xmath such that @xmath . Then we consider
@xmath . This is a smooth spacelike Cauchy surface for @xmath due to
Theorem 1.2.15 , in particular it is also connected. Moreover by
construction @xmath . Take now two arbitrary points @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath and consider two inextensible @xmath -future directed @xmath
-timelike curves @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath passes through
@xmath and @xmath passes through @xmath . These curves indeed meet
@xmath because it is a Cauchy surface. We denote with @xmath and @xmath
the intersections of @xmath and respectively @xmath with @xmath and we
consider the pieces @xmath and @xmath of @xmath and respectively @xmath
connecting @xmath to @xmath and @xmath to @xmath . From @xmath -causal
convexity it follows that @xmath and @xmath are entirely contained in
@xmath because also @xmath and @xmath fall in @xmath . Exploiting
connectedness of @xmath , we find @xmath connecting @xmath to @xmath .
Reversing @xmath and pasting the result with @xmath and @xmath , we
obtain a curve which connects @xmath to @xmath . This shows that @xmath
is connected.

Up to now we have shown that @xmath is an @xmath -causally convex and
@xmath -causally convex connected open subset of @xmath for each @xmath
. Applying Proposition 1.2.16 and Remark 1.2.10 , we deduce that @xmath
and @xmath are globally hyperbolic spacetimes for each @xmath . Now fix
an arbitrary @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath agrees with @xmath outside
@xmath . These facts entail that @xmath and that @xmath and @xmath
induce the same time orientations on the Lorentzian manifolds @xmath and
@xmath , therefore we conclude @xmath and the proof of the first point
is complete.

As for the second point, we already determined a smooth spacelike Cauchy
surface @xmath for @xmath . Now we show that this one is also a Cauchy
surface for @xmath for each @xmath . Fix @xmath . Since @xmath and
@xmath coincide on @xmath , @xmath is spacelike also with respect to
@xmath . Consider an inextensible @xmath -future directed @xmath
-timelike curve @xmath in @xmath . There are two possibilities: If
@xmath does not meet @xmath , then it is also an inextensible @xmath
-future directed @xmath -timelike curve in @xmath and hence it must meet
@xmath exactly once; conversely if @xmath meets @xmath , we can consider
the piece @xmath of @xmath that lies in @xmath . @xmath is a @xmath
-future directed @xmath -timelike curve in @xmath which is by
construction inextensible in the future. We can extend it in the past in
such a way that the result is an inextensible @xmath -future directed
@xmath -timelike curve @xmath in @xmath . Then @xmath meets @xmath
exactly once. The choice of @xmath entails that @xmath lies in the
@xmath -causal past of @xmath and that @xmath . Then the only
intersection of @xmath with @xmath must fall in the @xmath -causal
future of @xmath . We deduce that @xmath already met @xmath , and hence
also @xmath . Note that the other piece of @xmath (the one not contained
in @xmath ) cannot intersect @xmath because it is contained in @xmath .
Hence also in the second case @xmath meets @xmath exactly once.

We turn our attention to the last point and we begin noting that @xmath
is an embedding (cfr. Remark 1.1.7 ). Now fix @xmath . Undoubtedly
@xmath is isometric and preserves both orientation and time orientation
whether we consider @xmath or @xmath as target since @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath and @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 Note that pulling back @xmath and @xmath through
@xmath means that we are taking any representative (which is a vector
field) restricted to @xmath and we are pushing it forward through the
diffeomorphism @xmath induced by the embedding @xmath . induce the same
time orientations on the Lorentzian manifolds @xmath and @xmath (which
are the same as a matter of fact). Hence @xmath is an isometric
embedding which preserves both orientation and time orientation whether
we consider @xmath or @xmath as target (we are considering @xmath as
source). The image of @xmath is trivially @xmath , which is causally
convex with respect to both @xmath and @xmath . Moreover we showed that
@xmath is a smooth spacelike Cauchy surface for both @xmath and @xmath
that is contained in @xmath . These observations concludes the proof. ∎

Consider a globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath and take @xmath .
Applying the last lemma with @xmath , we have the following diagrams:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that here the arrows represent morphisms of the category @xmath
whose image includes a smooth spacelike Cauchy surface of the target
object (namely a globally hyperbolic spacetime). We introduce a
convenient notation rewriting the diagrams above (each element of the
new diagrams is defined by the element of the old diagram which occupies
the same position):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The main advantage of the new notation relies in the fact that we can
recognize from the name if we are considering @xmath as a morphism from
@xmath to @xmath (in which case we use the symbol @xmath ) or as a
morphism from @xmath to @xmath (in which case we use the symbol @xmath
). Moreover this notation emphasizes the dependence on @xmath of all the
elements actually depend in some way on the choice of @xmath in @xmath .

If we consider a locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath , the
diagrams above are mapped to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where all the arrows now are morphisms of the category @xmath . If we
suppose that @xmath fulfils the time slice axiom, we deduce that all the
morphisms are actually unit preserving *-isomorphisms between unital
C*-algebras. This fact is a consequence of the time slice axiom,
together with Lemma 3.1.2 . Reversing the arrows on the left in the last
two diagrams, we can define the following *-isomorphisms between unital
C*-algebras:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We are ready to define the relative Cauchy evolution.

###### Definition 3.1.3.

Consider a LCQFT @xmath fulfilling the time slice axiom. For each
globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath and each @xmath , we call relative
Cauchy evolution (or briefly RCE ) induced by @xmath on @xmath the
following *-automorphism of the unital C*-algebra @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Exploiting the expressions of @xmath , we may rewrite the RCE in the
following way:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As a consequence of the functorial properties of @xmath , we expect that
the RCE on a globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath is insensitive to
changes in the fluctuations @xmath of the spacetime metric @xmath
produced by an orientation preserving diffeomorphism from the oriented
manifold @xmath to itself that acts trivially outside of a compact
subset of @xmath including the support of @xmath .

###### Proposition 3.1.4.

Let @xmath be a LCQFT fulfilling the time slice axiom, let @xmath be a
globally hyperbolic spacetime and let @xmath be an orientation
preserving diffeomorphism from @xmath to itself acting trivially outside
of a compact subset @xmath of @xmath . Consider @xmath such that @xmath
. Then the diffeomorphism @xmath may be seen as an orientation and time
orientation preserving isometric diffeomorphism from @xmath to @xmath
and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Recall that @xmath and @xmath . Exploiting the hypothesis, we deduce

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From this fact it follows that @xmath is one of the connected components
of the set of everywhere @xmath -timelike vector fields over @xmath .
Furthermore @xmath is by definition one of the connected components of
the set of everywhere @xmath -timelike vector fields over @xmath , hence
@xmath is one of the connected components of the set of everywhere
@xmath -timelike vector fields over @xmath . @xmath agrees with @xmath
outside @xmath by definition of @xmath , while @xmath agrees with @xmath
outside @xmath by definition of @xmath , hence @xmath and @xmath agree
outside @xmath . Moreover @xmath outside @xmath because by hypothesis
@xmath acts trivially outside @xmath . Then we conclude that @xmath and
@xmath agree outside @xmath , therefore they are the same connected
component of the set of everywhere @xmath -timelike vector fields over
@xmath , i.e. @xmath . This shows that actually @xmath may be
interpreted as an orientation and time orientation isometric
diffeomorphism from @xmath to @xmath .

Now we focus on the second part of the statement. We begin defining
@xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath are elements of @xmath , we can apply
Lemma 3.1.2 to deduce that @xmath is an @xmath -causally convex, @xmath
-causally convex and @xmath -causally convex connected open subset of
@xmath containing a smooth spacelike Cauchy surface @xmath for @xmath
that is also a smooth spacelike Cauchy surface for both @xmath and
@xmath . Taking into account @xmath and @xmath (whose underlying
manifolds are respectively @xmath and @xmath ), we see that both include
@xmath and then also @xmath . It turns out almost trivially that @xmath
is a smooth spacelike Cauchy surface for both @xmath and @xmath . Hence
@xmath is also an @xmath -causally convex and @xmath -causally convex
connected open subset containing a smooth spacelike Cauchy surface
@xmath for both @xmath and @xmath . This fact entails that we can
consider the globally hyperbolic spacetimes @xmath and @xmath and
interpret the inclusion maps of @xmath in @xmath and in @xmath as
morphisms of the category @xmath whose image includes a smooth spacelike
Cauchy surface of the target:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We may also consider the globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath and we
realize that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

because @xmath outside @xmath and @xmath , @xmath and @xmath agree
outside @xmath . Hence we can consider @xmath and @xmath as morphisms
starting from @xmath . For convenience we recollect here the morphisms
generated by the globally hyperbolic perturbations @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We exploit @xmath and @xmath and the fact that their images include a
smooth spacelike Cauchy surface of the target, together with the
hypothesis that the time slice axiom holds for @xmath , to rewrite both
@xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We can observe that @xmath and @xmath are both morphisms from @xmath to
@xmath whose underlying map is nothing but the inclusion map of @xmath
into @xmath , hence these morphisms are exactly the same and we denote
both of them with @xmath . Now we exploit the morphism @xmath from
@xmath to @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We note that both @xmath and @xmath are morphisms from @xmath to @xmath
and, since @xmath acts trivially outside @xmath , we deduce that the
underlying maps coincide. Hence @xmath and @xmath are actually the same
morphism and we denote them with @xmath . At this point we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and this concludes the proof. ∎

#### 3.1.2 Functional derivative of the relative Cauchy evolution

In this subsection we define the functional derivative of the relative
Cauchy evolution with respect to the spacetime metric following the
procedure presented in [ BFV03 ] (adapted to the current definition of
the RCE).

We consider a globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath . For each @xmath we
know that @xmath is a globally hyperbolic spacetime in its own right.
Moreover, for each @xmath , taking @xmath and applying Lemma 3.1.2 with
@xmath , we find that @xmath is a globally hyperbolic spacetimes
including a smooth spacelike Cauchy surface for both @xmath and @xmath .

We consider a locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath fulfilling
the time slice axiom and we take into account the unital C*-algebra
@xmath .

###### Assumption 3.1.5.

Suppose that @xmath is a representation of @xmath on a Hilbert space
@xmath . Assume that there exist a dense subspace @xmath of @xmath and a
dense unital sub-*-algebra @xmath of @xmath such that for each @xmath
and each @xmath the following conditions are satisfied:

-    for each compact subset @xmath of @xmath and each smooth @xmath
    -parameter family

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    such that @xmath , the map

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    where @xmath denotes the scalar product of @xmath , is continuously
    differentiable;

-    there exists a section @xmath such that, for each compact subset
    @xmath of @xmath and each smooth @xmath -parameter family

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    verifying @xmath , it holds that

      -- -- -- ---------
               (3.1.2)
      -- -- -- ---------

    where the dual pairing between @xmath and @xmath is taken into
    account and @xmath is the standard volume form on @xmath .

###### Remark 3.1.6.

Some remarks about the last assumption are required. First of all we
explain the meaning of the integrand appearing on the LHS of eq. ( 3.1.2
). Fix a compact subset @xmath of @xmath and consider a smooth
1-parameter family @xmath of the type required above. Using local
coordinates at a point @xmath , we have the following expression for the
components of @xmath evaluated at @xmath :

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where @xmath are the components of @xmath evaluated at @xmath for some
@xmath . From the assumption that @xmath is smooth, it follows that
@xmath is a section in @xmath . Since @xmath is contained in @xmath for
each @xmath , we deduce also that @xmath has support included in @xmath
, hence compact. This fact assures that the integral makes sense.

Secondly we consider the term that appears on the RHS. The derivative
appearing here is well defined as a direct consequence of the first
point in the assumption above.

Now that we have understood the meaning of both the LHS and the RHS of
eq. ( 3.1.2 ), we can try to understand the consequences of this
equation on the section @xmath (which is supposed to exist). Fix a
compact subset @xmath of @xmath . The freedom in the choice of the
family @xmath , together with the fact that @xmath includes a
neighborhood of the null section in @xmath , entails that @xmath is
uniquely determined on @xmath : If we suppose that there exists another
section @xmath of the same type satisfying the same equation, we deduce
that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and, working with sections @xmath with support contained in open subsets
of @xmath included in @xmath on which the vector bundle @xmath is
trivialized, we conclude that @xmath on @xmath due to the density of the
vector space @xmath in the Banach space @xmath for each open subset
@xmath of @xmath , each @xmath , @xmath and each @xmath . Then the
freedom in the choice of @xmath entails that @xmath is uniquely
determined everywhere on @xmath .

These observations entail that the assumption made above assures the
uniqueness of the functional derivative @xmath of @xmath with respect to
@xmath -globally hyperbolic perturbations of the spacetime metric. For
brevity we will simply say that @xmath is the functional derivative of
@xmath with respect to the spacetime metric and we will write @xmath in
place of @xmath .

In the last remark we saw how Assumption 3.1.5 implies that @xmath is
uniquely defined for each @xmath in a dense subspace @xmath of a proper
Hilbert space @xmath and for each @xmath in a proper dense sub-*-algebra
of @xmath . We are ready to define the functional derivative of the RCE
with respect to the spacetime metric.

###### Definition 3.1.7.

Let @xmath be a LCQFT fulfilling the time slice axiom and let @xmath be
a globally hyperbolic spacetime. Consider a representation @xmath of
@xmath on a Hilbert space @xmath . If Assumption 3.1.5 holds, there
exist a dense subspace @xmath of @xmath and a dense unital sub-*-algebra
@xmath of @xmath such that we can uniquely define for each @xmath the
functional derivative with respect to the spacetime metric of the
relative Cauchy evolution acting on @xmath (briefly functional
derivative of the RCE ), denoted by @xmath , as a quadratic form on
@xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In [ BFV03 ] it was conjectured that the action of the functional
derivative of the RCE with respect to the spacetime metric agrees with
the action of the quantized-stress energy tensor. The first properties
to be checked in order to support such hypothesis are the symmetry and
the null divergence. Per definition @xmath is an element of @xmath for
each @xmath and each @xmath , hence @xmath is symmetric for each @xmath
(in the sense of the quadratic forms on @xmath ). The evaluation of the
divergence is adressed in the following proposition.

First we need to introduce some notation previously. Since @xmath is an
element of @xmath , at each point @xmath of @xmath we may write it in
local coordinates. We denote its components at @xmath with

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Note that the indices are “doubly” covariant, hence contravariant, in
accordance with the fact that @xmath evaluated in a point @xmath is an
element of @xmath . Similarly we denote the components of @xmath at
@xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition 3.1.8.

Let @xmath be a LCQFT fulfilling the time slice axiom and let @xmath be
a globally hyperbolic spacetime. Consider a representation @xmath of
@xmath on a Hilbert space @xmath such that Assumption 3.1.5 holds so
that we find a dense subspace @xmath of @xmath and a dense unital
sub-*-algebra @xmath of @xmath on which the functional derivative of the
RCE is defined. Then for each @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in the sense of the quadratic forms on @xmath , where @xmath denotes the
Levi-Civita connection with respect to the metric @xmath .

###### Proof.

The thesis is a formal expression meaning that for each @xmath , each
@xmath and each @xmath

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

We fix @xmath and @xmath and, denoting @xmath with @xmath , we may
rewrite the thesis in the following way: for each oriented local
coordinate neighborhood @xmath and for each vector field @xmath with
support included in @xmath it holds

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the standard volume form on @xmath and all sections
in the integrand are meant in local coordinates. Via an integration by
parts and since @xmath is null on the boundary of @xmath , we deduce
that the last equation is equivalent to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We know that @xmath is symmetric so that we can write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hence our thesis finally becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for each local coordinate neighborhood @xmath and for each vector field
@xmath with support included in @xmath .

Fix now a local coordinate neighborhood @xmath and a compactly supported
vector field @xmath with support @xmath included in @xmath . We know
that each compactly supported vector field on @xmath generates a
1-parameter group of diffeomorphisms of @xmath @xmath acting trivially
outside of @xmath with @xmath (cfr. [ Jos95 , Thm. 1.9.2, p. 49] ). Note
that @xmath is necessarily orientation preserving for each @xmath :
Outside of @xmath it acts trivially (hence its Jacobian determinant is
positive); if it reverses some coordinate neighborhood inside @xmath
(i.e. its Jacobian determinant in that coordinate neighborhood is
negative), then there exists a point in some coordinate neighborhood in
which its Jacobian determinant is null, in contradiction with the fact
that it is a diffeomorphism. Consider now @xmath and remember that it
includes at least a neighborhood of the null section in @xmath . Since
trivially @xmath , we may find @xmath such that @xmath falls in @xmath
for each @xmath . Defining @xmath , we obtain a @xmath -parameter family
@xmath , @xmath such that @xmath . By definition of @xmath , we have

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.1.4)
  -- -- -- ---------

On the one hand @xmath is an element of @xmath for each @xmath , hence
we can apply Proposition 3.1.4 (we choose @xmath as original
perturbation and @xmath for each @xmath ) and we deduce that @xmath (the
last equality follows from the fact that @xmath ) for each @xmath . This
fact entails

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand for each @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In fact @xmath is exactly the definition of the Lie derivative of @xmath
along the vector field @xmath (cfr. [ Wal84 , eq. C.2.1, p. 439] ) and
the last equivalence follows from [ Wal84 , eq. C.2.16, p. 441] .
Inserting the last two equations into eq. ( 3.1.4 ), we get the
following result:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used the fixed coordinate neighborhood @xmath to express the
integral in local coordinates (this can actually be done since the
integrand is supported in @xmath ). With the exception of @xmath , which
can be thrown away being a positive number, this is exactly our last
reformulation of the thesis, eq. ( 3.1.3 ). ∎

### 3.2 Relative Cauchy evolution for concrete fields

The functional derivative of the relative Cauchy evolution with respect
to the spacetime metric was defined as a section in @xmath , hence, as
we already observed, it is symmetric by construction. Moreover in
Proposition 3.1.8 we proved that its divergence is null. Both these
properties are good hints to support the conjecture that the functional
derivative of the RCE has the meaning of a quantized stress-energy
tensor. In this section we settle this question once and for all for the
cases of the Klein-Gordon field (already discussed in [ BFV03 ] ), the
Proca field and the electromagnetic field on a globally hyperbolic
spacetime @xmath .

#### 3.2.1 Quasi-free Hadamard states

This subsection is devoted to introduce quasi-free Hadamard states, an
essential ingredient in our way to the proof of the theorems stating the
compatibility between the action of the quantized stress-energy tensor
of the Klein-Gordon, Proca or electromagnetic field and the functional
derivative of the corresponding relative Cauchy evolution with respect
to the spacetime metric.

To start, we consider the locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath
built in Section 2.2 (in the next subsections @xmath will be one of the
LCQFTs built for the concrete examples discussed in Section 2.3 ) and we
choose an object @xmath of @xmath so that we have at our disposal the
unital C*-algebra @xmath . Now we take a state @xmath (see Definition
1.4.17 ) and we apply Theorem 1.4.22 . In this way we obtain the GNS
triple @xmath associated to the state @xmath on the unital C*-algebra
@xmath .

Recalling the procedure of Section 2.2 , we see that @xmath is the
(unique up to *-isomorphisms) CCR representation @xmath of the
symplectic space @xmath provided by the covariant functor @xmath
describing the theory of the field at a classical level (as a matter of
fact @xmath was obtained as the composition of @xmath with the covariant
functor @xmath embodying the quantization procedure). We define the
represented counterpart of the Weyl map @xmath setting @xmath , where
@xmath denotes the unital C*-algebra of the linear and continuous
operators on the Hilbert space @xmath . Note that @xmath maps each
@xmath to a unitary operator @xmath on the Hilbert space @xmath , as one
easily deduces from Remark 1.4.12 and the fact that @xmath is a unit
preserving *-homomorphism from @xmath to @xmath . With reference to [
AG93 , Chap VI, Sect. 62, p. 16] and [ AG93 , Chap VI, Sect. 74, p. 74]
, we can find a selfadjoint operator @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We may interpret the selfadjoint operator @xmath as the quantum field
corresponding to the classical field @xmath . It turns out that a map
from @xmath to @xmath is automatically defined:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Using the map @xmath we can define the @xmath -point functions on the
state @xmath and then characterize quasi-free states.

###### Definition 3.2.1.

Denote with @xmath the locally covariant quantum field theory and with
@xmath the covariant functor describing the classical field theory (cfr.
Section 2.2 ). For each object @xmath of @xmath we consider the CCR
representation @xmath and the symplectic space @xmath and for each state
@xmath on the unital C*-algebra @xmath we take the (unique up to unitary
transformations) GNS triple @xmath provided by Theorem 1.4.22 applied to
the state @xmath on the unital C*-algebra @xmath . Following the
procedure shown above, we obtain a map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for each @xmath and each state @xmath on the unital C*-algebra @xmath .

We define the @xmath -point function on @xmath as the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the scalar product of the Hilbert space @xmath .
The @xmath -point function @xmath on the vector @xmath of the GNS triple
is simply denoted by @xmath .

We say that the state @xmath is quasi-free if its @xmath -point function
@xmath vanishes for each @xmath , while its @xmath -point function
satisfies the following identity for each @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , where the sum is taken over all the
permutations @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath .

Note that for each quasi-free state all the @xmath -point functions
@xmath are completely determined by the 2-point function @xmath .

Now we want to spend few words about Hadamard states . These states are
widely accepted as the physically meaningful states for quantum field
theories on curved spacetimes. This is due to the fact that the short
distance behavior of their 2-point functions mimics the short distance
behavior of vacuum states for quantum field theories on Minkowski
spacetime. Although singularities are present, they are controlled in
such a way that the expectation values of physical observables (e.g. the
stress-energy tensor) on Hadamard states are prevented from taking
unbounded fluctuations.

To give an idea of what it is meant for a Hadamard state we give the
following definition according Kay and Wald, [ Kay91 ] . Indeed this is
specific for the Klein-Gordon field, yet it already gives a sketch of
the constraints on the singularities of a Hadamard state. A precise
extension of the notion of Hadamard state to fields in arbitrary vector
bundles can be found in [ SV01 , Sect. 5.1, p. 20] .

###### Definition 3.2.2.

Let @xmath be the LCQFT for the Klein-Gordon field (cfr. Subsection
2.3.1 ) and let @xmath be an object of the category @xmath . Consider a
diffeomorphism @xmath provided by Theorem 1.2.15 ( @xmath is some smooth
spacelike Cauchy surface for @xmath ) and define the smooth function
@xmath , where @xmath denotes the projection on the first argument of
the Cartesian product. We define the squared geodesic distance @xmath on
an open neighborhood @xmath in @xmath of the set of causally related
points @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath are included in a convex
normal neighborhood. It turns out that @xmath is well defined and
smooth. Then for each @xmath and each @xmath we define the function
@xmath according to the formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the branch-cut for the logarithm is taken on the negative half of
the real line, @xmath is the van Vleck-Morette determinant (refer to [
DB60 ] ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the functions @xmath are uniquely determined via the Hadamard recursion
relations (refer to [ DB60 , Gar98 ] ) and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now let @xmath be a smooth spacelike Cauchy surface for @xmath and take
a causal normal neighborhood of @xmath in @xmath (its existence is
proved in [ Kay91 , Lem. 2.2, p. 62] ). Consider an open neighborhood
@xmath in @xmath of the set of pairs of causally related points such
that the closure of @xmath in @xmath is contained in @xmath . Let @xmath
be a smooth real valued function on @xmath which is null outside @xmath
and equal to 1 inside @xmath . Then we say that a state @xmath on the
unital C*-algebra @xmath is a Hadamard state if its 2-point function
@xmath is such that for each @xmath there exists a function @xmath which
satisfies the following condition:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath , @xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The problem of the determination of Hadamard states on curved spacetimes
for the various quantum fields one may consider is not discussed here,
neither we analyze the properties of Hadamard states in detail because
this would require the introduction of several notions from microlocal
analysis. Anyway we provide some references:

-   [ Hör90 ] for the necessary tools of microlocal analysis;

-   [ Rad96 , SV01 , SVW02 , FV03 , San10a ] are only some of the
    publications discussing conditions (in the context of microlocal
    analysis) for a state on some C*-algebra that are equivalent to the
    requirement of being Hadamard (both for the case of a specific
    fields or for more general situations) and showing the existence of
    Hadamard states for specific fields.

In the present context we are mainly interested in the existence of
Hadamard states for spin 1 fields. Such result was established by
Fewster and Pfenning in [ FP03 ] .

Anyway few remarks about some of the properties of the GNS
representation induced by a Hadamard state are required. Let @xmath be
the LCQFT built in Section 2.2 (remember that it is causal and, above
all, it fulfils the time slice axiom) and let @xmath be an object of
@xmath . Consider a Hadamard state @xmath on the CCR representation
@xmath (recall that @xmath denotes the symplectic space from which
@xmath arises via the quantization functor @xmath ) and denote with
@xmath its associated GNS triple. Then the state @xmath is sufficiently
regular to allow us to regard the function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as a differentiable function whatever choice of @xmath we make. This
gives us the opportunity to define the map:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the causal propagator for @xmath . For each @xmath
we call @xmath smeared field . We deduce from its definition that the
map @xmath is linear and that the corresponding smeared fields allow us
to write @xmath in exponential form (cfr. eq. ( 3.2.1 )) for each @xmath
: one easily checks that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

agrees with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In this way we can also see that @xmath for each @xmath . Moreover we
can deduce the commutation relation between smeared fields from the Weyl
relations (cfr. Definition 1.4.11 ) and also the commutation relation
between a smeared field and a represented Weyl generator. We find

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for each @xmath , @xmath . These relations will be useful in the proof
of the theorems stating the agreement between the action of the
functional derivative of the relative Cauchy evolution and the quantized
stress-energy tensor. In particular it is interesting for this purpose
to consider the commutator of the product of two smeared fields with
some represented Weyl generator. Exploiting the second commutation
relation given above, we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.2.2)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

for each @xmath , @xmath and each @xmath .

There is still another very important consequence of the choice of a
quasi-free Hadamard state @xmath : We find a dense subspace @xmath of
the Hilbert space @xmath , namely the one constituted by all the vectors
obtained applying an arbitrary polynomial in @xmath and @xmath (for any
choice of @xmath and @xmath ) to the GNS vector @xmath , and a dense
unital sub-*-algebra @xmath of @xmath such that Assumption 3.1.5 holds.
This fact entails that we can actually give sense to the functional
derivative of the RCE.

Moreover it is possible to establish a relation that will be the key for
the proof of our theorems from now on. First of all we have to define a
classical counterpart of the relative Cauchy evolution which is obtained
simply replacing the covariant functor @xmath with the covariant functor
@xmath in eq. ( 3.1.1 ): for each object @xmath of @xmath and each
@xmath we set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that the definition is well posed because a proper version of the
time slice axiom holds also for the covariant functor @xmath describing
the classical field theory (see Subsection 2.2.1 ) and that @xmath ,
where @xmath is the covariant functor that realizes the quantization
procedure (cfr. Subsection 2.2.2 ). ² ² 2 In the following we will study
in some detail the classical RCE for the specific fields we will
consider. With this definition we are ready to state the key relation
which can be found in [ FP03 , Prop. A.8, p. 363] :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for each compact subset @xmath of @xmath , each smooth 1-parameter
family of globally hyperbolic perturbations @xmath , @xmath such that
@xmath , each @xmath and each @xmath . In [ FV03 ] the proof is
performed in the context of the Klein-Gordon field, however it holds in
general since it relies only on the properties of the CCR representation
of some symplectic space and on the choice of a Hadamard state which
gives rise to a Hilbert space representation with the “good” properties
mentioned above.

In the upcoming subsections, in which we deal with concrete fields, we
will always fix a quasi-free Hadamard state on the unital C*-algebra
provided by the LCQFT for such field on some globally hyperbolic
spacetime (note that all the LCQFTs we built in Section 2.3 fulfil the
time slice axiom) and we will perform calculations exploiting all the
properties that we presented here.

#### 3.2.2 Relative Cauchy evolution for the Klein-Gordon field

In this subsection we follow the calculations in [ BFV03 ] to show a
relation between the functional derivative of the relative Cauchy
evolution for the Klein-Gordon field and its quantized stress-energy
tensor. This relation will be proved in the theorem concluding this
subsection. First of all we need to introduce all the building blocks.

##### Relative Cauchy evolution for the classical Klein-Gordon field

As a starting point we consider Subsection 2.3.1 , where we discussed
the construction of a locally covariant quantum field theory for the
Klein-Gordon field applying a specialization of the general procedure
(Section 2.2 ). Here we use the notation introduced in Subsection 2.3.1
and in Section 2.2 .

The first ingredient that we need to consider pertains to the classical
theory of the Klein-Gordon field. Denote with @xmath the covariant
functor describing the classical theory of the Klein-Gordon field built
following the procedure of Subsection 2.2.1 (specialized to the case of
the Klein-Gordon field along the line sketched in Subsection 2.3.1 ). In
the upcoming proposition it appears an almost self-explanatory notation,
namely we write @xmath , where @xmath is the formally selfadjoint
normally hyperbolic operator @xmath governing the Klein-Gordon field. In
any case the beginning of the proof clarifies precisely what @xmath
stands for.

###### Proposition 3.2.3.

Let @xmath be the covariant functor describing the classical theory of
the Klein-Gordon field, let @xmath be an object of @xmath and let @xmath
be an @xmath -causally convex connected open subset of @xmath including
a smooth spacelike Cauchy surface @xmath for @xmath . Consider @xmath
and the morphism @xmath of @xmath from @xmath to @xmath induced by the
inclusion maps @xmath and @xmath . Then there exists a partition of
unity @xmath on @xmath such that the inverse @xmath of the bijective
morphism @xmath of @xmath from @xmath to @xmath satisfies the following
equation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the causal propagator for @xmath and the restriction map
is defined in Lemma 2.2.4 .

###### Proof.

We fix a globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath and we consider an @xmath
-causally convex connected open subset @xmath of @xmath including a
smooth spacelike Cauchy surface @xmath for @xmath . In Remark 2.1.2 we
saw that we can consider the globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath and
that the inclusion map @xmath can be interpreted as a morphism of @xmath
from @xmath to @xmath . Exploiting 1.1.14 , we realize that @xmath is a
vector bundle and that @xmath is a vector bundle homomorphism. It
follows from the comments made after Definition 2.2.1 that @xmath can be
endowed with the restriction of the inner product on @xmath and that we
can consider the formally selfadjoint normally hyperbolic operator
@xmath (for convenience we denote it with @xmath ). Hence we have the
object @xmath of @xmath and, exploiting again the comments made after
Definition 2.2.1 , we immediately see that @xmath is a morphism of
@xmath from @xmath to @xmath .

Now the main part of the proof begins. We exploit [ BS06 , Thm. 1.2]
that provides us (among other things) a diffeomorphism @xmath such that
@xmath and @xmath is a smooth spacelike Cauchy surface for @xmath for
each @xmath . Since @xmath is included in @xmath by hypothesis and
@xmath is open, we deduce that @xmath is a neighborhood of @xmath .
@xmath is continuous, therefore we find @xmath such that @xmath . This
entails that @xmath and @xmath are smooth spacelike Cauchy surfaces for
@xmath that are contained in @xmath . We consider the open covering
@xmath of @xmath and its subordinate partition of unity @xmath .

Take @xmath and denote the causal propagator for the formally
selfadjoint normally hyperbolic operator @xmath with @xmath . As a
consequence of the construction of the functor @xmath , @xmath . Hence
there exists a compact subset @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath . We
define @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We deduce that @xmath is an element of @xmath with @xmath -past/future
compact support. Another consequence of @xmath is @xmath . From this
fact, together with @xmath , we deduce @xmath , hence

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Exploiting Proposition 1.2.18 , we realize that @xmath with support
contained in @xmath . At this point we can apply the restriction map
(its definition in the general context of arbitrary vector bundles can
be found in Lemma 2.2.4 ) in order to obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore it makes sense to consider

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This shows that the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

is well defined.

Note that, from the hypothesis made, we know that the image @xmath
includes a smooth spacelike Cauchy surface for @xmath . Hence @xmath is
a morphism of @xmath from @xmath to @xmath because the time slice axiom
holds for @xmath (cfr. Theorem 2.2.6 ). We must check that @xmath . Take
@xmath , recall Lemma 2.2.5 and observe that the restriction followed by
the corresponding extension leaves the argument of the restriction
unchanged:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The support properties of @xmath and @xmath allow us to apply Lemma
1.3.17 :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

With this we conclude that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is injective, the last equation entails

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

therefore we realize that the thesis actually holds. ∎

Now we specialize the definition of the RCE to the case of the
Klein-Gordon field. Consider an object @xmath of @xmath , take @xmath
and recall the definitions of the morphisms @xmath and @xmath introduced
before Definition 3.1.3 . Together with the perturbed spacetime @xmath ,
we must also consider the effect of the perturbation of the spacetime
metric on the vector bundle (especially the inner product defined on it)
and on the differential operator @xmath . In this case @xmath and its
inner product (being simply the fiberwise multiplication of real
numbers) remain unchanged, while we define @xmath , where @xmath is the
d’Alembert operator defined on @xmath for 0-forms, specifically the
metric involved here is @xmath in place of @xmath . We may consider the
inclusion map @xmath , where @xmath in accordance with the definitions
of @xmath and @xmath . @xmath is compatible with @xmath via @xmath (see
the comments made after Definition 2.2.1 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since the effects of the perturbation @xmath are relevant only inside
@xmath , we realize that @xmath and @xmath act exactly in the same way
on sections supported outside @xmath . Together with @xmath , we may
consider @xmath and we immediately recognize that they coincide (we
denote both of them with @xmath in a fashion similar to that used when
we introduced @xmath to denote @xmath ). All these observations are made
in order to introduce the objects @xmath and @xmath of @xmath and to
interpret the vector bundle homomorphism @xmath in the following
(generally inequivalent) ways (note the analogy with the definitions of
@xmath and @xmath as different morphisms obtained from the same
inclusion map @xmath ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Denote with @xmath the LCQFT (fulfilling both the causality condition
and the time slice axiom) built following the procedure of Section 2.2
specialized according to Subsection 2.3.1 . For @xmath and @xmath we
define the RCE for the Klein-Gordon field as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In a similar way one can consider a classical version of the RCE based
on the covariant functor @xmath describing the classical theory of the
Klein-Gordon field (this is actually possible due to version of the time
slice axiom satisfied by @xmath , cfr. Theorem 2.2.6 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since the LCQFT @xmath is obtained via composition of @xmath with the
quantization functor @xmath presented in Subsection 2.2.2 , we almost
immediately realize that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

(this is simply a consequence of the covariant axioms fulfilled by any
covariant functor). We can determine the action of @xmath applying
Proposition 3.2.3 and Lemma 2.2.5 . We find proper partitions of unity
@xmath and @xmath on @xmath such that we can express @xmath and
respectively @xmath according to Proposition 3.2.3 . If we take @xmath
and evaluate @xmath , we easily obtain the following result:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the following we will need the expression of the derivative @xmath
for an arbitrary smooth 1-parameter family of perturbations of the
metric. For convenience in the upcoming calculation we write @xmath in
place of @xmath . Fix now @xmath , a compact subset @xmath of @xmath and
a smooth 1-parameter family of globally hyperbolic perturbations @xmath
, @xmath and evaluate @xmath . Our starting point is eq. ( 3.2.5 ) with
the choice of the superscript @xmath (if we choose @xmath , we face a
very similar calculation and we indeed obtain the same result). In the
present situation apparently we would have to consider different
partitions of unity @xmath and @xmath for each of the values assumed by
@xmath . Anyway this difficulty can be avoided making an intelligent
choice of the smooth spacelike Cauchy surfaces used to define the
partitions of unity: We use always the same foliation of @xmath (induced
by some fixed smooth Cauchy surface @xmath for @xmath ) and take the
smooth spacelike Cauchy surfaces inside @xmath instead of choosing, for
each value of @xmath , a pair of proper smooth spacelike Cauchy surfaces
inside @xmath . In this way a single choice of the smooth spacelike
Cauchy surfaces is satisfactory for each value of @xmath . Such choice
is possible because the supports of all the elements @xmath in the
family of perturbations are controlled by the compact subset @xmath of
@xmath .

In the first step we apply the Leibniz rule ³ ³ 3 note that causal
propagators are sequentially continuous with respect to a proper notion
of convergence, refer to [ BGP07 , Def. 3.4.6, p. 90 and Prop. 3.4.8, p.
91] :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We focus on the first addend: On the one hand, following the proof of
Proposition 3.2.3 (we are considering @xmath as @xmath ), we can easily
see that @xmath , while on the other hand @xmath can have coefficients
different from zero only inside @xmath . This entails that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

therefore we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recalling again the proof of Proposition 3.2.3 , we realize that @xmath
and deduces that its support is compact and lies in the causal future of
a smooth spacelike Cauchy surface for @xmath included in @xmath (that by
construction lies outside @xmath and intersects its causal future). On
the contrary @xmath is supported in the causal past of a smooth
spacelike Cauchy surface for @xmath included in @xmath (that by
construction lies outside @xmath and intersects its causal past). These
observations entail that @xmath has empty support, hence it is null.
Therefore from the last equation we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now we take a closer look to the term @xmath . In order for this term to
make sense it must be shown that @xmath has compact support. This
follows from the the following facts:

-   @xmath implies that @xmath has compact support (note that @xmath is
    supported in the causal future/past of a proper smooth spacelike
    Cauchy surface for @xmath and remember that @xmath for a proper
    compact subset @xmath of @xmath );

-   @xmath differs from @xmath only inside @xmath , which is compact.

This two facts imply that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

hence @xmath is compactly supported too. From the first point above it
follows also that @xmath has past/future compact support (we are
exploiting Proposition 1.2.18 ). Hence we can apply Lemma 1.3.17 to
conclude that for each @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Exploiting the Leibniz rule, we find

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

With this identity we can rewrite eq. ( 3.2.6 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Notice that @xmath because the coefficients of @xmath are supported
inside @xmath while @xmath is supported in the causal future of @xmath .
Hence we can add such term without modifying the result:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In this way we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Take into account the term @xmath : the coefficients of @xmath are
supported inside @xmath , hence

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

while @xmath is supported inside @xmath . This entails that @xmath ,
therefore we can modify again our last equation with the subtraction of
this term leaving the result unchanged:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The observation about the support of the coefficients appearing in the
linear differential operator @xmath entails that @xmath is an element of
@xmath with support included in @xmath and trivially we have @xmath , so
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On account of the last identity, the inclusion @xmath and the identity
@xmath for proper smooth spacelike Cauchy surfaces @xmath and applying
Proposition 1.2.18 and Lemma 1.3.17 , we obtain the following result:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

With the last identity we conclude

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We are left with the problem of the expression for @xmath . We know that
@xmath , where @xmath denotes the d’Alembert operator built with the
perturbed metric @xmath . Indeed the term @xmath gives null contribution
to @xmath , hence we are interested in the evaluation of @xmath . Using
an arbitrary coordinate neighborhood, we see from eq. ( 2.3.2 ) that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are the Christoffel symbols of the Levi-Civita connection
@xmath on @xmath , and therefore

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.2.8)
  -- -- -- ---------

where in the last step we exploited the relation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

that follows from @xmath and @xmath .

##### Properties of the GNS representation induced by a quasi-free
Hadamard state for the Klein-Gordon field

The second preparatory step is the choice of a quasi-free Hadamard state
@xmath for the unital C*-algebra @xmath (which is actually a CCR
representation) describing the Klein-Gordon field on the globally
hyperbolic spacetime @xmath . With this choice, we introduce the (unique
up to unitary equivalence) GNS triple @xmath induced by @xmath and we
follow the discussion made in Subsection 3.2.1 . In this way we obtain
the represented version

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

of the Weyl map @xmath , where @xmath is the symplectic space provided
by the covariant functor @xmath describing the classical theory of the
Klein-Gordon field, together with the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

that allows us to express the unitary operator @xmath as the complex
exponential of a selfadjoint operator for each @xmath , namely @xmath is
selfadjoint and satisfies @xmath . Together with this map, we have the
smeared fields (by virtue of the choice of a Hadamard state):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

As for the general case, it holds that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for each @xmath and we recognize @xmath to be linear.

We stated the most relevant consequence of the choice of a quasi-free
Hadamard state @xmath in Subsection 3.2.1 :

-   Assumption 3.1.5 is verified, i.e. we find a dense subspace @xmath
    of @xmath and a dense sub-*-algebra @xmath of @xmath such that the
    functional derivative of the RCE with respect to the spacetime
    metric can be defined;

-   specializing eq. ( 3.2.3 ) to the case of the Klein-Gordon field, we
    see that the following equation holds for each @xmath , each @xmath
    , each compact subset @xmath of @xmath and each smooth @xmath
    -parameter family @xmath , @xmath such that @xmath :

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (3.2.12)
      -- -------- -- ----------

Finally one can show that for each @xmath , @xmath there exists a smooth
section, that we denote with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath denotes the scalar product of the Hilbert space @xmath ,
such that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for each @xmath , where @xmath is the standard volume form on @xmath .
We may regard this section as (the matrix element of) the unsmeared
field. Uniqueness of the unsmeared field is a direct consequence of the
last equation.

##### Quantized stress-energy tensor for the Klein-Gordon field

We still need to find the expression of the quantized stress-energy
tensor. This is obtained starting from the action of the Klein-Gordon
field on the globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath , which in turn comes
from the differential operator @xmath governing the field:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From the expression of @xmath , we find the classical stress-energy
tensor (written in some coordinate neighborhood) via functional
differentiation with respect to the metric:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The choice of a quasi-free Hadamard state @xmath allows us to promote
@xmath to the renormalized quantum stress-energy tensor @xmath simply
with the formal replacement of the classical field @xmath with (the
matrix elements of) the unsmeared field @xmath defined in eq. ( 3.2.13 )
for each @xmath , @xmath . This regularization procedure is known as
point-splitting (refer to [ Wal94 , eq. 4.6.5, p. 88] ): For each @xmath
, @xmath , we choose two “near” points @xmath and @xmath in @xmath and a
curve @xmath connecting them and, parallel transporting along the curve
@xmath , we write

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.2.15)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

Finally we must take the limit @xmath once that all the divergences are
removed. The point-splitting procedure involves the parallel transport
@xmath (see Definition 1.1.21 ), which depends upon the choice of the
curve @xmath connecting the point @xmath to the point @xmath . It
follows that the expression above depends on the choice of such curve.
Anyway this ambiguity is avoided if we assume that @xmath and @xmath are
sufficiently close to have a unique geodesic connecting them and we
choose such geodesic as @xmath . This assumption can be done because in
our calculation we will finally take the limit @xmath along the chosen
curve. As a matter of fact the expression of the stress-energy tensor
renormalized with respect to the state @xmath as reference differs from
the expression given above by a multiple of the identity operator.
However such term is irrelevant for our calculations since the
stress-energy tensor will appear only inside a commutator.

As we said, the stress-energy tensor appears in our subsequent
calculations only in a commutator, specifically a commutator with an
arbitrary Weyl generator (represented via @xmath ). A cursory glance to
eq. ( 3.2.15 ) shows that it is useful for us to evaluate the matrix
elements of the commutator of two unsmeared fields with an arbitrary
represented Weyl generator. To this end we evaluate separately the
matrix elements arising from the LHS and the RHS of eq. ( 3.2.2 ). We
fix @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath , and we
use eq. ( 3.2.14 ) twice:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Now we exploit also the definition of the symplectic form @xmath (cfr.
Lemma 2.2.3 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

From eq. ( 3.2.2 ) and the freedom in the choice of @xmath and @xmath we
deduce that

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.2.16)
  -- -- -- ----------

for each @xmath and each @xmath , @xmath .

##### Main theorem

We are ready to prove that the action of the functional derivative of
the relative Cauchy evolution with respect to the spacetime metric
agrees with the action of the quantum stress-energy tensor in the case
of the Klein-Gordon field. As a matter of fact the main part of the
proof has already been discussed in the previous parts of the current
subsection. Here we simply state the theorem and put together all the
ingredients.

###### Theorem 3.2.4.

Let @xmath be the locally covariant quantum field theory for the
Klein-Gordon field obtained specializing the result of Section 2.2 to
the situation of Subsection 2.3.1 and let @xmath be an object of the
category @xmath defined there. Consider a quasi-free Hadamard state
@xmath on the CCR representation @xmath and denote the GNS triple
induced by @xmath with @xmath . We denote with @xmath the represented
counterpart of the Weyl map @xmath (cfr. eq. ( 3.2.10 )) and with @xmath
the quantum stress-energy tensor for the Klein-Gordon field on @xmath
obtained via point-splitting in the representation induced by the state
@xmath (cfr. eq. ( 3.2.15 )). Then there exists a dense subspace @xmath
of @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in the sense of quadratic forms on @xmath .

###### Proof.

A dense subspace @xmath of @xmath exists by virtue of the choice of a
quasi-free Hadamard state @xmath (see few lines before eq. ( 3.2.12 )).
The thesis means that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

for each @xmath and each @xmath , where @xmath denotes the scalar
product on the Hilbert space @xmath .

We fix a compact subset @xmath of @xmath and 1-parameter family of
globally hyperbolic perturbations @xmath , @xmath such that @xmath .
Using the definition of @xmath , we may find an equivalent form of our
thesis (we still adopt the notation @xmath ):

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where we are considering the dual pairing between @xmath and @xmath in
the integrand appearing on the RHS.

Recall that @xmath (cfr. eq. ( 3.2.4 )) and the properties of the
quantization functor @xmath defined in Subsection 2.2.2 . We deduce that
@xmath . This observation entails another slight modification of the
thesis:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we exploit eq. ( 3.2.12 ) and we eliminate the factor @xmath on both
sides of the resulting equation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We still want to reformulate the thesis a little bit using eq. ( 3.2.7 )
and eq. ( 3.2.11 ):

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Now we work with the LHS of the last equation (denoted by @xmath ) and
the RHS (denoted by @xmath ) separately. Starting from @xmath , we
exploit the relation between smeared and unsmeared fields, eq. ( 3.2.14
):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We want to express @xmath using oriented coordinate neighborhoods.
Indeed we can find an open covering of @xmath constituted by coordinate
neighborhoods. In order to make calculations easier, we choose these
coordinate neighborhoods in such a way that on each of them @xmath . We
can exploit the paracompactness of the manifold @xmath to pick out a
locally finite refinement and we introduce a partition of unity
subordinate to the refined covering. Since @xmath for each @xmath , the
support of the coefficients in @xmath must be included in @xmath too.
Exploiting the compactness of @xmath , we can find that only a finite
number of the coordinate neighborhoods considered so far intersect it.
We denote them with @xmath and we consider only the corresponding
members @xmath in the partition of unity (the other members indeed have
null product with the integrand). This entails that we can use this
finite collection of coordinate neighborhoods (together with the
corresponding members of the original partition of unity) to express
@xmath in local coordinates:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the standard volume form on @xmath and all the
sections that appear inside the integral are now written in local
coordinates ⁴ ⁴ 4 by this we mean that, inside the integral over @xmath
, @xmath now denotes the push-forward through @xmath of the original
@xmath restricted to @xmath and similarly for the other sections inside
the integral . It is convenient to define

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

in order to simplify our notation. Now we use eq. ( 3.2.8 ). In this way
we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the dependence of the integrand on the point @xmath now is
understood. We denote the first addend appearing on the RHS of the last
equation with @xmath and the second with @xmath . We integrate @xmath by
parts noting that @xmath is null on the boundary of @xmath , hence no
surface term appears:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The last term in the equation above gives null contribution. We can
check this fact observing that, on each point of the support of @xmath ,
the finite number of @xmath sum up to 1, hence their derivatives sum up
to zero. We denote the first of the remaining terms with @xmath and the
second with @xmath . Up to now we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we investigate @xmath . As we did for @xmath , we express it using
the chosen local coordinates:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consider the integrand (dropping @xmath for the moment). Inside the
commutator appears the quantized stress-energy tensor. Indeed we have
eq. ( 3.2.15 ) that tells us about its form, but we must perform the
coincidence limit before we can insert such equation inside the integral
in place of @xmath . As a matter of fact we previously calculate the
expectation value of the commutator recalling the commutation relation
found in eq. ( 3.2.16 ) and only after that we take the coincidence
limit as required by the point-splitting procedure realizing that no
divergences arise. Exploiting also the symmetry of @xmath and @xmath ,
anticommutators appear. All these operations produce the following
result (to shorten the expression we replace @xmath with @xmath as
above):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The first term coincides with the term @xmath in @xmath once that the
indices @xmath and @xmath are interchanged taking into account the
symmetry of @xmath . As for the other two terms, some more work is
required. We denote the first one with @xmath and the second one with
@xmath and we integrate @xmath by parts (this time we directly omit the
term containing derivatives of @xmath since it gives null contribution
as noted above):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we put together @xmath and @xmath and we remind that @xmath since
@xmath , we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

At this stage our thesis @xmath is reduced to the following identity:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The next step consist in the proof of the identity

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

in each point of @xmath . If this identity actually holds everywhere, it
follows that eq. ( 3.2.17 ) holds too and hence the proof is complete:
In fact, as the reader might easily check, eq. ( 3.2.18 ) written using
the coordinate neighborhoods @xmath , integrated on both sides on each
@xmath together with the factor @xmath and summed over the finite number
of indices @xmath gives exactly eq. ( 3.2.17 ).

The first thing we do is to use the metric to lower the index on @xmath
in the second term on the LHS of eq. ( 3.2.18 ) and, after that, we
rename some summation indices (bear in mind that @xmath and @xmath are
symmetric). In this way the identity in eq. ( 3.2.18 ) to be checked
becomes:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now we fix an arbitrary point @xmath in @xmath and we choose Riemannian
normal coordinates in a (sufficiently small) neighborhood of @xmath
(cfr. e.g. [ Wal84 , Sect. 3.3, p. 42] ). Doing so, we put ourselves in
a favorable situation from a computational point of view since with this
choice of coordinates the Christoffel symbols @xmath are null at @xmath
and hence we can freely replace @xmath with @xmath (note that a similar
result does not hold for the Christoffel symbols of a “perturbed”
connection @xmath ). With this considerations we evaluate @xmath (recall
eq. ( 1.1.1 ) which provides the expression of the Christoffel symbols
for the Levi-Civita connection):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.2.20)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

As a matter of fact we are interested in the contraction of @xmath with
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we exploited the identity @xmath . With this result we evaluate
the LHS of eq. ( 3.2.19 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

It is sufficient to restore @xmath in place of @xmath on the RHS of the
last equation to realize that eq. ( 3.2.19 ) actually is proved. We
already showed that this one is equivalent to eq. ( 3.2.18 ), which in
turn entails ( 3.2.17 ). This completes the proof. ∎

#### 3.2.3 Relative Cauchy evolution for the Proca field

Now we turn our attention to the Proca field. Our aim is to extend the
result obtained for the Klein-Gordon field also in the present context,
that is to prove the agreement of the action of the functional
derivative of the relative Cauchy evolution with the action of the
quantized stress-energy tensor for the Proca field.

We need some preparation also in this case. We will follow an approach
very similar to that of the previous subsection. The main difference
lies in the fact that now we are going to take into account the results
of Subsection 2.3.2 in place of those from Subsection 2.3.1 ,
specifically we consider the locally covariant quantum field theory
@xmath (cfr. Definition 2.3.8 for the definition of the category )
defined as the composition of the covariant functor @xmath describing
the classical theory of the Proca field (see Theorem 2.3.10 ) with the
usual quantization functor @xmath (see Lemma 2.2.7 ). After the proof of
Theorem 2.3.10 we argued that @xmath fulfils the time slice axiom as a
LCQFT (indeed the causality condition holds too, but this fact is not
relevant in this context). This ensures that one can actually consider
the RCE for the Proca field as presented in Section 3.1 and all the
results found there still hold since now we are only considering a
richer structure on each spacetime, but the morphisms considered there
are easily recognized to induce morphisms also in this context.

From now on we use the notation of Subsection 2.3.2 . In particular we
recall that the differential operators considered here (which are
formally selfadjoint, but fail to be normally hyperbolic) are of the
form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

on each globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath . At the same time we also
consider a formally selfadjoint normally hyperbolic operator

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

We denote with @xmath its associated advanced/retarded Green operator
and we use it to define the advanced/retarded Green operator for @xmath
(cfr. Lemma 2.3.6 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

##### Relative Cauchy evolution for the classical Proca field

Our first purpose is to find a convenient expression for the relative
Cauchy evolution of the Proca field at a classical level and to relate
it to the original RCE. To do this we need a result similar to
Proposition 3.2.3 . Note that the object @xmath of @xmath that we are
going to take into account is defined exactly with the procedure
followed for the corresponding object of @xmath with the only
replacement of @xmath with @xmath (see the first part of the proof in
Proposition 3.2.3 ).

###### Proposition 3.2.5.

Let @xmath be the covariant functor describing the classical theory of
the Proca field (cfr. Subsection 2.3.2 ), consider an object @xmath of
@xmath and let @xmath be an @xmath -causally convex connected open
subset of @xmath including a smooth spacelike Cauchy surface @xmath for
@xmath . Consider the object @xmath of @xmath and the morphism @xmath of
@xmath from @xmath to @xmath induced by the inclusion maps @xmath and
@xmath . Then there exists a partition of unity @xmath on @xmath such
that the inverse @xmath of the bijective morphism @xmath of @xmath from
@xmath to @xmath satisfies the following equation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the causal propagator for @xmath and the restriction map
is defined in Lemma 2.2.4 .

###### Proof.

The most part of this proof is identical to the proof of Proposition
3.2.3 , provided that you replace everywhere @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and its causal propagator @xmath with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
the current linear differential operator @xmath and its causal
propagator @xmath (whose existence follows from Lemma 2.3.6 ). You
should also remember that in the present situation there is a
(potentially) stricter condition on the morphisms of @xmath , that is
compatibility with both @xmath and @xmath , but this does not give rise
to problems of any sort because the inclusion maps easily satisfy this
requirement. The time slice axiom holds also in this situation as we
proved in Theorem 2.3.10 , hence @xmath is bijective and its inverse
@xmath is a morphism of @xmath . Our aim is to find a convenient
expression for @xmath . The only slight difference arises when we check
the identity in the statement. To be precise, we obtain the next
equation following exactly the same reasoning:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the map from @xmath to @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath and @xmath is the partition of unity that we find
imitating the first part of the proof of Proposition 3.2.3 . Now we
would like to apply Lemma 1.3.17 , but this cannot be done directly
since no normally hyperbolic operator is immediately available. Anyway
this problem is easily circumvented recalling that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

With these observations we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . Now a normally hyperbolic operator @xmath is available,
but we need to show that @xmath has compact support in order to exploit
Lemma 1.3.17 . This can be done easily because @xmath trivially entails
@xmath ; therefore we have @xmath . From this identity we deduce that
@xmath has compact support (the proof is based on the support properties
of the causal propagator @xmath and of the partition of unity). Since
@xmath , we can conclude that @xmath actually has compact support and
hence we are allowed to apply Lemma 1.3.17 obtaining

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

With this we conclude

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is injective, the last equation entails

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is exactly our thesis. ∎

As we did in the case of the Klein-Gordon field, we specialize the
definition of the RCE to the current situation. Consider an object
@xmath of @xmath , take @xmath and recall the definitions of the
morphisms @xmath and @xmath introduced before Definition 3.1.3 .
Together with the perturbed spacetime @xmath , we must also consider the
effects of @xmath on the inner product defined on the vector bundle
@xmath and on the differential operator @xmath . The inner product on
@xmath is induced by the metric, hence we should consider the inner
product induced by the perturbed metric @xmath . As for the linear
differential operator we define @xmath , where @xmath is the
codifferential over @xmath . Similarly we have to consider @xmath ,
where @xmath is the d’Alembert operator defined over @xmath for 1-forms.
As a matter of fact we are replacing the metric @xmath with @xmath
whenever there is something related to the metric. We may consider the
inclusion map @xmath , where @xmath in accordance with the definitions
of @xmath and @xmath . Compatibility with both @xmath and @xmath via
@xmath holds (cfr. Definition 2.3.8 ). Since the effects of the
perturbation @xmath are relevant only inside @xmath , we realize that
@xmath and @xmath act exactly in the same way on sections supported
outside @xmath . Together with @xmath , we may consider @xmath and we
immediately recognize that they coincide (we denote both of them with
@xmath ). Similarly @xmath so that we denote both with @xmath . Hence we
can introduce the objects @xmath and @xmath of @xmath and interpret the
vector bundle homomorphism @xmath in the following ways:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Denote with @xmath the LCQFT (fulfilling both the causality condition
and the time slice axiom) built following the procedure of Subsection
2.3.2 . For @xmath and @xmath we define the RCE for the Proca field as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In a similar way one can consider a classical version of the RCE based
on the covariant functor @xmath describing the classical theory of the
Proca field (this is actually possible due to version of the time slice
axiom satisfied by @xmath , cfr. Theorem 2.3.10 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since the LCQFT @xmath is obtained via composition of @xmath with the
quantization functor @xmath presented in Subsection 2.2.2 , we realize
that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We can determine the action of @xmath applying Proposition 3.2.5 and
Proposition 2.3.9 . To be precise, we find proper partitions of unity
@xmath and @xmath on @xmath such that we can express the action of
@xmath and respectively of @xmath according to Proposition 3.2.5 . If we
take @xmath and evaluate @xmath , we easily find the following result:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the following we will need the expression of @xmath for an arbitrary
smooth 1-parameter family of perturbations of the metric @xmath . For
convenience in the upcoming calculation we write @xmath in place of
@xmath . Fix now @xmath , a compact subset @xmath of @xmath and a smooth
1-parameter family of globally hyperbolic perturbations @xmath , @xmath
and evaluate @xmath . We carry on such calculation with a procedure
identical to the one followed for the Klein-Gordon field. We must only
pay attention to the application of Lemma 1.3.17 , which cannot be
exploited directly. For example, if we are dealing with a section @xmath
in @xmath with @xmath -past/future compact support such that @xmath has
compact support, we must show that also @xmath has compact support and
then we can use Lemma 1.3.17 to conclude

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In this way we obtain

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We are left with the problem of the expression for @xmath . We know that
@xmath , where @xmath denotes the codifferential built with the
perturbed metric @xmath . Indeed the term @xmath gives null contribution
to @xmath , hence we are interested in the evaluation of @xmath . Using
an arbitrary coordinate neighborhood, one can check that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath are the Christoffel symbols of the Levi-Civita connection
@xmath on @xmath and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where in the last step we exploited also eq. ( 3.2.9 ).

##### Properties of the GNS representation induced by a quasi-free
Hadamard state for the Proca field

We go on imitating what we have already done in the case of the
Klein-Gordon field. So we choose a quasi-free Hadamard state @xmath for
the unital C*-algebra @xmath (which is actually a CCR representation)
describing the quantum theory of the Proca field on the globally
hyperbolic spacetime @xmath . With this choice, we introduce the (unique
up to unitary equivalence) GNS triple @xmath induced by @xmath and we
follow the discussion made in Subsection 3.2.1 . In this way we obtain
the represented version of the Weyl map @xmath associated to the CCR
representation @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the symplectic space provided by the covariant functor
@xmath describing the classical theory of the Proca field. We find a map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

satisfying @xmath for each @xmath , where @xmath is selfadjoint.
Together with this map, we have the smeared fields (by virtue of the
choice of a Hadamard state):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

As for the general case, it holds that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for each @xmath and we recognize @xmath to be linear.

As we said in Subsection 3.2.1 , the choice of a quasi-free Hadamard
state @xmath assures that Assumption 3.1.5 is satisfied, i.e. we are
able to find a dense subspace @xmath of @xmath and a dense sub-*-algebra
@xmath of @xmath such that the functional derivative of the RCE with
respect to the spacetime metric can be defined. We also have a version
of eq. ( 3.2.3 ) fitted to the Proca field: for each @xmath , each
@xmath , each compact subset @xmath of @xmath and each smooth @xmath
-parameter family @xmath , @xmath such that @xmath , it holds that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Moreover one can show that for each @xmath , @xmath there exists a
smooth section, denoted by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath stands for the complex vector bundle obtained via the
tensor product of each fiber of @xmath with @xmath and @xmath denotes
the scalar product of the Hilbert space @xmath , such that

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.2.29)
  -- -- -- ----------

for each @xmath , where @xmath is the standard volume form on @xmath and
the dual pairing between @xmath and @xmath has been taken into account
(note that one may indeed write the integrand in the abstract index
notation putting a contravariant index on the new smooth section and a
covariant index on the test function). We may regard this section as the
matrix element of the (unique) unsmeared Proca field induced by the
quasi-free Hadamard state @xmath on the globally hyperbolic spacetime
@xmath .

##### Quantized stress-energy tensor for the Proca field

We try to define the quantized stress-energy tensor associated to the
Proca field through the point-splitting procedure starting from the
expression of the classical stress-energy tensor. To obtain it, we need
the expression for the action of the Proca field on the globally
hyperbolic spacetime @xmath , which in turn comes from the differential
operator @xmath governing the classical dynamics of the field:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Taking the functional derivative of @xmath with respect to the metric,
we find the classical stress-energy tensor for the Proca field (which we
express in local coordinates):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is defined in eq. ( 3.2.24 ).

With the choice of a quasi-free Hadamard state @xmath we can promote
@xmath to the renormalized quantum stress-energy tensor @xmath simply
via point-splitting (refer to [ Wal94 , eq. 4.6.5, p. 88] ): For each
@xmath , @xmath , we choose two “near” points @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath and a curve @xmath connecting them and, parallel transporting
along the curve @xmath , we write

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.2.30)
  -- -- -- ----------

where we introduced

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to shorten the last formula.

All the remarks made for the Klein-Gordon quantized stress-energy tensor
hold also in this case. In particular the expression does not depend
upon the choice of the curve @xmath provided that @xmath and @xmath are
in a sufficiently small neighborhood so that there exists a unique
geodesic connecting them and we choose @xmath to be such geodesic.
Indeed such choice can be done since our scope is to take the
coincidence limit @xmath along @xmath (once that we are sure that no
divergence may arise). Indeed this is not the standard regularization
procedure with respect to @xmath as reference state, but the result
differs only by a multiple of the identity operator. Since we are
interested in the commutator of the stress-energy tensor with some other
operator, for our aims the point-splitting is equivalent to the standard
regularization procedure.

In our upcoming theorem the stress-energy tensor will appear only in a
commutator with some represented Weyl generator @xmath , @xmath , where
@xmath for a fixed object @xmath in @xmath . From eq. ( 3.2.30 ) we
realize that it would be useful to evaluate the matrix elements of the
commutator of two unsmeared fields and of @xmath with an arbitrary
represented Weyl generator: we recall eq. ( 3.2.2 ) and we evaluate its
LHS and its RHS fixing @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and
exploiting eq. ( 3.2.29 ) twice (all the equations are written using the
abstract index notation):

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Now we exploit also the definition of the symplectic form @xmath (cfr.
Proposition 2.3.7 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

From eq. ( 3.2.2 ) and the freedom in the choice of @xmath and @xmath we
deduce that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for each @xmath and each @xmath , @xmath . From the last equation we
deduce also that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

##### Main theorem

We devoted the discussion from the beginning of the current subsection
to prepare all the material needed to state and prove a theorem about
the compatibility between the action of the functional derivative of the
relative Cauchy evolution with respect of the spacetime metric and the
stress-energy tensor, namely a result similar to the one found in
Subsection 3.2.2 for the Klein-Gordon field.

###### Theorem 3.2.6.

Let @xmath be the locally covariant quantum field theory for the Proca
field built in Subsection 2.3.2 and let @xmath be an object of the
category @xmath (see Definition 2.3.8 ). Consider a quasi-free Hadamard
state @xmath on the CCR representation @xmath and denote the GNS triple
induced by @xmath with @xmath . We denote with @xmath the represented
counterpart of the Weyl map @xmath (cfr. eq. ( 3.2.26 )) and with @xmath
the quantum stress-energy tensor for the Proca field on @xmath obtained
using the point-splitting procedure in the representation induced by the
state @xmath (cfr. eq. ( 3.2.30 )). Then there exists a dense subspace
@xmath of @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in the sense of quadratic forms on @xmath .

###### Proof.

We consider the dense subspace @xmath of @xmath whose existence is
assured by the choice of a quasi-free Hadamard state @xmath on the CCR
representation @xmath (see few lines before eq. ( 3.2.28 )).

We fix @xmath , @xmath , a compact subset @xmath of @xmath and
1-parameter family of globally hyperbolic perturbations @xmath , @xmath
such that @xmath and we adopt the notation @xmath . We reformulate the
thesis in a convenient manner imitating the first part of the proof of
the similar theorem for the Klein-Gordon field, namely Theorem 3.2.4 .
The only difference is that here we consider the results for the Proca
field in place of the similar results for the Klein-Gordon field. To be
precise, we use eq. ( 3.2.22 ) in place of eq. ( 3.2.4 ), eq. ( 3.2.28 )
in place of eq. ( 3.2.12 ), eq. ( 3.2.23 ) and eq. ( 3.2.27 )
respectively in place of eq. ( 3.2.7 ) and eq. ( 3.2.11 ). In this way
we obtain the following equivalent formulation of our thesis:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where the dual pairing between @xmath and @xmath is considered in the
integrand appearing on the RHS.

We begin with the analysis of the LHS of the last equation (denoted by
@xmath ). The RHS (denoted by @xmath ) will be discussed later. We
exploit the relation between smeared and unsmeared fields, eq. ( 3.2.29
):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the dual pairing between @xmath and @xmath is considered. In order
to find an expression for @xmath in local coordinates, we repeat the
construction performed in the proof of Theorem 3.2.4 to obtain a
convenient family of oriented coordinate neighborhoods. In this way we
find a finite family @xmath obtained choosing from a locally finite
covering of @xmath constituted by oriented coordinate neighborhoods all
the elements that intersect the fixed compact subset @xmath of @xmath
(which includes the support of the coefficients appearing in @xmath ).
We stress that the choice of the oriented coordinate neighborhoods is
made in such a way that @xmath . At the same time we consider only the
corresponding members @xmath in the partition of unity subordinate to
the original locally finite covering. Using this finite collection of
coordinate neighborhoods, together with the corresponding members of the
partition of unity, we can obtain the expression of @xmath in local
coordinates:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the standard volume form on @xmath and all the
sections that appear inside the integral are now written in local
coordinates ⁵ ⁵ 5 by this we mean that, inside the integral over @xmath
, @xmath now denotes the push-forward through @xmath of the original
@xmath restricted to @xmath and similarly for the other sections inside
the integral . It is convenient to define the section

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the complex vector bundle obtained taking the tensor
product of each fiber in @xmath with @xmath . Now we use eq. ( 3.2.3 ).
In this way we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is defined as in eq. ( 3.2.24 ) and the dependence of the
integrand on the point @xmath is now understood. We denote the first
addend appearing on the RHS of the last equation with @xmath and the
others with @xmath and @xmath . We integrate @xmath by parts noting that
@xmath is null on the boundary of @xmath , hence no surface term
appears:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The last term in the equation above vanishes because the sum of @xmath
gives 1 on each point of the support of @xmath , hence the sum of their
derivatives is null on such region. We denote the first of the remaining
terms with @xmath and the second with @xmath . At the present moment we
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we investigate @xmath expressing it in the local coordinates @xmath
:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now recall the expression of the quantized stress-energy tensor, eq. (
3.2.30 ), and the commutation relation found in eq. ( 3.2.31 ) and in
eq. ( 3.2.32 ) and use these data to evaluate @xmath . That done,
observe that no divergence arises in the limit @xmath . Hence we can
take the coincidence limit as required by the point-splitting procedure
and insert the result in the last equation. Exploiting the symmetry of
@xmath and @xmath , we manage to simplify the result (matrix elements of
anticommutators should appear). We obtain the following expression (as
above we replace @xmath with @xmath ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We denote the term on the first line of the RHS in the last equation
with @xmath and that on the second line with @xmath . In first place we
evaluate @xmath performing a partial integration on its first term (we
directly omit the term containing derivatives of the functions @xmath
its contribution being null):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

It appears the term @xmath already found in @xmath and with trivial
manipulations on summation indices we are able to show a term involving
the LHS of the Proca equation (cfr. eq. ( 2.3.5 ) bearing in mind the
definition of @xmath given in eq. ( 3.2.24 )). In this way we get rid of
another term since @xmath , hence it is a solution of the Proca
equation. At the moment we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In second place we evaluate @xmath proceeding with the same approach.
First of all we notice that we can exploit the antisymmetry of @xmath to
simplify a little bit the first integral. Then we partially integrate
such term with the intention of finding another integrand that
explicitly exhibits the structure of the Proca equation so that we can
get rid of it too (again we omit at all the null term containing
derivatives of @xmath ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Therefore, renaming some summation indices, we obtain the following
result:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

At this stage our thesis @xmath is reduced to the following identity:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The remaining part of this proof is similar to the end of the proof of
Theorem 3.2.4 . To be precise, this time we will prove two identities
that hold everywhere on @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

A cursory glance to such identities shows that the first one entails
@xmath (it is sufficient to contract it with @xmath on each @xmath and
then integrate over @xmath and take the sum over @xmath ), while the
second entails @xmath (now you should contract with @xmath and then
proceed as in the other case). Hence these identities together imply our
thesis, eq. ( 3.2.33 ). We prove them fixing a point @xmath of @xmath
and choosing Riemannian normal coordinates in a (sufficiently small)
neighborhood of @xmath (cfr. e.g. [ Wal84 , Sect. 3.3, p. 42] ) so that
the Christoffel symbols of the connection @xmath are null at @xmath
(note that nothing can be said about the Christoffel symbols of a
“perturbed” connection @xmath ).

We begin evaluating the LHS of the first identity, eq. ( 3.2.34 ), with
the help of eq. ( 3.2.20 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we exploited the symmetry of @xmath , the antisymmetry of @xmath
(note that in particular @xmath ) and we renamed some summation indices
for convenience. This calculation shows that eq. ( 3.2.34 ) actually
holds.

Now we focus on the second identity, eq. ( 3.2.35 ). Specifically we
evaluate the first term on its LHS using eq. ( 3.2.21 ), exploiting the
symmetry of @xmath , renaming some summation indices and bearing in mind
that our choice of coordinates allows us to replace @xmath with @xmath
and vice versa at the fixed point @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This shows that eq. ( 3.2.35 ) holds too, hence the proof is complete. ∎

#### 3.2.4 Relative Cauchy evolution for the electromagnetic field

The last question we try to answer deals with the agreement between the
action of the functional derivative of the relative Cauchy evolution for
the electromagnetic field and its quantized stress-energy tensor. To
tackle such problem we resort to our discussion about the locally
covariant quantum field theory for the electromagnetic field (cfr.
Subsection 2.3.3 ).

Our approach will be similar to the last two subsections, but now we
consider the electromagnetic field, hence we adopt the notation
introduced in Subsection 2.3.3 and we refer to the results proved there.
In particular here we consider the category @xmath (see Definition
2.3.15 ) and the covariant functor @xmath describing the classical
theory of the electromagnetic field which fulfils both the causality
condition and the time slice axiom in the sense of functors describing
classical field theories (see Theorem 2.3.17 ). Having @xmath at
disposal, we follow the usual procedure (see Subsection 2.2.2 ) to
obtain the locally covariant quantum field theory @xmath for the
electromagnetic field, i.e. we take the composition of @xmath with the
quantization functor @xmath . By virtue of the properties enjoyed by
@xmath , we deduce that @xmath is causal and fulfils the time slice
axiom in the sense of LCQFTs (for the details refer to Subsection 2.3.3
). In particular, the fulfilment of the time slice axiom is essential
for the upcoming discussion.

##### Relative Cauchy evolution for the classical electromagnetic field

The first building block for our final theorem is an expression for the
relative Cauchy evolution for the electromagnetic field at a classical
level. Such result will be achieved with the help of the next
proposition. We remind the reader that an object of @xmath is a triple
@xmath where @xmath is a globally hyperbolic spacetime, @xmath denotes
the cotangent bundle over @xmath which we endow with the inner product
@xmath induced by the metric @xmath and @xmath is the linear
differential operator @xmath acting on sections in @xmath (note that
such operator depends on the metric @xmath through the codifferential
@xmath ).

As we did for the Klein-Gordon field and the Proca field, we are going
to take into account an object of @xmath denoted by @xmath for some
@xmath -causally convex connected open subset @xmath of @xmath . To see
how such object is defined and realize that it is actually an object of
@xmath refer to the first part of the proof of Proposition 3.2.3
replacing @xmath with @xmath .

A slight difference appears at the level of morphisms since now we
consider only push-forwards of morphisms of @xmath . This has to be
intended in a proper sense, namely that of Remark 2.3.11 : We call
push-forward of a morphism @xmath the composition of the inclusion map
of the proper tensor bundle over @xmath into the tensor bundle over
@xmath of the same type and the push-forward @xmath through the
isometric diffeomorphism @xmath induced by @xmath . For example a
morphism @xmath of @xmath from @xmath to @xmath acts on a element of
@xmath as @xmath .

Here we are interested in morphisms of @xmath that are generated by the
inclusion maps of a causally convex connected open subset of a globally
hyperbolic spacetime into the whole spacetime. In such cases the induced
isometric diffeomorphism is nothing but the identity map of the subset,
hence the push-forward (in the sense specified above) reduces to the
inclusion map between the proper tensor bundles.

###### Proposition 3.2.7.

Let @xmath be an object of @xmath and let @xmath be an @xmath -causally
convex connected open subset of @xmath including a smooth spacelike
Cauchy surface @xmath for @xmath . Consider the object @xmath of @xmath
and the morphism @xmath of @xmath from @xmath to @xmath induced by the
inclusion map @xmath . Then there exists a partition of unity @xmath on
@xmath such that the inverse @xmath of the bijective morphism @xmath of
@xmath from @xmath to @xmath satisfies the following equation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a representative of the equivalence class @xmath ,
@xmath is the causal propagator for the formally selfadjoint normally
hyperbolic operator @xmath and the restriction map is defined in Lemma
2.2.4 .

###### Proof.

We apply the procedure presented in the first part of the proof of
Proposition 3.2.3 to choose two smooth spacelike Cauchy surfaces @xmath
and @xmath for @xmath contained in @xmath among the smooth spacelike
Cauchy surfaces in the foliation of @xmath induced by @xmath . With this
choice we consider the open covering @xmath of @xmath and its
subordinate partition of unity @xmath .

Take now @xmath . As a consequence of the construction of the functor
@xmath , @xmath (we remind the reader that @xmath denotes the space of
compactly supported coclosed 1-forms). Hence, choosing a representative
@xmath of the class @xmath , we also find @xmath and therefore we deduce
@xmath for @xmath , which is a compact subset of @xmath . If we define
@xmath , we see that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

From the last inclusion it follows that @xmath is an element of @xmath
with @xmath -past/future compact support. Moreover we know that @xmath
and @xmath because @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (see Lemma 2.3.5 ). This
entails that @xmath . From this fact, together with @xmath , we deduce

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

hence

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Exploiting Proposition 1.2.18 , we realize that both @xmath and @xmath
fall in @xmath and their supports are contained in @xmath . At this
point we know that we can apply the restriction map ⁶ ⁶ 6 the definition
of the restriction map in the general context of vector bundles was
given in Lemma 2.2.4 . to @xmath (and indeed also to @xmath ) in order
to obtain an element of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One can almost immediately recognize that @xmath because @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each morphism @xmath of @xmath because the push-forward intertwines
with both @xmath and @xmath (see the footnote at page 1 ). This proves
that it makes sense to consider

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Suppose that we choose a different representative @xmath of @xmath . We
obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Indeed we know that @xmath because @xmath and @xmath are in the same
equivalence class and we wonder if the new element of @xmath coincides
with the old one. To answer such question we have to take a
representative from each of the elements of @xmath considered and show
that they differ by a closed 1-form. Since all operators involved are
linear, it is sufficient to show that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where @xmath . We apply again Lemma 2.3.5 and, bearing in mind the
footnote at page 1 , we obtain

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Since @xmath , we deduce that @xmath . From this relation we deduce that
@xmath has compact support contained in @xmath (the proof is identical
to that of the compactness and the inclusion in @xmath of the supports
of @xmath and @xmath ). Moreover @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From all these observations we conclude that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

This proves that the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is a representative of @xmath , is well defined.

Note that, from the hypothesis made, we know that the image @xmath
includes a smooth spacelike Cauchy surface for @xmath . Hence @xmath is
a morphism of @xmath from @xmath to @xmath because the time slice axiom
holds for @xmath (cfr. Theorem 2.3.17 ). To conclude the proof we must
check that @xmath . Take @xmath and one of its representatives @xmath ,
consider a partition of unity @xmath built following the prescriptions
given above and define @xmath . Recalling Lemma 2.3.16 and observing
that the restriction map followed by the corresponding extension leaves
the argument of the restriction unchanged, we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The support properties of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath allow us to apply
Lemma 2.3.5 and Lemma 1.3.17 :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The result of the last calculation entails that @xmath and @xmath are
gauge equivalent, hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

With this we conclude

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is injective, the last equation entails

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

therefore we realize that the thesis actually holds. ∎

We specialize the definition of the RCE to the case of the
electromagnetic field. Consider an object @xmath of @xmath , take @xmath
and recall the definitions of the morphisms @xmath and @xmath of the
category @xmath introduced before Definition 3.1.3 . Together with the
perturbed spacetime @xmath , we must also consider the effects of the
perturbation @xmath on the vector bundle (specifically on the inner
product defined on it) and on the linear differential operator @xmath .
The inner product on the cotangent bundle over the perturbed spacetime
is induced by the perturbed metric @xmath and the perturbed linear
differential operator is @xmath , where @xmath is the codifferential
defined on @xmath . It can be useful to consider also the perturbed
d’Alembert operator @xmath acting on 1-form over @xmath . We take into
account the inclusion map @xmath , where @xmath in accordance with the
definitions of @xmath and @xmath . Compatibility of @xmath with both
@xmath and @xmath holds (see the footnote at page 1 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since the effects of the perturbation @xmath are relevant only inside
@xmath , we realize that @xmath and @xmath act exactly in the same way
on sections supported outside @xmath . Together with @xmath , we may
consider @xmath and we immediately recognize that they are the same
linear differential operator acting on sections in @xmath (we denote
both of them with @xmath ). All these observations are made in order to
introduce the objects @xmath and @xmath of @xmath and to interpret
@xmath both as a morphism from @xmath to @xmath and as a morphism from
@xmath to @xmath (note the analogy with the definitions of @xmath and
@xmath as different morphisms obtained from the inclusion map @xmath ).
We denote such morphisms in the following way:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Denote with @xmath the LCQFT (fulfilling both the causality condition
and the time slice axiom) built in Subsection 2.3.3 . For @xmath and
@xmath we define the RCE for the electromagnetic field as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In a similar way one can consider a classical version of the RCE based
on the covariant functor @xmath describing the classical theory of the
electromagnetic field (this is actually possible due to version of the
time slice axiom satisfied by @xmath , cfr. Theorem 2.3.17 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since the LCQFT @xmath is obtained via composition of @xmath with the
quantization functor @xmath presented in Subsection 2.2.2 , we realize
that ⁷ ⁷ 7 this is a direct consequence of the covariant axioms, which
are required to be verified by any covariant functor

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We can determine the action of @xmath applying Proposition 3.2.7 and
Lemma 2.3.16 . We find proper partitions of unity @xmath and @xmath on
@xmath such that we can express the action of @xmath and respectively of
@xmath according to Proposition 3.2.7 . If we take @xmath and evaluate
@xmath , we easily obtain the following result:

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.2.37)
  -- -- -- ----------

whatever choice of the representative @xmath of the equivalence class
@xmath we make. The independence on the choice of the representative
follows from the fact that the same property holds for all the morphisms
that we composed to find the expression above.

To prove our final theorem we will need the expression of @xmath for an
arbitrary smooth 1-parameter family of perturbations of the metric. For
convenience in the upcoming calculation we will denote @xmath with
@xmath . Fix @xmath , a compact subset @xmath of @xmath and a smooth
1-parameter family of globally hyperbolic perturbations @xmath , @xmath
such that @xmath . To evaluate @xmath , we start from eq. ( 3.2.37 )
with the choice of the superscript @xmath (indeed the choice of @xmath
would produce a similar calculation and the same result). In the present
situation apparently we would have to consider different partitions of
unity @xmath and @xmath for each of the values assumed by @xmath .
Anyway such complication can be avoided making an intelligent choice of
the smooth spacelike Cauchy surfaces used to define the partitions of
unity: We use always the same foliation of @xmath (induced by some fixed
smooth spacelike Cauchy surface @xmath for @xmath ) and take the smooth
spacelike Cauchy surfaces inside @xmath instead of choosing, for each
value of @xmath , a pair of proper smooth spacelike Cauchy surfaces
inside @xmath . In this way a single choice of the smooth spacelike
Cauchy surfaces is satisfactory for each value of @xmath . Such choice
is possible because the supports of all the elements @xmath in the
family of perturbations are controlled by the compact subset @xmath of
@xmath .

We fix @xmath and we take one of its representatives @xmath . For
convenience we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that eq. ( 3.2.37 ) becomes @xmath and our problem reduces to the
search of a convenient vector potential that is gauge equivalent to
@xmath . We try to reproduce the calculations performed in the case of
the Klein-Gordon field. The important thing now is that we can add terms
to our representative vector potential without changing the equivalence
class in which it falls, provided that such terms are closed and
coclosed 1-forms: actually this means that we can take Lorentz solutions
(refer to Lemma 2.3.13 ) that are gauge equivalent to our starting
Lorentz solution @xmath . In first place we apply the Leibniz rule (see
the footnote at page 3 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We focus on the first addend: On the one hand, following the proof of
Proposition 3.2.7 (we are considering @xmath as @xmath ), we can easily
see that @xmath , while on the other hand @xmath can have non null
coefficients only inside @xmath . This entails that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recalling again the proof of Proposition 3.2.7 , one sees that @xmath
and hence deduces that its support is compact and lies in the causal
future of a smooth spacelike Cauchy surface for @xmath included in
@xmath (that by construction lies outside @xmath and intersects its
causal future). On the contrary @xmath is supported in the causal past
of a smooth spacelike Cauchy surface for @xmath included in @xmath (that
by construction lies outside @xmath and intersects its causal past).
These observations entail that @xmath has empty support for each @xmath
, hence it is null. Therefore from the last equation we obtain

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now we take a closer look to the term @xmath for an arbitrary but fixed
value of @xmath . In order for this term to make sense it must be shown
that @xmath has compact support. This follows from the the following
facts:

-   @xmath implies that @xmath has compact support (note that @xmath is
    supported in the causal future/past of a proper smooth spacelike
    Cauchy surface for @xmath and remember that @xmath for a proper
    compact subset @xmath of @xmath );

-   @xmath , hence we also have @xmath , which entails that @xmath has
    compact support by the argument exploited in the previous point;

-   @xmath acts as @xmath on sections whose support has empty
    intersection with @xmath , which is compact, hence the support of
    the codifferential of a section can be enlarged at most by @xmath
    when we replace @xmath with the perturbed codifferential @xmath
    (obviously the same conclusion holds if we replace @xmath with
    @xmath ).

These facts imply that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
              @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

hence the supports appearing on the LHS of the last inclusions are
compact subsets of @xmath since they are closed (by definition of
support) and contained in the union of a finite number of compact
subsets of @xmath . From the first point above it follows also that
@xmath has past/future compact support (we are exploiting Proposition
1.2.18 ). Hence we can apply Lemma 1.3.17 and Lemma 2.3.5 to conclude
that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.2.39)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

Applying @xmath to both sides of the last equation (with the superscript
@xmath ) and exploiting the Leibniz rule, we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which can be written as

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

With this identity we can rewrite eq. ( 3.2.38 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we show that the second term appearing on the RHS is both closed and
coclosed applying Lemma 2.3.5 :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

Therefore we are allowed to replace the representative @xmath with the
representative

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

without changing the equivalence class.

Observing that @xmath is supported inside @xmath (which does not
intersect @xmath by definition of @xmath ) and recalling that the
coefficients of @xmath are null outside @xmath , we conclude that @xmath
, hence we can add the term

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to @xmath without any problem. In this way we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now take into account the term @xmath : the coefficients of @xmath are
supported inside @xmath , hence

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

while @xmath is supported inside @xmath . This entails that @xmath ,
therefore we can modify again our expression for @xmath subtracting the
term

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The result is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we focus our attention on the term @xmath . First of all we notice
that it is an element of @xmath supported inside @xmath because of the
support properties of the coefficients of @xmath . Applying the Leibniz
rule in reverse we find the following chain of equalities:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we exploited @xmath and @xmath . This proves that @xmath is also
coclosed, hence @xmath is a Lorentz solution. In particular we have
@xmath and also @xmath . Then it follows that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

From the last identities, exploiting @xmath , @xmath for proper smooth
spacelike Cauchy surfaces @xmath for @xmath and Proposition 1.2.18 , we
deduce that the sections @xmath and @xmath have compact support.
Therefore we can use eq. ( 3.2.39 ) for @xmath to obtain the following
result:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The last calculation proves that @xmath and @xmath are gauge equivalent
Lorentz solutions, hence we can consider

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

as new representative of the same equivalence class, i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

With this we conclude

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a representative of the class @xmath . Note that also
now the result does not depend on the choice of the particular
representative of @xmath since, if we consider two representatives in
the same equivalence class, they differ by a closed form @xmath , i.e.
@xmath , hence also @xmath for each @xmath . This fact anyway is trivial
since the original expression for @xmath was independent of the choice
of the representative and now we simply looked for a convenient
representative in the same equivalence class.

The evaluation of @xmath can be carried on as for the case of the Proca
field (as a matter of fact the the only difference relies in the absence
of the mass term, which is irrelevant for this calculation since it does
not depend on @xmath ). For convenience we quote here the result:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath denotes the field strength associated to @xmath , i.e.
@xmath or, in local coordinates,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which can be expressed in a manifestly covariant manner on both @xmath
and @xmath (for each @xmath ) because the terms involving the
Christoffel symbols cancel out due to their symmetry (cfr. eq. ( 1.1.2
)):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that the RHS of eq. ( 3.2.42 ) is independent of the choice of the
representative @xmath since only the field strength @xmath appears.

##### Properties of the GNS representation induced by a quasi-free
Hadamard state for the electromagnetic field

At this point we choose a quasi-free Hadamard state @xmath on the CCR
representation @xmath describing the electromagnetic field on the
globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath . With this choice, we introduce
the (unique up to unitary equivalence) GNS triple @xmath induced by
@xmath and we follow the discussion made in Subsection 3.2.1 . In this
way we obtain the represented version

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

of the Weyl map @xmath , where @xmath is the symplectic space provided
by the covariant functor describing the classical theory of the
electromagnetic field, and the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath                     
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

which maps each element @xmath of @xmath to a selfadjoint operator
@xmath on @xmath . Moreover for each @xmath it holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Together with the map @xmath , we have the smeared fields (this is a
consequence of the choice of a Hadamard state):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Note that here appears a slight difference with respect to the previous
cases, namely that the test section we consider are coclosed. As for the
general case, it holds that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.45)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for each @xmath and we recognize @xmath to be linear.

Also in this case the choice of a quasi-free Hadamard state @xmath
assures that Assumption 3.1.5 holds, i.e. we are able to find a dense
subspace @xmath of @xmath and a dense sub-*-algebra @xmath of @xmath
such that the functional derivative of the RCE with respect to the
spacetime metric can be defined. In particular @xmath is constituted by
all the vectors of the form @xmath , where @xmath is an arbitrary
polynomial in @xmath and @xmath for arbitrary @xmath and @xmath .

Again we have an equation similar to eq. ( 3.2.3 ): for each @xmath ,
each @xmath , each compact subset @xmath of @xmath and each smooth
@xmath -parameter family @xmath , @xmath such that @xmath , it holds
that

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.2.46)
  -- -- -- ----------

Moreover one can show that for each @xmath , @xmath there exists a
smooth section, that we denote with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.47)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath stands for the complex vector bundle obtained via the
tensor product of each fiber of @xmath with @xmath and @xmath denotes
the scalar product of the Hilbert space @xmath , such that

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.2.48)
  -- -- -- ----------

for each @xmath , where @xmath is the standard volume form on @xmath and
the dual pairing between @xmath and @xmath has been taken into account
(note that one may indeed write the integrand using the abstract index
notation putting a contravariant index on the new section and a
covariant index on the test function).

###### Remark 3.2.8.

We meet here the first consequence of the restriction of the set of test
sections to @xmath , namely that @xmath fails to be unique: as a matter
of fact each section that differs from this one by an exact 1-form (with
raised indices) will do the work perfectly well. On the contrary, if
there are two sections satisfying eq. ( 3.2.48 ), we deduce that they
differ by a closed one form (with raised indices).

It seems that we fail to have a characterization of @xmath in terms of a
class of gauge equivalent sections since we are not sure that we obtain
a section satisfying eq. ( 3.2.48 ) if we add a closed form (with raised
indices) to a section that satisfies eq. ( 3.2.48 ). However we required
that the first de Rham cohomology group of the manifolds over which we
discuss the electromagnetic field is trivial (see. Definition 2.3.15 ),
hence each closed 1-form is also exact. This hypothesis restores the
usual notion of gauge equivalence also for @xmath because now exactness
and closure of 1-forms coincide.

Indeed from a physical point of view we expected to find a counterpart
of the gauge equivalence for the electromagnetic field at the quantum
level.

As we will see, the lack of uniqueness for @xmath will not affect our
calculation. For the moment we regard the section in eq. ( 3.2.47 ) as
(the matrix element of) one of the gauge equivalent unsmeared
electromagnetic fields induced by the quasi-free Hadamard state @xmath
on the globally hyperbolic spacetime @xmath .

##### Quantized stress-energy tensor for the electromagnetic field

Our final theorem requires that we know how to express the quantized
stress-energy tensor for the electromagnetic field. As always, we use as
a starting point the equation governing the classical dynamics of the
field to obtain a natural expression for the action associated to the
field itself. After that, we determine the classical stress-energy
tensor for the electromagnetic field evaluating the functional
derivative of the action with respect to the spacetime metric and we try
to determine the corresponding quantum observable via the
point-splitting procedure. At the classical level the situation is
identical to the Proca field provided that we set @xmath (this is due to
the fact that the linear differential operator governing the classical
dynamics of the electromagnetic field, i.e. @xmath , is nothing but the
one for the Proca field with @xmath ). For the action on the globally
hyperbolic spacetime @xmath we obtain the following expression:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Evaluating the functional derivative of @xmath with respect to the
metric, we find the classical stress-energy tensor for the
electromagnetic field (we express it in local coordinates):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is defined according to eq. ( 3.2.43 ). The choice of a
Hadamard state allows us to promote @xmath to the renormalized quantum
stress-energy tensor @xmath simply via point-splitting (refer to [ Wal94
, eq. 4.6.5, p. 88] ): For each @xmath , @xmath , we choose two “near”
points @xmath and @xmath in @xmath and a curve @xmath connecting them
and, parallel transporting along the curve @xmath , we write

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.49)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we considered

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.50)
  -- -------- -- ----------

to shorten the expression.

If we lower all the indices in eq. ( 3.2.50 ), we realize that @xmath is
nothing but the exterior derivative of the (non unique) unsmeared field.
This fact entails that @xmath does not depend on the particular choice
of the unsmeared field because, even if we add a closed 1-form, then the
exterior derivative set this contribution to zero. A direct consequence
of this fact is the independence of eq. ( 3.2.49 ) on the choice of an
unsmeared field because only @xmath appears on the RHS. Indeed all these
observations must be intended in the sense of matrix elements (which are
the only ones that we defined so far).

As we observed when we dealt with the Klein-Gordon field in @xmath there
is no dependence upon the choice of the curve @xmath along which we
parallel transport provided that the points @xmath and @xmath are
sufficiently near so that there exists only one geodesic connecting them
and we consider such geodesic as @xmath . Indeed we can take @xmath and
@xmath in a sufficiently small neighborhood since our aim is to take the
limit @xmath along @xmath once that we have found an expression that
does not present divergences in this limit. We also stress that the
quantized stress-energy tensor obtained via point-splitting differs by a
multiple of the identity operator from the quantized stress-energy
tensor provided by the regularization procedure with @xmath as reference
state. Anyway we are only interested in the commutator of the
stress-energy tensor with some represented Weyl generator, hence such
difference is irrelevant in our computations.

As we said few lines above, our upcoming theorem will involve the
stress-energy tensor only in a commutator with some represented Weyl
generator @xmath for @xmath , where @xmath for a fixed object @xmath in
@xmath . Reading eq. ( 3.2.49 ) we realize that it would be useful to
evaluate the matrix elements of the commutator of @xmath with an
arbitrary represented Weyl generator. To this end we recall eq. ( 3.2.2
) and we evaluate its LHS and its RHS fixing @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath using eq. ( 3.2.48 ) twice (all the equations are
written using the abstract index notation):

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Indeed the matrix element inside the integral on the LHS of the last
equation is not unique because of the gauge invariance. Now we exploit
also the definition of the symplectic form @xmath (cfr. Lemma 2.3.14 ):

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is some representative of the class @xmath . These
integrals present the terms

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which are not uniquely defined exactly as seen above. From eq. ( 3.2.2 )
and the freedom in the choice of @xmath and @xmath we deduce that

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.2.51)
  -- -- -- ----------

for each choice of @xmath in the class @xmath , where @xmath means gauge
equivalence. All the terms that we could add without affecting the
relation @xmath cancel out once that we evaluate

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hence from eq. ( 3.2.51 ) we deduce that

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.2.52)
  -- -- -- ----------

This is the relation that we will use in the proof of the next theorem.

##### Main theorem

We are ready to state and prove the main theorem of this subsection.
Such theorem extends to the case of the electromagnetic field the
results of compatibility between the action of the functional derivative
of the relative Cauchy evolution and the stress-energy tensor, which are
already known to hold for the Klein-Gordon field and the Proca field
(refer to Subsection 3.2.2 and to Subsection 3.2.3 ).

###### Theorem 3.2.9.

Let @xmath be the locally covariant quantum field theory for the
electromagnetic field built in Subsection 2.3.3 and let @xmath be an
object of the category @xmath (see Definition 2.3.15 ). Consider a
quasi-free Hadamard state @xmath on the CCR representation @xmath and
denote the GNS triple induced by @xmath with @xmath . We denote with
@xmath the represented counterpart of the Weyl map @xmath (cfr. eq. (
3.2.44 )) and with @xmath the quantum stress-energy tensor for the
electromagnetic field on @xmath obtained via point-splitting in the
representation induced by the state @xmath (cfr. eq. ( 3.2.49 )). Then
there exists a dense subspace @xmath of @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in the sense of quadratic forms on @xmath .

###### Proof.

A dense subspace @xmath of @xmath exists by virtue of the choice of a
quasi-free Hadamard state @xmath (see few lines before eq. ( 3.2.46 )).

We fix @xmath , @xmath , a compact subset @xmath of @xmath and
1-parameter family @xmath , @xmath such that @xmath . We repeat the
first part of the proof of Theorem 3.2.4 using eq. ( 3.2.36 ) and eq. (
3.2.46 ) in place of eq. ( 3.2.4 ) and respectively eq. ( 3.2.12 ). In
this way we find the following reformulation of the thesis:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where the dual pairing between @xmath and @xmath is taken into account
in the integrand appearing on the RHS. Now we exploit eq. ( 3.2.41 )
choosing a representative @xmath of the fixed class @xmath :

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Note that the result does not depend on the particular choice of @xmath
in the class @xmath because the same is true for eq. ( 3.2.41 ). We can
apply also eq. ( 3.2.45 ) since eq. ( 3.2.40 ) shows that @xmath is
coclosed whatever choice of @xmath we make:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Now we work with the LHS of the last equation (denoted by @xmath ) and
the RHS (denoted by @xmath ) separately. Starting from @xmath , we
exploit the relation between smeared and unsmeared fields, eq. ( 3.2.48
):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we consider the dual pairing between @xmath and @xmath . Indeed
the integrand on the right is not uniquely determined because of gauge
equivalence. Anyway every admissible choice of this section will give
the same value for @xmath . In order to find an expression for @xmath in
local coordinates, we perform the usual construction which provides a
finite family @xmath obtained choosing all the elements of a locally
finite covering of @xmath constituted by oriented coordinate
neighborhoods that intersect the fixed compact subset @xmath of @xmath
(which includes the support of the coefficients appearing in @xmath ).
As usual the choice of the oriented coordinate neighborhoods is made in
such a way that @xmath so that @xmath reduces to the standard volume
form @xmath on @xmath on each coordinate neighborhood. At the same time
we take only the corresponding members @xmath in the partition of unity
subordinate to the original locally finite covering. In this way we
obtain the expression of @xmath in local coordinates:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where all the sections that appear inside the integral are now written
in local coordinates, namely @xmath inside the integral over @xmath
denotes the push-forward through @xmath of the original @xmath
restricted to @xmath and similarly for the other sections inside the
integral. It is convenient to define

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

in order to simplify our notation. Indeed @xmath is not uniquely
determined so that we fix some proper @xmath and we show that everything
works whatever choice of @xmath we make. The next two steps are
identical to the corresponding ones in the proof of Theorem 3.2.6 ,
provided that we use @xmath defined in eq. ( 3.2.41 ) in place of @xmath
: In first place we use eq. ( 3.2.42 ) and in second place we partially
integrate. We get the following result:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Now we focus on @xmath and we express it using the local coordinates
@xmath :

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Now recall the expression of the quantized stress-energy tensor, eq. (
3.2.49 ), and the commutation relation found in eq. ( 3.2.52 ).
Exploiting these results, evaluate @xmath . That done, take the
coincidence limit as required by the point-splitting procedure (note
that no divergence arises) and insert the result into the last equation.
After that, use the symmetry of @xmath and @xmath to simplify the
expression (matrix elements of anticommutators should appear). All these
operations produce the following result (to shorten the expression we
denote @xmath with @xmath ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Eq. ( 3.2.50 ) and the subsequent remarks entail that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

does not depend on the particular choice of the non unique matrix
element of the unsmeared field. In particular we can use the section
@xmath previously fixed:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We denote the first part of @xmath with @xmath and the second with
@xmath . In first place we evaluate @xmath by partial integration (we
omit the term including derivatives of @xmath since as always they give
null contribution):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we recognized the term @xmath already present in @xmath , we
exploited the fact that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

because every representative @xmath of the class @xmath satisfies @xmath
and we denoted with @xmath the remaining term. We have the following
result:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In second place we evaluate @xmath proceeding with the same approach.
First of all we notice that we can exploit the antisymmetry of @xmath to
simplify a little bit the first integral. Then we partially integrate
such term with the purpose of finding another integrand that explicitly
exhibits the structure of the field equation, i.e. a term @xmath , so
that we can get rid of it too (again we omit the null term containing
derivatives of @xmath ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Therefore, renaming some summation indices, we obtain the following
result:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

At this stage our thesis @xmath is reduced to the following identity:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One immediately realizes that eq. ( 3.2.34 ) (with @xmath in place of
@xmath ) and eq. ( 3.2.35 ) imply our last equation: to recognize this
fact proceed as we did after eq. ( 3.2.35 ) in the case of the Proca
field.

Eq. ( 3.2.35 ) is a purely geometrical identity, hence holds also in
this case without any further comment. On the contrary eq. ( 3.2.34 )
involves an object strictly connected with the dynamics of the Proca
field (namely @xmath ), however the proof of this identity relies only
on the antisymmetry of such object, a property that indeed holds also
for @xmath , hence a similar identity holds for @xmath in place of
@xmath . These observations entail that we have @xmath whatever choice
of @xmath we make. This completes the proof. ∎

## Conclusions

In Chapter 1 we introduced almost all the mathematical tools required
for the entire thesis. Particular attention was devoted to geometrical
tools in the context of vector bundles, which constitute the
mathematical setting of the whole discussion, together with globally
hyperbolic spacetimes. We also recalled some results about normally
hyperbolic equations on globally hyperbolic spacetimes. After that we
turned our attention to the algebraic tools, namely algebras and states,
that are needed to discuss the algebraic approach to quantum field
theory. We focused mainly on particular C*-algebras, namely Weyl systems
and CCR representation, which are well suited for the quantization of
bosonic fields. To conclude some definitions from category theory where
presented, the language of category theory being suitable for a number
of notions presented in the thesis.

After the required mathematical preliminaries, the main subject of the
thesis was tackled in Chapter 2 with the introduction the generally
covariant locality principle ( GCLP ), originally formulated in [ BFV03
] . To do this, in first place we analyzed in detail the structure of
the category of globally hyperbolic spacetimes and the structure of the
category of unital C*-algebras, taking advantage of the remarks made in
Chapter 1 . In second place we stated the GCLP giving the definition of
locally covariant quantum field theory ( LCQFT ). We devoted particular
attention to the physical interpretation of the GCLP, essentially
borrowing the interpretation of the Haag-Kastler axioms (refer to [ HK64
] ). We also showed in full detail that it is possible to completely
recover the Haag-Kastler axioms starting from the assignment of a
locally covariant quantum field theory fulfilling both the causality
condition and the time slice axiom. In third place we showed how to
realize a LCQFT starting from a normally hyperbolic equation over a
globally hyperbolic spacetime. This was done in two steps. The first one
consisted in the realization of a covariant functor describing the
classical theory of the field whose dynamics is ruled by the assigned
normally hyperbolic equation, while the second was realized quantizing
such classical field theory via composition with another covariant
functor that embodies the quantization procedure. Great care was devoted
to study in full detail the properties of the starting category for the
classical field functor, which is a sort of enriched category of
globally hyperbolic spacetimes. We concluded Chapter 2 with the
construction of LCQFTs for the Klein-Gordon field, the Proca field and
the electromagnetic field. While the Klein-Gordon case is nothing more
than a specialization of the general procedure, the other two cases
required more attention as a consequence of the lack of a normally
hyperbolic equation governing their classical dynamics. The case of the
electromagnetic field proved to be the most involved. To simplify the
situation, we restricted to those field strengths that could be
described in terms of a vector potential. Therefore, in place of the
Maxwell equations, we considered the resulting equation for the vector
potential and we kept into account the effects of gauge equivalence.

Chapter 3 was devoted to the main argument of the thesis, namely the
relative Cauchy evolution ( RCE ). In fact our original purpose was to
show that a relation between the RCE and the stress-energy tensor
similar to the one proved in [ BFV03 ] for the Klein-Gordon field holds
also for the Proca field and the electromagnetic field. In first place
we defined in a general context the RCE and its functional derivative
with respect to the spacetime metric. We proved that the functional
derivative, which is symmetric by construction, is also divergence free,
thus finding a hint for a possible strict relation with the
stress-energy tensor. After that we returned to the examples discussed
at the end of Chapter 2 . In first place we proved the relation between
the functional derivative of the RCE and the stress-energy tensor
originally showed in [ BFV03 ] for the case of the Klein-Gordon field.
In second place we tried to extend this result to the Proca field and
the electromagnetic field. While the case of the Proca field proved to
be almost straightforward (the main difference can be ascribed to the
fact that the Proca field is a 1-form, while the Klein-Gordon field is a
0-form), the electromagnetic field presents some additional
complications. Anyway we were able to circumvent these obstructions
exploiting the gauge equivalence. In this way our purpose was achieved,
namely we showed that the relation between the functional derivative of
the RCE and stress-energy tensor, which was already known to hold for
the Klein-Gordon field, holds in an identical form in the cases of the
Proca and the electromagnetic fields too.