The contributions of the first half of this thesis are on the
computational and algebraic aspects of convexity in polynomial
optimization. We show that unless P=NP, there exists no polynomial time
(or even pseudo-polynomial time) algorithm that can decide whether a
multivariate polynomial of degree four (or higher even degree) is
globally convex. This solves a problem that has been open since 1992
when N. Z. Shor asked for the complexity of deciding convexity for
quartic polynomials. We also prove that deciding strict convexity,
strong convexity, quasiconvexity, and pseudoconvexity of polynomials of
even degree four or higher is strongly NP-hard. By contrast, we show
that quasiconvexity and pseudoconvexity of odd degree polynomials can be
decided in polynomial time.

We then turn our attention to sos-convexityâ€”an algebraic sum of squares
(sos) based sufficient condition for polynomial convexity that can be
efficiently checked with semidefinite programming. We show that three
natural formulations for sos-convexity derived from relaxations on the
definition of convexity, its first order characterization, and its
second order characterization are equivalent. We present the first
example of a convex polynomial that is not sos-convex. Our main result
then is to prove that the cones of convex and sos-convex polynomials
(resp. forms) in @xmath variables and of degree @xmath coincide if and
only if @xmath or @xmath or @xmath (resp. @xmath or @xmath or @xmath ).
Although for disparate reasons, the remarkable outcome is that convex
polynomials (resp. forms) are sos-convex exactly in cases where
nonnegative polynomials (resp. forms) are sums of squares, as
characterized by Hilbert in 1888.

The contributions of the second half of this thesis are on the
development and analysis of computational techniques for certifying
stability of uncertain and nonlinear dynamical systems. We show that
deciding asymptotic stability of homogeneous cubic polynomial vector
fields is strongly NP-hard. We settle some of the converse questions on
existence of polynomial and sum of squares Lyapunov functions. We
present a globally asymptotically stable polynomial vector field with no
polynomial Lyapunov function. We show via an explicit counterexample
that if the degree of the polynomial Lyapunov function is fixed, then
sos programming can fail to find a valid Lyapunov function even though
one exists. By contrast, we show that if the degree is allowed to
increase, then existence of a polynomial Lyapunov function for a planar
or a homogeneous polynomial vector field implies existence of a
polynomial Lyapunov function that can be found with sos programming. We
extend this result to develop a converse sos Lyapunov theorem for robust
stability of switched linear systems.

In our final chapter, we introduce the framework of path-complete graph
Lyapunov functions for approximation of the joint spectral radius. The
approach is based on the analysis of the underlying switched system via
inequalities imposed between multiple Lyapunov functions associated to a
labeled directed graph. Inspired by concepts in automata theory and
symbolic dynamics, we define a class of graphs called path-complete
graphs, and show that any such graph gives rise to a method for proving
stability of switched systems. The semidefinite programs arising from
this technique include as special case many of the existing methods such
as common quadratic, common sum of squares, and
maximum/minimum-of-quadratics Lyapunov functions. We prove approximation
guarantees for analysis via several families of path-complete graphs and
a constructive converse Lyapunov theorem for
maximum/minimum-of-quadratics Lyapunov functions.
