### Résumé

L’objet de cette thèse est l’étude du modèle plat , l’ingrédient
principal du programme de quantification de la gravité par les mousses
de spins, avec un accent particulier sur ses divergences . Outre une
introduction personnelle au problème de la gravité quantique, le
manuscrit se compose de deux parties. Dans la première, nous obtenons
une formule exacte pour le comptage de puissances des divergences de
bulles dans le modèle plat, notamment grâce à des outils de théorie de
jauge discrète et de cohomologie tordue. Dans la seconde partie, nous
considérons le problème de la limite continue des mousses de spins ,
tant du point de vue des théorie de jauge sur réseau que du point de vue
de la group field theory . Nous avançons en particulier une nouvelle
preuve de la sommabilité de Borel du modèle de Boulatov-Freidel-Louapre,
permettant un contrôle accru du comportement d’échelle dans la limite de
grands spins. Nous concluons par une discussion prospective du programme
de renormalisation pour les mousses de spins.

### Foreword

This manuscript presents my results on the structure of divergences in
spinfoam models. They were obtained in collaboration with my advisors
Carlo Rovelli and Vincent Rivasseau, and with Karim Noui, Jacques Magnen
and Valentin Bonzom.

##### List of publications

Five papers were written and submitted during the completion of this
thesis:

-   J. Magnen, K. Noui, V. Rivasseau, M. Smerlak, Scaling behaviour of
    three-dimensional group field theory , Class. Quantum Grav. 26 (3),
    185012 (2009) [0906.5477 (hep-th)]

-   V. Bonzom, M. Smerlak, Bubble divergences from cellular cohomology ,
    Lett. Math. Phys. 93 (3), 295-305 (2010) [1004.5196 (gr-qc)]

-   V. Bonzom, M. Smerlak, Bubble divergences from twisted
    cohomology (2010) [1008.1476 (math-ph)], submitted to Comm. Math.
    Phys.

-   V. Bonzom, M. Smerlak, Bubble divergences: sorting out topology from
    cell structure , Ann. Henri Poincaré, online first , 2 July 2011
    [1103.3961 (gr-qc)]

-   C. Rovelli, M. Smerlak, In quantum gravity, summing is refining
    , (2010) [1010.5437 (gr-qc)]

In addition to these works in spinfoam quantum gravity, I studied during
my PhD years various aspects of relativistic statistical physics: Tolman
effect in a static gravitational field, Unruh effect and vacuum
entanglement, random walks in curved spacetimes. Neither these
investigations,

-   C. Rovelli, M. Smerlak, Thermal time and the Tolman-Ehrenfest
    effect: ’temperature as the speed of time’ , Class. Quant. Grav. 28
     (7) 075007 (2011) [1005.2985 (gr-qc)]

-   M. Smerlak, Random walks in curved spacetimes (2011) [1108.0320
    (gr-qc)], submitted to New. Journ. Phys.

-   C. Rovelli, M. Smerlak, Unruh effect without entanglement (2011)
    [1108.0320 (gr-qc)], submitted to Phys. Rev. D,

nor the didactic discussion

-   M. Smerlak, A blackbody is not a blackbox , Eur. J. Phys. 32 1143
    (2011), [1010.5696 (physics.class-ph)]

will be addressed in this manuscript. The same holds for my earlier
papers

-   C. Rovelli, M. Smerlak, Relational EPR , Found. Phys. 37 ,
    427-445 (2007) [quant-ph/0604064]

-   V. Bonzom, E. R. Livine, M. Smerlak, S. Speziale, Towards the
    graviton from spinfoams: the complete perturbative expansion of the
    3d toy model , Nucl. Phys. B 804 , 507-526 (2008) [0802.3983
    (gr-qc)]

##### On mathematical rigor

The level of mathematical rigor of the considerations presented in this
thesis is variable: while the chapters 3 to 5 and 7 are precise (in the
sense of mathematical physics), the chapters 2 and 6 contain many formal
or heuristic arguments. This variability is consistent with my
conviction that, in physics, certain matters are more efficiently
addressed at the formal level, while others do require a full-fledged
mathematical analysis.

##### Notations

For more clarity, we will therefore reserve the sign @xmath for
mathematical identites, and will use the sign @xmath for formal
identities. The symbol @xmath will denote a definition, and @xmath an
asymptotic equivalence.

### Acknowledgements

At the time of leaving Eden at CPT, I want to thank heartfully Carlo
Rovelli for having been over the years an extraordinarily trustful and
inspiring mentor. Per me, sei tu il primo scienzato.

I am also particularly grateful to Vincent Rivasseau, for this thesis,
for AIMS, and for much more. I am delighted that his shining
intelligence and outstanding generosity are becoming sources of
inspiration for our African fellows as well.

My warmest thanks extend to the CPT and Orsay groups, and in particular
to Simone Speziale and Francesca Vidotto, for their unique friendship,
and to Eugenio Bianchi, for knowing everything – and sharing it.

Many thanks also to Bianca Dittrich and Daniele Oriti, for making sure
that the end of this thesis is also the beginning of a career. See you
soon!

Dearest thanks to my collaborators and friends, Karim Noui, Valentin
Bonzom, and also to the King of Lower and Upper Egypt, Ahmed Youssef.

Et bien sûr, merci à mes parents, pour la première cellule, et pour les
autres.

Et à Maéva, toujours.

###### Contents

-    Abstract/Résumé
-    Foreword
-    Acknowledgements
-    I Introduction and preliminaries
    -    1 Introduction
        -    1.1 Le problème de la gravité quantique
        -    1.2 Quantification ou émergence ?
        -    1.3 Quantification et troncation
        -    1.4 Réseaux et mousses de spins
        -    1.5 Limite continue des mousses de spins
    -    2 The flat spinfoam model
        -    2.1 The Ponzano-Regge model
            -    2.1.1 The Ponzano-Regge asymptotic formula
            -    2.1.2 A simplicial partition function
            -    2.1.3 Bubble divergences
        -    2.2 A discrete gauge theory
            -    2.2.1 Palatini-Cartan gravity
            -    2.2.2 Discrete gauge theory
            -    2.2.3 Boulatov’s group field theory
        -    2.3 The flat spinfoam model
            -    2.3.1 Foams
            -    2.3.2 Definition of the model
            -    2.3.3 Heat kernel regularization
-    II Homological powercounting of bubble divergences
    -    3 Powercounting by Laplace’s method
        -    3.1 The amplitude as a Laplace integral
            -    3.1.1 Divergence degree
            -    3.1.2 A Laplace integral
        -    3.2 Degenerate Laplace asymptotics
            -    3.2.1 The generalized Laplace method
            -    3.2.2 Tame singularities
        -    3.3 The divergence degree: first results
            -    3.3.1 A powercounting formula
            -    3.3.2 Bubbles from cellular homology: the simply
                connected case
    -    4 The (co)homology of flat connections
        -    4.1 More on discrete gauge theory
            -    4.1.1 Further definitions
            -    4.1.2 Reducing gauge symmetries
            -    4.1.3 Representations of the fundamental group
            -    4.1.4 The geometry of @xmath and @xmath
        -    4.2 Twisted (co)homology
            -    4.2.1 Curvature as a coboundary operator
            -    4.2.2 Interlude: twisted deRham cohomology
            -    4.2.3 Twisted cellular cohomology
            -    4.2.4 Twisted cohomology in the flat model
        -    4.3 Examples
            -    4.3.1 Abelian structure group
            -    4.3.2 Surface groups with @xmath
            -    4.3.3 A foam with wild singularities
    -    5 Applications of homological powercounting
        -    5.1 Sorting out topology from cell structure
            -    5.1.1 A useful decomposition
            -    5.1.2 On the topological part of @xmath
        -    5.2 Comparison with previous results
            -    5.2.1 Powercounting from Pachner moves
            -    5.2.2 Powercounting from bubble counting
            -    5.2.3 Powercounting from vertex and jacket counting
        -    5.3 Three-dimensional examples
            -    5.3.1 The @xmath -torus
            -    5.3.2 Lens spaces
            -    5.3.3 Prism spaces
-    III On the spinfoam continuum limit
    -    6 Spinfoams: refining or summing?
        -    6.1 The refinement limit of spinfoams
            -    6.1.1 The directed set of generalized scales
            -    6.1.2 Kinematical and dynamical continuum limits
            -    6.1.3 Loop quantization as a continuum limit
            -    6.1.4 The spinfoam continuum limit
        -    6.2 Refining = summing?
            -    6.2.1 Spinfoam cylindrical consistency
            -    6.2.2 Summing is refining
            -    6.2.3 Discussion
    -    7 Resummation of the Boulatov series
        -    7.1 Constructive field theory
            -    7.1.1 Current status of constructive field theory
            -    7.1.2 Power series and Borel sums
            -    7.1.3 Proliferating and non-proliferating species
        -    7.2 A constructive tool: the cactus expansion
            -    7.2.1 Degenerate Gaussian measures
            -    7.2.2 An absolutely convergent expansion
            -    7.2.3 Four ingredients for a cactus expansion
            -    7.2.4 A toy example: @xmath theory in @xmath dimensions
        -    7.3 Borel summability and scaling behavior
            -    7.3.1 A twofold regularization
            -    7.3.2 Intermediate field representation
            -    7.3.3 Cactus expansion
            -    7.3.4 Cauchy-Schwarz inequalities
            -    7.3.5 A constructive scaling limit
    -    8 Conclusion
        -    8.1 Des fondations pour les mousses de spins
        -    8.2 Le modèle plat, une phase de la gravité quantique ?
        -    8.3 Quel “groupe” de renormalisation ?
    -    A Appendix A: Cellular homology
    -    B Appendix B: Colored homology

## Part I Introduction and preliminaries

C’est quand c’est mou que c’est dur, mais… c’est quand c’est dur que
c’est bon.

Un Suisse anonyme.

### Chapter 1 Introduction

#### 1.1 Le problème de la gravité quantique

Aux yeux de la majorité des physiciens, la gravité quantique est et
demeure un oxymore. Comment croire qu’une théorie quantique de
l’interaction gravitationnelle soit seulement possible, quand les
méthodes de quantification perturbative sont vouées à l’échec, en raison
de la non-renormalisabilité du couplage entre gravitons ¹ ¹ 1 Ceci
n’excluant pas la possibilité de prédictions quantitatives à basse
énergie, dans le cadre de la théorie des champs effective [ 33 ] . [ 60
] ? Quand les approches non-perturbatives, théories des boucles [ 119 ,
132 ] ou des cordes [ 61 , 98 ] notamment, faillent à se montrer
prédictives ? Quand les apports expérimentaux sont inexistants, et pour
longtemps sans doute ? Quatre-vingts ans après les premiers travaux de
Rosenfeld et Bronstein [ 117 ] , on est en droit de se demander si le
programme de quantification de la relativité générale n’est pas
obsolète. Des voix aujourd’hui s’élèvent pour réclamer [ 76 ] – et
parfois proposer [ 138 ] – un changement de paradigme.

Quel est au fond le problème de la gravité quantique ? La physique
contemporaine, on le sait, donne à voir deux images du monde. L’une,
soutenue par la théorie de la relativité générale [ 85 , 141 ] , fait de
l’univers un “mollusque” [ 42 ] dynamique au sein duquel l’espace, le
temps et la matière s’influencent mutuellement, selon les équations
locales et déterministes d’Einstein. L’autre, inspirée des règles
opérationnelles de la mécanique quantique [ 20 ] , présente la matière
comme étant animée de singulières fluctuations, gouvernées par des lois
holistiques et aléatoires. Au plan épistémologique, le problème de la
gravité quantique est donc un problème d’ unification : il s’agit
d’élaborer une théorie capable de concilier les caractères apparemment
contradictoires de la relativité générale et de la mécanique quantique –
quelque chose comme la description d’un espace-temps-matière fluctuant.
La nécessité de cette unification se fait jour dès lors qu’on considère
la structure globale [ 72 ] d’un espace-temps relativiste. Si l’on s’en
tient à une description purement classique de la matière, par un tenseur
d’énergie-impulsion satisfaisant une condition d’énergie, les théorèmes
de singularité d’Hawking-Penrose [ 72 , 141 ] montrent en effet qu’un
tel espace-temps contient nécessairement une singularité : une région où
les géodésiques s’arrêtent, purement et simplement. Qu’elle passe par
des violations des conditions d’énergie [ 84 ] ou plus radicalement par
le dépassement de la relativité générale, la solution de cette
“catastrophe spatio-temporelle” – comme la divergence du potentiel de
Coulomb en électrostatique ou de l’énergie thermique de la radiation –
fera certainement intervenir la mécanique quantique.

Le problème de la gravité quantique est aussi un problème de
relativisation . On sait comment les relativités galiléenne, restreinte
et générale ont évacué de l’appareil conceptuel de la physique ces
“idoles” [ 46 ] que sont, respectivement, l’espace absolu, le temps
absolu, et l’espace-temps absolu. De la même façon, la mécanique
quantique a déposé le concept d’état absolu, le remplaçant par celui,
plus participatif, d’opération (ou action [ 47 ] , préparation/mesure [
139 ] , interaction [ 116 ] , relation [ 25 ] …). L’enjeu d’une théorie
de la gravité quantique est de croiser et de prolonger ces
relativisations. Pour reprendre une image de Rovelli, avec la relativité
générale (pour laquelle l’occurence d’un événement est absolue), et la
mécanique quantique (dans laquelle l’espace-temps est donné a priori ),
nous sommes seulement “half-way through the woods” [ 117 ] . Les
résultats préliminaires de Hawking [ 71 ] et de Unruh [ 135 ] , dans le
cadre de la théorie quantique des champs sur espace-temps courbes [ 140
] (où l’on néglige la rétro-action des champs quantiques sur
l’espace-temps), suggèrent que cette nouvelle relativisation affectera
notamment les notions de particules, de température et d’entropie.

Enfin, et surtout, le problème de la gravité quantique est un problème
physique . Loin de se confiner à des spéculations extrapolant, malmenant
parfois, notre connaissance de l’univers, ² ² 2 Exemples : la
supersymétrie, le big bounce , le scénario ekpyrotique, le principe
holographique, les dimensions supplémentaires, la discrétude de
l’espace-temps… il perce dans de nombreuses questions issues de
l’expérience, à la signification opérationnelle claire, et dont nous
ignorons la réponse :

-   La pression de Casimir gravite-t-elle [ 56 ] ?

-   Existe-t-il un Lamb shift gravitationnel [ 142 ] ?

-   La propagation de la lumière dans le vide est-elle dispersive [ 3 ]
    ?

-   La symétrie de Lorentz est-elle brisée [ 77 ] ? Déformée [ 4 ] ?

-   …

En un mot, nous ignorons la nature de la relation entre matière et
espace-temps . A mon sens, c’est ce problème fondamental -- et pas un
autre ³ ³ 3 Parmi les problèmes qui ne sont pas directement relié au
problème de la gravité quantique, citons : l’interprétation de la
mécanique quantique, le problème de la constante cosmologique, les
divergences ultraviolettes en théorie quantique des champs, les
conditions initiales en cosmologie, le problème du temps, de la flèche
du temps, etc. – qui devra être résolu par une théorie de la gravité
quantique. Qu’elle se présente comme une quantification de la relativité
générale ou pas, celle-ci n’aura rien d’un oxymore.

#### 1.2 Quantification ou émergence ?

Pour aborder le problème de la gravité quantique, les approches
théoriques s’organisent en deux categories, que je qualifierais de
réductionnistes et émergentistes . Les premières proposent de réduire le
problème de la gravité quantique à celui de la description de la
dynamique de l’espace-temps lui-même, dans un premier temps sans tenir
compte de la présence de la matière (la gravité pure). Elles se fondent
en cela sur l’antique dichotomie entre matière et géométrie, préservée
dans la cinématique relativiste : l’action d’Einstein-Hilbert est
fonction de deux types de champs distincts – la métrique lorentzienne
d’espace-temps d’une part, et les champs de matière d’autre part. La
gravité quantique à boucles, dont il sera question dans cette thèse,
fait partie de cette catégorie : elle s’attache à quantifier
l’espace-temps, comme une champ dynamique à part entière, avec ses
degrés de liberté propres (dont les ondes gravitationnelles sont la
manifestation perturbative). Elle marche en cela dans les pas de Dirac,
Feynman, Wheeler, DeWitt etc. [ 118 ] : pour la théorie des boucles,
l’espace-temps est un champ classique comme les autres, qui doit être
quantifié indépendamment de la matière.

Les approches émergentistes [ 138 , 75 , 133 ] , initiées par Sakharov [
126 ] , prennent le point de vue inverse : l’espace-temps n’existe qu’en
présence d’un substrat microscopique, matériel ou non, et apparaît comme
un type original de propriété collective. Les troublantes relations
entre gravité et thermodynamique découvertes dans le contexte de la
mécanique des trous noirs, et approfondies par Jacobson [ 76 ] et
Padmanabhan [ 133 ] grâce à l’interprétation des équations d’Einstein
comme des équations d’état, donne un crédit important à ce point de vue.
(On trouve également une forme d’émergentisme dans la théorie des
cordes, pour laquelle les équations d’Einstein semblent apparaître comme
condition de cohérence pour la dynamique de cordes supersymétriques.)
Face aux difficultés rencontrées par les tentatives réductionnistes de
quantification de l’espace-temps, cet émergentisme apparaît comme un
contrepoint salutaire. Cela étant, les résultats de Jacobson,
Padmanabhan et d’autres dans cette direction restent trop fragmentaires
pour constituer un véritable “changement de paradigme”, et en
particulier ne prouvent pas que le “champ gravitationnel ne doit pas
être quantifié” [ 137 ] . Gageons simplement que les relations entre
thermodynamique et gravité seront naturellement intégrées dans une
théorie future de la gravité quantique. ⁴ ⁴ 4 Certains chercheurs, à
commencer par Einstein [ 41 ] , ont imaginé une forme d’émergence
inverse : la matière serait une structure interne à l’espace-temps. Un
scénario de ce type est étudié aujourd’hui en théorie des boucles [ 24 ]
, ce qui montre que, dans ce contexte en tous cas, réduction et
émergence ne s’excluent pas nécessairement.

Dans cette thèse, je m’inscrirai donc dans le cadre de la théorie des
boucles, conscient de l’ hypothèse réductionniste qui la sous-tend.
Rappelons aux sceptiques que la procédure de quantification des champs
classiques a été donnée pour morte à deux reprises (dans les années 40,
en raison des divergences ultraviolettes, puis dans les années 60, à
cause du fantôme de Landau) – et qu’elle est toujours bien vivante. La
non-renormalisabilité du développement perturbatif, dans le cas de la
gravité, n’est peut-être pas davantage rédhibitoire : elle indiquerait
simplement qu’il faut non seulement quantifier, mais aussi quantifier
intelligemment .

#### 1.3 Quantification et troncation

Si l’on considère le champ gravitationnel comme un champ classique
fondamental, comme les champs de Maxwell ou de Dirac, le problème de la
gravité quantique consiste à élaborer une procédure de quantification de
l’espace-temps. On insiste souvent sur le fait qu’une telle
quantification est radicalement originale, en ceci qu’elle doit s’opérer
sans le cadre cinématique de la relativité restreinte (référentiels
inertiels et transformations de Lorentz) ; on dit qu’elle doit être
“background independent”. Les difficultés propres à cette situation ont
été soulignées par de nombreux auteurs, parmi lesquelles Rovelli fait
figure de référence. Je renvoie à son livre [ 119 ] pour une excellente
discussion de cet aspect.

Il est pourtant un aspect de la quantification de la métrique
d’espace-temps qui est similaire à celle des champs de matière usuels,
au sein du modèle standard de la physique des particules. Il s’agit de
la nécessité de procéder à une troncation de l’ensemble des degrés de
liberté dynamiques. Comme l’électrodynamique ou la chromodynamique, la
géométrodynamique (la relativité générale) est en effet une théorie
non-linéaire. Ceci signifie qu’il est impossible de scinder les
équations du mouvement en composantes indépendantes, comme on peut le
faire par l’analyse de Fourier dans le cas du champ libre de
Klein-Gordon. Tous les degrés de liberté du champ sont couplés entre
eux, sans hiérarchie apparente.

Nous ignorons comment quantifier une telle infinité de degrés de liberté
en interaction. Pour progresser vers une théorie quantique prédictive,
il faut donc procéder à une troncation de l’espace des phases, par
laquelle on isole certains degrés de liberté, identifiés comme plus
pertinents pour le régime expérimental d’intérêt. On établit par cette
opération un schéma d’approximation, qui est d’autant plus fin que le
nombre de degrés de libertés conservés est important. Plusieurs type de
troncation sont utilisées couramment en physique des hautes énergies :

1.  Le développement perturbatif [ 97 ] . Dans les théories faiblement
    couplées, comme l’électrodynamique à basse énergie ou la
    chromodynamique à haute énergie, ou peut utiliser le nombre de
    particules pour tronquer l’espace des phases. Rappelons qu’une
    particule (virtuelle) est un mode de Fourier du champ, représentant
    un état dans l’espace de Fock du champ libre correspondant. Le
    développement perturbatif consiste à organiser les amplitudes
    quantiques en série de termes au nombre de particules croissants. On
    tronque habituellement cette série à l’ordre 1 pour une première
    estimation des corrections quantiques, et à l’ordre @xmath pour les
    calculs les plus précis.

2.  La discrétisation sur réseau [ 112 ] . Pour étudier les phénomènes
    résultant d’interactions fortes entre particules élémentaires, comme
    le confinement des quarks et des gluons au sein des hadrons, le
    développement perturbatif est inopérant. Avec l’avènement des
    calculateurs numériques puissants, la troncation la plus utile dans
    ce contexte est la discrétisation sur réseau : on réduit
    l’espace-temps à un nombre fini de points sur un graphe régulier,
    séparés par une distance @xmath infime par rapport à la dimension
    caractéristique du phénomène que l’on souhaite étudier (la masse du
    hadron, par exemple). Dans cette approche, toutes les fluctuations
    d’échelle inférieure à @xmath sont supprimées.

3.  Factorisation des symétries de jauge. Il existe une classe de
    théories de champs, telles les célèbres théories de champs
    topologiques [ 12 ] , dans lesquelles le nombre infini de degrés de
    liberté est imputable à une symétrie de jauge. La réduction de cette
    symétrie de jauge réduit le système à un nombre fini de degrés de
    libertés, qu’on peut quantifier par les méthodes usuelles de
    mécanique quantique. A proprement parler, cette opération n’est pas
    une troncation de l’espace des phases, puisque les degrés de
    libertés éliminés sont redondants. Aucune information physique n’est
    donc perdue.

Dans le développement perturbatif et la mise sur réseau, la troncation
d’un nombre infini de degrés de liberté ne peut se faire sans tenir
compte de leur résultante effective sur les degrés de libertés
préservés. Cette opération, qualifiée traditionnellement de
renormalisation [ 104 ] dans le premier cas et de groupe de
renormalisation [ 144 ] dans le second, est à l’origine de l’essentiel
des difficultés techniques et conceptuelles liées à la troncation de
l’espace des phases. Son résultat, la définition de constante de
couplages “habillées” ou “d’actions parfaites”, dépendant de l’échelle,
doit s’interpréter comme la condition de cohérence d’un schéma de
troncation associant échelles spatiales et force des interactions.

Comme tout schéma d’approximation, la troncation possède une limite
exacte, dans laquelle le couplage entre tous les degrés de libertés est
rétabli. Dans le cas du développement pertubatif, la définition et
l’étude de cette limite est le sujet de la théorie constructive [ 103 ]
; dans les approches sur réseau, on parle de limite continue .

Un point important à noter concernant cette limite exacte est la forme
qu’elle prend dans les cas 1 et 2, respectivement. La limite
constructive du développement pertubatif est essentiellement une somme :
pour caricaturer un processus en vérité très subtil (et sur lequel nous
reviendrons plus tard), on peut dire qu’il s’agit d’ ajouter la valeur
de tous les diagrammes de Feynman, à tous les ordres. La limite continue
des théorie sur réseau, à l’inverse, s’obtient en raffinant le graphe.
Les deux schémas de troncation apparaissent donc techniquement très
différents, même s’ils correspondent tous deux à l’élargissement de la
section d’espace des phases préservée par la troncation.

En gravité quantique comme dans le modèle standard, il est nécessaire
d’opérer une troncation des degrés de liberté contenu dans la métrique
pour réaliser la quantification des équations d’Einstein. On peut
considérer que la singulière difficulté de la gravité quantique réside
dans le fait qu’aucun des schémas cités précédemment ne s’applique au
cas de la relativité générale.

1.  Non-renormalisabilité du développement perturbatif. La
    quantification perturbative de la relativité générale, fondée sur le
    concept de graviton, consiste à supposer que la métrique
    d’espace-temps fluctue peu autour de la métrique de Minkowski. Ceci
    conduit à un développement des amplitudes en puissances de la
    constante de Newton @xmath pour lequel la procédure de
    renormalisation n’est pas close. Techniquement, on montre que
    l’interaction des gravitons entre eux est non-renormalisable. En
    présence d’un cutoff en énergie @xmath , on peut toutefois
    construire une théorie de champs effective [ 33 ] , consistant en un
    double développement en @xmath et @xmath . Celle-ci permet de
    calculer notamment les premières corrections quantiques au potentiel
    gravitationnel de Newton, mais ne possède pas de limite
    ultraviolette exacte.

2.  Absence d’une métrique de fond. La mise sur réseau de la relativité
    générale est rendue impossible par le fait qu’aucune métrique de
    fond ne permet de définir le pas du réseau @xmath . Cette voie de
    troncation est donc exclue pour la gravité quantique.

3.  Présence d’une infinité de degrés de liberté physiques. Même s’il
    est vrai que quatre des six degrés de liberté par point de la
    métrique (en quatre dimensions) sont redondants, du fait de la
    symétrie par difféomorphisme de la relativité générale, deux degrés
    de liberté par point sont physiques et doivent être quantifiés.
    C’est dire que la relativité générale n’est pas à l’image de la
    théorie de Chern-Simons [ 145 ] ou de la théorie BF [ 74 ] : son
    espace des phases réduit est de dimension infinie.

Une contribution essentielle à l’élaboration d’un schéma de troncation
de la relativité générale qui dépasse ces difficultés est due à Regge [
100 ] . S’appuyant sur une triangulation @xmath de la variété
d’espace-temps, il a en effet découvert une approximation simple de
l’action d’Einstein-Hilbert, s’exprimant en fonction de la longueur
@xmath des arêtes des simplex : pour un espace-temps de dimension @xmath
, notant @xmath un @xmath -simplex (un “os” ou “charnière”) de @xmath ,
@xmath son volume euclidien et @xmath l’angle de déficit autour de
@xmath , l’action de Regge s’écrit ⁵ ⁵ 5 On n’inclut pas ici de
constante cosmologique.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

et approche l’action de Einstein-Hilbert d’autant mieux que le nombre de
@xmath -simplexes est grand. Cette observation est aujourd’hui au
fondement de plusieurs approches à la gravité quantique, parmi
lesquelles on peut citer la théorie des triangulations dynamiques
causales [ 2 ] et le calcul de Regge quantique [ 143 ] .

Un aspect remarquable de l’approche de Regge est sa capacité à décrire
une géométrie quadrimensionnelle sans devoir recourir à un choix de
jauge, c’est-à-dire de coordonnées sur l’espace-temps [ 120 ] . En
localisant la courbure sur les “os” d’une triangulation, elle offre en
effet la possibilité d’exprimer la dynamique en termes de longueurs
physiques – la dimension de ces “os”. Ainsi, le schéma de troncation de
Regge est également une solution (alternative à celle de Komar et
Bergmann [ 22 ] ) au problème fondamental de la gravité pure : la
difficulté d’identifier des observables invariantes par difféomorphismes
en l’absence de champs de matière.

#### 1.4 Réseaux et mousses de spins

La théorie des boucles [ 119 , 9 , 132 ] développée à l’origine par
Rovelli et Smolin [ 123 , 113 ] sur la base du travail d’Ashtekar [ 7 ]
, promeut un schéma de troncation de la relativité générale d’un genre
différent, mêlant discrétisation sur réseau et factorisation des
symétries de jauge (exemples 2 et 3 ci-dessus). Elle se présente sous
deux formes, canonique et covariante, correspondant pour le cas
gravitationnel aux quantifications de Schrödinger et de Feynman
utilisées en mécanique quantique.

Chronologiquement, la première version de la théorie des boucles est la
version canonique. S’inscrivant dans le sillage de Arnowitt, Deser et
Misner [ 6 ] , celle-ci s’appuie sur une décomposition de l’espace-temps
en feuilles d’espaces indexées par une coordonnées de temps, et
reformule les équations d’Einstein comme des équations de contraintes.
Sur chacune de ces feuilles d’espaces, elle utilise comme variables
canoniques – c’est là son originalité – la connexion d’Ashtekar @xmath
et son champ électrique conjugué @xmath , et fait l’hypothèse que
l’ensemble des holonomies @xmath de @xmath – les boucles – et des flux
bidimensionnels @xmath de @xmath forme un jeu de variables adaptées pour
une troncation des degrés de liberté du champ gravitationnel compatible
avec sa symétrie sous les difféomorphismes.

Cette hypothèse est motivée par la théorie des noeuds [ 123 , 57 , 14 ]
, qui sont précisément des structures invariantes par difféomorphismes
dans un espace tridimensionnel [ 14 ] . En ne considérant que les
holonomies supportées sur une classe d’équivalence @xmath de graphes
dirigés et plongés dans une feuille d’espace donnée, on obtient ainsi un
troncation finie de la relativité générale, qu’il est possible de
quantifier à l’instar du champ de Yang-Mills [ 57 ] . Ceci conduit à la
représentation des holonomies de @xmath et des flux de @xmath par des
opérateurs sur l’espace de Hilbert des fonctions de carré sommable pour
la mesure de Haar

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

où @xmath et @xmath désignent respectivement le nombre de noeuds et de
liens de @xmath , et où le quotient correspond à la symétrie de jauge
sur réseau traditionnelle (action aux noeuds du graphe). Les états
quantiques générant cet espace par la décomposition de Peter-Weyl sont
appelés réseaux de spins [ 114 ] . On peut considérer qu’ils décrivent
un “espace quantique tronqué”, dont les aires et volumes,
essentiellement données par les opérateurs de Penrose [ 94 , 87 ] , sont
quantifiées [ 124 ] . Pour résumer, la théorie des boucles fait du champ
gravitationnel un champ de jauge sur un réseau dynamique . Son point
commun avec le calcul de Regge est qu’elle s’appuie sur des structures
discrètes pour définir des observables relationnelles internes au champs
gravitationnel .

Dans cette approche, on obtient l’espace de Hilbert (cinématique,
c’est-à-dire permettant de représenter la contrainte hamiltonienne)
total par une limite inductive sur @xmath , qui est aussi une somme
directe de sous-espaces @xmath sur lesquels tous les spins sont-nuls: ⁶
⁶ 6 Du point du vue de l’analyse fonctionnelle, cet espace @xmath
accompagné de sa représentation de l’algèbre des holonomies et flux de
la connection d’Ashtekar est isomorphe à un espace de fonctionnelles de
connections distributionnelles, de carré intégrable pour une mesure dite
d’Ashtekar-Lewandowski [ 8 , 10 ] . (Cette dernière présentation est
analogue à la formulation de Schrödinger de la mécanique quantique.)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Précisons ce point. Pour obtenir l’espace de Hilbert cinématique total,
il faut considérer des graphes “arbitrairement denses”. Pour ce faire,
on peut observer que l’ensemble de tous les graphes, équipé de la
relation d’ordre @xmath correspondant à l’inclusion d’un graphe dans un
autre, forme un ensemble ordonné filtrant ( directed set en anglais) :
pour toute paire de graphes @xmath et @xmath , il existe un graphe
@xmath contenant @xmath et @xmath comme sous-graphes. Grâce à cette
structure, ainsi que les injections @xmath quand @xmath obtenues en
coloriant les arêtes de @xmath non contenues dans @xmath par un spin
nul, on peut construire la limite inductive ( 1.3 ). Nous reviendrons
dans le paragraphe suivant sur le fait que, dans le schéma de troncation
en boucles, la limite continue est aussi une somme.

La limite de la formulation canonique de la théorie des boucles est la
difficulté de résoudre la contrainte hamiltonienne scalaire, qui génère
les reparamatrisations de la coordonnée temporelle dans l’espace-temps [
132 ] . Pour contourner ce problème, Reisenberger et Rovelli [ 102 ] ont
introduit une intégrale de chemins pour les réseaux de spins. Dans ce
schéma, une “trajectoire” d’un réseau de spins est représenteée par un
@xmath -complexe colorées par des spins, appelé mousse de spins . On
définira précisément ces @xmath -complexes, ou mousses , dans le
chapitre 2. Pour notre propos présent, il suffit de se représenter une
mousse @xmath comme un ensemble de vertex, arêtes et faces, attachées le
long de leurs bords, et possédant un graphe @xmath comme frontière (
@xmath pouvant être le graphe vide). De même que le graphe @xmath
représente une troncation de la géométrie spatiale dans l’approche
canonique, la mousse @xmath représente une troncation de la géometrie
spatio-temporelle. Suivant la logique de l’intégrale de chemin, on peut
définir une dynamique pour l’espace-temps quantique en associant à
chacune de ces mousses une amplitude complexe @xmath . En principe,
cette amplitude devrait pouvoir être calculée à partir des éléments de
matrice de la contrainte hamiltonienne. Ceci a pu être réalisé en trois
dimensions [ 90 ] , mais semble hors de portée en quatre dimensions. La
stratégié utilisée en théorie des boucles est donc de faire un ansatz
pour cette amplitude : on parle de modèles de mousses de spins.

Ces dernières années ont vu l’introduction d’une nouvelle classe de tels
modèles en quatre dimensions, par Engle, Pereira, Rovelli [ 44 , 43 ]
mais aussi par Freidel et Krasnov [ 50 ] sur la base de travaux de
Livine et Speziale [ 78 ] , qui semblent prometteurs. Ainsi, Barrett et
ses collaborateurs [ 18 ] ont montré que, pour une mousse @xmath
contenant un seul vertex et dont la frontière @xmath est le graphe
complet sur @xmath noeuds, correspondant aux @xmath tétraèdres qui
bordent un @xmath -simplex, la limite de grand spin de @xmath est
proportionnelle à l’exponentielle de l’action de Regge pour un @xmath
-simplex. Ceci montre que le schéma de troncation en mousses de spins
est lié au calcul de Regge, dont on sait qu’il est lui-même une
troncation de la relativité générale. Un autre résultat remarquable
concerne l’identification d’un régime perturbatif [ 86 ] : en utilisant
un état cohérent sur @xmath piquant la géométrie quantique sur
l’espace-temps plat de Minkowski, Rovelli et al. ont pu montrer que les
fluctuations quantiques sur @xmath ont la même structure que le graviton
en relativité générale linéarisée. Leur fonction de corrélation à @xmath
[ 23 ] et @xmath points [ 125 ] , en particulier, ont la même structure
tensorielle que celles du graviton.

Dans cette thèse, j’étudierai un modèle plus simple, le modèle plat ,
qui forme le squelette de ces “nouveaux modèles” et en partage certaines
propriétés, comme la limite Regge [ 99 , 37 , 18 ] . Les motivations
pour étudier dans un premier temps ce modèle-ci plutôt que les nouveaux
modèles sont nombreuses :

-   l’essentiel des résultats supportant l’approche par mousses de spins
    portent sur le modèle plat

-   tous les modèles de mousses de spins étudiés dans la littérature
    sont des modifications du modèle plat

-   techniquement, il est considérablement plus simple que les nouveaux
    modèles

-   il est lié à la topologie quantique (et en est en quelque sorte à
    l’origine)

-   son interprétation géométrique est claire : il décrit un système de
    connections de jauge discrètes plates

J’étudierai en profondeur un aspect du modèle plat qui a été peu
considéré jusqu’à présent : celui de ses divergences . Le premier
problème spécifique sur lequel je concentrerai mes efforts est ainsi
celui des divergences de bulles . Certains résultats préliminaires dûs à
Perez et Rovelli [ 95 ] et Freidel et al. [ 51 , 54 , 53 ] suggèrent en
effet que pour une mousse @xmath contenant des “bulles” (à définir
précisément), la quantité @xmath est divergente. Cette situation, qui
rappelle les divergences ultraviolettes des amplitudes de Feynman en
théorie quantique des champs, réclame une analyse quantitative : quel
est le degré de divergence d’une mousse @xmath ? De quoi dépend-il ? De
la topologie de @xmath ? D’autre chose ? Ces questions apparaissent
essentielle pour une compréhension à la fois rigoureuse et générale du
modèle plat et, partant, des modèles de mousses de spins en général. La
seconde partie de ce manuscrit (chapitres 3 à 5 ) fournit une solution
détaillée à ce problème.

#### 1.5 Limite continue des mousses de spins

L’autre problème qui se pose quand on étudie le modèle plat est bien sûr
celui de la limite continue : de l’ensemble des amplitudes tronquées
@xmath , comment obtient-on une amplitude complète @xmath contenant tous
les degrés de liberté du champ gravitationnel quantique ? On a vu
précédemment qu’au niveau cinématique, la limite continue, consistant à
raffiner les graphes jusqu’à l’infini, prend aussi la forme d’une somme
directe d’espace de Hilbert. Qu’en est-il au niveau dynamique ? Faut-il
définir @xmath en sommant sur les mousses, formellement @xmath , comme
dans un développement perturbatif à la Feynman (cas 1) ? Ou raffiner
@xmath infiniment, @xmath , comme en théorie de jauge sur réseau (cas 2)
? Cette question a été la source de nombreux débats entre spécialistes
des mousses de spins [ 48 ] .

L’implémentation la plus populaire de la somme sur les mousses est due à
Boulatov [ 31 ] et Ooguri [ 91 ] , et est connue sous le nom théorie de
champs sur le groupe ( group field theory ) [ 48 , 92 ] . Dans ce
schéma, les amplitudes @xmath apparaissent comme d’authentiques
amplitudes de Feynman [ 101 ] pour une théorie de champs auxiliaires,
définies sur une certaine puissance cartésienne d’un groupe de Lie
compact, @xmath le plus souvent. C’est dire que, pour la théorie de
champs sur le groupe, la divergence de @xmath est un problème de
renormalisation, et la somme sur @xmath un problème constructif. Le
calcul du degré de divergence d’une mousse @xmath prend ainsi tout son
sens, puisqu’il permet d’étudier la renormalisabilité de la théorie de
champs sur le groupe de Boulatov-Ooguri. Rivasseau a également souligné
que ce point de vue présente l’avantage remarquable de fixer le
coefficient de chaque mousse @xmath dans la somme [ 107 ] : c’est le
coefficient combinatoire du développement de Feynamn de la théorie de
champs sur le groupe. Enfin, Oriti soutient que cette perspective permet
de rapprocher la théorie des boucles de la matière condensée [ 93 ] , et
ainsi de réduire la fracture entre réductionnisme et émergentisme en
gravité quantique.

Dans le chapitre 7 de cette thèse, je prendrai ce point de vue pour
étudier la limite continue des mousses de spins : je montrerai qu’il est
possible, dans le cadre de la théorie de champs sur le groupe de
Boulatov (en trois dimensions), de réaliser la somme sur les mousses
dans un sens rigoureux, celui de la resommation de Borel. J’utiliserai
pour cela l’outil le plus récent de la théorie constructive, développés
par Rivasseau et Magnen : le développement en cactus [ 105 , 82 ] . Ce
résultat donne un crédit supplémentaire à la viabilité de la théorie de
champs sur le groupe.

Mais on peut également définir une forme de limite inductive pour les
mousses de spins [ 149 , 121 ] . Celle-ci forme une alternative à la
théorie de champs sur le groupe, dont l’avantage est de préserver la
relation entre somme et limite suggérée par l’idée, fondamentale en
théorie des boucles, qu’un espace-temps est un processus virtuel, et non
une structure a priori : une mousse est donc à la fois un diagramme de
Feynman (cas 1) et un réseau (cas 2). Cet argument sera présenté en
détail au chapitre 6 .

### Chapter 2 The flat spinfoam model

In this preparatory chapter, we introduce the Ponzano-Regge model, give
a first account of its bubble divergences , discuss its relationship
with three-dimensional quantum gravity, and introduce a cellular
generalization coined the flat spinfoam model .

#### 2.1 The Ponzano-Regge model

The Ponzano-Regge model was put forward in 1968 as a simplicial model of
quantum gravity in three dimensions. Its influence over the later
developments of theoretical and mathematical physics cannot be
overestimated: the spinfoam and group field theory approaches to quantum
gravity, as well as the mathematical theory of state-sum topological
invariants, ¹ ¹ 1 Part of my work with Bonzom has been concerned with
the topological features of the (generalized) Ponzano-Regge model, and
in particular with its relationship to twisted Reidemeister torsion.
This aspect of our work will not be addressed in this thesis. are direct
offsprings of the Ponzano-Regge model.

##### 2.1.1 The Ponzano-Regge asymptotic formula

At the roots of these developments is a most surprising result: the
Wigner @xmath symbol (a key object in @xmath recoupling theory [ 136 ] ,
with applications in nuclear, atomic and molecular physics) contains, in
the large spin asymptotics, the three-dimensional Regge action for a
tetrahedron with edge lengths @xmath , where @xmath are half-integers.
Explicitly, if @xmath is the volume of a Euclidean tetrahedron with edge
lengths @xmath , and @xmath the corresponding Regge action ( 1.1 ), one
has in the uniform @xmath limit ² ² 2 Meaning that the spins are scaled
as @xmath with a single @xmath . In this regime, the “shape” of the
tetrahedron, defined by the ratios @xmath with @xmath , is preserved in
the limit.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Moreover, when the spins @xmath do not define a Euclidean tetrahedron,
the @xmath symbol is exponentially suppressed in this limit.

Ponzano and Regge conjectured this asymptotic behavior on the basis of
numerical simulations [ 99 ] . An influential proof thereof, using
geometric quantization, was given by Roberts in [ 111 ] ; see [ 5 , 26 ]
for the most recent advances on the semiclassics of Wigner symbols.
(Higher orders in the large-spin asymptotic expansion were also
investigated using saddle point techniques in my paper [ 27 ] and the
subsequent [ 38 ] .)

The remarkable character of the asymptotic formula ( 2.1 ) lies in the
fact that, not only it contains the Regge action @xmath (hence it is
related to three-dimensional gravity), but contains it within a cosine .
This is reminiscent of the semiclassical (WKB) approximation of quantum
amplitudes (with the only difference that the eikonal exponential @xmath
, where @xmath is the Hamilton function, is replaced by the cosine. ³ ³
3 This difference can be traced back to the fact that @xmath edge
lengths define a tetrahedron up to rotation and reflection [ 13 ] . ) In
other words, the @xmath symbol appears to be related to semiclassical
quantum gravity.

This striking connection between @xmath representation theory and
three-dimensional quantum gravity prompted Ponzano and Regge to put
forward the first spinfoam model ever written.

##### 2.1.2 A simplicial partition function

Since a @xmath symbol appears to represent a quantum tetrahedron , ⁴ ⁴ 4
The notion of quantum tetrahedron was later expounded by Barbieri [ 15 ]
and Baez and Barrett [ 16 ] with applications in four-dimensional
spinfoam gravity [ 17 ] . with quantized edge lengths and Regge
semiclassics, it is not unreasonable to surmise that a model of
(Riemannian) quantum gravity on a triangulated @xmath -manifold @xmath
can be obtained by

-   associating one @xmath symbol to each tetrahedron, and

-   summing over the spins, in the spirit of Feynman’s path integral.

Indeed, Ponzano and Regge defined in [ 99 ] a partition function @xmath
for the triangulation @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath denotes the set of @xmath -simplices of @xmath , @xmath is
the @xmath symbol based on the spins coloring the @xmath edges of the
tetrahedron @xmath , and @xmath is a linear function of the spins @xmath
, left unspecified by Ponzano and Regge (except for very special cases)
but fixed in [ 19 ] . Note that, if @xmath has a boundary, this
expression defines a transition amplitude for a two-dimensional Regge
geometry with fixed edge lengths.

The key input in this heuristic quantization of three-dimensional
geometry is the quantization of edge lengths . This follows from the
quantization of irreducible representations (spins) @xmath of @xmath ,
and the identification @xmath suggested by the Ponzano-Regge asymptotic
formula ( 2.1 ). As pointed out by Rovelli [ 115 ] , this quantization
hypothesis has a compelling justification in loop quantum gravity. We
refer to Rovelli’s book [ 119 ] for more details on this aspect.

##### 2.1.3 Bubble divergences

It did not escape Ponzano and Regge’s attention that the multi-series in
the definition ( 2.2 ) is unlikely to converge for a general
triangulation @xmath [ 99 ] . Unfortunately, it is difficult to turn
this concern into a precise mathematical statement. Even absolute
convergence of ( 2.2 ) is hard to check, mainly for two reasons.

-   First, not all the values of the spins @xmath actually contribute to
    the sum, because of the triangle constraints which enter the
    definition of @xmath symbols. For instance, a necessary condition
    for the @xmath symbol in ( 2.1 ) is that @xmath . Describing the
    domain @xmath of admissible spins for a general triangulation @xmath
    is by no means straightforward.

-   Even if @xmath could be described explicitly, as in the elementary
    cases studied in [ 96 ] , we would not know how the @xmath symbols
    behave there: the Ponzano-Regge asymptotic formula only prescribes
    its behavior in the homogeneous limit, where all the spins grow at
    the same rate. ⁵ ⁵ 5 Recent work has improved this situation: we now
    know the asymptotic behavior of the @xmath symbol with small angular
    momenta as well [ 148 , 26 ] . This is only a very restricted
    subdomain of @xmath .

Because of these difficulties, simple estimates based on a balance
between the divergent edge factors @xmath and the convergent tetrahedra
factors @xmath are not reliable: the absolute convergence of the
Ponzano-Regge partition function is an open problem.

Worse still, even assuming that we can resolve these issues
satisfactorily, the most likely outcome is be that the Ponzano-Regge sum
( 2.2 ) is not absolutely convergent. One would then ask whether it is
perhaps semi-convergent , like the alternating series @xmath .
Unfortunately, the complicated oscillation pattern induced by the
factors @xmath and the Ponzano-Regge cosines @xmath make this question
almost impossible to answer in full generality.

This notwithstanding, one observation made in an attempt by Perez and
Rovelli [ 95 ] to describe the domain @xmath deserves to be mentioned.
First, consider the dual cell complex @xmath of the triangulation @xmath
, whose @xmath -cells are in one-to-one correspondence with the @xmath
-simplices of @xmath . (Since the partition function ( 2.2 ) only
involves the edges and tetrahedra of @xmath , and not its vertices, we
can actually restrict to the @xmath -skeleton of @xmath .) Within @xmath
, the triangle constraints can be localized on the edges @xmath , where
three spin-colored faces @xmath meet. A moment of reflection then shows
that, for one the spins to be free, namely to have admissible values
from zero to infinity, a necessary condition is that there exists a
closed set of faces within @xmath : a bubble .

This insight has two immediate consequences. First, it suggests that the
number of bubbles of @xmath is somehow the driving parameter in the
divergence degree of @xmath , if such a thing can be defined. Second, it
gives a field-theoretic flavor to the issue of divergences in the
Ponzano-Regge model: bubbles are higher-dimensional analog of loops –
and we know that loops support the divergences of Feynman amplitudes.
This circumstance calls for an interpretation of the Ponzano-Regge model
as a “higher categorical” version of perturbative quantum field theory [
13 ] .

We shall see in this thesis that both intuitions are relevant.

#### 2.2 A discrete gauge theory

So far, the only evidence we have given for the connection between the
Ponzano-Regge ansatz and three-dimensional quantum gravity is the
Ponzano-Regge asymptotic formula. There is however another argument to
this effect, relying on the Palatini-Cartan formulation of general
relativity. The latter sheds a new light on the Ponzano-Regge model: it
is a discrete gauge theory . This new perspective turns out to be the
key for understanding its bubble divergences, as we will see in the
second part of this thesis.

##### 2.2.1 Palatini-Cartan gravity

Recall that, in a “first order” formulation of (Riemannian)
three-dimensional general relativity, the gravitational field can be
represented by a pair of fields @xmath , where @xmath is an @xmath
connection @xmath -form on spacetime @xmath , and @xmath is an @xmath
-valued @xmath -form over @xmath , or equivalently a triad field on
@xmath . ⁶ ⁶ 6 This is identification is possible due to the fact that
the adjoint representation of @xmath is also its vector representation.
The so-called Palatini-Cartan ⁷ ⁷ 7 The name given to various
gravitational actions is very author-dependent. We use ”Cartan” to mean
that a vielbein is involved, and ”Palatini” to express the fact that the
connection is an independent variable. action is then [ 14 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here the bracket is the Killing form in the Lie algebra @xmath . It is
not hard to see that the Euler-Lagrange equations for this action,
namely

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

are indeed the vacuum Einstein equation @xmath in disguise: the first
states that @xmath is flat, and the second that it is the unique spin
connection associated to @xmath , see [ 14 ] .

The Palatini-Cartan action is an instance of the BF models considered by
Horowicz [ 74 ] , defined in dimension @xmath by the analogue of ( 2.3 )
with @xmath replaced by a @xmath -form @xmath . Like the latter, it is
invariant under an extended gauge group which, besides the
diffeomorphisms and @xmath gauge transformations, includes a shift
symmetry generated by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is an @xmath -valued @xmath -form over @xmath and @xmath is
a flat connection.

Let us now perform a formal path-integral “quantization” of the
Palatini-Cartan, according to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Integrating out the @xmath field gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The tilde and quotes here are meant to remind us that no gauge-fixing
has been performed for the on-shell gauge symmetry ( 2.5 ) [ 51 , 53 ] ,
and so we cannot speak of a genuine quantization in the usual sense of
gauge theory [ 145 , 74 ] . For clarity, the operation performed in (
2.6 )-( 2.7 ) should perhaps be called a “half-quantization” of
Palatini-Cartan gravity.

Before we move on to explain the connection between this procedure and
the Ponzano-Regge model, one more comment is in order. In quantizing a
classical theory à la Feynman, it is not uncommon that the space of
histories has to be enlarged with respect to its classical counterpart.
For instance, the quantum histories of a free particle contains rough
(viz. non-differentiable) paths in addition to the smooth ones
considered in the classical theory. Similarly, the quantum histories of
a free field include distributional fields as well as smooth ones. Now,
the path-integral half-quantization of the Palatini-Cartan action relies
on a similar extension of the classical notion of a gravitational
history, including torsion and degenerate metrics . Witten has argued [
145 ] that such configurations are essential in three-dimensional
quantum gravity (showing that they permit a renormalizable perturbative
extension), but later changed his mind [ 147 ] . All in all, it is fair
to say that the status of torsion and degenerate metrics is quantum
gravity remains to be understood. ⁸ ⁸ 8 I thank Simone Speziale for
drawing my attention to this point.

##### 2.2.2 Discrete gauge theory

Let us now consider the half-quantized expression ( 2.7 ), and
discretize it . To this aim, we must

1.  introduce a triangulation @xmath of @xmath , and its dual cell
    complex @xmath , and

2.  discretize the connection @xmath (resp. the curvature @xmath ) on
    the edges (resp. the faces) of the @xmath -skeleton @xmath of @xmath

3.  Choose orientations for the edges and faces of @xmath .

Recall that, given this data, discrete gauge theory is formulated in
terms of parallel transport operators and holonomies . For a given cell
decomposition @xmath of @xmath , these are defined respectively as
assignments of group elements @xmath to each edge @xmath , and of the
products

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

to each face @xmath , with @xmath depending on the relative orientation
of @xmath and @xmath . Thus, a discrete connection @xmath is an element
of @xmath and the curvature of @xmath is the family of holonomies @xmath
defined by ( 2.8 ).

Using these definitions, we can make the following ansatz for the
discretization of ( 2.7 ) on @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is the Haar measure on @xmath and @xmath denotes the set of
@xmath -cells of @xmath . Just like the formal path integral ( 2.7 )
described a system of flat @xmath connections, the expression ( 2.9 )
can be seen as the path-integral for a system of flat discrete
connections.

Now comes the main result of this section: the half-quantized,
discretized path integral ( 2.9 ) is formally identical to the
Ponzano-Regge partition function ( 2.2 ). To understand how this comes
about, we must recall the basis of the Peter-Weyl theory of Fourier
analysis on compact groups.

Let @xmath be a smooth function on a compact group @xmath , and @xmath
be the sequence of unitary irreducible representations of @xmath ,
labelled by a discrete index @xmath . ⁹ ⁹ 9 More precisely, @xmath
ranges over the set of equivalence classes of unitary irreps of @xmath ,
and @xmath is an element of @xmath . For each @xmath , pick a basis
@xmath of @xmath , and define the representative functions @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then the Peter-Weyl theorem states that @xmath can be decomposed over
the representative functions as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

When @xmath is a class function, viz. when it is conjugation invariant,
this decomposition reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the character of the representation @xmath . These
decompositions extend to square-integrable functions and Schwartz
distributions. In particular, one computes that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The second ingredient we need to derive the Ponzano-Regge model from the
discrete path-integral ( 2.9 ) is the recoupling identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

in which @xmath ranges over an orthonormal basis of the @xmath
-invariant subspace of the tensor product representation @xmath . For
the case @xmath and @xmath , there is only one such @xmath : the Wigner
@xmath -symbol.

Let us now come back to the integral ( 2.9 ), and use ( 2.14 ) to
decompose the delta functions, noting that @xmath is now a spin. This
gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, since @xmath is the triangulation of a three-dimensional manifold,
every edge @xmath of the dual decomposition is shared by exactly three
faces. Therefore the recoupling identity ( 2.15 ) can be applied along
each edge @xmath . Associating the vectors @xmath and @xmath to the
source and target of each @xmath , this results in a contraction pattern
whereby four invariant vectors @xmath are contracted at each vertex of
@xmath . Examination of this contraction pattern shows that the
corresponding invariant is nothing but the Wigner @xmath symbol. All in
all, we find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

This result clearly vindicates the relevance of the Ponzano-Regge for
quantum gravity. But it also provides us with a new interpretation of
the bubble divergences discussed in sec. 2.1.3 [ 53 ] : they are the
discrete remnants of the (non-compact) shift symmetry of the
Palatini-Cartan action. Building on this insight, these authors
developed a regularization scheme based on a tentative gauge-fixing of
this symmetry. It appears, however, that their ansatz is successful only
in limited cases. Recent work by Barrett and Naish-Guzman [ 19 ] , and
also by Bonzom and myself [ 28 ] , has clarified the reasons of this
failure and the way to overcome it.

##### 2.2.3 Boulatov’s group field theory

The presentation of the Ponzano-Regge model as a discrete gauge theory,
with group elements instead of spins as basic variables, has another
interesting payoff: it puts us on the right track to understand its
bubble divergences as genuine field-theoretic divergences.

To proceed in this direction, let us follow Boulatov [ 31 ] and
introduce an auxiliary field @xmath , defined over the configuration
space @xmath and invariant under the right diagonal action of @xmath and
cyclic permutations @xmath of its arguments, i.e.:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us assume furthermore that the “dynamics” of this field is given by
the non-local action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the @xmath Haar measure. Note that, in the quartic
term, the six integration variables are repeated twice, following the
pattern of the edges of a tetrahedron. (The factor @xmath is only for
simpler final formulas.)

Consider now the perturbative quantization of this model, by mean of the
formal partition function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Examination of the corresponding Feynman rules reveals that the
propagator is three-stranded, with integral kernel

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Likewise, the interaction vertex can be written a product of six delta
functions, matching twelve group elements pair-wise, as in fig. 2.1:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

For a given stranded graph @xmath , these Feynman rules correspond to a
contraction pattern which gives, after integration over all @xmath
variables, the Feynman amplitude (for a vacuum diagram, viz. with no
external leg)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number of vertices of the stranded graph @xmath ,
@xmath denotes an edge @xmath , and @xmath a face, i.e. a closed strand.
Up to a multiplicative constant, this is nothing but the Ponzano-Regge
partition function ( 2.9 ) evaluated on the @xmath -complex defined by
the edges and faces of the stranded Feynman graph. If we interpret
furthermore this @xmath -complex as dual to a three-dimensional space,
as in [ 35 ] , the connection with the Ponzano-Regge model becomes
transparent: Boulatov’s model is a generating function for Ponzano-Regge
amplitudes. (Note however that not all such @xmath -complexes define a
three-dimensional manifold : there can be point-like singularities,
yielding what is known as a pseudo-manifold . We refer the interested
reader to [ 65 , 128 , 67 ] for a discussion on this point.)

#### 2.3 The flat spinfoam model

The upshot of the above discussion of the Ponzano-Regge model can be
summarized as follows:

1.  Although originally defined on a triangulation @xmath of the
    spacetime manifold, the structure of the partition function (and in
    particular its divergence) is better understood in terms of the dual
    cell complex @xmath , and in fact of the @xmath -skeleton @xmath of
    @xmath .

2.  The analytic structure of the Ponzano-Regge partition function is
    more transparent when written as a group integral ( 2.9 ); its
    gauge-theoretic underpinning, and in particular its connection to
    the Palatini-Cartan formulation of gravity, its then manifest.

This motivates a generalization of the Ponzano-Regge model defined on
more general @xmath -complexes: a kind of cellular gauge theory , with
no reference to a particular spacetime manifold. This is concomitant
with Boulatov’s approach, which, as we already mentioned, departs from
the strict setup of three-dimensional manifolds.

##### 2.3.1 Foams

Before we introduce this generalization, let us spell out what we mean
by the expression “ @xmath -complex” above.

The most general possible definition one can think of is a finite,
connected two-dimensional CW complex . Recall that a @xmath -dimensional
CW-complex @xmath is the last of a nested sequence of topological spaces
@xmath defined inductively as follows. The @xmath -skeleton @xmath is
just a discrete set of points. For each integer @xmath , the @xmath
-skeleton @xmath is the result of attaching a set of @xmath -dimensional
balls @xmath to @xmath by gluing maps of the form @xmath . For each
@xmath , the subspace @xmath is called the @xmath -skeleton of @xmath ,
and the interiors of the balls @xmath attached to @xmath are the @xmath
-cells of @xmath .

Contrary to what one might expect (perhaps on the basis of the easy
classification of two-dimensional manifolds ), two-dimensional CW
complexes are very subtle objects, about which several outstanding
conjectures remain open. ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 One of them, the Zeeman conjecture,
actually implies the Poincaré conjecture. In order to stay away from
such mathematical difficulties, in this thesis we will stick to a more
restricted context, where the gluing maps are themselves cellular : we
will assume that each ball @xmath has a cellular decomposition such that
the @xmath -cells on the boundary of @xmath are glued onto @xmath -cells
of @xmath . This condition introduces a form of rigidity in the gluing
patterns, thereby removing most of the topological difficulties
associated to general CW complexes.

The most useful examples of such CW complexes can be found in the
polyhedral category, where the balls @xmath are in fact convex
polyhedra. Explicitly, a polyhedral complex , or piecewise-linear cell
complex , is a CW complex where each ball @xmath is in fact a @xmath
-dimensional convex polytope @xmath in some @xmath , and the gluing maps
@xmath are cellular homeomorphisms onto their images. When all the
polytopes are simplices, one speaks of a @xmath -complex [ 70 ] .

One reason which makes two-dimensional polyhedral complexes, from now on
called foams , particularly convenient to deal with is that their
structure can be described purely combinatorially: attaching a polygon
onto the @xmath -skeleton @xmath amounts to choosing a cycle in @xmath ,
i.e. a finite sequence of vertices ( @xmath -cells) such that, from each
of its vertices there is an edge ( @xmath -cell) to the next vertex in
the sequence, and the start and end vertices are the same. In other
words, a two-dimensional polyhedral complex @xmath can be equivalently
defined as a triple @xmath with @xmath a finite set of vertices , @xmath
a set of ordered pairs of vertices @xmath , or edges , and @xmath a
finite set of cycles, or faces . This data uniquely defines a
two-dimensional polyhedral complex up to homeomorphism.

Note that this definition includes the stranded Feynman diagrams of the
Boulatov model, but is also much more general: unlike the former, the
number of faces adjacent to any edge can be arbitrary. It is in this
sense that the flat spinfoam model, being defined on general foams,
generalizes the Ponzano-Regge model to “arbitrary dimensions”.

Finally, observe that there is a notion of boundary for foams. Indeed,
let us call the edges of @xmath appearing exactly once in only one face
its links , and the other ones its interior edges . Similarly, let us
call the vertices appearing exactly once in an interior edge its nodes ,
and the other ones its interior vertices . The sets of nodes and links
of a foam @xmath generally do not form a graph, but when they do, and
moreover the orientation of each link matches the one induced by the
unique face passing through it, we say that @xmath is a proper foam . We
then define the boundary @xmath as the subcomplex of @xmath defined by
those faces of @xmath which contain at least one link. The underlying
graph of @xmath is the boundary graph of @xmath . In this language,
foams with the same boundary graphs can still have different boundaries,
because the boundary faces can be different.

##### 2.3.2 Definition of the model

We are now in the position to define the flat spinfoam model . Let
@xmath be a foam, and @xmath be a compact Lie group. Denote @xmath the
space of discrete @xmath -connections @xmath over @xmath , and @xmath
its curvature as in ( 2.8 ). The flat model is then defined formally by
the expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Haar measure on @xmath .

When @xmath is the @xmath -skeleton of the cell complex dual to a
triangulated @xmath -manifold, this expression of course coincides with
the Ponzano-Regge partition function. But this is only a very special
case of ( 2.24 ): there are many foams which cannot be constructed in
this way. Note in particular that, when there are more than three faces
adjacent to each edge, the Peter-Weyl transform of ( 2.24 ) does not
consist of @xmath -symbols. For instance, if @xmath is the @xmath
-skeleton of the dual cell complex of a triangulated @xmath -manifold,
these are replaced by @xmath -symbols: this is the so-called Ooguri
model [ 91 ] .

Another particular case of the flat spinfoam model is when @xmath is the
cellular decomposition of a closed, orientable surface : the partition
function ( 2.24 ) then corresponds to the weak coupling limit of
two-dimensional Yang-Mills theory , considered notably by Witten in [
146 ] . When the genus of @xmath is greater or equal to @xmath ,
extensive studies of ( 2.24 ) after [ 146 ] have showed that @xmath is
finite. ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 It is then equal to @xmath , with @xmath the Riemann
zeta function and @xmath the Euler characteristic of @xmath . We will
re-derive this result in sec. 4.3.2 .

##### 2.3.3 Heat kernel regularization

Just like its Ponzano-Regge specialization, the flat spinfoam model is
ill-defined. In the definition ( 2.24 ), this is manifest from the fact
that delta distributions supported at coincident points are multiplied –
a famously illicit operation.

Very roughly speaking, we can say that a troublesome situation will
arise every time the number of delta functions ( @xmath , the number of
faces of @xmath ) does not match the number of integrals in ( 2.24 ) (
@xmath , the number of @xmath ). Thus, when @xmath , we might expect
that the a possible regularization of @xmath consists in removing some
redundant delta functions in ( 2.24 ). Indeed, this is the idea followed
by Freidel and Louapre in [ 51 , 53 ] , and later by Barrett and
Naish-Guzman [ 19 ] . We will comment on this approach in sec. 3.3 .

For now, we will content ourselves with a more straightforward
regularization, consisting simply in replacing the delta functions by
smooth functions, peaked on the unit @xmath . One way to construct such
functions is by letting the delta diffuse over @xmath for some small
time @xmath . This gives the so-called heat kernel ¹² ¹² 12 Explicit
expression of the heat kernel for simply connected and connected
semi-simple groups are known, see [ 45 ] . @xmath , viz. the solution of
the heat equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

with initial condition @xmath . Here @xmath is the Laplace-Beltrami
operator, defined using some bi-invariant metric on @xmath (e.g. the one
induced by the Killing form on its Lie algebra, when @xmath is
semi-simple).

Using the heat kernel on @xmath , we thus define the regularized flat
spinfoam model by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

This ansatz turns the problem of understanding the bubble divergences of
the flat spinfoam model (and in particular of the Ponzano-Regge and
Ooguri models) into a well-posed analytical question: what is the @xmath
asymptotic behavior of @xmath ? Answering this question is the purpose
of the next chapters of this thesis.

## Part II Homological powercounting of bubble divergences

In this part of the thesis, we address the problem of computing the
divergence degree of the regularized flat spinfoam model @xmath in the
@xmath limit. The approach we take has two ingredients, detailed in
chapters 3 and 4 respectively:

1.  study the @xmath asymptotics of ( 2.26 ) by means of a (generalized)
    Laplace approximation

2.  use (twisted) cellular homology to disentangle the interplay between
    the topology of @xmath and the non-Abelian structure of @xmath
    within @xmath

We will see that the divergence degree is given by the number of
“bubbles” of @xmath only in very special cases; in general, the
combinatorial structure of the foam does not fix @xmath alone – the rôle
played by the non-Abelian structure of @xmath is crucial. Applications
of our result will be presented in chapter 5 .

### Chapter 3 Powercounting by Laplace’s method

#### 3.1 The amplitude as a Laplace integral

In this section, we define the divergence degree of a foam, and show
that, in principle, it can be computed by means of the Laplace method.

##### 3.1.1 Divergence degree

The small-time asymptotic behaviour of the heat kernel on @xmath is
well-known, and easy to understand: when @xmath , a Brownian particle on
@xmath has no time to explore the geometry of @xmath and confuses the
latter with the Euclidean space @xmath . In this limit, the heat kernel
therefore takes a Euclidean form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Riemannian distance between @xmath and the unit
@xmath of @xmath . In particular, we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

playing the rôle of a large-spin cutoff. This motivates the definition
of the divergence degree of @xmath as the number @xmath such that the
limit

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

is finite and non-vanishing. Let us emphasize that we do not assume a
priori that @xmath is a multiple of @xmath , as would be implied by the
notion that to regularize the flat spinfoam model, one should remove
redundant delta functions [ 53 ] .

##### 3.1.2 A Laplace integral

Denote @xmath the number of vertices, edges and faces of the foam @xmath
. Using the asymptotics ( 3.1 ), we can write the regularized amplitude
@xmath in the @xmath limit as the integral

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The function @xmath thus defined is smooth, non-negative, and vanishes
on flat connections where @xmath for every face @xmath of @xmath . This
suggests that the integral on the right-hand side of ( 3.5 ) can be
estimated by means of Laplace’s method, which we now review.

#### 3.2 Degenerate Laplace asymptotics

Let @xmath be a (closed) Riemannian manifold, @xmath the canonical
volume form on @xmath , and @xmath a smooth function. A point @xmath is
a critical point of @xmath if the differential of @xmath vanishes at
@xmath ; it is non-degenerate if the Riemannian Hessian @xmath is
non-degenerate, i.e. if @xmath . If @xmath has only non-degenerate
critical points (viz. it is a Morse function ), Laplace’s method states
that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath runs over the minima of @xmath . This formula can be proved
by Taylor-expanding @xmath to second order about @xmath , and performing
the resulting Gaussian integral.

It is tempting to try to apply this well-know asymptotic formula to the
amplitude ( 3.5 ). Unfortunately, one sees easily that the function
@xmath defined by ( 3.6 ) does have the required property. Indeed, the
Morse lemma ¹ ¹ 1 If @xmath is a Morse function and @xmath a critical
point of @xmath , there is a coordinate patch @xmath around @xmath in
which @xmath for some @xmath . implies that non-degenerate critical
points are isolated. But we know that topologically non-trivial spaces
admit a continuum of flat connections, hence that @xmath consists of
degenerate critical points. To deal with this situation, we need a
generalized Laplace method .

##### 3.2.1 The generalized Laplace method

Let us consider the case where the critical set of @xmath is a disjoint
union of submanifolds of @xmath . Denote @xmath the (possibly
disconnected) critical manifold with maximum dimension . Using the
metric on @xmath , we can split the tangent bundle of @xmath along
@xmath into its tangential and normal sub-bundles, as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let us then define the normal Hessian @xmath of @xmath as the
restriction of @xmath to the normal fibers @xmath , and assume that
@xmath is non-degenerate (one says that @xmath is a Morse-Bott
function). Laplace’s formula ( 3.7 ) then generalizes to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the induced Riemannian volume form on @xmath . Indeed,
the orthogonal decomposition ( 3.8 ) implies that, along @xmath , the
volume form on @xmath factorizes as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Riemannian volume form on the fibers normal to
@xmath . Using the exponential decay @xmath away from @xmath to restrict
the integral over @xmath to a tubular neighborhood @xmath of @xmath , in
which @xmath is parametrized by @xmath , and then applying Fubini’s
theorem, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The usual Laplace formula ( 3.7 ) can then be applied to the normal
integrals @xmath ; this gives immediately ( 3.9 ).

##### 3.2.2 Tame singularities

What if @xmath is not a Morse-Bott function? Define a singularity of
@xmath as a critical point were either @xmath is not a manifold, or the
normal Hessian @xmath is degenerate. Following [ 55 ] , say that the
singularities of @xmath tame if for every @xmath -neighborhood @xmath of
the set @xmath of singularities,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

(Unfortunately, there is no useful sufficient condition on @xmath for
this relation to hold; it must be checked explicitly case by case.)

Assuming ( 3.12 ), we can apply the generalized Laplace method by simply
excluding the singularities from the integral:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

In other words, for what concerns the @xmath asymptotic behaviour of a
Laplace-type integral, tame singularities are like no singularities at
all. ² ² 2 That not all singularities are tame, however, can be seen on
the two-dimensional example

@xmath (3.14)

Here, the critical set is the ‘cross’ @xmath , and has a singularity at
@xmath . A naive application of the generalized Laplace method would
give @xmath as @xmath , since the critical set is of codimension one
except at the origin. However, this is not the correct estimate, which
turns out to be @xmath . In this case, indeed, integrating along the
normal fibers yields a Hessian which is not integrable at the
singularity: formally,

@xmath (3.15)

It can be shown that isolated degenerate critical points always yield an
asymptotic behaviour of the form @xmath with @xmath two integers,
although computing the power of the logarithm is a difficult task, which
requires to expand @xmath to orders higher than two. For extended
degenerate critical sets, there is no general result.

#### 3.3 The divergence degree: first results

##### 3.3.1 A powercounting formula

Let us now come back to the regularized amplitude

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

and assume that @xmath has tame singularities . Applying the generalized
Laplace method described above then gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the set of flat connections @xmath minus its
singularities, and @xmath is the induced Riemannian volume form on
@xmath . Since the remaining integral does not contain @xmath anymore,
we can read off from ( 3.17 ) an explicit for the sought-for divergence
degree:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Recall that from the formal expression ( 2.24 ), we inferred that a foam
is potentially divergent if it has more faces than edges, because then
some of the delta functions are redundant. This is confirmed by the
first term in the above formula. But the latter also shows how to
sharpen this naive hunch, namely by studying the geometry of the space
of flat connections @xmath . We will address this problem in some detail
in the next section. For now, let us ask: is the intuition of Perez and
Rovelli [ 95 ] and Freidel and Louapre [ 51 , 53 ] that the divergence
of a foam can be traced back to the presence of bubbles vindicated by
the formula ( 3.18 )?

##### 3.3.2 Bubbles from cellular homology: the simply connected case

The notion of bubble has a precise mathematical definition: it is a
@xmath -cycle in cellular homology (see the appendix for a review of
cellular homology). On a @xmath -complex @xmath , the space of @xmath
-cycles coincides with the second homology group @xmath . Thus, a
tentative definition of the “number of bubbles” of @xmath is @xmath ,
the second Betti number of @xmath . Is the divergence degree @xmath
related to @xmath ?

Consider the case when the foam is simply connected, i.e. when its
fundamental group @xmath is trivial. Then we have that

-   the flat connections on @xmath are all gauge-equivalent to the
    trivial one, hence

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.19)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   the first homology group of @xmath vanishes ³ ³ 3 By virtue of the
    Hurewicz theorem, according to which @xmath is the abelianization of
    @xmath . ,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.20)
      -- -------- -- --------

In this case, the result ( 6.6 ) gives therefore @xmath . Furthermore,
the equations @xmath ( @xmath connected) and @xmath ( @xmath simply
connected), together with the Euler-Poincaré theorem, give @xmath .
Hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

That is, for simply connected foams, the divergence degree is – indeed –
given by the number of bubbles of @xmath , times the dimension of @xmath
.

### Chapter 4 The (co)homology of flat connections

Unfortunately, this identity between divergence degree and number of
bubbles (second Betti number) breaks down when @xmath is not simply
connected, because then the term @xmath in the divergence degree
intertwines the topological structure of @xmath with the non-Abelian
structure of @xmath . (In particular, it does not factorize as @xmath
times a function of @xmath as in ( 3.19 ).) We will see in this section
that, this notwithstanding, the divergence degree can still be seen as
counting the number of bubbles – only these are not subsets of @xmath .
Rather, they are twisted bubbles , in the sense of twisted (co)homology.
To develop this perspective, we need to introduce more concepts from
discrete gauge theory. This is the goal of this chapter.

#### 4.1 More on discrete gauge theory

Discrete gauge theory has been studied extensively in two dimensions,
especially after the seminal works of Atiyah and Bott [ 11 ] , Goldman [
59 ] and Witten [ 146 ] . In this preliminary section, we extend this
framework from triangulated @xmath -manifold to general foams.

##### 4.1.1 Further definitions

In the previous chapter, we called an element of @xmath a (discrete)
G-connection on @xmath , and defined the curvature map @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let us now complete these definitions.

###### Flat connections

Let us say that @xmath is flat if @xmath , and denote @xmath the space
of flat connections . (From now on, we shall write @xmath for a generic
element of @xmath .) Moreover, in differential-geometric parlance we say
that a connection @xmath is regular if the differential @xmath has
maximal rank, i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

else we say that @xmath is critical .

###### Parallel transport

Let @xmath be a connection on @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath are two
vertices of @xmath , and @xmath is an edge-path connecting them, with
@xmath to take into account the orientations of the edges, we define the
parallel transport operator from @xmath to @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

If @xmath is flat, two paths in the same homotopy class yield the same
parallel transport operator.

###### Gauge transformations

Connections are by nature acted upon by gauge transformations . In this
discrete setup, these correspond to the action of @xmath at the vertices
of @xmath , according to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath and @xmath denote the source and target vertices
of @xmath . For each connection @xmath , the relation ( 4.4 ) defines a
map @xmath from the gauge group @xmath to @xmath , the local gauge map .
The set of gauge transformations @xmath fixing @xmath is the stabilizer
of @xmath , and the image @xmath of @xmath is the orbit of @xmath ; they
are subgroups of @xmath and @xmath respectively. A connection @xmath
such that @xmath is only the center @xmath of @xmath is called
irreducible ; else it is reducible . Finally, two connections @xmath and
@xmath belonging to the same orbit are called gauge equivalent .

###### Moduli space

The space of gauge orbits of flat connections is a very important object
in two-dimensional gauge theory: it is the semiclassical limit of the
Yang-Mills phase space. This space is usually called the moduli space of
flat connections . Here, we denote it

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

##### 4.1.2 Reducing gauge symmetries

The moduli space of flat connections is best described after gauge
transformations have been reduced , in the following sense.

Since gauge transformations multiply the elements @xmath of a connection
@xmath independently at each vertex, every connection @xmath is gauge
equivalent to one which has @xmath on a subset @xmath of @xmath touching
all the vertices of @xmath without forming loops – a spanning tree . In
particular, the orbit of a flat connection on @xmath is the same as the
orbit of a flat connection on @xmath , and we can show that ¹ ¹ 1 Note
however @xmath . The relation ( 6.6 ) and the gauge-invariance of the
amplitude shows that, unless the singularities are wild, @xmath , or
equivalently @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The advantage of this reduction is that the action of gauge
transformations on @xmath is simply the conjugation of each element
@xmath of @xmath by a single group element @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Understanding the orbits of this action is usually much simpler than
that of @xmath with @xmath .

Moreover, since the integrand in @xmath is gauge-invariant, we can
safely replace @xmath by the foam @xmath to compute the amplitude:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

For this reason, hereafter (and unless explicitly stated) we shall only
consider foams with one vertex, understanding that the reduction of the
gauge symmetry has already been performed.

##### 4.1.3 Representations of the fundamental group

There is another benefit to this reduction of gauge transformations: it
provides a very useful algebraic interpretation of the space of flat
connections. The latter is based on the one-to-one relationship between
foams with a single vertex and group presentations, as follows.

If @xmath is a foam with a single vertex, one can immediately read off a
presentation of the fundamental group @xmath by associating a generator
@xmath to each edge of @xmath and one relation per face:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Reciprocally, a finite presentation of a group @xmath unambiguously
determines a foam @xmath . From a single vertex, draw an edge for each
generator, and attach the faces according to the relators. ² ² 2 Note
that trivial relations such as @xmath must not be eliminated from the
presentation of @xmath for this duality to hold. An example of this
issue is provided by the ‘dunce hat’: while @xmath is obviously
equivalent to @xmath as a group presentation, the corresponding @xmath
-complexes, the dunce hat and the disc respectively, are not.

Furthermore, the obvious translation of the flatness conditions @xmath
into relations in a presentation of @xmath shows that a flat connection
on @xmath can be seen as a homomorphism from @xmath to @xmath , hence
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equipped with this algebraic interpretation, the space of flat
connections is referred to as the representation variety of @xmath into
@xmath . Moreover, the moduli space of flat connections

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

is called the character variety of @xmath .

##### 4.1.4 The geometry of @xmath and @xmath

Unless all flat connections are regular, in which case the inverse
function theorem proves that @xmath is a smooth submanifold of @xmath ,
the space of flat connections has singularities. Although little is
known about the detailed structure of these singularities in the general
case, it is easy to see that @xmath has the structure of an affine
algebraic set whenever @xmath is algebraic: the flatness relations
@xmath are then polynomial equations in some affine space. This has
various consequences.

First, an algebraic set consists of several irreducible components ,
which by definition do not decompose as the union of smaller algebraic
sets. Each irreducible component, also called an algebraic variety
@xmath , has a well-defined dimension, in spite of the fact that it is
not a manifold, viz. contains singular points: @xmath is simply the
dimension of a suitable neighborhood of any point where it is a
manifold.

Second, the singularities of an algebraic variety @xmath can be
identified by computing the Zariski tangent space @xmath at @xmath .
This tangent space is defined as the joint kernel of the differentials
of all the polynomials which vanish on @xmath . It is naturally a vector
space, and we have in general

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The smooth , or non-singular points of @xmath are those saturating this
inequality. ³ ³ 3 And in fact we can define @xmath . To get a feel for
this definition, one can think of the cross @xmath in the plane
considered in sec. 3.2.2 . At each point different from @xmath , there
is one tangent direction to the variety: the Zariski tangent space is
one-dimensional. But at the origin, there are two independent tangent
vectors, spanning a two -dimensional Zariski tangent space: @xmath is
the unique singular point of the cross. The set of smooth points @xmath
of a variety @xmath , its smooth locus , always forms a manifold that is
dense ⁴ ⁴ 4 In the Zariski topology; we do not elaborate on this aspect
here. in @xmath . For instance, the smooth locus of the cross in @xmath
is the (disconnected) union of four half-lines.

In the case of the space of flat connections @xmath , one sees
immediately that the smooth locus @xmath contains all the regular
connections @xmath : the map @xmath is submersive at @xmath , hence by
the inverse function theorem @xmath has a manifold neighborhood. In
fact, the smooth locus is precisely the subset of @xmath where @xmath
has maximal rank, and the Zariski tangent space is just @xmath .

Note also that the singularities of @xmath in the algebraic-geometric
sense coincide with the analytic singularities of the function @xmath
defined in sec. 3.2.2 . To see this, it is enough to check that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

hence that the degeneracy of @xmath corresponds to points where @xmath ,
the dimension of the Zariski tangent space, is larger than expected.

Observe that the smooth locus is stable under the action of @xmath by
conjugation: if @xmath is non-singular and @xmath is gauge-equivalent to
@xmath , then @xmath is also non-singular. This fact turns @xmath into a
@xmath -manifold, and allows to describe the quotient @xmath as
consisting of a disjoint union of manifolds characterized by their orbit
type @xmath . Each such orbit stratum @xmath has dimension @xmath . In
particular, if there are irreducible flat connections, they form the
stratum with maximal dimensional dimension, or top stratum of @xmath .

#### 4.2 Twisted (co)homology

We are now ready to introduce the theory of twisted cohomology . ⁵ ⁵ 5
Although Bonzom and I were unaware of their work when we started using
this tool, the relevance of twisted cohomology for the Ponzano-Regge
model was first pointed out by Barrett and Naish-Guzman in [ 19 ] .

##### 4.2.1 Curvature as a coboundary operator

To understand the relationship between the space of flat connections and
cohomology in more general terms than in sec. 3.3.2 , it is illuminating
to compute explicitly the differential of the curvature map @xmath at
@xmath , the trivial connection. For @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the family of edges of @xmath lying on the boundary
of the face @xmath , and as before @xmath is a sign encoding the
relative orientation of @xmath and @xmath . Now, this map @xmath
coincides with the first coboundary operator @xmath in the cellular
cohomology @xmath of @xmath with coefficients in @xmath , the Lie
algebra of @xmath (see the appendix for a reminder on cellular
cohomology):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath vanishes because @xmath has a single vertex.

This observation provides further insight into the fact that for simply
connected foams (which after gauge reduction admit a single flat
connection, the trivial one), we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Indeed, from @xmath we get @xmath , hence the flat connection @xmath is
non-degenerate. The standard Laplace method then gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

That is, the corank of the curvature map @xmath is the second Betti
number of the cochain complex ( 4.15 ), hence counts the number of
“bubbles with coefficients in @xmath ”. This explains the homological
nature of the divergence degree @xmath for simply connected foams.

##### 4.2.2 Interlude: twisted deRham cohomology

If @xmath is a smooth @xmath -manifold, it is well known that the
exterior derivative @xmath defines a cochain complex

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose cochain groups @xmath are the space of @xmath -forms on @xmath .
Its cohomology @xmath is called the de Rham cohomology of @xmath . ⁶ ⁶ 6
Physically, the first de Rham cohomology group @xmath is the space of
Maxwell fields up to gauge; more generally, @xmath is the solution space
of ‘ @xmath -form electrodynamics’ [ 73 ] .

Now, if @xmath is flat connection on a principal @xmath -bundle @xmath ,
this construction extends to forms over @xmath valued in the adjoint
bundle @xmath , by means of the covariant exterior derivative @xmath .
Indeed, the flatness of @xmath entails @xmath , which means that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

is also a cochain complex. The corresponding cohomology @xmath is the
twisted de Rham cohomology of @xmath . ⁷ ⁷ 7 Twisted deRham cohomology
describes non-Abelian gauge theory in a background field @xmath . For
instance, @xmath is the space of solutions up to gauge of the equation
of motion @xmath of BF theory [ 74 ] .

##### 4.2.3 Twisted cellular cohomology

Just like de Rham cohomology, there is a twisted version of cellular
cohomology. Here is one possible description of it. (The
mathematically-oriented reader can consult Turaev’s book [ 134 ] for a
more algebraic presentation.)

Let @xmath be a finite-dimensional CW complex, with cochain groups
@xmath , and let

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the number of @xmath -cells of @xmath .

This space is the discrete counterpart of @xmath : it consists linear
combinations of @xmath -cells of @xmath with coefficients in @xmath .

To describe the corresponding analogue of the covariant exterior
derivative, first pick a reference vertex @xmath on the boundary of each
@xmath -cell @xmath of @xmath . Then choose for each @xmath -cell @xmath
adjacent to @xmath an edge-path connecting @xmath and @xmath on the
boundary of @xmath .

For each flat connection @xmath , consider the parallel transport
operator @xmath along a path of edges connecting @xmath and @xmath on
the boundary of @xmath . (Since the connection is flat, the operator is
independent of the chosen path.) Via the adjoint representation of
@xmath , these operators act on the cochain spaces @xmath . Use them to
define the twisted coboundary operators @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath . Here, @xmath is the incidence number of the pair of cells
@xmath (the higher-dimensional analogue of the numbers @xmath considered
so far).

It can then be checked that @xmath , and that the @xmath -twisted
cellular cohomology groups

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

are well-defined, i.e. do not depend on the choice of reference
vertices. Like the usual cohomology groups, they are homotopy invariants
of @xmath ; their dimensions @xmath are the @xmath -twisted Betti
numbers of @xmath .

Let us emphasize that, in general, these are not simply related to the
standard Betti numbers @xmath . There is such a simple relationship,
however, for the twisted Euler characteristic , which satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

By the Euler-Poincaré theorem, it follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### 4.2.4 Twisted cohomology in the flat model

Twisted cellular cohomology arises naturally in the flat spinfoam model.
Thus, a moment of reflection shows that the @xmath -th twisted
coboundary operator @xmath is nothing but the differential of the local
gauge map @xmath at the unit,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

That is to say that the space of @xmath -coboundaries @xmath is the
tangent space of the gauge orbit of @xmath , and the space of @xmath
-cocycles @xmath is the Lie algebra of its stabilizer @xmath . In
particular, @xmath vanishes if and only if @xmath is irreducible.

Similarly, we can check that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, the space of @xmath -cocycles @xmath is the tangent space to
@xmath at @xmath , and the first cohomology group @xmath is the tangent
space to @xmath at @xmath . Moreover, @xmath means that @xmath , i.e.
that @xmath is regular. ⁸ ⁸ 8 The reader might wonder whether the higher
coboundary operators also have a gauge-theoretic interpretation. From
the perspective of discrete connections on a foam, the answer is
negative. However, the flat spinfoam model can be analyzed as a discrete
BF model, with an additional variable in @xmath on each face of @xmath ;
the higher coboundary operators turn out to describe the (reducible)
shift gauge symmetry of the discrete @xmath field. We will detail this
point of view in [ 28 ] .

Note that, by definition of non-singular connections, the second twisted
Betti number @xmath has a constant value

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

on @xmath , given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Comparing with the result ( 3.18 ), we see that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

In words: (provided the singularities of the curvature map are tame) the
divergence degree of a foam is given by the value of its second twisted
Betti number on non-singular connections . This is the main result of
this chapter, and the precise sense in which divergences in the flat
model are counted by “bubbles”.

#### 4.3 Examples

Let us now illustrate this result with several examples of interest.

##### 4.3.1 Abelian structure group

Consider first the case where the structure group @xmath is Abelian . In
this case the curvature map @xmath is a group homomorphism @xmath ,
hence

-   the space of flat connections @xmath is a Lie subgroup of @xmath ,
    and in particular has no singularity,

-   the relation ( 4.14 ) holds for any flat connection @xmath , i.e.

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.30)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath and @xmath is the Maurer-Cartan form on @xmath . In
    other words,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.31)
      -- -------- -- --------

Both observations imply that @xmath is constant on @xmath , equal to its
value on the trivial connection @xmath . But we saw in the previous
section that the twisted cochain complex of @xmath at @xmath is just the
cellular cochain complex of @xmath with coefficients in @xmath , hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, for Abelian groups like for simply connected foams, the relevant
“bubbles” are the cellular @xmath -cycles of @xmath . The initial
intuition that, in the flat spinfoam model, powercounting amounts to the
chasing of “closed surfaces” within @xmath is correct is this case too.

##### 4.3.2 Surface groups with @xmath

Assume now that @xmath is the cellular decomposition @xmath of a
(closed, orientable) surface with genus @xmath , and that @xmath . This
is the case studied by Witten in the context of two-dimensional
Yang-Mills theory [ 146 ] , and by Goldman [ 59 ] and Atiyah and Bott [
11 ] from the mathematical perspective.

As well-known, @xmath can always be reduced to a flower graph with
@xmath edges supporting only one face. This corresponds to the following
presentation of the fundamental group:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here the square brackets denote the group commutator in @xmath , @xmath
.

The space @xmath of discrete @xmath -connections on @xmath can therefore
be described as

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.34)
  -- -- -- --------

Geometrically, the group elements @xmath and @xmath can be thought of as
rotations with the same axis of rotation @xmath , but @xmath and @xmath
can have different axes for @xmath . Computing the action of @xmath on
@xmath by conjugation, we find that a gauge transformation is a rotation
of these axes.

It is not difficult to convince oneself that there are singular
connections in @xmath , as the differential of the flatness relation is
clearly not of constant rank. Yet, one circumstance greatly simplifies
the description of @xmath with respect to the general case: its
singularities are classified by the orbit type @xmath . This follows
from Poincaré duality, which states that @xmath . Hence, in this case a
flat connection @xmath is non-singular ( @xmath ) if and only if it is
irreducible ( @xmath ).

To make this observation more concrete, we now describe explicitly the
Zariski tangent space @xmath , for @xmath . We treat the cases @xmath
(the torus) and @xmath separately (the sphere, which is simply
connected, was already treated in sec. 4.2.1 ).

###### Higher genera (@xmath)

Identifying the tangent space @xmath with its Lie algebra @xmath by
means of the Maurer-Cartan form, we have in this case

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

for algebra elements @xmath and @xmath . Considering @xmath and @xmath
as vectors in three-dimensional space, the adjoint action @xmath is a
rotation around the axis @xmath . Thus, for each @xmath , it is natural
to decompose @xmath and @xmath into orthogonal and parallel components
to the direction @xmath , viz.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

and similarly for @xmath .

All parallel components @xmath drop out from ( 4.35 ), since @xmath .
Moreover, the latter quantity belongs to the orthogonal plane to @xmath
, where @xmath is invertible. This means that, varying @xmath and @xmath
, each term of the sum in ( 4.35 ) spans the orthogonal plane to @xmath
. Finally, if at least two axes among the @xmath directions are
distinct, then the span of @xmath is the whole algebra @xmath .

Hence, there exist flat connections where the curvature map is
submersive, i.e. there are regular flat connections. (Note that they are
irreducible.) Consequently, by the implicit function theorem, the
non-singular flat connections form a smooth manifold of dimension

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

and therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, we find that the regularized amplitude

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

has a finite limit as @xmath . This is consistent with Witten’s formula
[ 146 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

We refer to the work of Sengupta [ 127 ] for details on why
singularities are tame in this case.

Let us also say a word about the singular connections. In this case,
they are of two kinds:

-   Abelian connections . All group elements have the same axis @xmath .
    These form a submanifold of dimension @xmath , on which @xmath .
    Such flat connections have a @xmath stabilizer, corresponding to
    rotations around @xmath .

-   Central connections . All group elements are in the center of @xmath
    , i.e. @xmath . They are isolated points, where @xmath . (Indeed,
    @xmath , hence @xmath .) They are completely reducible, viz. @xmath
    .

These observations are consistent Poincaré duality: the more a flat
connection is reducible, the more it is singular.

###### The torus (@xmath)

The case of the torus is more subtle, because all flat connections are
critical, and also more interesting, because @xmath is not a multiple of
@xmath .

To see this, recall first that the curvature map in this case is a
single group commutator, @xmath , hence flat connections @xmath consist
in pairs of rotations with angles @xmath and the same axis @xmath .
Moreover, the coboundary operator @xmath (again pulled back to the Lie
algebra @xmath ) reads

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.41)
  -- -- -- --------

As before, let us distinguish between the Abelian and central
connections:

-   Abelian connections. Assume that either @xmath or @xmath (say @xmath
    ) is not @xmath . Then the operators @xmath and @xmath in ( 4.42 ),
    seen as linear maps on @xmath , have the same one-dimensional
    kernel, namely the direction parallel to @xmath : this corresponds
    to variations of the angles @xmath , @xmath for a fixed @xmath .
    Restricted to the orthogonal plane, the map @xmath is invertible,
    hence the equation for the kernel of @xmath reads

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.42)
      -- -------- -- --------

    and therefore fixes @xmath real components of @xmath . It expresses
    the condition that the connection remains flat under variations of
    the directions of @xmath and @xmath . It follows that @xmath , hence
    that @xmath .

-   Abelian connections. If on the other hand both @xmath and @xmath are
    @xmath , , the differential ( 4.42 ) vanishes, hence @xmath , i.e.
    @xmath .

Thus, the singular connections are the central ones, and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

This confirms that the torus is divergent, as suggested by ( 4.40 ).

##### 4.3.3 A foam with wild singularities

We close this section by an example of a foam presenting wild
singularities, still with @xmath . Consider the group ⁹ ⁹ 9 We do not
know if this is the fundamental group of a @xmath -manifold. (But it is
that of a @xmath -manifold, like any other finitely generated group.)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

The set of flat connections on the corresponding foam @xmath with three
edges and two faces is determined by the relations

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.45)
  -- -- -- --------

This set has two irreducible components.

-   If @xmath is in the center of @xmath , i.e. @xmath , then, @xmath
    can be arbitrary:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.46)
      -- -------- -- --------

    These are the irreducible flat connections.

-   If @xmath is not in the center, then @xmath and @xmath have to lie
    in a common @xmath subgroup of @xmath . These are the Abelian
    representations. If we write a generic element @xmath , with @xmath
    the direction of the rotation and @xmath its class angle, then

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.47)
      -- -------- -- --------

    with @xmath and @xmath .

Quite obviously, @xmath is of dimension @xmath , while @xmath is @xmath
-dimensional. ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 Recall that, by definition, these are the
dimensions of the kernel of @xmath on non-singular flat connections. It
follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Applying Laplace’s method as in sec. 3.3 therefore suggests that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.50)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In other words, it suggests that the divergence of the amplitude is
controlled by irreducible connections, and @xmath . However, it so
happens that reducible connections actually spoil this result, because
@xmath . This was showed in [ 29 ] by direct computation of the
contribution of @xmath to the Laplace asymptotics of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

Explicitly, we showed in this reference that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

The factor @xmath corresponds to the integral over gauge orbits, which
here correspond to rotations of the common direction @xmath of the three
group elements, the class angles remaining fixed; the class angles
@xmath and @xmath on the other hand parametrize the moduli space. This
integral is manifestly divergent . This is strictly analogous to the
wild singularity discussed in sec. 3.2.2 , and shows that the divergence
degree of @xmath cannot be estimated by Laplace’s method.

### Chapter 5 Applications of homological powercounting

We found in the previous chapter that, except for a caveat related to
possibly wild singularities in the space of flat connections @xmath ,
the divergence degree of a foam @xmath is the second twisted Betti
number of @xmath , evaluated on the non-singular elements of @xmath . We
commented on the interpretation of this result as the actual realization
of the idea that the divergences of @xmath can be traced back to the
presence of “bubbles”.

In this chapter, we discuss another aspect of this result: the
clarification, unification and generalization of all the earlier results
on divergences in the Ponzano-Regge and Ooguri models.

#### 5.1 Sorting out topology from cell structure

One such clarification concerns the extent to which the divergence
degree of a foam is determined by the topology of spacetime. We now
derive a decomposition of @xmath which completely settles this question.

##### 5.1.1 A useful decomposition

Part of the interest of the powercounting result obtained in the
previous chapter is that it holds for arbitrary foams. Suppose, however,
that @xmath is actually the @xmath -skeleton of a cell decomposition
@xmath of a @xmath -pseudomanifold @xmath . ¹ ¹ 1 This includes the
manifolds usually considered in general relativity, but also the more
singular spaces arising as Feynman diagrams of a group field theory.
Then the result @xmath can be sharpened considerably.

Consider indeed the twisted Euler-Poincaré formula for the @xmath
-skeleton @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

From the discussion in sec. 4.2.4 , we know that @xmath is the dimension
of the stabilizer @xmath , and that @xmath is the local dimension of the
moduli space @xmath . Combining this with ( 4.23 ), we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the common stabilizer of non-singular flat connections
@xmath . Moreover, by definition of the Euler characteristic, we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the number of @xmath -cells in @xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus, we have a decomposition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the ‘topological’ part of the divergence degree, depending only on
the homeomorphism (and in fact homotopy) class of @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

is its ‘cellular’ part, depending on the given cell decomposition @xmath
of @xmath . ² ² 2 Note that this decomposition actually holds for any
@xmath -dimensional cell complex. The restriction to pseudo-manifolds is
made for comparison with the literature and as a natural choice in group
field theory. This decomposition “sorts out topology from cell
structure” in the divergence degree [ 30 ] .

##### 5.1.2 On the topological part of @xmath

The above decomposition should be contrasted with the result obtained in
sec. 3.3.1 , where @xmath was written as the sum of a term proportional
to @xmath (the number of “redundant” delta functions in the definition
of the flat spinfoam model), and of @xmath (the dimension of the space
of flat connections).

Indeed, unlike @xmath in ( 3.18 ), the topological part @xmath in ( 5.5
) only depends on the fundamental group @xmath (and the homotopy class
of @xmath via the Euler characteristic @xmath ).

This fact makes the computation of the divergence degree much easier in
the form ( 5.5 ): in practice, it reduces the problem of computing
@xmath for a given (pseudo)manifold @xmath to that of identifying the
representation variety of its fundamental group @xmath and computing the
the orbits of @xmath under the conjugation action. Since these only
depend on @xmath , any presentation of @xmath can be used to that
effect; in particular, from the standard presentation ( 4.9 ) obtained
by retracting a tree @xmath in @xmath , as in sec. 4.1.2 .

One more comment about the computation of @xmath . It may happen that
the character variety @xmath has several irreducible components. These
lead to different values of @xmath ; in @xmath limit, the leading
behaviour of the amplitude @xmath is of course given by the largest one.
This phenomenon will be illustrated in sec. 5.3 .

#### 5.2 Comparison with previous results

Prior to our introduction of twisted cohomology in the discussion of
powercounting in the flat model, several results had been presented in
the literature, mostly within the context of the Boulatov and Ooguri
models, where foams are “simplicial”: in dimension @xmath , exactly
@xmath edges (resp. @xmath faces) are incident on each vertex (resp.
edge) of @xmath , corresponding to the number of faces of a @xmath
-simplex (resp. @xmath -simplex).

These results fall in four classes:

-   Powercounting from Pachner moves . If one assumes that @xmath arises
    from a triangulation @xmath of a closed @xmath -manifold @xmath , as
    the @xmath -skeleton of its dual cell complex, one can see that
    Pachner moves on @xmath generate divergences in the partition
    function. Ponzano and Regge [ 99 ] , Boulatov [ 31 ] and Ooguri [ 91
    ] relied on this observation to relate the divergence degree to the
    combinatorics of @xmath .

-   Powercounting from bubble counting . A different approach to the
    divergences of the flat spinfoam model was initiated by Perez and
    Rovelli [ 95 ] , who realized that they are related to the presence
    of “bubbles” within @xmath . Freidel and Louapre [ 51 , 53 ] , and
    later Freidel, Gurau and Oriti [ 49 ] , pushed this intuition
    further in three-dimensions and obtained a powercounting estimate
    for certain special complexes, coined “type 1”. Within Gurau’s
    colored tensor models, this result was then extended to higher
    dimensions by Ben Geloun et al. [ 58 ] .

-   Powercounting from vertex counting . Yet another approach relies on
    the field-theoretic notion that the divergence degree of a Feynman
    diagram can be bounded by the number of its vertices. Together with
    Magnen, Noui and Rivasseau, I obtained such bounds in the Boulatov
    model [ 81 ] ; these were adapted to the colored tensor models in [
    21 ] .

-   Powercounting from jackets . The notion of “jacket” for a (colored)
    Boulatov-Ooguri complex was introduced by Ben Geloun et al. in [ 58
    ] , and used by Gurau and Rivasseau [ 68 , 64 ] to obtain an upper
    bound on the divergence degree improving the one obtained by vertex
    counting mentioned above.

In this section, we explain how our main formula ( 5.5 ) encompasses all
the results quoted above. One important should be stressed: except for
the perturbative bounds obtained from vertex counting, these results are
all based on the (usually implicit) assumption that @xmath is an integer
multiple of @xmath . An immediate consequence of ( 5.6 ) and ( 5.7 ),
however, is that this is not true in general, because neither @xmath nor
@xmath in the topological part @xmath are multiples of @xmath .

##### 5.2.1 Powercounting from Pachner moves

When Ponzano and Regge introduced their model in 1968, they considered a
@xmath -manifold @xmath equipped with a triangulation @xmath , @xmath ,
and conjectured that the divergence degree was given by three (i.e.
@xmath ) times the number of vertices @xmath in the triangulation. They
were guided in making this conjecture by the following consideration:
because of the Biedenharn-Elliot identity for @xmath -symbols, the
formal amplitudes of two triangulations @xmath and @xmath of @xmath
related by a @xmath Pachner move satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath scales as @xmath when @xmath , and since the @xmath move
introduces a single new vertex in the triangulation, the conclusion that
each vertex contributes a factor of @xmath in the amplitude appears
tantalizing. Indeed, Ponzano and Regge proposed to cut off the sums in
their state-sum to a maximal value @xmath to obtain a finite value
@xmath for the amplitude, and tentatively defined a regularized
amplitude by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The origin of the intuition that divergences in the Ponzano-Regge model
are related to the vertices of @xmath , but also the reason why this
naive regularization is bound to fail, is completely elucidated by our
decomposition ( 5.5 ). Indeed, taking @xmath as the dual cell complex to
a triangulation @xmath , and noting that in three dimensions, a vertex
is dual to a @xmath -cell, we see that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

That is, the relationship between divergences of @xmath and vertices of
@xmath conjectured by Ponzano and Regge is exact for the non-topological
part of @xmath , but misses completely its topological part @xmath .
This is because the argument based on the @xmath Pachner move actually
estimates not the divergence degree itself, but its variation in the
move, that is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this variation, @xmath cancels .

A similar observation was made in the four-dimensional case by Ooguri in
[ 91 ] . He considered separately the @xmath move (in which the number
of vertices and edges increase by one and five respectively) and the
@xmath move (in which the number of vertices is left unchanged while the
number of edge is increased by one), and found that @xmath depends on
the triangulation @xmath only through a divergent factor measured by
@xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are the number of vertices and edges of
@xmath . Although he could not show this result rigorously (because he
could not make sense of the amplitude as a finite number), we can
interpret his argument along the same lines as in three dimensions: it
provides the correct non-topological divergent degree @xmath , but
misses the topological part @xmath . Indeed, in the dual complex @xmath
to @xmath , there is one @xmath -cell per vertex, and one @xmath -cell
per edge in @xmath , so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### 5.2.2 Powercounting from bubble counting

Freidel, Gurau and Oriti defined in [ 49 ] a restricted class of foams
@xmath , which they called “type @xmath ”, for which they could show
that the divergence degree is simply related to the number @xmath of
“bubbles” in @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

With the view that @xmath is the @xmath -skeleton of a cell complex
@xmath decomposing a @xmath -pseudomanifold @xmath , the “bubbles” of
@xmath in the sense of Freidel et al. correspond to the @xmath -cells of
@xmath , hence ( 5.13 ) reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking their cues from the Turaev-Viro model, they speculated that the
“type @xmath ” condition should correspond to “topologically trivial
manifolds”, i.e. to the @xmath -sphere. Given the decomposition ( 5.5 ),
the identity ( 5.14 ) is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

In other words, the “type 1” complexes are, for a given number of @xmath
-cells in the corresponding complex @xmath , are minimally divergent.
Moreover, they are such that their flat connections up to gauge are
isolated and completely reducible. We will see in the next section that
this last condition alone does not single out the @xmath -sphere (it is
also satisfied e.g. by the real projective space @xmath ).

In [ 58 ] , Ben Geloun et al. considered Gurau’s colored model , and
used the corresponding “bubble homology” to obtain the following formula
for the divergence degree in dimension @xmath for the Abelian structure
groups @xmath : ³ ³ 3 That @xmath is non-compact introduces another
source of divergences, which can be tamed with a second cutoff.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is a @xmath -colored graph, @xmath is for @xmath the number
of @xmath -bubbles in @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is the @xmath -th
“bubble” Betti number of @xmath . All the details are given in the
appendix.

The relationship with our result is based on the following
correspondence. A @xmath -colored graph @xmath naturally defines a
@xmath -dimensional CW complex @xmath with the following property:

-   the underlying graph of @xmath is the @xmath -skeleton of @xmath ,

-   the number of @xmath -bubbles of @xmath equals the number of @xmath
    -cells of @xmath ,

-   the “bubble” homology of @xmath coincides with the cellular homology
    of @xmath .

With this correspondence, the relationship between ( 5.16 ) and our
result ( 5.4 ) is straightforward. First, note that what is denoted
@xmath in ( 5.16 ) is really @xmath , so that it can (and should) be
rewritten

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, use the identities @xmath and @xmath and the Euler-Poincaré
relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

to get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the same as ( 5.4 ) in this particular case. Our result can
therefore be described as the generalization of ( 5.16 ) to general cell
complexes, and non-Abelian groups.

##### 5.2.3 Powercounting from vertex and jacket counting

Using tools from perturbative quantum field theory, and notably
Cauchy-Schwarz inequalities, an upper bound on the divergence degree in
the Boulatov model was obtained in [ 81 ] . It is formulated in terms of
the number of vertices rather than @xmath -cells in the complex, and
reads for a Boulatov complex @xmath without generalized tadpole [ 21 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Within the colored model, this bound was then generalized to higher
dimensions in [ 21 ] . In dimension @xmath , it becomes for a colored
graph @xmath with @xmath vertices

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the notion of “jacket” introduced in [ 58 ] , Gurau and Rivasseau
further improved this bound in [ 68 , 64 ] , obtaining

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the genus of (orientable surface dual to) the jacket
@xmath .

Remarkably, the jacket bound ( 5.22 ) follows easily from our exact
result ( 5.4 ). Indeed, denoting @xmath the number of edges and @xmath
the number of faces of @xmath , the formula ( 5.4 ) reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since a colored graph has no tadpole, we have @xmath , hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Moreover, since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is a subgroup of @xmath for each jacket @xmath of @xmath , we
have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the number of jackets of @xmath . Now it is well-known that the
dimension of the @xmath representation variety of a genus @xmath surface
is @xmath . Thus,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the Euler relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

the combinatorial facts that @xmath and that each face of @xmath belongs
to @xmath jackets, we have [ 69 ]

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.30)
  -- -- -- --------

Using this relation in ( 5.28 ) gives a bound on @xmath which, when
inserted in ( 5.24 ), immediately gives the jacket bound ( 5.22 ).

#### 5.3 Three-dimensional examples

In this section, we illustrate how the divergence degree, and more
specifically its topological part @xmath , can be computed for certain
three-dimensional manifolds @xmath , always with @xmath . (Hence,
hereafter we will drop the reference to @xmath in the notation.) Most of
them cannot be handled by the previous methods and do not saturate the
corresponding bounds [ 53 , 19 , 49 , 58 ] .

Closed @xmath -manifolds have @xmath , so @xmath and it is completely
determined by the fundamental group. It is also well-known that @xmath
is a finite set of points, and hence @xmath , when the fundamental group
@xmath is finite (but we will re-derive this feature in specific
examples for illustrative purpose).

The method to compute @xmath for a cellular pseudomanifold (and in fact
for any cell complex) has been presented in the section 5.1.2 . The
steps are:

-   Choose a presentation of @xmath (e.g. from a deformation retract of
    the 2-skeleton @xmath ).

-   Identify the representation variety @xmath using the chosen
    presentation. In general, it has several irreducible components.

-   Identify the orbit of the @xmath -action on each irreducible
    component.

##### 5.3.1 The @xmath-torus

The case of the @xmath -torus @xmath was discussed in Appendix C of [ 53
] . Its fundamental group has the presentation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The representations of this group in @xmath are of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath their common direction of rotation, @xmath three class
angles, and @xmath the 3-vector formed by a set of (anti-Hermitian)
generators of the algebra @xmath . They form a @xmath -dimensional
manifold @xmath .

The group action by conjugation rotates the direction @xmath . For each
representation there is a stabilizer @xmath isomorphic to @xmath (and
larger if the three rotations are in the center of @xmath ) which leaves
it invariant: the subgroup generated by the direction @xmath . Hence,
the dimension of the stabilizer is @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Hence,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that this implies that the divergence degree of a cell
decomposition of @xmath cannot be a multiple of @xmath , as the
procedure of [ 53 ] assumed implicitly.

##### 5.3.2 Lens spaces

Lens spaces @xmath are standard spherical manifolds, with @xmath as
their fundamental group (we exclude the case of @xmath which can be
understood separately). They include as a particular case the real
projective space @xmath , which is the first example in the appendix of
[ 66 ] .

The standard presentation of @xmath is of course

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath , let @xmath be the subset of @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

consisting in those rotations of fixed angle @xmath . In the topological
picture induced by the identification @xmath , @xmath is a sphere of
radius @xmath centered on the origin. (In this picture, the central
elements @xmath of @xmath are the center and boundary of @xmath
respectively.)

Hence,

-   If @xmath (the @xmath -sphere), there is only one representation,
    the trivial one.

-   If @xmath (the real projective space), the representations of @xmath
    send its generator to an element of the center of @xmath , i.e.
    @xmath .

-   If @xmath , the set of representations decomposes as @xmath , with

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath               (5.37)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.38)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

    This means that the class angles admit a finite number of values,
    @xmath , for @xmath . The set @xmath consists of points, while
    @xmath is a union of @xmath -spheres.

The next step consists in finding the orbits generated by conjugation in
@xmath . It turns out that all of the above representations are
reducible.

-   In the cases @xmath , and on @xmath when @xmath , the
    representations are left invariant by the group action (since they
    commute with the whole group): they are central. Thus, the
    centralizer is @xmath , which is 3-dimensional.

-   On @xmath for @xmath , group conjugation corresponds to rotation of
    the axis @xmath . Similarly to the 3-torus case, the stabilizer is
    then @xmath .

In all cases, the moduli space @xmath consists in @xmath distinct
points, one for each connected component of @xmath , hence @xmath .
However, when @xmath , one can compute two different values of the
topological part of the divergence degree, one on @xmath and another on
@xmath . The relevant value is obviously that which gives the most
divergent contribution to the amplitude and thus the greatest value of
@xmath . We get @xmath on @xmath , to be compared with @xmath on @xmath
. This means that the relevant value is the one computed on the less
reducible representations, i.e. those with the smallest stabilizer.

In conclusion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### 5.3.3 Prism spaces

Prism manifolds @xmath , with @xmath , form a different class of
spherical manifolds. They are characterized by their fundamental group

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us first give the irreducible representations @xmath in the case of
@xmath even. The first relation imposes the direction of the rotation
@xmath to be orthogonal to that of @xmath , and its class angle to be
@xmath . Then the second relation reduces to @xmath , which only
constrains the class angle of @xmath to be @xmath for @xmath (the case
@xmath gives a reducible representation). This way the set of
irreducible representations is identified as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath               (5.41)
              @xmath      (5.42)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Clearly this space is of dimension 3. Moreover, simultaneous conjugation
of @xmath by some @xmath element induces a simultaneous rotation on
@xmath . Thus, the orbit is 3-dimensional, isomorphic to @xmath and the
centralizer is just the center of @xmath . This leads to @xmath , and
hence:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

when @xmath is even, and evaluated on irreducible representations. The
situation is similar for @xmath odd, only the specific values of the
class angle of @xmath are changed.

As for reducible representations, they are obtained by taking @xmath .
Then, the image of the generator @xmath lives on a sphere of the type
@xmath ( 5.36 ) or is @xmath . One easily sees that @xmath again, but
@xmath or @xmath . This produces a topological part for the divergence
degree which is negative. Thus, the highly divergent contribution to the
amplitude comes from the irreducible representations of the fundamental
group.

## Part III On the spinfoam continuum limit

The purpose of the third part of this thesis is to present two
preliminary results on the continuum limit of spinfoam models, viz. the
problem of describing a quantum spacetime with infinitely many dynamical
degrees of freedom from the truncated amplitudes @xmath .

In chap. 6 , we address a long-standing question in the spinfoam
community: to construct this continuum limit, should one sum over all
foams @xmath , or infinitely refine a foam? We give a mathematical
definition for each alternative, and an argument to the effect that, as
it happens, they could be two facets of the same solution.

In chap. 7 , we consider a specific framework for the sum over all
foams, in three dimensions: Boulatov’s group field theory . Using a tool
of constructive field theory – Magnen’s and Rivasseau’s cactus expansion
– we improve Freidel and Louapre’s proof of Borel summability of the
Boulatov series with a high-spin cutoff, and establish a remarkable
scaling limit .

The two sections are completely independent.

### Chapter 6 Spinfoams: refining or summing?

What is the mathematical definition of the operation of refining a foam
to increase the number of gravitational degrees of freedom? Does this
process have a well-defined limit? How is it related to the sum over
foams sometimes advocated in the spinfaom community?

These questions were addressed in collaboration with Carlo Rovelli [ 122
] . Some aspects of the arguments presented there, such as the emphasis
on the structure of directed sets and the rôle of zero-spin colorings,
were already discussed in Zapata’s earlier work. ¹ ¹ 1 We came to know
Zapata’s work on the continuum limit of spinfoams on the occasion of the
Loops 2011 conference, after the paper [ 122 ] was completed; the
similarities between his approach and ours are thus only fortuitous.

#### 6.1 The refinement limit of spinfoams

We sketched in the introduction the Ashtekar-Lewandoswki construction of
the Hilbert space of loop quantum gravity as the inductive limit of
truncated spaces @xmath labelled by graphs. This defines the quantum
kinematics of the gravitational field as a continuum limit of lattice
gauge fields.

It turns out that little work has been done to study the analogue of
this construction for spinfoams, viz. at the dynamical level. (The
notable exception is Zapata’s papers [ 83 , 149 ] .) This is surprising:
such a hierarchical scheme, whereby more and more degrees of freedom of
the field are taken into account according to some notion of scale ,
lies at the core of our modern understanding of quantum field theory, in
the form of the renormalization group .

The obvious stumbling block to apply Wilsonian techniques to study the
dynamics of quantum gravity is the absence of a background metric, which
makes the notion the scale difficult to assess. ² ² 2 Of course, one can
run the functional renormalization equation with respect to a fixed,
arbitrary, background metric: this is the strategy underlying Weinberg’s
and Reuter’s asymptotic safety scenario [ 89 ] . The problem with this
approach is the difficulty to extract physics from the truncated flow
equation. But there is a way out of this dead end: to think of the foams
themselves as generalized scales . Let us elaborate on this idea.

##### 6.1.1 The directed set of generalized scales

Lattice field theory [ 112 ] is based on the discretization of
(Euclidean) spacetime by means of regular lattices: lattices where the
distance between neighboring vertices is constant, given by the lattice
spacing @xmath . To refine the lattice, one introduces new vertices at
the midpoints of edges and plaquettes, and constructs the corresponding
regular lattice with lattice spacing @xmath . Note that both the choice
of the initial lattice and the refinement step rely on the metric
structure of Euclidean space. (For instance, the midpoint of an edge is
singled out by the fact that it is located at a distance @xmath from the
endpoints of the edge.)

The prominent feature of this metric notion of scale is its
one-dimensional character, which leads to sequences of discretizations.
This can be expressed mathematically by the statement that the set of
distance scales @xmath is a totally ordered set : for any two scales
@xmath and @xmath , we have either @xmath or @xmath , viz. @xmath and
@xmath are mutually comparable.

Non-metric discretizations generally do not share this one-dimensional
character. Consider for instance the set @xmath of triangulations of a
given manifold @xmath . There is a natural order relation on this set,
defined by @xmath when all the simplices of @xmath are subsets of the
simplices of @xmath ; this corresponds to the intuitive notion that
@xmath is finer than @xmath . It is obvious that not all triangulations
are comparable with respect to this relation: @xmath is only a partially
ordered set , or poset .

The limit of a family of objects indexed by a poset is ill-defined,
because non-unique. Yet, in the case of triangulations of a manifold, we
have the intuition that there is only one continuum limit: roughly
speaking, it corresponds to a “triangulation” with infinitely many
simplices. The reason why this intuition is meaningful is because the
set of triangulations is directed : for any two triangulations @xmath ,
there is a triangulation @xmath which is finer than both @xmath and
@xmath , viz. @xmath and @xmath . A poset satisfying this condition is
called a directed set . Roughly speaking, a directed order relation has
a single ‘asymptotic direction’: here, the continuum limit.

This observation provides a sound definition of the notion of
generalized scale : it is simply an element of some directed set, be it
totally ordered or not. In this sense, a triangulation is indeed a
generalized scale.

##### 6.1.2 Kinematical and dynamical continuum limits

Generally speaking, a quantum system can be described by an algebra of
observables @xmath acting on a Hilbert space @xmath , its kinematics ,
and a state over this algebra @xmath , its dynamics . In particular, a
truncation of the degrees of freedom by means of a directed set @xmath
associates to each generalized scale @xmath an algebra @xmath and a
state @xmath , corresponding respectively to the truncated kinematics
and dynamics of the system.

Thus, to obtain the continuum limit of a truncated system, we need two
limits: an algebraic one, for the family of algebras @xmath and Hilbert
spaces @xmath (kinematics), and a topological one, for the family of
states @xmath (dynamics). The corresponding mathematical notions are
that of inductive limits and limit of nets . The definitions are as
follows.

-   Let @xmath be a directed set, and @xmath a family of algebraic
    objects indexed by @xmath . Suppose that, for each @xmath , we have
    a homomorphism @xmath , such that

    -   @xmath is the identity of @xmath

    -   @xmath for all @xmath

    These conditions ensure that the identification of @xmath with its
    images @xmath for all @xmath defines an equivalence relation over
    the disjoint union @xmath . The inductive limit @xmath of @xmath is
    then the set of equivalence classes for this relation. It naturally
    comes equipped with the same algebraic structure as the @xmath . For
    instance, if the latter are inner product spaces, then the maps
    @xmath are isometric embeddings, and the inner product on @xmath is
    given by @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are representatives of
    @xmath and @xmath respectively, and @xmath .

-   Let @xmath be a topological space, and @xmath a function over a
    directed set @xmath valued in @xmath , viz. a net over @xmath . Then
    @xmath converges to @xmath , or that @xmath is the limit of @xmath ,
    if for any neighborhood @xmath of @xmath there exists @xmath such
    that @xmath for any @xmath . It is easy to check that, thanks to the
    directedness of @xmath , the limit of a net over @xmath , when it
    exists, is unique (assuming @xmath is Hausdorff). ³ ³ 3 Standard
    examples of nets are provided by Riemann sums. Let @xmath denote the
    set of partitions of the unit interval @xmath directed by inclusion,
    and @xmath a (continuous) function. The map @xmath associating to
    each partition @xmath the corresponding Riemann sum of @xmath is a
    net over @xmath . Its limit is the Riemann integral @xmath .

These definitions clarify the general notion of refinement : in general
terms, a set of generalized scales is given in the form a directed set;
kinematics (resp. dynamics) defines an inductive system (resp. a net)
over the set of generalized scales; the continuum limit is the
corresponding limit. No metric is involved in this process.

Although little known outside the mathematical community, the structure
of directed set plays a fundamental rôle in the conceptual architecture
of physics. Indeed, it captures in its general form the concept of
approximation scheme : a hierarchical structure directed towards a
unique limit. Since physics is the science of approximations, we could
say (paraphrasing Rivasseau on the renormalization group) that directed
sets are the soul of physics .

##### 6.1.3 Loop quantization as a continuum limit

The kinematical truncation scheme used in loop quantum gravity is
precisely of the above type, with the notion of generalized scale
provided by graphs . ⁴ ⁴ 4 Along the lines of the canonical formulation
of general relativity, these are usually defined as embedded in a
three-dimensional Cauchy surface in some globally hyperbolic spacetime.
Rovelli has recently considered a purely combinatorial version of this
construction, but it is not clear that the inductive limit procedure is
meaningful in this case. For each graph @xmath , one considers the
algebra @xmath of gauge-invariant functions on the cotangent bundle
@xmath and its standard quantization over the Hilbert space @xmath .
This defines the quantum kinematics of a system of discrete connections
on @xmath .

The kinematics of the quantum gravitational field is then constructed as
the continuum limit of this system of discrete connections. To this
effect, one uses the natural order relation on the set of graphs @xmath
defined by @xmath if @xmath is a subgraph of @xmath . The latter clearly
equips @xmath with a directed set structure: given any two graphs @xmath
and @xmath , it is easy to construct @xmath by adding all the vertices
and edges of @xmath to @xmath . Moreover, each embedding @xmath
naturally induces maps @xmath and @xmath which turn the family of
algebras and Hilbert spaces into inductive systems. Their inductive
limits @xmath and @xmath form the kinematical arena of loop quantum
gravity, where the action of (some extension of) the diffeomorphism
group can be implemented.

Let us be more specific about the mappings @xmath induced by the
inclusion of @xmath into @xmath . Let @xmath and denote @xmath (resp.
@xmath ) the edges of @xmath (resp. @xmath ). Then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

In other words, the image of @xmath in @xmath is the set of
gauge-invariant functions on @xmath which are constant on those edges of
@xmath that are not edges of @xmath ; equivalently, it is the subspace
of @xmath spanned by spin-network functions with zero spins on the edges
of @xmath . It follows from this definition that the inductive limit
@xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the subspace of @xmath spanned by spin-network
functions with non-zero spins. This is an interesting observation: at
the kinematical level, the continuum limit of loop quantum gravity
consists of superselection sectors with non-zero spin colorings.
Pictorially, we can say that “refining the graphs” is the same as
“summing over the graphs with zero-spins excluded”.

##### 6.1.4 The spinfoam continuum limit

To discuss the analogue construction for spinfoam models, we must begin
by identifying the relevant directed set. One possibility (explored by
Zapata in [ 149 ] ) is to work with embedded foams and their
diffeomorphisms classes. Let us use instead the combinatorial framework
sketched in sec. 2.3.1 , in which a foam @xmath is defined as a triple
of sets @xmath enumerating its vertices, edges and faces.

In a given spinfoam model, to each foam @xmath with boundary @xmath is
associated a vector @xmath in the boundary Hilbert space @xmath . Now,
this map @xmath defines a net over the set @xmath of foams with fixed
boundary @xmath .

Consider indeed the natural order relation defined by @xmath if there is
an embedding @xmath , namely a triple of injective maps @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath preserving the relations between vertices, edges and faces. It
is easy to see that any pair of foams with the same boundary has an
upper bound @xmath with respect to this relation, given essentially by
attaching the vertices, edges and faces of @xmath to @xmath . Thus, a
spinfoam model is a net over the set of proper foams with a given
boundary.

Hence, the set @xmath is naturally a directed set, and @xmath a net over
it. We can therefore define formally, for each boundary @xmath , the
spinfoam continuum limit as the limit @xmath of this net:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### 6.2 Refining = summing?

The spinfoam continuum limit defined above, if compelling, is at
variance with Baez’s, Rovelli’s and Reisenberger’s original idea that
foams are “quantum histories” of the gravitational field, like Feynman
diagrams are “quantum histories” of systems of particles. Indeed, this
latter conception suggests that the proper way to unfreeze the truncated
degrees of freedom is not by refining a foam, as in lattice field
theory, but rather by summing over the set of all foams. Is there a
relationship between refinement and sum over foams, similar to
kinematical relation between refinement and sum over graphs?

##### 6.2.1 Spinfoam cylindrical consistency

From now, let us assume that the foam amplitudes @xmath are given as
sums over colorings of the faces of @xmath by irreducible
representations of a compact Lie group @xmath (typically @xmath ). More
specifically, we assume that for each coloring @xmath of @xmath , we
have a spinfoam amplitude @xmath . This assignement defines two spinfoam
models, depending whether the trivial representations are included or
not:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, for a fixed foam @xmath , we denoted @xmath the set of all
colorings @xmath , and @xmath the subset consisting of colorings by
non-trivial ( @xmath ) representations.

Since trivial representations play no rôle in the kinematics of loop
quantum gravity, it is natural to impose a cylindrical consistency
condition relating @xmath to @xmath . To state it, we must first observe
that each coloring @xmath of a foam @xmath comes with a multiplicity,
related to the symmetries of @xmath . The multiplicity @xmath of a
coloring @xmath is the number of colorings @xmath such that @xmath ,
with @xmath an automorphism of @xmath , i.e. a foam embedding of @xmath
into itself. Then we say that the amplitude

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

is cylindrically consistent if @xmath when @xmath is a trivial extension
of @xmath , that is when @xmath is a subfoam of @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath coincide on the faces of @xmath and @xmath is trivial on the
other faces of @xmath .

##### 6.2.2 Summing is refining

Under this cylindrical consistency condition, the relationship between
the continuum limit @xmath and the sum of @xmath over all the foams
@xmath with fixed boundary is the following:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

If we assume furthermore that the net @xmath is convergent, then we have
by passing to the limit in the identity above

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus, refining foams in the model @xmath is the same as summing over
foams in the model @xmath . Note that, due to the peculiar directed set
structure, all foams appear in ( 6.7 ) the following sense: every foam
@xmath with boundary @xmath appears in one finite sum ( 6.6 ) whose
value can be chosen arbitrarily close to @xmath .

The proof of ( 6.6 ) is easy. First, observe that the subfoams of @xmath
index a partition of @xmath , in which each each class is made of the
trivial extensions of a given subfoam @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

This implies that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Second, check that we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath the number of subfoams of @xmath isomorphic to @xmath .
Third, use cylindrical consistency to get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

and conclude to ( 6.6 ).

##### 6.2.3 Discussion

But is there any rationale for assuming the cylindrical consistency
condition and expecting it to be part of the quantum theory of gravity?
There is. The spinfoam sum is meant to be an implementation of the
Misner-Hawking sum over geometries

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here the integral is not over metrics, but over equivalence classes of
metrics under diffeomorphisms. In the truncation induced by the choice
of a foam, the diffeomorphisms are reduced to the automorphisms @xmath
of the foam. Therefore the colorings @xmath and @xmath have a natural
interpretation as the discrete residual equivalent of
diffeomorphism-related metrics. This interpretation is reinforced by the
fact that the amplitude is in fact invariant. If we want to integrate
over geometries, then, the contributions of @xmath and @xmath represent
an overcounting, and we must divide by the number of them, namely by
@xmath . The same conclusion can be reached by interpreting colored
spinfoams as histories of nontrivial spin networks. Then colorings
related by foam automorphisms clearly represent the same history. For
both these reasons, it is physically interesting to consider the
amplitudes modified as in ( 6.5 ) and the cylindrical consistency
condition. Then the sum over foams is equal to the continuum limit.

### Chapter 7 Resummation of the Boulatov series

In this section, we address the issue of the continuum limit from the
angle of group field theory (GFT). In this scheme, the sum over foams is
nothing but a Feynman series, and the issue of convergence is a problem
of constructive field theory . Is the sum over foams the asymptotic
expansion of a well-defined GFT correlation functions?

The first results in this direction were obtained in the Boulatov model
by Freidel and Louapre [ 52 ] . Here, using more advanced constructive
techniques, we improve their proof of Borel summability, notably by
establishing the constructive scaling behaviour of the correlation
functions in the large cutoff limit. These results were obtained under
the lead of Rivasseau, in collaboration with Magnen and Noui [ 81 ] .

#### 7.1 Constructive field theory

Constructive field theory [ 103 ] is the name of a mathematical physics
program launched around 1970 by Wightman. It aims at defining rigorously
certain field theory models, in increasing order of difficulty, by
checking that they obey the “Wightman axioms” [ 130 ] . The strategy is
clear-cut: introduce as many cutoffs as necessary for the correlation
functions of these models to be well-defined, and then develop the
necessary methods to lift these cutoffs.

##### 7.1.1 Current status of constructive field theory

Early constructive field theory succeeded in building rigorously
super-renormalizable field theories such as the emblematic @xmath model
in two and three dimensions. It also elucidated their relationship to
perturbation theory: the Schwinger functions of these models are the
Borel sum of their perturbation theory [ 40 , 80 ] . But
four-dimensional @xmath theory itself could not be built, because its
coupling constant does not remain small in the ultraviolet regime. Being
asymptotically free, non-Abelian gauge theories do not have this
problem. Nevertheless, although some partial results were obtained, they
could not be built in the full constructive sense either, due to
technical difficulties such as Gribov ambiguities; neither could the
interesting infrared confining regime of the theory be understood
rigorously. Probably the first four-dimensional field theory to be built
completely through constructive methods will be the Grosse-Wulkenhaar
model [ 63 ] , a non-commutative field theory which, ironically, should
not satisfy the Wightman axioms of the initial constructive program.

The constructive program is largely unknown in the quantum gravity
community, with the notable exception of [ 52 ] . However, it can be
argued that constructive theory embodies a deeper point of view on
quantum field theory than the textbook one. A modern constructive
technique such as the cactus expansion used hereafter allows to resum
perturbation theory by reorganizing it in a precise, explicit manner.

##### 7.1.2 Power series and Borel sums

Renormalized perturbation theory writes field-theoretic observables
@xmath , notably correlation functions, as formal power series in the
coupling constant(s) @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The coefficients @xmath are, in turn, given by a sum of Feynman
amplitudes @xmath , where @xmath spans the set of Feynman graphs with
@xmath vertices:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

It was early realized by Dyson [ 39 ] that the construction of
observables by power series in @xmath is bound to remain heuristic,
because ( 7.1 ) cannot converge . Indeed, if it did, it would define an
analytic function of @xmath in a disk around @xmath , and hence would be
equally well-defined for @xmath and @xmath . But this is physically
absurd. Think of @xmath as the fine structure constant of quantum
electrodynamics: @xmath means that charge of the same sign attract each
other. But the vacuum is clearly unstable in this regime: to decrease
the energy of the field, create many electrons and as many positrons and
let them collapse on each other. The same argument can be run for @xmath
theory.

The consequence of the non-analyticity of @xmath at @xmath is
irrevocable: the perturbative series ( 7.1 ) is, at best, an asymptotic
expansion ¹ ¹ 1 A formal power series @xmath is an asymptotic expansion
of a function @xmath as @xmath if, for any @xmath , @xmath . This does
not imply that @xmath converges. of @xmath in the @xmath limit. But it
is a classic theorem of Borel that there is an infinite number of smooth
functions asymptotic to any power series: the sequence of coefficients
@xmath does not uniquely defines the function @xmath , as it would if
@xmath were analytic in a disk centered on @xmath .

But what if @xmath is analytic in a disk tangent to @xmath in the @xmath
half-space, as in Fig. 7.1 ? This corresponds to the case mentioned
above, where @xmath has singularities on the @xmath axis (a branch cut),
where the vacuum is unstable.

Borel summability states that, under certain conditions formulated by
Nevanlinna [ 88 ] and rediscovered by Sokal [ 129 ] , the function
@xmath can be reconstructed from the coefficients @xmath . These
conditions are that

-   @xmath is analytic in the disk @xmath

-   there are constants @xmath such that the bound

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (7.3)
      -- -------- -- -------

    holds uniformly in @xmath and @xmath .

Then the power series

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

converges for @xmath , and admits an analytic continuation in the strip

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

satisfying the bound

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

for some constant @xmath . Moreover, @xmath is represented in @xmath by
the absolutely convergent integral

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is then called the Borel transform of @xmath , and the complex
@xmath plane is called the Borel plane .

There is a reciprocal to this theorem: consider the power series @xmath
. If the power series @xmath converges in a disk @xmath , admits an
analytic continuation @xmath in the strip @xmath and satisfies the bound
( 7.6 ) in this strip, then the function @xmath defined by the integral
representation ( 7.7 ) is analytic in @xmath , has @xmath as Taylor
series at the origin and satisfies the uniform remainder estimates ( 7.3
). In this case we say that the series @xmath is Borel summable , and
call the series @xmath its Borel transform and the function @xmath its
Borel sum.

In other words, Borel summable series and Borel summable functions are
in one-to-one correspondence just like are ordinary series and germs of
analytic functions.

##### 7.1.3 Proliferating and non-proliferating species

Even when the perturbative series ( 7.1 ) is actually Borel summable, it
is very difficult to obtain the relevant information about its Borel
transform, and in particular to show that ( 7.4 ) converges. The main
reason for this is purely combinatorial: there are too many graphs at a
fixed order @xmath . Indeed, the typical bound for a Feynman amplitude
is of the type [ 103 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

for some constant @xmath . Hence, one usually has to deal with the
series

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the number of Feynman graphs with @xmath vertices. Its
Borel summability is in turn subject to the convergence of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is known as the generating series of Feynman graphs .
Unfortunately, it so happens that the latter has zero radius of
convergence, because @xmath grows too fast (typically like @xmath ).
Rivasseau has called proliferating [ 106 ] a combinatorial species whose
generating series has zero radius of convergence.

Thus, to get started with the constructive program, one must abandon the
Feynman expansion and try to replace it by a series labelled by a
non-proliferating species, such as trees. ² ² 2 Cayley’s theorem states
that there are @xmath labelled trees over @xmath vertices. The
corresponding generating series clearly has a non-zero radius of
convergence. Each such tree should resum an infinite number of Feynman
amplitudes [ 108 ] . This is precisely what the Magnen-Rivasseau cactus
expansion does.

#### 7.2 A constructive tool: the cactus expansion

Although it was initially designed to deal with matrix @xmath theory [
105 ] , the cactus expansion applies to scalar models [ 79 , 110 ] and
higher-order interactions [ 108 ] as well.

An important mathematical prerequisite for constructive field theory is
the notion of degenerate Gaussian measure , which we now review.

##### 7.2.1 Degenerate Gaussian measures

If @xmath is a @xmath positive-definite matrix, the Gaussian measure
@xmath associated to @xmath is usually defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where is @xmath and @xmath is the standard @xmath -dimensional Lebesgue
measure. The inverse matrix @xmath is the covariance of the measure:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

When @xmath is the unit matrix, we call @xmath the standard Gaussian
measure on @xmath .

The key property of Gaussian measures is expressed by Wick’s theorem ³ ³
3 This is a slight generalization of the usual Wick theorem, which is
stated for monomials only. : for any smooth, summable function @xmath ,
we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

This implies that @xmath is completely determined by its covariance
@xmath .

Now, observe that unlike ( 7.11 ), ( 7.13 ) still makes sense if @xmath
is non-invertible , i.e. only positive-semidefinite. For any such matrix
@xmath , we can thus define the degenerate Gaussian measure @xmath with
covariance @xmath by ( 7.13 ). When @xmath actually has zero modes, it
is not be absolutely continuous with respect to the Lebesgue measure
@xmath : it is a Dirac delta along each zero mode.

One important observation about (degenerate) Gaussian measures is that
they have a well-defined functional counterpart – unlike the Lebesgue
measure. The covariance @xmath is then a positive semi-definite operator
, and by Minlos’ theorem @xmath is supported on a suitable space of
distributions. (In this setup the zero modes of @xmath are interpreted
as gauge modes .)

##### 7.2.2 An absolutely convergent expansion

We are now ready to discuss the cactus expansion . Consider a quartic
field theory @xmath , with partition function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is some Gaussian measure, and we leave the number of
components of @xmath (scalar, vector, matrix…) unspecified. The cactus
expansion constructs @xmath as an absolutely convergent series

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath ranges over the set of forests , i.e. graphs without loops.
The amplitudes @xmath have the following properties:

1.  They factorize over the connected components of @xmath . It follows
    that the free energy @xmath is given by the very same expansion (
    7.15 ), with the sum restricted to connected forests, viz. trees.

2.  They are analytic functions of @xmath in a Nevanlinna-Sokal disk
    @xmath , hence so are @xmath and @xmath .

3.  They are easily bounded, and it is straightforward to check that the
    Taylor remainders of ( 7.15 ) about @xmath satisfy the
    Nevanlinna-Sokal bound ( 7.3 ).

Thus, in addition to giving a rigorous definition of (single-scale, i.e.
with a ultraviolet cutoff) @xmath theory, the cactus expansion naturally
shows that it is the Borel sum of its perturbative series.

##### 7.2.3 Four ingredients for a cactus expansion

The cactus expansion is a recipe with four ingredients: (1) an
intermediate field representation, (3) a replica trick, (3) a forest
formula and (4) a resolvent bound.

(1) The intermediate field representation is a very useful trick to
represent a quartic interaction @xmath in terms of a cubic one @xmath .
Schematically, it reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a field with Gaussian ultralocal ⁴ ⁴ 4 To say that a
Gaussian measure is ultralocal means that, as a differential operator,
its covariance is of zeroth-order, viz. contains no derivatives. measure
@xmath (which in zero dimension would simply be the standard Gaussian
measure over @xmath ). Performing the Gaussian integration over @xmath ,
one can then express the original path integral @xmath in terms of
@xmath only. For instance, in zero spacetime dimension, viz. for the
numerical integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The new interaction vertex @xmath was called a loop vertex in [ 105 ] .
In more than zero dimension, i.e. for a genuine field theory, a
propagator @xmath would typically sandwich the @xmath field on both
sides, and the loop vertex would be given by the trace of operator
@xmath . This trick can be generalized to any correlation functions and
to more complicated models [ 109 ] .

(2) The replica trick is a property of degenerate Gaussian measures. Let
@xmath denote the standard Gaussian measure on @xmath , and @xmath .
Now, ‘replicate’ @xmath times the variable @xmath , and consider the
degenerate Gaussian measure @xmath on @xmath with covariance @xmath .
The replica trick is then the statement that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us emphasize that this is not a form of Fubini’s theorem, which
expresses an @xmath -dimensional integral as a product of @xmath
integrals. Here, we replace one @xmath -dimensional integral by an
@xmath -dimensional one, with @xmath delta functions.

(3) Consider a smooth function @xmath of @xmath variables @xmath ,
living on the lines @xmath of the complete graph over @xmath vertices.
The so-called Brydges-Kennedy Taylor forest formula [ 1 , 32 ] is a
Taylor interpolation of @xmath with integral remainders indexed by
labeled forests over @xmath vertices:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this expression, @xmath denotes the set of forests over @xmath
vertices, the products are over lines @xmath of each forest @xmath , and
@xmath is the @xmath -uple defined by @xmath , where @xmath runs over
the unique path in @xmath connecting the source and target vertices of
@xmath . (If they are not connected by @xmath , then @xmath .)

One can easily check that for @xmath , this is nothing but the
fundamental theorem of calculus:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

For higher values of @xmath , on the other hand, the outcome of ( 7.21 )
is genuinely non-trivial, as the case @xmath already demonstrates (Fig.
7.2 ):

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (7.23)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

(4) If @xmath is a complex number with positive real part, and @xmath a
real number, one has

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let @xmath be a Hermitian matrix. Taking the supremum over the spectrum
of @xmath in ( 7.24 ) gives the resolvent bound

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the operator norm, @xmath .

##### 7.2.4 A toy example: @xmath theory in @xmath dimensions

To illustrate how these four ingredients can be combined to yield the
cactus expansion, we now consider the @xmath field theory in @xmath
dimension, ⁵ ⁵ 5 For a historical perspective on constructive methods
applied to this @xmath -dimensional model, see [ 106 ] . i.e. the
integral ( 7.17 ). The functions @xmath and @xmath it defines are
analytic in the cut plane @xmath , and hence admit, at best, a Borel
expansion about @xmath . Using the four ingredients presented above, we
now show that this is indeed the case.

We start from the intermediate field representation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

with loop vertex @xmath .

First, expand the exponential in ( 7.26 ) in powers of @xmath , swap
integration and summation ⁶ ⁶ 6 Of course, it is precisely such an
interchange between integration and summation that yields the divergent
perturbative series. Note that here, however, the process is licit
because @xmath , and so Lebesgue’s dominated convergence theorem
applies. and apply the replica trick to the order- @xmath term to obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next, consider the matrix @xmath , parametrized by an @xmath -uple
@xmath and defined by @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath ( @xmath ), and
let @xmath be the Gaussian measure with covariance @xmath . Then apply
the forest formula to the function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

This gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

or equivalently

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath ranging over the set of all forests, and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

As announced, the summand factorizes along connected components of each
forest. This implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where now @xmath ranges over the set of all trees . It is these trees
@xmath over loop vertices @xmath which we coin cacti .

Since the dependence of the covariance of @xmath in the @xmath variables
is linear, applying the derivative @xmath in ( 7.32 ) is easy using (
7.13 ): it amounts to an additional insertions of @xmath in the
integral, where @xmath and @xmath are respectively the starting and
ending vertices of the line @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Consider the loop vertex @xmath , with coordination @xmath in the tree
@xmath . Thanks to the resolvent bound, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

and thus, since there are @xmath lines in a tree over @xmath vertices,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

This bound goes through the normalized integrals over the @xmath ’s and
the @xmath ’s. Using Cayley’s formula for the number of trees over
@xmath labeled vertices with fixed coordinations @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

we find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

This shows that the cactus expansion ( 7.32 ) of @xmath converges
uniformly in a half-disk @xmath , with @xmath , which obviously contains
the Nevanlinna-Sokal disk @xmath .

Furthermore, the order- @xmath Taylor-Lagrange remainder

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

can easily be shown to satisfy the Nevanlinna-Sokal criterion ( 7.3 ).
Indeed, consider a cactus amplitude @xmath with @xmath loop vertices. By
( 7.33 )-( 7.34 ), each such amplitude is made of an explicit factor
@xmath times an integral over @xmath of a product of @xmath resolvents

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denote a half-line hooked to a vertex @xmath . Hence for
@xmath , @xmath , and for @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

But by ( 7.13 ) and since @xmath is solely a function of @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence the Taylor-Lagrange formula applies to the exponential:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the operator @xmath creates exactly @xmath additional insertions of
lines @xmath . The combinatorics of @xmath derivations on a product of
@xmath resolvents costs a factor @xmath times a new Gaussian integral
with @xmath resolvents of the same type @xmath . The @xmath factor can
be then transferred back to a @xmath factor in the resolvents:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, since @xmath the convergent series @xmath can be bounded exactly
as before, except for two facts: each term contains a factor @xmath and
we have also to add to the bounds a factor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

This last factor is maximal for the trivial tree with @xmath , and
certainly bounded by @xmath , from which it follows that for some
constant @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

To summarize, the cactus expansion allows not only to trade the
asymptotic perturbative series

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

for the convergent expression ( 7.32 ), but also to check the
Sokal-Nevanlinna criteria, proving Borel summability of ( 7.46 ). Of
course, in this toy example, Borel summability of @xmath is obvious and
Borel summability of @xmath could be shown by more elementary methods;
the power of the cactus expansion becomes manifest when it comes to the
constructive analysis of the @xmath field theory [ 79 ] , and of the
matrix @xmath model [ 105 ] . And of Boulatov’s group field theory.

#### 7.3 Borel summability and scaling behavior

Indeed, the fact that Boulatov’s group field theory has a quartic
interaction allows to use the cactus expansion to study its Borel
summability. The great advantage of this method over Freidel and
Louapre’s [ 52 ] lies in the control it provides over the high-spin
cutoff: by this token, we can unravel the constructive scaling limit of
this group field theory.

##### 7.3.1 A twofold regularization

We introduced Boulatov’s model in the first chapter of this thesis. In
the language of degenerate Gaussian measures, the Boulatov partition
function is defined formally by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the Gaussian measure with covariance @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath ranges over the cyclic permutations of three elements. This
measure is clearly degenerate: the covariance @xmath is the orthogonal
projector onto the subspace of @xmath invariant under @xmath averaging
and cyclic permutations.

Of course, the partition function ( 7.47 ) is only formal and needs
regularizations to become mathematically well-defined. The problem is
twofold:

-   the Fourier space of the field @xmath is non-compact, although
    discrete, and hence ‘ultraviolet’ divergences arise,

-   Boulatov’s quartic interaction @xmath is not positive, hence
    unstable. This can be seen from its Fourier space formulation where
    the interaction term reduces to an oscillatory @xmath symbol.

To cure the first problem, we follow [ 52 ] and introduce a cutoff
@xmath truncating the Peter-Weyl (or Fourier) decomposition of the
field:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this formula, the sum runs over the spins @xmath up to @xmath ;
@xmath denotes the @xmath -dimensional matrix representation of @xmath ;
@xmath are the Fourier modes of the field @xmath viewed as
complex-valued tensors and denotes the trace in the space carrying the
tensor product representation associated to the spins @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . In the following, we denote @xmath the subspace of @xmath
resulting from this truncation, and @xmath . The number of degrees of
freedom left is thus given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now for the second problem: the fact that Boulatov’s interaction @xmath
is not positive. To fix this shortcoming, Freidel and Louapre proposed
to add the following ‘pillow’ term ⁷ ⁷ 7 The word ‘pillow’ refers to the
geometric interpretation of the GFT vertex: if Boulatov’s @xmath is a
tetrahedron, then Freidel and Louapre’s @xmath are two tetrahedra glued
along two triangles – a pillow. to the action [ 52 ] , see Fig. 7.3

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

Indeed, they showed that when @xmath , @xmath is positive. To this aim,
they introduce the ‘squaring’ operator @xmath mapping @xmath to the
function @xmath on @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

In terms of this new field, the modified interaction @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the involution transposing the central arguments of
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the standard inner product in @xmath . Since @xmath is a
positive operator, the modified quartic interaction @xmath is indeed
positive.

Combining the cutoff on spins @xmath and the Boulatov-Freidel-Louapre
(BFL) interaction, we get the (now well-defined) regularized partition
function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

The following bound on this model’s Feynman amplitudes, proved in [ 81 ]
, will useful later on. Let @xmath be a (vacuum, i.e. without external
legs) Feynman graph of ( 7.56 ). The corresponding Feynman amplitude
@xmath satisfies ⁸ ⁸ 8 Rivasseau and Magnen later found a caveat in this
theorem, see [ 21 ] .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some @xmath -dependent constant @xmath .

##### 7.3.2 Intermediate field representation

Let us now construct the cactus expansion of the BFL model. Following
the recipe explained in sec. 7.2.3 , we start by introducing a
ultralocal intermediate field @xmath on @xmath slicing the BFL @xmath
vertices into two @xmath vertices as in Fig. 7.4 :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this intermediate field picture, the tetrahedral and pillow
interactions are encapsulated in the ultralocal Gaussian measure @xmath
through its covariance @xmath .

Let us then define the operator @xmath coupling @xmath to @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

in such a way that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the standard inner product in @xmath . After integration
over the original field @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the loop vertex is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

One easily checks that @xmath is a Hermitian operator and therefore that
the resolvent bound applies to the derivatives of this loop vertex just
like in the toy example.

##### 7.3.3 Cactus expansion

Following the same steps as in sec. 7.2.4 yields the cactus expansion of
the BFL free energy:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (7.63)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

At this stage, the only difference with the 0-dimensional case is the
insertion of a covariance @xmath on each line @xmath of the tree, and
the integration with respect to the corresponding @xmath -uples of group
elements @xmath , attached to the half-lines @xmath .

Computing the effect of the @xmath derivatives on the loop vertex @xmath
, labeled by the half-lines @xmath connecting it to the tree, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, the cactus amplitude @xmath is given by the following product of
traces connected by ultralocal covariances:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (7.65)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

##### 7.3.4 Cauchy-Schwarz inequalities

To get some insight into this cactus amplitude, it is handy to introduce
a ‘dual’ representation of a tree @xmath , as a planar partition of the
disk. The boundary of the disk is obtained by turning around @xmath ,
while the dotted lines partitioning it cross the boundary twice and each
line of @xmath exactly once, without crossing each other, see Fig. 7.5 .

In such a picture, the resolvents @xmath are attached to the arcs on the
boundary of the disk, while the covariances @xmath are attached to the
dotted lines. To bound ( 7.3.3 ), we can apply the Cauchy-Schwarz
inequality along a line splitting the disk in two parts with the same
number of consecutive resolvents. Indeed, the number of half-lines of a
tree being even, it is always possible to pick two arcs with resolvents
@xmath and @xmath , and express ( 7.3.3 ) as the inner product @xmath ,
where @xmath and @xmath contain the same number of arcs, and thus of
resolvents (see Fig. 7.6 ). By the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

This process has two effects: thanks to the resolvent bound, it trades
the original tree for two trees, with the same number of vertices, but
with two resolvents replaced by the identity ( @xmath ); each covariance
@xmath which is sandwiched in the inner product is replaced by a
modified covariance @xmath , where @xmath identifies the two central
arguments of @xmath instead of twisting them (Fig. 7.7 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can iterate the process @xmath times, until all resolvents are
removed, and all covariances @xmath replaced by @xmath . We are then
left with a BFL Feynman graph , hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, from theorem ( 7.57 ) we have @xmath , hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

Before we can conclude, we should check that this estimate also holds
for the trivial tree with just one vertex ( @xmath ): since it contains
no half-line, the loop vertex @xmath is not acted upon by a @xmath
-derivative, and therefore the resolvent bound does not apply. However,
using standard convexity inequalities, we have for any @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

and therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

Absorbing the uniform factor @xmath appearing in all estimates in the
definition of a free energy per degree of freedom

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

we have proved that the cactus expansion of the BFL free energy per
degree of freedom @xmath is uniformly convergent in a half-disk

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

Moreover, the Nevanlinna-Sokal criteria can be checked exactly as in the
toy example, hence @xmath defines the Borel sum of the BFL perturbative
series.

##### 7.3.5 A constructive scaling limit

The remarkable feature of this result lies in the control it provides
over the summability radius: it shows that, as the cutoff @xmath is sent
to infinity, the coupling constant should shrink as @xmath . This
immediately suggests the definition of a scaling limit for the BFL
model, analogous to one discovered in matrix models by ’t Hooft at the
perturbative level [ 131 ] , and confirmed by Rivasseau at the
constructive level [ 105 ] .

Define indeed a running coupling constant

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, seen as a function of @xmath , the BFL free energy per degree of
freedom @xmath has a summability radius which is independent of @xmath .
This fact suggests the existence of a limit

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Three comments are in order.

-   This scaling behavior was beyond the scope of the Freidel-Louapre
    analysis [ 52 ] . It is only thanks to our use of the (much less
    elementary) cactus expansion that we could establish this result.

-   The constructive scaling ( 7.75 ) matches the perturbative scaling (
    7.57 ). In other words, the sum over all foams does not introduce
    further divergences in the high-spin limit .

-   The presence of the pillow term in the BFL action is key to this
    result. Let us emphasize however that the BFL scaling behavior does
    not coincide with the one of the original Boulatov model. A
    perturbative estimate established in [ 81 ] shows indeed that, in
    the pure Boulatov model, we have

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (7.77)
      -- -------- -- --------

Let us conclude by remarking that, since we established in 2009 the
perturbative ( 7.57 ) and constructive ( 7.75 ) scaling behavior of
three-dimensional group field theory, Gurau and Rivasseau have made
significant progress towards the identification of dominant
contributions in the Boulatov [ 68 ] and Ooguri models [ 68 , 64 ] ,
analogous to ’t Hooft’s planar diagrams [ 131 ] .

### Chapter 8 Conclusion

#### 8.1 Des fondations pour les mousses de spins

La viabilité du modèle plat en tant que théorie quantique de la
géométrie est cruciale pour le programme des mousses de spins. Dans
cette thèse, nous avons abordé certains des aspects réputés obscurs de
ce modèle, et notamment celui de ses divergences : divergences de bulles
d’une amplitude donnée, mais aussi divergence de la série perturbative,
du moins dans le cadre de la group field theory de Boulatov. Nous avons
obtenus les résultats suivants :

-   Le degré de divergence d’une mousse @xmath , pour un groupe de
    structure compact @xmath , est donné par le deuxième nombre de Betti
    tordu par les @xmath -connexions plates non-singulières sur @xmath .
    Ce résultat confirme l’intuition de Perez-Rovelli et de
    Freidel-Louapre concernant le rôle des bulles pour ce comptage de
    puissance, quoique dans un sens éminemment plus subtil que la notion
    de “surface fermée” ne le laisse entendre a priori .

-   Il existe une prescription combinatoire réalisant, dans les modèles
    de mousses de spins, l’identité heuristique entre “limite de
    raffinement” et “somme sur les histoires”. Ce résultat structurel
    suggère qu’en ce qui concerne la limite continue des mousses de
    spins, raffiner ou sommer, telle n’est pas la question.

-   La série perturbative du modèle de Boulatov, avec régularisation aux
    grands spins et terme de “coussin”, n’est pas seulement sommable au
    sens de Borel : elle possède une limite d’échelle où la constante de
    couplage s’annule .

Certes, ces résultats sont loin d’apporter une réponse, même partielle,
au problème de la gravité quantique évoqué dans l’introduction. Ils
peuvent toutefois être vu comme des fondements solides pour la théorie
des mousses de spin.

#### 8.2 Le modèle plat, une phase de la gravité quantique ?

S’il est directement relié à la théorie de Yang-Mills en deux dimensions
et à la gravité de Palatini-Cartan en trois dimensions, le modèle plat
n’est lié à la gravité quantique en quatre dimensions qu’au niveau
heuristique : modèle auxiliaire sans dynamique gravitationnelle, il
permet la construction des modèles du type EPRL ou FK par l’imposition
de certaines contraintes dites “de simplicité”. On pourrait donc –
légitimement – s’interroger sur la pertinence physique des résultats
obtenus dans cette thèse.

Il s’avère que la relation entre le modèle plat et la gravité quantique
quadri-dimensionnelle pourrait être plus étroite que ne le suggère la
construction des modèles EPRL-FK. Considérant le comportement d’une
action invariante par reparamétrisation sous l’effet d’une
discrétisation de l’espace-temps, Rovelli a en effet suggéré récemment
l’existence d’une phase “topologique” de la gravité, où la géométrie
serait plate : un mécanisme qu’il a baptisé Ditt -invariance [ 120 ] ,
en hommage au travail de B. Dittrich.

Une idée similaire a également été défendue par Rivasseau [ 107 ] .
Inspiré par le comportement du paramètre @xmath de Grosse-Wulkenhaar [
62 ] à haute énergie, il conjecture un “running” du paramètre d’Immirzi
dans le modèle EPRL vers la valeur critique @xmath , où l’amplitude de
mousse de spins se réduit à celle du modèle plat pour @xmath . Ceci
correspondrait selon lui à la phase “pré-géométrique” de la gravité
quantique.

Il est clair que, si l’un de ces scénarios venait à se réaliser, le
modèle plat reviendrait naturellement sur le devant de la scène
physique. Les résultats présentés dans cette thèse deviendraient alors
directement pertinents pour étudier le régime quantique de la gravité.

#### 8.3 Quel “groupe” de renormalisation ?

Pour faire sens d’une telle hypothèse, il reste toutefois à formuler une
généralisation du groupe de renormalisation adaptée au cadre des mousses
de spins. Plusieurs pistes semblent envisageables, parmi lesquelles :

-   Adapter le groupe de renormalisation de Wilson-Kadanoff au filet des
    mousses de spins . Comme nous l’avons rappelé au chap. 6 , celui-ci
    repose dans sa formulation traditionnelle sur la présence d’un
    réseau métrique . Le caractère background independent de la
    relativité générale nécessite le recours à une notion d’échelle
    généralisée ; nous postulons que la notion d’ensemble ordonné
    filtrant ( directed set ) a un role essentiel à jouer dans ce
    programme. Nous renvoyons le lecteur aux travaux préliminaires de
    Zapata [ 149 ] , Oeckl et leurs collaborateurs [ 83 ] à ce sujet,
    ainsi qu’aux résultats récents de Dittrich et al. [ 36 ] .

-   Une autre piste, poursuivie notamment par Rivasseau et ses
    collaborateurs, s’appuie sur l’analogie structurelle entre la
    théorie des champs sur le groupe ( group field theory ) et la
    théorie quantique des champs usuelle pour tenter de construire un
    groupe de renormalisation généralisé. Pour mener à bien ce
    programme, il est crucial de se doter d’une group field theory avec
    un propagateur non-trivial, donc de mousses de spins non-plates [
    107 ] . Tout reste à faire dans cette approche.

Développer ces points de vue, ou d’autres encore, afin de mieux
maîtriser la troncation du champ gravitationnel en mousses de spins :
c’est à mon sens le défi crucial pour la théorie des boucles. Courage à
ceux qui s’y attelleront, ou s’y attellent déjà !

### Appendix A Appendix A: Cellular homology

For the reader’s convenience, we recall here some basic definitions
concerning cell complexes and their (co)homology (a well-written,
pedagogical reference is [ 70 ] ). A cell complex, or finite CW complex,
is a topological space @xmath presented as the disjoint union of
finitely many open cells, such that for each open @xmath -cell @xmath
there is a continuous map @xmath whose restriction to the interior of
@xmath is a homeomorphism onto @xmath , and such that the image of the
boundary of @xmath is contained in the union of lower dimensional cells.
The dimension of @xmath , @xmath , is the maximal dimension of its
cells. If @xmath is the number of @xmath -cells of @xmath , the Euler
characteristic of @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is homotopy invariant.

Cellular homology associates to each cell complex @xmath a sequence of
homotopy invariant abelian groups, the homology groups of @xmath , as
follows. For each dimension @xmath , consider the set @xmath of formal
linear combination of @xmath -cells with integer coefficients (the ‘free
Abelian group’ over the @xmath -cells of @xmath ); its elements are
called @xmath -chains. Define, for each @xmath , the boundary map @xmath
by its action on @xmath -cells @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and linearity. Here, the sum runs over the @xmath -cells on the boundary
of @xmath , and @xmath is the incidence number of @xmath on @xmath –
that is, the number of times @xmath wraps around @xmath , with relative
orientations taken into account (see [ 70 ] for a precise definition).
Elements of @xmath are called @xmath -cycles, and elements of @xmath are
called @xmath -boundaries. The fundamental property of the boundary maps
is that, for each @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

This implies that @xmath , and allows to consider the quotients @xmath
of @xmath -cycles modulo @xmath -boundaries. The sequence of Abelian
groups @xmath , together with the boundaries maps @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

forms the cellular chain complex of @xmath , and the @xmath ’s are the
homology groups of @xmath . They are homotopy invariant, and in
particular so are their ranks @xmath , the Betti numbers of @xmath .
Intuitively, @xmath is the number of ‘independent @xmath -holes’ of
@xmath . The Euler-Poincaré theorem states that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Dualization of this construction leads to cellular cohomology.
Explicitely, for each p, the cochain group @xmath of @xmath is defined
as the set of linear maps from @xmath to @xmath , and the coboundary
operator @xmath as the transpose of @xmath . One checks that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the resulting complex

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

is called the cellular cochain complex of @xmath , and the quotients
@xmath its cohomology groups. They are homotopy invariant as well.

This construction can be generalized by replacing the integer
coefficients in the (co)chains by elements of an arbitrary Abelian group
@xmath . The corresponding homology and cohomology groups are then
denoted @xmath and @xmath respectively. One shows in particular that,
whenever @xmath is actually a vector space, @xmath and @xmath are dual
to each other. Also, in this case (and more generally if @xmath is
torsion-free), it holds that @xmath , and thus @xmath .

Eventually, let us mention Poincaré duality: when @xmath is the cell
decomposition of an oriented, closed @xmath -manifold, we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

### Appendix B Appendix B: Colored homology

Due to the several simplifications it provides, the recent literature on
group field theory has focused on Gurau’s colored model [ 66 ] . To ease
the translation between this framework and ours, based on finite CW
complexes, we recall here the basics of cristallization and colored
graph theory, and explicit the relationship between colored and cellular
homology. Although it seems that Gurau did not know about this work,
colored homology was actually introduced in [ 34 ] .

An @xmath -colored graph is a pair @xmath , where @xmath is a connected
multigraph (without tadpoles) regular of degree @xmath , and @xmath is
an edge-coloring such that @xmath for any pair @xmath and @xmath of
adjacent edges of @xmath . For each proper subset @xmath of @xmath , let
@xmath denote the subgraph of @xmath defined by @xmath ; each connected
component of @xmath is called a @xmath -residue, or @xmath -bubble. If
@xmath has @xmath elements, it is also called a @xmath -bubble. The
@xmath -bubbles of @xmath are its vertices.

The colored , or bubble , homology of such a colored graph @xmath is
defined as follows. Let @xmath be the free Abelian group generated by
the @xmath -bubbles of @xmath , and @xmath the linear map defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a @xmath -bubble @xmath colors, and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is not difficult to check that @xmath , and thus that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

forms a chain complex. Its homology groups @xmath are the colored
homology groups of @xmath . We denote the corresponding Betti numbers
@xmath .

Every @xmath -colored graph @xmath determines a @xmath -dimensional CW
complex @xmath as follows. For each vertex @xmath of @xmath , consider
an @xmath -simplex @xmath and label its vertices by @xmath . If @xmath
and @xmath are joined in @xmath by an @xmath -colored edge, @xmath ,
then identify the @xmath -faces of @xmath and @xmath opposite to the
vertex labelled by @xmath , so that equally labelled vertices coincide.
The quotient space is @xmath . It is obviously connected.

The CW complex thus defined is special in that every cell @xmath arises
as the projection of a @xmath -simplex @xmath with vertices labelled in
a subset @xmath of @xmath . Moreover, the cells on the boundary of
@xmath are the projections of the faces of @xmath . Such a CW complexes
is called a @xmath -complex by Hatcher [ 70 ] , and a pseudo-complex by
other authors [ 34 ] . Thanks to its simplicial character, its boundary
operator is readily computed. For @xmath , denote @xmath the @xmath
-cell on the boundary of @xmath arising as the projection of the face of
@xmath opposite to the vertex labelled by @xmath . Then @xmath , and
thus

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Moreover, like a simplicial complex, @xmath possesses a dual CW complex
@xmath , whose @xmath -cells @xmath are in one-to-one correspondence
with the @xmath -cells @xmath of @xmath (see [ 70 ] for details). Let

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

index the set of cofaces of @xmath . Then @xmath is such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

i.e. the boundary operator @xmath of @xmath is the coboundary operator
@xmath of @xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

as in Poincaré duality.

To relate the colored homology of the colored graph @xmath to the
cellular homology of the corresponding complex, it suffices to note that
the @xmath -bubbles of @xmath are in one-to-one correspondence with the
cells of @xmath arising from simplices with vertices labelled in @xmath
. Indeed, let @xmath be a vertex of a @xmath -bubble @xmath with @xmath
, and @xmath the corresponding simplex, with vertices labelled by @xmath
. Let @xmath be the @xmath -subsimplex of @xmath defined by those of its
vertices which are not in @xmath , and @xmath the corresponding @xmath
-cell in @xmath . By definition of the quotient space @xmath , the cell
@xmath actually does not depend on @xmath . Thus, for each @xmath
-bubble @xmath of @xmath there is a @xmath -cell @xmath of @xmath , and
therefore a @xmath -cell @xmath of @xmath . It is not hard to check that
this correspondence is actually bijective. Moreover, inspection of ( B.1
) and ( B.6 ) shows that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath the mapping @xmath . In other words, we have an isomorphism
of chain complexes @xmath , and thus

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

In particular, the colored Betti numbers of @xmath coincide with the
cellular Betti numbers of @xmath . Note moreover that, since the @xmath
-th Betti number of a topological space counts the number of its
connected components, we have @xmath and @xmath .