# Acknowledgements \pdfbookmark

[0]Acknowledgementsacknowledgements I would particular like to thank my
supervisor J. F. Feinstein for his guidance and enthusiasm over the last
four years. Through his expert knowledge of Banach algebra theory he has
helped me to identify several productive lines of research whilst always
allowing me the freedom required to make the work my own.
In addition to my supervisor, I. B. Fesenko also positively influenced
the direction of my research. During my doctoral training I undertook a
postgraduate training module on the theory of local fields given by I.
B. Fesenko. With extra reading, this enabled me to work both in the
Archimedean and non-Archimedean settings as implicitly suggested by my
thesis title.
It was a pleasure to know my friends in the algebra and analysis group
at Nottingham and I thank them for their interest in my work and
hospitality.
I am grateful to the School of Mathematical sciences at the University
of Nottingham for providing funds in support of my conference
participation and visits.
Similarly I appreciate the support given to me by the EPSRC through a
Doctoral Training Grant.
This PhD thesis was examined by A. G. O’Farrell and J. Zacharias who I
thank for their time and interest in my work.

###### Contents

-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 Background and Overview
    -    1.2 Summary
-    2 Complete valued fields
    -    2.1 Introduction
        -    2.1.1 Series expansions of elements of valued fields
        -    2.1.2 Examples of complete valued fields
        -    2.1.3 Topological properties of complete valued fields
    -    2.2 Extending complete valued fields
        -    2.2.1 Extensions
        -    2.2.2 Galois theory
-    3 Functions and algebras
    -    3.1 Functional analysis over complete valued fields
        -    3.1.1 Analytic functions
    -    3.2 Banach F -algebras
        -    3.2.1 Spectrum of an element
-    4 Uniform algebras
    -    4.1 Complex uniform algebras
        -    4.1.1 Swiss cheese sets in the complex plane
        -    4.1.2 Classicalisation theorem
    -    4.2 Non-complex analogs of uniform algebras
        -    4.2.1 Real function algebras
-    5 Commutative generalisation over complete valued fields
    -    5.1 Main definitions
    -    5.2 Generalisation theorems
    -    5.3 Examples
    -    5.4 Non-Archimedean new basic function algebras from old
        -    5.4.1 Basic extensions
        -    5.4.2 Residue algebras
-    6 Representation theory
    -    6.1 Further Banach rings and Banach F -algebras
    -    6.2 Representations
        -    6.2.1 Established theorems
        -    6.2.2 Motivation
        -    6.2.3 Representation under finite basic dimension
-    7 Non-commutative generalisation and open questions
    -    7.1 Non-commutative generalisation
        -    7.1.1 Non-commutative real function algebras
        -    7.1.2 Non-commutative non-Archimedean analogs
    -    7.2 Open questions

## Chapter 1 Introduction

This short chapter provides an informal overview of the material in this
thesis. Justification of the statements made in this chapter can
therefore be found in the main body of the thesis which starts at
Chapter 2 .

### 1.1 Background and Overview

Complex uniform algebras have been extensively investigated because of
their importance in the theory of uniform approximation and as examples
of complex Banach algebras. Let @xmath denote the complex Banach algebra
of all continuous complex-valued functions defined on a compact
Hausdorff space @xmath . A complex uniform algebra @xmath is a
subalgebra of @xmath that is complete with respect to the sup norm,
contains the constant functions making it a unital complex Banach
algebra and separates the points of X in the sense that for all @xmath
with @xmath there is @xmath satisfying @xmath . Attempting to generalise
this definition to other complete valued fields simply by replacing
@xmath with some other complete valued field @xmath produces very
limited results. This is because the various versions of the
Stone-Weierstrass theorem restricts our attention to @xmath in this
case.
However the theory of real function algebras introduced by S. H.
Kulkarni and B. V. Limaye in the 1980s does provide an interesting
generalisation of complex uniform algebras. One important departure in
the definition of these algebras from that of complex uniform algebras
is that they are real Banach algebras of continuous complex-valued
functions. Similarly the elements of the algebras introduced in this
thesis are also continuous functions that take values in some complete
valued field or division ring extending the field of scalars over which
the algebra is a vector space.
A prominent aspect of the emerging theory is that it has a lot to do
with representation. As a very simple example the field of complex
numbers itself is isometrically isomorphic to a real function algebra,
all be it on a two point space.
When considering the generalisation of complex uniform algebras over all
complete valued fields I naturally wanted the complex uniform algebras
and real function algebras to appear directly as instances of the new
theory. This resulted in the definition of basic function algebras
involving the use of a Galois automorphism and homeomorphic endofunction
that interact in a useful way, see Definition 5.1 . In retrospect these
particular algebras should more appropriately be referred to as cyclic
basic function algebras since the functions involved take values in some
cyclic extension of the underlying field of scalars of the algebra.
Necessarily this thesis starts by surveying complete valued fields and
their properties. The transition from the Archimedean setting to the
non-Archimedean setting preserves in places several of the nice
properties that complete Archimedean fields have. However all complete
non-Archimedean fields are totally disconnected, some of them are not
locally compact and there is no non-Archimedean analog of the
Gel’fand-Mazur Theorem.
On the other hand some complete non-Archimedean fields have interesting
properties that only appear in the non-Archimedean setting. Consider for
example the closed unit disc of the complex plane. It is closed under
multiplication but not with respect to addition. In the non-Archimedean
setting the closed unit ball @xmath , of a complete valued field @xmath
, is a ring since in this case the valuation involved observes the
strong version of the triangle inequality, see Definition 2.1.1 . The
set @xmath is a maximal ideal of @xmath from which the residue field
@xmath is obtained. The residue field is of great importance in the
study of such fields.
Similarly in the non-Archimedean setting we will see that certain basic
function algebras have residue algebras that are also basic function
algebras. In the process of proving this result an interesting fact is
shown concerning a large class of complete non-Archimedean fields. For
such a field @xmath and every finite extension @xmath of @xmath ,
extending @xmath as a valued field, it is shown that for each Galois
automorphism @xmath there exists a set @xmath of residue class
representatives such that the restriction of @xmath to @xmath is an
endofunction, i.e. a self map, on @xmath . This fact is probably known
to certain number theorists.
This thesis also includes several examples of basic function algebras
and these are considered at depth. A new proof of an existing theorem in
the setting of complex uniform algebras is given and theory in the
non-commutative setting is also considered.
With respect to commutative Banach algebra theory, Chapter 6 presents an
interesting new Gel’fand representation result extending those of the
Archimedean setting. In particular we have the following theorem where
the condition of finite basic dimension is automatically satisfied in
the Archimedean setting and compensates for the lack of a Gel’fand-Mazur
Theorem in the non-Archimedean setting. See Chapter 6 for full details.

###### Theorem 1.1.1.

Let @xmath be a locally compact complete valued field with nontrivial
valuation. Let @xmath be a commutative unital Banach @xmath -algebra
with @xmath for all @xmath and finite basic dimension. Then:

1.   if @xmath is the field of complex numbers then @xmath is
    isometrically @xmath -isomorphic to a complex uniform algebra on
    some compact Hausdorff space @xmath ;

2.   if @xmath is the field of real numbers then @xmath is isometrically
    @xmath -isomorphic to a real function algebra on some compact
    Hausdorff space @xmath ;

3.   if @xmath is non-Archimedean then @xmath is isometrically @xmath
    -isomorphic to a non-Archimedean analog of the real function
    algebras on some Stone space @xmath where by a Stone space we mean a
    totally disconnected compact Hausdorff space.

In particular @xmath is isometrically @xmath -isomorphic to some
subalgebra @xmath of a basic function algebra and @xmath separates the
points of @xmath .

Note that (i) and (ii) of Theorem 1.1.1 are the well known results from
the Archimedean setting. This brings us to the following summary.

### 1.2 Summary

1.  The relevant background concerning complete valued fields is
    provided. Several examples are given and the topological properties
    of complete valued fields are compared and discussed. A particularly
    useful and well known way of expressing the extension of a valuation
    is considered and the relevant Galois theory is introduced.

2.  Some background concerning functional analysis over complete valued
    fields is given. Analytic functions are discussed. Banach @xmath
    -algebras are introduced and the spectrum of an element is
    considered.

3.  Complex uniform algebras are introduced. In the context of complex
    uniform algebras, a new proof is given using transfinite induction
    of the Feinstein-Heath Swiss cheese “Classicalisation” theorem. This
    new proof also appeared in a paper by J. W. Mason in 2010. This is
    followed by a preliminary discussion concerning non-complex analogs
    of uniform algebras. Real function algebras are introduced.

4.  Basic function algebras are defined providing the required
    generalisation of real function algebras to all complete valued
    fields. A generalisation theorem proves that Basic function algebras
    have the obligatory properties of uniform algebras.
    Several examples are provided. Complex uniform algebras and real
    function algebras now appear as instances of the new theory. A basic
    function algebra is constructed in the non-Archimedean setting on a
    @xmath -adic ball such that the only globally analytic elements of
    the algebra are constants.
    Each basic function algebra is shown to have a lattice of basic
    extensions related to the field structure. Further, in the
    non-Archimedean setting it is shown that certain basic function
    algebras have residue algebras that are also basic function
    algebras. To prove this each Galois automorphism, for certain field
    extensions, is shown to restrict to an endofunction on some set of
    residue class representatives.

5.  A representation theorem is established in the context of locally
    compact complete fields with nontrivial valuation. For such a field
    @xmath , commutative unital Banach @xmath -algebras with square
    preserving norm and finite basic dimension are shown to be
    isometrically @xmath -isomorphic to some subalgebra of a Basic
    function algebra. The condition of finite basic dimension is
    automatically satisfied in the Archimedean setting by the
    Gel’fand-Mazur Theorem.

6.  The theory of non-commutative real function algebras was established
    by K. Jarosz in 2008. The possibility of their generalisation to the
    non-Archimedean setting is established in this thesis having been
    originally pointed out in a paper by J. W. Mason in 2011. The thesis
    concludes with a list of open questions highlighting the potential
    for further interesting developments of this theory.

## Chapter 2 Complete valued fields

In this chapter we survey some of the basic facts and definitions
concerning complete valued fields. Whilst also providing a background,
most of the material presented here is required by later chapters and
has been selected accordingly.

### 2.1 Introduction

We begin with some definitions.

###### Definition 2.1.1.

We adopt the following terminology:

1.  Let @xmath be a field. We will call a multiplicative norm @xmath a
    valuation on @xmath and @xmath together with @xmath a valued field .

2.  Let @xmath be a valued field. If the valuation on @xmath satisfies
    the strong triangle inequality,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    then we call @xmath a non-Archimedean valuation and @xmath a
    non-Archimedean field . Else we call @xmath an Archimedean valuation
    and @xmath an Archimedean field .

3.  If a valued field is complete with respect to the metric obtained
    from its valuation then we call it a complete valued field .
    Similarly we have complete valuation and complete non-Archimedean
    field etc.

4.  More generally, a metric space @xmath is called an ultrametric space
    if the metric @xmath satisfies the strong triangle inequality,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

The following theorem is a characterisation of non-Archimedean fields,
courtesy of [ Sch06 , p18] .

###### Theorem 2.1.2.

Let @xmath be a valued field. Then @xmath is a non-Archimedean field if
and only if @xmath .

###### Remark 2.1.3.

Whilst it is clear from the definition of the strong triangle inequality
that an Archimedean field can’t be extended as a valued field to a
non-Archimedean field, Theorem 2.1.2 also shows that a non-Archimedean
field can’t be extended to an Archimedean field.

###### Theorem 2.1.4.

Let @xmath be a valued field. Let @xmath , with pointwise operations, be
the ring of Cauchy sequences of elements of @xmath and let @xmath denote
its ideal of null sequences. Then the completion @xmath of @xmath with
the function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath , is a complete valued field extending @xmath as a valued
field.

###### Proof.

We will only highlight one important part of the proof since further
details can be found in [ McC66 , p80] . We first note that since the
valuation @xmath is multiplicative we have @xmath for all units @xmath .
Let @xmath be a Cauchy sequence taking values in @xmath but not a null
sequence. Then there exists @xmath and @xmath such that for all @xmath
we have @xmath . If @xmath takes the value @xmath then a null sequence
can be added to @xmath such that the resulting sequence @xmath does not
takes the value @xmath and @xmath agrees with @xmath for all @xmath .
Hence for all @xmath and @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so the sequence @xmath is also a Cauchy sequence. This shows that
the ideal of null sequences @xmath is maximal and @xmath is therefore a
field opposed to merely a ring. ∎

###### Definition 2.1.5.

Let @xmath be a valued field. We will call a function @xmath a valuation
logarithm if and only if for an appropriate fixed @xmath we have @xmath
for all @xmath .

###### Remark 2.1.6.

We have the following basic facts.

1.  With reference to Definition 2.1.1 , a valuation logarithm @xmath on
    a non-Archimedean field @xmath has the following properties. For
    @xmath we have:

    1.  @xmath ;

    2.  @xmath ;

    3.  @xmath and @xmath if and only if @xmath .

2.  Every valued field @xmath has a valuation logarithm since we can
    take @xmath , where @xmath , and for @xmath define

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.  If @xmath is a valuation logarithm on a valued field @xmath then so
    is @xmath for any @xmath with @xmath . However there will sometimes
    be a preferred choice. For example a valuation logarithm of rank 1
    is such that @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.1.7.

Let @xmath be a non-Archimedean field with valuation logarithm @xmath .
If @xmath are such that @xmath then @xmath .

###### Proof.

Given that @xmath we have @xmath . Moreover @xmath therefore giving
@xmath . Hence @xmath . But @xmath and so @xmath giving @xmath . ∎

Before looking at specific examples of complete valued fields we first
consider some of the theory concerning series representations of
elements.

#### 2.1.1 Series expansions of elements of valued fields

###### Definition 2.1.8.

Let @xmath be a valued field. If 1 is an isolated point of @xmath ,
equivalently 0 is an isolated point of @xmath for @xmath a valuation
logarithm on @xmath , then the valuation on @xmath is said to be
discrete , else it is said to be dense .

###### Lemma 2.1.9.

If a valued field @xmath has a discrete valuation then @xmath is a
discrete subset of @xmath for @xmath a valuation logarithm on @xmath .

###### Proof.

We show the contrapositive. Suppose there is a sequence @xmath of
elements of @xmath such that @xmath converges to a point of @xmath with
@xmath for all @xmath . We can take @xmath to be such that @xmath for
@xmath . Then setting @xmath defines a sequence @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which converges to 0. ∎

The following standard definitions are particularly important.

###### Definition 2.1.10.

For @xmath a non-Archimedean field with valuation logarithm @xmath ,
Define:

1.  @xmath the ring of integers of @xmath noting that this is a ring by
    the strong triangle inequality;

2.  @xmath the units of @xmath ;

3.  @xmath the maximal ideal of @xmath of elements without inverses in
    @xmath ;

4.  @xmath the residue field of @xmath of residue classes .

###### Definition 2.1.11.

Let @xmath be a field with a discrete valuation and valuation logarithm
@xmath .

1.  If @xmath , equivalently @xmath , then the valuation is called
    trivial .

2.  If @xmath is not trivial then an element @xmath such that @xmath is
    called a prime element since @xmath for all @xmath given above.

###### Remark 2.1.12.

For a field @xmath , as in part (ii) of Definition 2.1.11 , it follows
easily from Lemma 2.1.9 that @xmath has a prime element @xmath and from
Remark 2.1.6 that @xmath which we call the value group . Moreover for
@xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

giving a rank 1 valuation logarithm @xmath noting that @xmath since
@xmath .

###### Theorem 2.1.13.

Let @xmath be a valued field with a non-trivial, discrete valuation. Let
@xmath be a prime element of @xmath and let @xmath be a set of residue
class representatives with 0 representing @xmath . Then every element
@xmath has a unique series expansion over @xmath of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover if @xmath is complete then every series over @xmath of the
above form defines an element of @xmath .

###### Remark 2.1.14.

Concerning Theorem 2.1.13 .

1.  A proof is given in [ Sch06 , p28] , in fact a generalisation of
    Theorem 2.1.13 is also given that can be applied to non-Archimedean
    fields with a dense valuation.

2.  For @xmath as in Theorem 2.1.13 and using the rank 1 valuation
    logarithm of Remark 2.1.12 we have, for each @xmath , @xmath if
    @xmath and @xmath otherwise. Further by Lemma 2.1.7 @xmath defines a
    Cauchy sequence in @xmath , with respect to @xmath , and its limit
    is @xmath . Hence, since for each @xmath we have @xmath , @xmath
    converges in @xmath to @xmath . But @xmath for all @xmath by Lemma
    2.1.7 and so @xmath .

We will now look at some examples of complete valued fields and consider
the availability of such structures in the Archimedean and
non-Archimedean settings.

#### 2.1.2 Examples of complete valued fields

###### Example 2.1.15.

Here are some non-Archimedean examples.

1.  Let @xmath be any field. Then @xmath with the trivial valuation is a
    non-Archimedean field. It is complete noting that in this case each
    Cauchy sequences will be constant after some finite number of
    initial values. The trivial valuation induces the trivial topology
    on @xmath where every subset of @xmath is clopen i.e. both open and
    closed. Furthermore @xmath will coincide with its own residue field.

2.  There are examples of complete non-Archimedean fields of non-zero
    characteristic with non-trivial valuation. For each there is a prime
    @xmath such that the field is a transcendental extension of the
    finite field @xmath of @xmath elements. The reason why such a field
    is not an algebraic extension of @xmath follows easily from the fact
    that the only valuation on a finite field is the trivial valuation.
    One example of this sort is the valued field of formal Laurent
    series @xmath in one variable over @xmath with termwise addition,

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

    multiplication in the form of the Cauchy product,

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

    and valuation given at zero by @xmath and on the units @xmath by,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    The valuation on @xmath is discrete and its residue field is
    isomorphic to @xmath . The above construction also gives a complete
    non-Archimedean field if we replace @xmath with any other field
    @xmath , see [ Sch06 , p288] .

3.  On the other hand complete valued fields of characteristic zero
    necessarily contain one of the completions of the rational numbers
    @xmath . The Levi-Civita field @xmath is such a valued field, see [
    SB10 ] . Each element @xmath can be represented as a formal power
    series of the form

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

    such that for each @xmath there are at most finitely many @xmath
    with @xmath . Moreover addition, multiplication and the valuation
    for @xmath can all be obtained by analogy with example (ii) above. A
    total order can be put on the Levi-Civita field such that the order
    topology agrees with the topology induced by the field’s valuation
    which is non-trivial. To verify this one shows that the order
    topology sub-base of open rays topologically generates the valuation
    topology sub-base of open balls and vice versa. This might be useful
    to those interested in generalising the theory of C*-algebras to new
    fields where there is a need to define positive elements. The
    completion of @xmath that the Levi-Civita field contains is in fact
    @xmath itself since the valuation when restricted to @xmath is
    trivial.

We consider what examples of complete Archimedean fields there are.
Since the only valuation on a finite field is the trivial valuation, it
follows from Remark 2.1.3 that every Archimedean field is of
characteristic zero. Moreover every non-trivial valuation on the
rational numbers is given by Ostrowski’s Theorem, see [ FV02 , p2] [
Sch06 , p22] .

###### Theorem 2.1.16.

A non-trivial valuation on @xmath is either a power of the absolute
valuation @xmath , with @xmath , or a power of the @xmath -adic
valuation @xmath for some prime @xmath with positive @xmath .

###### Remark 2.1.17.

We will look at the @xmath -adic valuations on @xmath and the @xmath
-adic numbers in Example 2.1.18 . We note that any two of the valuations
mentioned in Theorem 2.1.16 that are not the same up to a positive power
will also not be equivalent as norms. Further, since all of the @xmath
-adic valuations are non-Archimedean, Theorem 2.1.16 implies that every
complete Archimedean field contains @xmath , with a positive power of
the absolute valuation, as a valued sub-field. It turns out that almost
all complete valued fields are non-Archimedean with @xmath and @xmath
being the only two Archimedean exceptions up to isomorphism as
topological fields, see [ Sch06 , p36] . This in part follows from the
Gel’fand-Mazur Theorem which depends on spectral analysis involving
Liouville’s Theorem and the Hahn-Banach Theorem in the complex setting.
We will return to these issues in the more general setting of Banach
@xmath -algebras.

###### Example 2.1.18.

Let @xmath be a prime. Then with reference to Remark 2.1.6 , for @xmath
,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

extends uniquely to @xmath under the properties of a valuation
logarithm. Indeed for @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

giving @xmath etc. The standard @xmath -adic valuation of @xmath is then
given by @xmath . This is a discrete valuation on @xmath with respect to
which @xmath is a prime element in the sense of Definition 2.1.11 .
Moreover @xmath is one choice of a set of residue class representatives
for @xmath . This is because for @xmath with @xmath and @xmath we have
that @xmath , using the Division algorithm, can be expressed as @xmath
and @xmath , using the extended Euclidean algorithm, can be expressed as
@xmath with @xmath and @xmath . Hence, with reference to Definition
2.1.10 , @xmath can be expressed as @xmath with @xmath and @xmath as
required. With these details in place we can apply Theorem 2.1.13 so
that every element @xmath has a unique series expansion over @xmath of
the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The completion of @xmath with respect to @xmath is the field of @xmath
-adic numbers denoted @xmath . The elements of @xmath are all of the
series of the above form when using the expansion over @xmath . Further,
with reference to Remark 2.1.14 , for such an element @xmath with @xmath
we have @xmath . As an example of such expansions for @xmath we have,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

More generally the residue field of @xmath is the finite field @xmath of
@xmath elements. Each non-zero element of @xmath has a lift to a @xmath
root of unity in @xmath , see [ FV02 , p37] . These roots of unity
together with @xmath also constitute a set of residue class
representatives for @xmath . The ring that they generate embeds as a
ring into the complex numbers, e.g. see Figure 2.1 .

Moreover as a field, rather than as a valued field, @xmath has an
embedding into @xmath . The @xmath -adic valuation on @xmath can then be
extended to a complete valuation on the complex numbers which in this
case as a valued field we denote as @xmath , see [ Sch06 , 46] [ Roq84 ]
.

Finally it is interesting to note that the different standard valuations
on @xmath , when restricted to the units @xmath , are related by the
equation @xmath where @xmath denotes the trivial valuation and @xmath
the absolute value function. See [ FV02 , p3] .

#### 2.1.3 Topological properties of complete valued fields

In this subsection we consider the connectedness and local compactness
of complete valued fields.

###### Definition 2.1.19.

Let @xmath be a topological space and @xmath .

1.  If @xmath cannot be expressed as the disjoint union of two non-empty
    clopen subsets with respect to the relative topology then @xmath is
    said to be a connected subset of @xmath .

2.  If the only non-empty connected subsets of @xmath are singletons
    then @xmath is said to be totally disconnected .

3.  If for each pair of points @xmath there exists a continuous map
    @xmath , @xmath , such that @xmath and @xmath then @xmath is
    path-connected .

4.  A neighborhood base @xmath at a point @xmath is a collection of
    neighborhoods of @xmath such that for every neighborhood @xmath of
    @xmath there is @xmath with @xmath .

5.  We call @xmath locally compact if and only if each point in @xmath
    has a neighborhood base consisting of compact sets.

The following lemma is well known however I have provided a proof for
the reader’s convenience.

###### Lemma 2.1.20.

Let @xmath be a non-Archimedean field. Then @xmath is totally
disconnected.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a non-Archimedean field and @xmath with @xmath . For
@xmath , @xmath if and only if @xmath defines an equivalence relation on
@xmath by the strong triangle inequality noting that for transitivity if
@xmath and @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence for @xmath the @xmath -ball @xmath is an equivalence class and so
every element of @xmath is at its center because every element is an
equivalence class representative. In particular if @xmath then @xmath
but for @xmath we have @xmath , showing that @xmath is clopen. Since
this holds for every @xmath , @xmath has a neighborhood base of clopen
balls. Hence since @xmath is Hausdorff, @xmath is the only connected
subset of @xmath with @xmath as an element and so @xmath is totally
disconnected. ∎

###### Remark 2.1.21.

We make the following observations.

1.  Every complete Archimedean field is path-connected whereas every
    complete non-Archimedean field is totally disconnected.

2.  In general a valued field being totally disconnected is not the same
    as it being discrete. For example @xmath with the absolute valuation
    is a totally disconnected Archimedean field but it is obviously
    neither discrete nor complete. Also it is easy to show that a valued
    field admits a non-constant path if and only if it is
    path-connected, see [ Wil04 , p197] for the standard definitions
    used here.

3.  With reference to the proof of Lemma 2.1.20 , @xmath if and only if
    @xmath , noting the change from the strict inequality, is again an
    equivalence relation on @xmath . Hence every ball of positive radius
    in a non-Archimedean field is clopen although a ball @xmath may
    contain elements in addition to those in @xmath depending on whether
    @xmath . To clarify then, in the non-Archimedean setting @xmath does
    not denote the closure of @xmath with respect to the valuation.

4.  In section 4.1.1 concerning complex uniform algebras we will look at
    Swiss cheese sets. For a non-Archimedean field @xmath if @xmath and
    @xmath with @xmath then either @xmath or @xmath since either @xmath
    or @xmath . Further if @xmath is an @xmath -ball or the complement
    of an @xmath -ball then the closure of @xmath with respect to @xmath
    coincides with @xmath since @xmath -balls are clopen. Hence a Swiss
    cheese set @xmath will be classical exactly when there exists a
    countable or finite collection @xmath of @xmath -balls, with finite
    radius sum, and an @xmath -ball @xmath such that each element of
    @xmath is a subset of @xmath and @xmath . It follows that such a set
    @xmath can be empty in the non-Archimedean setting.

###### Theorem 2.1.22.

Let @xmath be a Hausdorff space. Then @xmath is locally compact if and
only if each point in @xmath has a compact neighborhood.

###### Theorem 2.1.23.

Let @xmath be a complete non-Archimedean field that is not
simultaneously both infinite and with the trivial valuation. Then the
following are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is locally compact;

2.   the residue field @xmath is finite and the valuation on @xmath is
    discrete;

3.   each bounded sequence in @xmath has a convergent subsequence;

4.   each infinite bounded subset of @xmath has an accumulation point in
    @xmath ;

5.   each closed and bounded subset of @xmath is compact.

Proofs of Theorem 2.1.22 and Theorem 2.1.23 can be found in [ Wil04 ,
p130] and [ Sch06 , p29,p57] respectively.

###### Remark 2.1.24.

Concerning Theorem 2.1.23 .

1.  Let @xmath be an infinite field with the trivial valuation. Then
    @xmath is locally compact since for @xmath it follows that @xmath is
    a neighborhood base of compact sets for @xmath . However @xmath does
    not have any of the other properties given in Theorem 2.1.23 . For
    example the residue field @xmath is @xmath and so it is not finite
    and @xmath itself is closed and bounded but not compact etc.

2.  We will call a complete non-Archimedean field @xmath that
    satisfies (ii) of Theorem 2.1.23 a local field . Some authors weaken
    the condition on the residue field when defining local fields so
    that the residue field needs only to be of prime characteristic for
    some prime @xmath and perfect, that is the Frobenius endomorphism on
    @xmath , @xmath , is an automorphism.

3.  Since the only complete Archimedean fields are @xmath and @xmath all
    but property (ii) of Theorem 2.1.23 hold for complete Archimedean
    fields by the Heine-Borel Theorem and Bolzano-Weierstrass Theorem
    etc. In fact this provides one way to prove Theorem 2.1.23 since if
    @xmath is a local field then there is a homeomorphic embedding of
    @xmath into @xmath as a closed unbounded subset.

4.  By the details given in Example 2.1.18 it is immediate that for each
    prime @xmath the field of @xmath -adic numbers @xmath is a local
    field. However @xmath is not a local field since its valuation is
    dense and its residue field is infinite, see [ Sch06 , p45] .

### 2.2 Extending complete valued fields

In this section and later chapters we will adopt the following notation.
Notation
If @xmath is a field and @xmath is a field extending @xmath then we will
denote the Galois group of @xmath -automorphisms on @xmath , that is
automorphisms on @xmath that fix the elements of @xmath , by @xmath .
Further we will denote fixed fields by:

1.  @xmath , for @xmath ;

2.  @xmath , for a subgroup @xmath .

More generally if @xmath is a set and @xmath is a group of self maps
@xmath , with group law composition, then we will denote:

1.  @xmath , the order of an element @xmath with finite order;

2.  @xmath , the order at an element @xmath , when finite, of an element
    @xmath ;

3.  @xmath , the order set of an element @xmath with finite order.

In the rest of this section we will look mainly at extensions of valued
fields, including their valuations, as well as some Galois theory used
in later chapters.

#### 2.2.1 Extensions

The first theorem below is rather general in scope.

###### Theorem 2.2.1.

Let @xmath be a complete non-Archimedean field. All non-Archimedean
norms, that is norms that observe the strong triangle inequality, on a
finite dimensional @xmath -vector space @xmath are equivalent. Further
@xmath is a Banach space, i.e. complete normed space, with respect to
each norm.

Theorem 2.2.1 also holds for complete Archimedean fields and in the
Archimedean setting proofs often make use of the underlying field being
locally compact. However the complete non-Archimedean field @xmath in
Theorem 2.2.1 is not assumed to be locally compact and so a proof of the
theorem from [ Sch06 ] has been included below for interest.

###### Proof of Theorem 2.2.1.

We use induction on @xmath . The base case @xmath is immediate. Suppose
Theorem 2.2.1 holds for @xmath -dimensional spaces and let @xmath be
such that @xmath . We choose a base @xmath for @xmath and define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that @xmath is a non-Archimedean norm on @xmath by @xmath being a
non-Archimedean valuation. Now let @xmath be any other non-Archimedean
norm on @xmath . We show that @xmath is equivalent to @xmath . For
@xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . Hence it remains to show that there is a positive
constant @xmath such that for all @xmath we have @xmath . Let @xmath be
the linear subspace generated by @xmath . By the inductive hypothesis
there is @xmath such that for all @xmath we have @xmath . Further @xmath
is complete and hence closed in @xmath with respect to @xmath . Hence
for

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we have @xmath . Now set @xmath and let @xmath . Then @xmath for some
@xmath and @xmath . If @xmath then @xmath . But then we also get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and this inequality also holds for @xmath since @xmath . We get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . Hence @xmath and @xmath are equivalent. Finally we note
that a sequence in @xmath is a Cauchy sequence with respect to @xmath if
and only if each of its coordinate sequences is a Cauchy sequence with
respect to @xmath . Hence @xmath is a Banach space with respect to each
norm by the equivalence of norms and completeness of @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 2.2.2.

Let @xmath be a non-Archimedean field and let @xmath be a complete
subfield of @xmath . If @xmath is a finite extension of @xmath then
@xmath is also complete by Theorem 2.2.1 . Now suppose @xmath is such a
complete finite extension of @xmath , then viewing @xmath as a finite
dimensional @xmath -vector space we note that convergence in @xmath is
coordinate-wise since @xmath is equivalent to @xmath by Theorem 2.2.1 .
Hence each element @xmath is continuous since being linear over @xmath .
We will see later in this section that, for such complete finite
extensions, each element of @xmath is in fact an isometry. Finally in
all cases if @xmath is complete and @xmath is continuous then the fixed
field @xmath is also complete. To see this let @xmath be a Cauchy
sequence in @xmath and let @xmath be its limit in @xmath . For @xmath
the identity map on @xmath , note that @xmath is also continuous on
@xmath and so @xmath is a closed subset of @xmath . In particular we
have @xmath as required.

The following is Krull’s extension theorem, a proof can be found in [
Sch06 , p34] .

###### Theorem 2.2.3.

Let @xmath be a subfield of a field @xmath and let @xmath be a
non-Archimedean valuation on @xmath . Then there exists a
non-Archimedean valuation on @xmath that extends @xmath .

The following corollary to Theorem 2.2.3 , which also uses Theorem 2.1.4
, contrasts with the Archimedean setting.

###### Corollary 2.2.4.

For every complete non-Archimedean field @xmath there exists a proper
extension @xmath of @xmath for which the complete valuation on @xmath
extends to a complete valuation on @xmath .

Moreover an extension of a valuation is often unique.

###### Theorem 2.2.5.

Let @xmath be a complete non-Archimedean field, let @xmath be an
algebraic extension of @xmath and let @xmath . Then:

1.   there is a unique valuation @xmath on @xmath that extends the
    valuation on @xmath ;

2.   if @xmath is an arbitrary norm on the @xmath -vector space @xmath
    then @xmath .

###### Remark 2.2.6.

We make the following observations.

1.  Part (i) of Theorem 2.2.5 follows easily from Theorem 2.2.3 and
    Theorem 2.2.1 applied respectively noting that if @xmath then @xmath
    is also an element of a finite extension of @xmath . See [ Sch06 ,
    p39] for the rest of the proof.

2.  It is worth emphasizing that Theorem 2.2.1 , Theorem 2.2.3 and
    Theorem 2.2.5 all hold for the case where the valuation on @xmath is
    trivial.

3.  Now for @xmath and @xmath conforming to the conditions of Theorem
    2.2.5 we have that each @xmath is indeed an isometry on @xmath since
    @xmath , for @xmath , is a valuation on @xmath giving @xmath by
    uniqueness.

The following theory will often allow us to express the extension of a
valuation in a particularly useful form. We begin with a standard
theorem.

###### Theorem 2.2.7.

Let @xmath be a field, let @xmath be an algebraic extension of @xmath
and let @xmath . Then there is a unique monic irreducible polynomial
@xmath such that @xmath . Moreover, for the simple extension @xmath , we
have @xmath where @xmath denotes the dimension of @xmath as an @xmath
-vector space.

###### Definition 2.2.8.

Let @xmath be a field and let @xmath be an algebraic extension of @xmath
.

1.  An element @xmath is said to be separable over @xmath if @xmath is
    not a repeated root of its own irreducible polynomial @xmath .

2.  We call @xmath the separable closure of @xmath in @xmath .

3.  The extension @xmath is said to be a separable extension of @xmath
    if @xmath .

4.  Let @xmath . Then @xmath is called a splitting field of @xmath over
    @xmath if @xmath splits completely in @xmath as a product of linear
    factors but not over any proper subfield of @xmath containing @xmath
    .

5.  We will call @xmath a normal extension of @xmath if @xmath is the
    splitting field over @xmath of some polynomial in @xmath .

6.  The field @xmath is called a Galois extension of @xmath if @xmath
    for @xmath .

###### Remark 2.2.9.

Following Definition 2.2.8 we note that the separable closure @xmath of
@xmath in @xmath is a field with @xmath . Moreover if @xmath is of
characteristic zero then @xmath is a separable extension of @xmath .

For proofs of the following two theorems and Remark 2.2.9 see [ McC66 ,
p13-p19,p36] .

###### Theorem 2.2.10.

Let @xmath be a field and let @xmath be a finite extension of @xmath .
Then there is a normal extension @xmath of @xmath which contains @xmath
and which is the smallest such extension in the sense that if @xmath is
a normal extension of @xmath which contains @xmath then there is a
@xmath -monomorphism of @xmath into @xmath , i.e. an embedding of @xmath
into @xmath that fixes @xmath .

###### Theorem 2.2.11.

Let @xmath be a field and let @xmath be a finite extension of @xmath .
Then, with reference to Theorem 2.2.10 and Definition 2.2.8 , there are
exactly @xmath distinct @xmath -isomorphisms of @xmath onto subfields of
@xmath . Further if @xmath then @xmath . Moreover @xmath is a Galois
extension of @xmath if and only if @xmath in which case @xmath .

###### Definition 2.2.12.

Let @xmath be a field, let @xmath be a finite extension of @xmath and
let @xmath . By Theorem 2.2.11 there are exactly @xmath distinct @xmath
-isomorphisms @xmath of @xmath onto subfields of @xmath . The norm map
@xmath is defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A proof showing that the norm map only takes values in the ground field
can be found in [ McC66 , p23,p24] . Using the preceding theory we can
now state and prove a theorem that will often allow us to express the
extension of a valuation in a particularly useful form. The theorem is
in the literature. However, having set out the preceding theory, the
proof presented here is more immediate than the sources I have seen.

###### Theorem 2.2.13.

Let @xmath be a complete non-Archimedean field with valuation @xmath ,
for @xmath , where @xmath is a valuation logarithm on @xmath . Let
@xmath be a finite extension of @xmath as a field. Then, with reference
to Theorem 2.2.5 and Theorem 2.2.1 , the unique extension of @xmath to a
complete valuation @xmath on @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath is the corresponding extension of @xmath to
@xmath . If in addition the valuation @xmath is discrete then @xmath is
also discrete. If further @xmath is non-trivial and @xmath is the rank 1
valuation logarithm of remark 2.1.12 then @xmath for some @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the normal extension of @xmath containing @xmath of
Theorem 2.2.10 . Since @xmath is the splitting field of some polynomial
in @xmath it is a finite extension of @xmath and so also of @xmath .
Hence by Theorem 2.2.5 the valuation @xmath extends uniquely to a
valuation @xmath on @xmath . Let @xmath and let @xmath be the @xmath
distinct @xmath -isomorphisms of @xmath onto subfields of @xmath as
given by Theorem 2.2.11 . Then for each @xmath we have that @xmath , for
@xmath , is a valuation on @xmath extending @xmath . Hence, by the
uniqueness of @xmath as an extension of @xmath to @xmath , each of
@xmath is an isometry from @xmath onto a subfield of @xmath with respect
to @xmath . Hence setting @xmath , @xmath and noting that the norm map
@xmath takes values in @xmath , we have for all @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore we also have @xmath and so if @xmath is a discrete valuation
then so is @xmath . Moreover @xmath is indeed an extension of @xmath
since for @xmath we have @xmath . Now suppose that @xmath is a rank 1
valuation logarithm so that @xmath and @xmath . Then there are at most
@xmath elements in @xmath but also at least @xmath element since there
is @xmath that is prime with respect to @xmath giving @xmath . Hence let
@xmath and @xmath such that @xmath . We show that @xmath . Let @xmath
giving @xmath for some @xmath and @xmath . Then since @xmath we have
@xmath giving @xmath by the definition of @xmath . Hence @xmath . On the
other hand for @xmath we have @xmath so @xmath giving @xmath . Finally
since @xmath we have @xmath and so there is @xmath such that @xmath
giving @xmath which completes the proof. ∎

###### Remark 2.2.14.

Let @xmath and @xmath be as in Theorem 2.2.13 with non-trivial discrete
valuations. Let @xmath be the rank 1 valuation logarithm on @xmath and
let @xmath be the extension of @xmath to @xmath .

1.  With group law addition, @xmath and @xmath are groups. It is
    immediate from Theorem 2.2.13 that @xmath , the index of @xmath in
    @xmath .

2.  If @xmath then @xmath is called an unramified extension of @xmath .
    If @xmath then @xmath is called a totally ramified extension of
    @xmath . Other classifications are also in use in the literature.

3.  The value of @xmath has implications for the degree of the extension
    @xmath of the residue field @xmath . For @xmath and @xmath as
    specified in these remarks we have @xmath , see [ McC66 , p107,p108]
    for details. Hence in this case, with reference to Theorem 2.1.23 ,
    if @xmath is locally compact then @xmath is locally compact.

#### 2.2.2 Galois theory

The following is the fundamental theorem of Galois theory, see [ McC66 ,
p36] .

###### Theorem 2.2.15.

Let @xmath and @xmath be fields such that @xmath is a finite Galois
extension of @xmath , that is @xmath for @xmath . Then we have the
following one-one correspondence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

given by the inverse maps @xmath and @xmath .

###### Corollary 2.2.16.

Let @xmath and @xmath be fields such that @xmath is a finite extension
of @xmath and let @xmath . Then @xmath is a finite Galois extension of
@xmath and so for @xmath and @xmath Theorem 2.2.15 is applicable.

###### Proof.

We show that @xmath is a Galois extension of @xmath . For @xmath we have
@xmath for all @xmath and so @xmath . On the other hand for @xmath we
have @xmath for all @xmath since @xmath and so @xmath . Therefore @xmath
and so setting @xmath gives @xmath as required. ∎

The following group theory result must be known. However we will provide
a proof in lieu of a reference.

###### Lemma 2.2.17.

Let @xmath be a group and @xmath be a group automorphism on @xmath . If
@xmath are such that @xmath then @xmath .

###### Proof.

We assume the conditions of Lemma 2.2.17 and note that the result is
immediate if one or more of @xmath and @xmath is equal to 1. So assuming
otherwise, let @xmath and @xmath be the prime decompositions of @xmath
and @xmath respectively. For @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore @xmath . Suppose towards a contradiction that @xmath . Then
@xmath for some @xmath . If @xmath for some @xmath then @xmath giving,
by right cancellation of @xmath , @xmath . It then follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

giving @xmath which is a contradiction since @xmath . A similar
contradiction occurs for @xmath with @xmath . Hence @xmath as required.
∎

###### Lemma 2.2.18.

Let @xmath be a field with finite extension @xmath and let @xmath . If
@xmath is such that @xmath then @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose towards a contradiction that there is @xmath such that @xmath
but @xmath . We can take @xmath to be the least such element and note
that @xmath since @xmath . Express @xmath as @xmath where @xmath is a
prime, @xmath and @xmath . We thus have the following two cases.
Case: @xmath . In this case by the definition of @xmath we have @xmath
and so there are @xmath with @xmath , @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then by Lemma 2.2.17 we have @xmath which contradicts our assumption
that @xmath .
Case: @xmath . In this case @xmath and note that @xmath for some @xmath
. Hence we have the following subgroups of @xmath :

1.  @xmath ;

2.  @xmath .

Therefore @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is a proper normal subgroup of
@xmath . Hence by Corollary 2.2.16 we have the following tower of fields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now it is immediate that @xmath and @xmath and so there is some @xmath
with @xmath but @xmath . Therefore @xmath which again contradicts our
assumption that @xmath . In particular the lemma holds. ∎

The following lemma is well known but we will provide a proof in lieu of
a reference.

###### Lemma 2.2.19.

Let @xmath be a field, let @xmath be an algebraic extension of @xmath
and let @xmath . For the simple extension @xmath of @xmath and @xmath
the ring of polynomials over @xmath we have @xmath .

###### Proof.

It is immediate that @xmath . Now by Theorem 2.2.7 there is a unique
monic irreducible polynomial @xmath such that @xmath . Further for any
element @xmath , given by @xmath , we have @xmath . Hence @xmath and
@xmath are relatively prime, that is we have @xmath . Therefore by
Bezout’s identity there are @xmath such that @xmath giving @xmath .
Finally then we have @xmath giving @xmath which is an element of @xmath
as required. ∎

## Chapter 3 Functions and algebras

In this chapter we build upon some of the basic facts and analysis of
complete valued fields surveyed in Chapter 2 . The first section
establishes particular facts in functional analysis over complete valued
fields that will be used in later chapters. However it is not the
purpose of the first section to provide an extensive introduction to the
subject. The second section provides background on Banach @xmath
-algebras, Banach algebras over a complete valued field @xmath . Whilst
some of the details are included purely as background others also
support the discussion from Remark 2.1.17 of Chapter 2 .

### 3.1 Functional analysis over complete valued fields

We begin with the following lemma.

###### Lemma 3.1.1.

Let @xmath be a non-Archimedean field and let @xmath be a sequence of
elements of @xmath .

1.   If @xmath for some @xmath then there exists @xmath such that for
    all @xmath we have @xmath . We will call this convergence from the
    side , opposed to from above or below.

2.   If @xmath is also complete then @xmath converges if and only if
    @xmath , in sharp contrast to the Archimedean case. Further if
    @xmath does converge then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Proof.

For (i), since @xmath we have @xmath and so there is some @xmath such
that, for all @xmath , @xmath . Hence for all @xmath we have by Lemma
2.1.7 that @xmath .
For (ii), suppose @xmath and let @xmath . Then there is @xmath such that
for all @xmath we have @xmath . Hence for @xmath with @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence the sequence of partial sums is a Cauchy sequence in @xmath and so
converges. The converse is immediate. Further suppose @xmath does
converge. For @xmath we have by (i) that there is @xmath such that for
all @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand for @xmath the result is immediate. ∎

The following theorem appears in [ Sch06 , p59] without proof.

###### Theorem 3.1.2.

Let @xmath be a complete non-Archimedean field and let @xmath be a
sequence of elements of @xmath . Define the radius of convergence by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then the power series @xmath , @xmath , converges if @xmath and diverges
if @xmath . Furthermore for each @xmath , @xmath the convergence is
uniform on @xmath .

###### Proof.

Note that the following equalities hold, except for when @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Suppose @xmath is divergent. Then by part (ii) of Lemma 3.1.1 , @xmath
is not @xmath . Therefore there is some @xmath such that for each @xmath
there is @xmath with @xmath , in particular @xmath . Hence since @xmath
we have @xmath . Therefore in this case @xmath by ( 3.1.1 ). In
particular for cases where @xmath the series @xmath converges.
On the other hand suppose @xmath converges. Then since @xmath we have
@xmath . Therefore in this case @xmath by ( 3.1.1 ). In particular for
cases where @xmath the series @xmath diverges.
Now suppose there is @xmath with @xmath and let @xmath . If the
valuation on @xmath is dense then @xmath is dense in the positive reals
and so there is some @xmath with @xmath . Alternatively, if the
valuation on @xmath is discrete, there is @xmath with @xmath . In either
case, since @xmath , @xmath converges and so @xmath . Hence there is
some @xmath such that for all @xmath we have @xmath . Now by the last
part of Lemma 3.1.1 we have for all @xmath and @xmath that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But @xmath and so @xmath and the convergence is uniform on @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 3.1.3.

With reference to Theorem 3.1.2 .

1.  We note that the radius of convergence as defined in Theorem 3.1.2
    is the same as that used in the Archimedean setting when replacing
    @xmath with the complex numbers. However, unlike in the complex
    setting, if the valuation on @xmath is discrete then a power series
    @xmath may not have a unique choice for the definition of its radius
    of convergence since @xmath is discrete in this case.

2.  We need to be careful when considering convergence of power series.
    Let @xmath denote the absolute valuation on @xmath and let @xmath
    denote the trivial valuation on @xmath . All power series are
    convergent on @xmath with respect to @xmath . Whereas the only power
    series that are convergent at a point @xmath with respect to @xmath
    are polynomials. On the other hand @xmath converges everywhere on
    @xmath with respect to @xmath . The function @xmath defined with
    respect to @xmath is a continuous function on all of @xmath with
    respect to @xmath but does not have a power series representation on
    @xmath with respect to @xmath . Similarly @xmath does not converge
    everywhere on the @xmath -adic numbers @xmath with respect to @xmath
    , see [ Sch06 , p70] for details in this case.

3.  Under the conditions of Theorem 3.1.2 , suppose that the ball @xmath
    is without isolated points where @xmath is the radius of convergence
    of @xmath . Then, with differentiation defined as in the Archimedean
    setting, the derivative of @xmath exists on @xmath and it is @xmath
    . We will not consider this in depth but note, for @xmath , the
    series @xmath converges giving @xmath for @xmath by Lemma 3.1.1 .
    Hence for all @xmath , since @xmath , we have for @xmath that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Therefore the series @xmath also converges on @xmath by Lemma 3.1.1
    .

#### 3.1.1 Analytic functions

Let @xmath be a complete valued field. In this subsection we consider
@xmath valued functions that are analytic on the interior of some subset
of @xmath that is without isolated points. In particular the situation
concerning such analytic functions is some what different in the
non-Archimedean setting to that in the Archimedean one, even though the
standard results of differentiation such as the chain rule and Leibniz
rule are the same, see [ Sch06 , p59] . Recall that if a complex valued
function @xmath is analytic on an open disc @xmath then @xmath can be
represented by the convergent power series

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

known as the Taylor expansion of @xmath about @xmath , where @xmath is
the @xmath th derivative of @xmath at @xmath . Moreover if @xmath then
@xmath can also be expanded about @xmath . However this expansion need
not be convergent on all of @xmath merely on the largest open disc
centered at @xmath contained in @xmath since a lack of differentiability
of @xmath at points on, or outside, the boundary of @xmath will restrict
the radius of convergence of such an expansion, see [ Apo74 , p449,p450]
.
Now for @xmath a complete non-Archimedean field the same scenario in
this case is such that if @xmath is analytic on a ball @xmath and can be
represented by a Taylor expansion about @xmath on all of @xmath then
@xmath can be represented by a Taylor expansion about any other point
@xmath and this expansion will also be valid on all of @xmath , see [
Sch06 , p68] . This is closely related to the fact that every point of
@xmath is at its center, see the proof of Lemma 2.1.20 . However in
general a function @xmath analytic on @xmath need not have a Taylor
expansion about @xmath that is valid on all of @xmath . This is because
@xmath can be decomposed as a disjoint union of clopen balls, see Remark
2.1.21 , upon each of which @xmath can independently be defined. This
leads to the following definitions.

###### Definition 3.1.4.

Let @xmath be a complete valued field with non-trivial valuation.

1.  We will call a subset @xmath strongly convex if @xmath is either
    @xmath , the empty set @xmath , a ball or a singleton set.

2.  Let @xmath be an open strongly convex subset of @xmath and let
    @xmath be a continuous @xmath -valued function on @xmath . If @xmath
    can be represented by a single Taylor expansion that is valid on all
    of @xmath then we say that @xmath is globally analytic on @xmath .

3.  Let @xmath be an open subset of @xmath and let @xmath be a
    continuous @xmath -valued function on @xmath . If for each @xmath
    there is an open strongly convex neighborhood @xmath of @xmath such
    that @xmath is globally analytic on @xmath then we say that @xmath
    is locally analytic on @xmath .

4.  Let @xmath and @xmath be as in (iii). As usual, if the derivative

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    exists at every @xmath then we say that @xmath is analytic on @xmath
    .

5.  In the case where @xmath we similarly define globally entire ,
    locally entire and entire functions on @xmath .

###### Remark 3.1.5.

Note that the condition in Definition 3.1.4 that @xmath has a
non-trivial valuation is there because it does not make sense to talk
about analytic functions defined on a space without accumulation points.
We also note that (ii), (iii) and (iv) of Definition 3.1.4 are
equivalent in the complex setting for @xmath an open strongly convex
subset of @xmath , see [ Apo74 , p450] .

Now let @xmath be a complete non-Archimedean field and let @xmath be a
sequence of @xmath -valued functions analytic on @xmath and converging
uniformly on @xmath to a function @xmath . We ask whether @xmath will
also be analytic on @xmath in this case? It is very well known that the
answer to the analog of this question involving the complex numbers is
yes although in this case the functions are required to be continuous on
@xmath and analytic only on the interior of @xmath since @xmath will not
be clopen. In the case involving the real numbers the answer to the
question is of course no since for example a function with a chevron
shaped graph in @xmath can be uniformly approximated by differentiable
functions. In the non-Archimedean setting the following theorem provides
insight for when @xmath is not locally compact and also gives a maximum
principle result, see [ Sch06 , p122] for proof.

###### Theorem 3.1.6.

Let @xmath be a complete non-Archimedean field that is not locally
compact and let @xmath .

1.   If @xmath are globally analytic functions on @xmath and if @xmath
    uniformly on @xmath then @xmath is also globally analytic on @xmath
    .

2.   Let @xmath be a globally analytic function on @xmath with power
    series @xmath .
    If the valuation @xmath is dense then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    If the residue field @xmath is infinite then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Remark 3.1.7.

In Theorem 3.1.6 @xmath is not compact since @xmath is not locally
compact. In fact every ball of positive radius is not compact in this
case and this follows from Theorem 2.1.23 noting that translations and
non-zero scalings in @xmath are homeomorphisms on @xmath . Now since we
are progressing towards a study of uniform algebras and their
generalisation over complete valued fields we note that in order to use
the uniform norm, see Remark 4.1.2 , on such algebras of continuous
functions we need the functions to be bounded. Hence to avoid imposing
boundedness directly it is convenient to work on compact spaces.

For @xmath compact, i.e. in the @xmath locally compact case, I provide
the following example to show that in this case the uniform limit of
locally analytic, and hence analytic, functions on @xmath need not be
analytic.

###### Example 3.1.8.

Let @xmath be a locally compact, complete non-Archimedean field with
non-trivial valuation. Then we have the following sequence of functions
on @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a prime element of @xmath and @xmath is the rank 1
valuation logarithm. For each @xmath , @xmath is a locally constant
function since convergence in @xmath is from the side, see Lemma 3.1.1 ,
and so @xmath is locally analytic on @xmath . Moreover the sequence
@xmath converges uniformly on @xmath to the continuous function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath since @xmath for all @xmath . We now show that @xmath is not
differentiable at zero. let @xmath and @xmath be sequences in @xmath
given by @xmath and @xmath . Both of these sequences tend to zero as
@xmath tends to @xmath . But then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath so that the limit @xmath does not exist as required.
Alternatively we can obtain a similar example by redefining @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In this case @xmath blows up with respect to @xmath as demonstrated by
the sequence @xmath with @xmath .

Later when we look at non-complex analogs of uniform algebras we will
see, from Kaplansky’s non-Archimedean generalisation of the
Stone-Weierstrass theorem, that the continuous functions in Example
3.1.8 can be uniformly approximated by polynomials on @xmath given that
@xmath is compact in this case. Hence Example 3.1.8 also shows that, for
@xmath locally compact, the uniform limit of globally analytic functions
on @xmath need not be analytic in contrast to Theorem 3.1.6 .
In anticipation of topics in the next section we now consider
Liouville’s theorem. It is immediate that the standard Liouville theorem
never holds in the non-Archimedean setting since for a complete
non-Archimedean field @xmath with non-trivial valuation the indicator
function @xmath for @xmath is a non-constant bounded locally analytic
function from @xmath to @xmath noting that @xmath is a clopen subset of
@xmath . However the following is called the ultrametric Liouville
theorem.

###### Theorem 3.1.9.

Let @xmath be a complete non-Archimedean field with non-trivial
valuation. Then every bounded globally analytic function from @xmath to
@xmath is constant if and only if @xmath is not locally compact.

###### Proof.

See [ Sch06 , p124,p125] for a full proof of Theorem 3.1.9 . However
proof in the if direction is as follows. Let @xmath , for @xmath , be as
in Theorem 3.1.9 . Since @xmath is bounded there is @xmath such that
@xmath for all @xmath . Let @xmath . Since @xmath is not locally compact
we can apply (ii) of Theorem 3.1.6 so that for @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This holds for every @xmath and so @xmath leaving @xmath for all @xmath
. ∎

For a field @xmath with the trivial valuation we note that @xmath is
locally compact and that there are bounded non-constant polynomials from
@xmath to @xmath , where we take polynomials to be the analog of
globally analytic functions in this case.

### 3.2 Banach F-algebras

We begin this section with the following definitions.

###### Definition 3.2.1.

Let @xmath be a complete valued field.

1.  A general Banach ring is a normed ring @xmath that is complete with
    respect to its norm which is required to be sub-multiplicative, i.e.

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    We do not assume that @xmath has a multiplicative identity or that
    its multiplication is commutative, we merely assume it is
    associative.

2.  A Banach ring is a general Banach ring @xmath that has a left/right
    multiplicative identity satisfying @xmath .

3.  A Banach @xmath -algebra is a general Banach ring @xmath that is
    also a normed vector space over @xmath , with respect to the ring’s
    addition operation and norm, and such that the ring’s multiplication
    operation is a bilinear map over @xmath , i.e. respectively

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

4.  A unital Banach @xmath -algebra is a Banach @xmath -algebra that is
    also a Banach ring opposed to being merely a general Banach ring.

5.  By commutative general Banach ring and commutative Banach @xmath
    -algebra etc. we mean that the multiplication is commutative in
    these cases. By @xmath -algebra we mean the structure of a Banach
    @xmath -algebra but without the requirement of a norm.

###### Remark 3.2.2.

In Definition 3.2.1 we always require a multiplicative identity to be
different to the additive identity. As standard we will usually dispense
with the subscript when denoting elements of the structures defined in
Definition 3.2.1 and in the Archimedean setting we will call a Banach
@xmath -algebra a complex Banach algebra and a Banach @xmath -algebra a
real Banach algebra.

#### 3.2.1 Spectrum of an element

The following discussion concerns the spectrum of an element.

###### Definition 3.2.3.

Let @xmath be a complete valued field and let @xmath be a unital Banach
@xmath -algebra. Then for @xmath we call the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the spectrum of @xmath .

###### Theorem 3.2.4.

Every element of every unital complex Banach algebra has non-empty
spectrum.

Theorem 3.2.4 is very well known. A proof can be found in [ Sto71 , p11]
and relies on Liouville’s theorem and the Hahn-Banach theorem in the
complex setting. We will confirm that this result is unique among unital
Banach @xmath -algebras and I will give details of where the proof from
the complex setting fails for other complete valued fields. Let us first
recall the Gelfand-Mazur theorem which demonstrates the importance of
Theorem 3.2.4 in the complex setting and supports Remark 2.1.17 of
Chapter 2 .

###### Theorem 3.2.5.

A unital complex Banach algebra that is also a division ring is
isometrically isomorphic to the complex numbers.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a unital complex Banach algebra that is also a division
ring and let @xmath . Since in this case @xmath is non-empty, there is
some @xmath . Hence because @xmath is a division ring @xmath giving
@xmath . More accurately we have @xmath but because @xmath is unital we
have @xmath and so the map from @xmath onto @xmath given by @xmath is an
isometric isomorphism. ∎

###### Remark 3.2.6.

In the Archimedean setting it follows immediately from Theorem 3.2.5
that any complete valued field containing the complex numbers as a
valued subfield will coincide with the complex numbers. Note that the
proof of Theorem 3.2.5 is very well known.

In contrast to Theorem 3.2.4 we have the following lemma. The result is
certainly known but we give full details in lieu of a reference.

###### Lemma 3.2.7.

Let @xmath be a complete valued field other than the complex numbers.
Then there exists a unital Banach @xmath -algebra @xmath such that
@xmath for some @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a complete valued field other that the complex numbers. By
Corollary 2.2.4 in the non-Archimedean setting, and since @xmath is the
only complete valued field other than @xmath in the Archimedean setting,
we can always find a complete valued field @xmath that is a proper
extension of @xmath . Let @xmath and note that @xmath is a unital Banach
@xmath -algebra. Then for every @xmath we have @xmath and so @xmath is
invertible in @xmath since @xmath is a field. Hence @xmath . ∎

Whilst not considering every case, we now consider where the proof of
Theorem 3.2.4 fails when applying it to unital Banach @xmath -algebras
with @xmath . For @xmath the Hahn-Banach theorem holds but Liouville’s
theorem does not with the trigonometric @xmath function restricted to
@xmath as an example of a non-constant, bounded, analytic function from
@xmath to @xmath . In the non-Archimedean setting we do have the
ultrametric Liouville theorem, Theorem 3.1.9 for @xmath not locally
compact, and there is also an ultrametric Hahn-Banach theorem for
spherically complete fields, as follows.

###### Definition 3.2.8.

An ultrametric space, see Definition 2.1.1 , is spherically complete if
each nested sequence of balls has a non-empty intersection.

###### Theorem 3.2.9.

Let @xmath be a spherically complete non-Archimedean field and let
@xmath be an @xmath -vector space, @xmath a seminorm on @xmath and
@xmath a vector subspace. Then for every linear functional @xmath such
that @xmath for all @xmath there is a linear functional @xmath such that
@xmath and @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Remark 3.2.10.

We note that Theorem 3.2.9 is exactly the same as the Hahn-Banach
theorem from the Archimedean setting, see [ Sto71 , p472] , except with
@xmath and @xmath replaced by any spherically complete non-Archimedean
field. A proof can be found in both [ Sch02 , p51] and [ Sch06 , p288]
the latter of which further states that Theorem 3.2.9 becomes a falsity
if @xmath is replaced by a non-spherically complete field. It is
immediate that spherically complete ultrametric spaces are complete.

A proof of the following lemma can be found in [ Sch02 , p6] .

###### Lemma 3.2.11.

All complete non-Archimedean fields with a discrete valuation are
spherically complete. In particular if @xmath is a complete
non-Archimedean fields that is locally compact then @xmath is
spherically complete.

From the above details we see that for both Theorem 3.1.9 and Theorem
3.2.9 to be applicable we need a non-locally compact, spherically
complete, non-Archimedean field. This restricts the possibilities since
for example, for any prime @xmath , a finite extension of @xmath is
locally compact and @xmath whilst not locally compact is also not
spherically complete, see [ Sch02 , p5] . However, with reference to
(ii) of Example 2.1.15 , the complete non-Archimedean field @xmath is
not locally compact since having an infinite residue field and it is
spherically complete since its valuation is discrete. Moreover the
totally ramified, see Remark 2.2.14 , simple extension @xmath is a
unital Banach @xmath -algebra with complete valuation given by Theorem
2.2.13 . But by the proof of Lemma 3.2.7 we have @xmath . So let’s
briefly review how the proof of Theorem 3.2.4 from [ Sto71 , p11] works
and then consider where it fails for @xmath .
Let @xmath be a unital complex Banach algebra and let @xmath . Suppose
towards a contradiction that @xmath . Then @xmath is invertible for all
@xmath . In particular @xmath exists in @xmath and the map @xmath ,
given by @xmath for a fixed @xmath with @xmath , is a continuous linear
functional on the subspace @xmath of @xmath to which the Hahn-Banach
theorem can be applied directly. Hence there exists a continuous linear
functional @xmath such that @xmath . On the other hand for any
continuous linear functional @xmath we can define a function @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The proof then shows that @xmath is differentiable at every point of
@xmath and is therefore an entire function. Moreover @xmath since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the standard operator norm. Hence, by Liouville theorem
in the complex setting, @xmath is the zero function. But we have @xmath
, a contradiction, and so @xmath as required. Note however that the
function @xmath is defined on @xmath .
Now for @xmath the coordinate projection @xmath given by @xmath , where
@xmath , is a continuous linear functional analogous to an evaluation
functional noting that convergence in @xmath is coordinate-wise over
@xmath by Remark 2.2.2 . Hence we can define a function @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The function @xmath is defined on all of @xmath since the roots of
@xmath are @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore @xmath is not constant and so
it is the relative weakness of the ultrametric Liouville theorem in the
non-Archimedean setting that allows the argument used in the proof of
Theorem 3.2.4 to fails in this case. Indeed we will now show that @xmath
is not globally analytic on all of @xmath . The first derivative of
@xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so @xmath and @xmath . Continuing in this way we obtain the Taylor
expansion of @xmath about zero as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the radius of convergence of the Taylor series expansion. Hence we
show that @xmath is finite. Using the rank 1 valuation logarithm, for
@xmath we have @xmath for some fixed @xmath . Hence, noting that @xmath
and @xmath for @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath since @xmath . In particular @xmath is only locally
analytic on @xmath and not globally analytic, consistent with the
ultrametric Liouville theorem not being applicable to @xmath as
required.

###### Definition 3.2.12.

Let @xmath be a complete valued field and let @xmath be a unital Banach
@xmath -algebra. Define @xmath as the set of all complete valued fields
@xmath contained inside @xmath over which @xmath is also a unital Banach
@xmath -algebra.

###### Remark 3.2.13.

Concerning the spectrum of an element.

1.  It is tempting to conjecture that a generalisation of Theorem 3.2.4
    might hold for every complete valued field @xmath provided that,
    given @xmath , we restrict the statement to those unital Banach
    @xmath -algebras @xmath for which @xmath is a maximal element of
    @xmath . This conjecture is false in both the non-commutative and
    commutative settings by Lemma 3.2.14 below. However for a more
    general version of the conjecture one could permit the elements of
    @xmath to be complete normed division rings.

2.  Let @xmath be a unital real Banach algebra. In order to avoid an
    element @xmath having empty spectrum Kaplansky gave the following
    alternative definition in this case,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    We won’t investigate this definition here but for more details see [
    KL92 , p6] .

###### Lemma 3.2.14.

In both the non-commutative and commutative algebra settings one can
find a complete valued field @xmath , a unital Banach @xmath -algebra
@xmath and an element @xmath such that @xmath is a maximal element of
@xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Hamilton’s real quaternions, @xmath , are an example of a
non-commutative complete Archimedean division ring and unital real
Banach algebra. Viewing @xmath as a real vector space, the valuation on
@xmath is the Euclidean norm which is complete, Archimedean and indeed a
valuation since being multiplicative on @xmath , see [ Lam05 , p56,p57]
. By the Gelfand-Mazur theorem, Theorem 3.2.5 , @xmath is not a unital
complex Banach algebra since being different to @xmath and so @xmath is
maximal in @xmath . Moreover for @xmath it is immediate that we have
@xmath .
In the commutative setting consider the field of complex numbers @xmath
with the absolute valuation replaced by the @xmath -norm as it applies
to the real vector space @xmath , that is for @xmath we have @xmath .
Then @xmath is complete with respect to @xmath by the equivalence of
norms on finite dimensional @xmath -vector spaces. Expressing complex
numbers in their coordinate form it is easy to show that @xmath is
sub-multiplicative and so @xmath is a unital real Banach algebra.
However @xmath is not multiplicative since @xmath and so @xmath is not a
valuation on @xmath . Consequently @xmath is maximal in @xmath and over
@xmath , @xmath which completes the proof. ∎

## Chapter 4 Uniform algebras

In the first section of this chapter we survey some of the basic facts
about complex uniform algebras and recall the close connection with the
study of compact Hausdorff spaces, such as Swiss cheese sets, upon which
such algebras of functions are defined. An inductive proof by the author
of the Feinstein-Heath Swiss cheese “classicalisation” theorem is then
presented. An article containing this proof has been published by the
American Mathematical Society, see [ Mas10 ] . In the second section of
this chapter we turn our attention to non-complex analogs of uniform
algebras. The constraints imposed by the various generalisations of the
Stone-Weierstrass theorem are considered and the theory of real function
algebras developed by Kulkarni and Limaye is introduced. We will
establish the topological requirements of the spaces upon which algebras
of functions in the non-Archimedean setting can be defined whilst
qualifying as non-complex analogs of uniform algebras. These
observations together with some of the details and examples from other
chapters have been gathered together by the author into a survey paper
which was subsequently accepted for publication by the American
Mathematical Society, see [ Mas11 ] .

### 4.1 Complex uniform algebras

###### Definition 4.1.1.

Let @xmath be the unital complex Banach algebra of all continuous
complex valued functions, defined on a compact Hausdorff space @xmath ,
with pointwise operations and the sup norm given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A uniform algebra , @xmath , is a subalgebra of @xmath that is complete
with respect to the sup norm, contains the constant functions making it
a unital complex Banach algebra and separates the points of @xmath in
the sense that for all @xmath with @xmath there is @xmath satisfying
@xmath .

###### Remark 4.1.2.

Introductions to uniform algebras can be found in [ Bro69 ] , [ Gam69 ]
and [ Sto71 ] . Some authors take Definition 4.1.1 to be a
representation of uniform algebras and take a uniform algebra @xmath to
be a unital complex Banach algebra with a square preserving norm, that
is @xmath for all @xmath , which they sometimes then referred to as a
uniform norm. This is quite legitimate since, as we will discuss at
depth in the section on representation theory, the Gelfand transform
shows us that every such algebra is isometrically isomorphic to an
algebra conforming to Definition 4.1.1 . In this thesis we mainly
introduce generalisations of Definition 4.1.1 over complete valued
fields and then investigate the important representation theory results.
Hence for us by uniform norm we will mean the sup norm.

It is very well known that in the complex setting, for suitable @xmath ,
there exist uniform algebras that are proper subalgebras of @xmath .
However if @xmath is such a uniform algebra then @xmath is not
self-adjoint, that is there is @xmath with @xmath where @xmath denotes
the complex conjugate of @xmath . This result is the complex
Stone-Weierstrass theorem, generalisations of which we will meet in
Section 4.2 . We will also meet several analogs of the following
example.

###### Example 4.1.3.

A standard example is the disc algebra @xmath , of continuous functions
analytic on the interior of @xmath , which is as far from being
self-adjoint as possible since if both @xmath and @xmath are in @xmath
then @xmath is constant, see [ KL92 , p47] . Also @xmath where @xmath is
the uniform algebra of all functions on @xmath that can be uniformly
approximated by polynomials restricted to @xmath with complex
coefficients. This largely follows from Remark 3.1.5 , see [ Bro69 , p5]
or [ Sto71 , p2] .

For a compact Hausdorff space @xmath let @xmath denote the uniform
algebra of all functions on @xmath that can be uniformly approximated by
rational functions from @xmath . We also generalise to @xmath the
uniform algebras introduced in Example 4.1.3 giving @xmath and @xmath .
In the theory of uniform approximation it is standard to ask for which
@xmath is one or more of the following inclusions non-trivial

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Whilst not always the case, this often only depend on @xmath up to
homeomorphism. In particular many properties of uniform algebras are
topological properties of the spaces upon which they are defined. Hence
there is a strong connection between the study of uniform algebras and
that of compact Hausdorff spaces. Therefore, in addition to being of
interest in their own right, uniform algebras are important in the
theory of uniform approximation; as examples of complex Banach algebras;
in representation theory and in the study of compact Hausdorff space.
With respect to the latter, we now turn our attention to the compact
plane sets known as Swiss cheese sets.

#### 4.1.1 Swiss cheese sets in the complex plane

Throughout subsections 4.1.1 and 4.1.2 , all discs in the complex plane
are required to have finite positive radius. More generally let @xmath
from here on throughout the thesis. We begin with the following
definitions taken from [ FH10 ] .

###### Definition 4.1.4.

For a disc @xmath in the plane let @xmath denote the radius of @xmath .

1.  A Swiss cheese is a pair @xmath for which @xmath is a closed disc
    and @xmath is a countable or finite collection of open discs. A
    Swiss cheese @xmath is classical if the closures of the discs in
    @xmath intersect neither one another nor @xmath , and @xmath .

2.  The associated Swiss cheese set of a Swiss cheese @xmath is the
    plane set @xmath .
    A classical Swiss cheese set is a plane set @xmath for which there
    exists a classical Swiss cheese @xmath such that @xmath .

3.  For a Swiss cheese @xmath , we define @xmath so that @xmath if and
    only if @xmath .

Figure 4.1 provides an example for (ii) of Definition 4.1.4 .

Swiss cheese sets are used extensively in the theory of uniform algebras
since they provide many examples of uniform algebras with particular
properties. For examples see [ Fei04 ] , [ Gam69 , Ch2] and [ Rot38 ] .
In particular [ FH10 ] includes a survey of the use of Swiss cheese
constructions in the theory of uniform algebras. The following example
is from [ Rot38 ] .

###### Lemma 4.1.5.

For @xmath non-empty and compact, let @xmath be uniform algebras with
@xmath uniformly dense in @xmath . Suppose we can find a continuous
linear functional @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath for some @xmath .
Then @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

giving @xmath for all @xmath . Hence @xmath can not be uniformly
approximated by elements of @xmath . More simply, @xmath by continuity.
∎

###### Example 4.1.6.

It is possible to have @xmath . Let @xmath be a closed disc and let
@xmath be a classical Swiss cheese with @xmath and @xmath infinite. Let
@xmath be a sequence of open discs such that the map @xmath is a
bijection from @xmath to @xmath . For @xmath define @xmath as the
circular path

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

around the boundary @xmath . Now for a rational function @xmath we note
that on @xmath the finitely many poles of @xmath lie in the open
complement of @xmath and so @xmath is a subset of an open subset of
@xmath upon which @xmath is analytic. Hence by Cauchy’s theorem, see [
Rud87 , p218] , we have @xmath for @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We now check that @xmath is a bounded linear functional on @xmath . The
following uses the fundamental estimate. Let @xmath with @xmath . Then,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath since @xmath . Now @xmath is an upper bound for the series
of absolute terms, hence we have absolute convergence. Since absolute
convergence implies convergence we have, for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath . Moreover, our calculation shows that @xmath is bounded
with @xmath . The linearity of @xmath follows from the linearity of
integrating over a sum of terms and so @xmath is a continuous linear
functional on @xmath . Next we note that the function @xmath on @xmath
given by complex conjugation is an element of @xmath . Cauchy’s theorem
does not imply that @xmath will be zero since @xmath is not analytic on
any non-empty open subset of @xmath . We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since for each @xmath

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Furthermore @xmath since @xmath , by @xmath , and so @xmath . Therefore
by Lemma 4.1.5 we have @xmath and @xmath . Certainly this result is
immediate in the case where @xmath has interior since then @xmath will
not be an element of @xmath . However this is one of the occasions where
the usefulness of Swiss cheese set constructions becomes evident since,
with some consideration, it is straightforward to construct a classical
Swiss cheese @xmath with @xmath such that @xmath has empty interior.
Since @xmath is the uniform algebra of all elements from @xmath that are
analytic on the interior of @xmath , in this case we have @xmath and so
by the above @xmath which completes this example.

Let @xmath be a Swiss cheese as specified in Example 4.1.6 such that
@xmath has empty interior. The following subsection shows that in this
case there is actually no need to require @xmath to be classical in
order that @xmath .

#### 4.1.2 Classicalisation theorem

In this subsection we give a new proof of an existing theorem by J. F.
Feinstein and M. J. Heath, see [ FH10 ] . The theorem states that any
Swiss cheese set defined by a Swiss cheese @xmath with @xmath contains a
Swiss cheese set as a subset defined by a classical Swiss cheese @xmath
with @xmath . Feinstein and Heath begin their proof by developing a
theory of allocation maps connected to such sets. A partial order on a
family of these allocation maps is then introduced and Zorn’s lemma
applied. We take a more direct approach by using transfinite induction,
cardinality and disc assignment functions, where a disc assignment
function is a kind of labeled Swiss cheese that defines a Swiss cheese
set. An explicit theory of allocation maps is no longer required
although we are still using them implicitly. In this regard we will
discuss the connections with the original proof of Feinstein and Heath.
See [ Kel75 , p266] and [ Dal00 , p9] for useful introductions to
ordinals and transfinite induction which has been used in this
subsection. We begin with the following definitions.

###### Definition 4.1.7.

Let @xmath be the set of all open discs and complements of closed discs
in the complex plane.

1.  A disc assignment function @xmath is a map from a subset @xmath ,
    with @xmath , into @xmath such that @xmath is a Swiss cheese. We
    allow @xmath to be empty since a Swiss cheese @xmath can have @xmath
    .

2.  For a disc assignment function @xmath and @xmath we let @xmath
    denote the closure of @xmath in @xmath , that is @xmath . A disc
    assignment function @xmath is said to be classical if for all @xmath
    with @xmath we have @xmath and @xmath .

3.  For a disc assignment function @xmath we let @xmath denote the
    associated Swiss cheese set of the Swiss cheese @xmath .

4.  A disc assignment function @xmath is said to have the
    Feinstein-Heath condition when @xmath .

5.  Define @xmath as the set of all disc assignment functions with the
    Feinstein-Heath condition.
    For @xmath , @xmath , define @xmath .

Here is the Feinstein-Heath Swiss cheese “Classicalisation” theorem as
it appears in [ FH10 ] .

###### Theorem 4.1.8.

For every Swiss cheese @xmath with @xmath , there is a classical Swiss
cheese @xmath with @xmath and @xmath .

From Definition 4.1.7 we note that if a disc assignment function @xmath
is classical then the Swiss cheese @xmath will also be classical.
Similarly if @xmath has the Feinstein-Heath condition then @xmath . The
converse of each of these implications will not hold in general because
@xmath need not be injective. However it is immediate that for every
Swiss cheese @xmath with @xmath there exists an injective disc
assignment function @xmath such that @xmath . We note that every disc
assignment function @xmath has @xmath with equality if and only if
@xmath is injective and that classical disc assignment functions are
always injective. With these observations it easily follows that Theorem
4.1.8 is equivalent to the following theorem involving disc assignment
function.

###### Theorem 4.1.9.

For every disc assignment function @xmath there is a classical disc
assignment function @xmath with @xmath and @xmath .

Several lemmas from [ FH10 ] and [ Hea08 , §2.4.1] will be used in the
proof of Theorem 4.1.9 and we consider them now.

###### Lemma 4.1.10.

Let @xmath and @xmath be open discs in @xmath with radii @xmath and
@xmath respectively such that @xmath . Then there is an open disc @xmath
with @xmath and with radius @xmath .

Figure 4.2 , Example 1 exemplifies the application of Lemma 4.1.10 .

###### Lemma 4.1.11.

Let @xmath be an open disc and @xmath be a closed disc such that @xmath
and @xmath . Then there is a closed disc @xmath with @xmath and @xmath .

Figure 4.2 , Example 2 exemplifies the application of Lemma 4.1.11 .

###### Lemma 4.1.12.

Let @xmath be a non-empty, nested collection of open discs in @xmath ,
such that we have @xmath . Then @xmath is an open disc @xmath . Further,
for @xmath ordered by inclusion, @xmath .

###### Lemma 4.1.13.

Let @xmath be a non-empty, nested collection of closed discs in @xmath ,
such that we have @xmath . Then @xmath is a closed disc @xmath .
Further, for @xmath ordered by reverse inclusion, @xmath .

###### Proof of Theorem 4.1.9.

At the heart of the proof of Theorem 4.1.9 is a completely defined map
@xmath which we now define case by case.

###### Definition 4.1.14.

Let @xmath be the self map with the following construction.
Case 1: If @xmath is a classical disc assignment function then define
@xmath .
Case 2: If @xmath is not classical then for @xmath let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We then have lexicographic ordering on @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since this is a well-ordering on @xmath , let @xmath be the minimum
element of @xmath and hence note that @xmath since @xmath . We proceed
toward defining @xmath .

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

It remains for the definition of @xmath to be given and to this end we
have the following two cases.
Case 2.1: @xmath . In this case, by Definition 4.1.7 , we note that both
@xmath and @xmath are open discs. Associating @xmath and @xmath with
@xmath and @xmath of Lemma 4.1.10 we define @xmath to be the open disc
satisfying the properties of @xmath of the lemma. Note in particular
that,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Case 2.2: @xmath . In this case, by Definition 4.1.7 , we note that
@xmath is an open disc and @xmath is the complement of a closed disc.
Associate @xmath with @xmath from Lemma 4.1.11 and put @xmath . Since
@xmath we have @xmath and so @xmath , noting @xmath . Further, since
@xmath we have @xmath and so @xmath . Therefore the conditions of Lemma
4.1.11 are satisfied for @xmath and @xmath . Hence we define @xmath to
be the complement of the closed disc satisfying the properties of @xmath
of Lemma 4.1.11 . Note in particular that,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For this definition of the map @xmath we have yet to show that @xmath
maps into @xmath . We now show this together with certain other useful
properties of @xmath .

###### Lemma 4.1.15.

Let @xmath , then the following hold:

1.  @xmath with @xmath ;

2.   For @xmath @xmath @xmath we have @xmath with equality if and only
    if @xmath is classical. Otherwise @xmath for some @xmath ;

3.  @xmath ;

4.   For all @xmath .

###### Proof.

We need only check (i) and (iii) for cases 2.1 and 2.2 of the definition
of @xmath , as everything else is immediate. Let @xmath .
(i) It is clear that @xmath is a disc assignment function. It remains to
check that @xmath .
For Case 2.1 we have, by Lemma 4.1.10 ,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

For Case 2.2 we have, by Lemma 4.1.11 ,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

(iii) Since @xmath we require @xmath .
For Case 2.1 we have by Lemma 4.1.10 that @xmath , as shown at ( 4.1.1
), giving @xmath .
For Case 2.2 put @xmath and @xmath . We have by Lemma 4.1.11 that @xmath
and @xmath . Hence @xmath , as shown at ( 4.1.2 ), and so @xmath as
required. ∎

We will use @xmath to construct an ordinal sequence of disc assignment
functions and then apply a cardinality argument to show that this
ordinal sequence must stabilise at a classical disc assignment function.
We construct the ordinal sequence so that it has the right properties.

###### Definition 4.1.16.

Let @xmath .

1.  Define @xmath by @xmath .

Now let @xmath be an ordinal for which we have defined @xmath for all
@xmath .

1.  If @xmath is a successor ordinal then define @xmath by @xmath .

2.  If @xmath is a limit ordinal then define @xmath as follows.

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Suppose that for every ordinal @xmath for which Definition 4.1.16 can be
applied we have @xmath . Then Definition 4.1.16 can be applied for every
ordinal @xmath by transfinite induction and therefore defines an ordinal
sequence of disc assignment function. We will use transfinite induction
to prove Lemma 4.1.17 below which asserts that @xmath is an element of
@xmath as well as other useful properties of @xmath .

###### Lemma 4.1.17.

Let @xmath be an ordinal number and let @xmath . Then the following
hold:

1.  @xmath with @xmath ;

    1.  @xmath ;

    2.  @xmath is the complement of a closed disc and
        @xmath is an open disc for all @xmath ;

    3.  @xmath ;

2.   For all @xmath we have @xmath ;

3.   For all @xmath we have @xmath ;

4.   For all @xmath , @xmath is a nested increasing family of open sets.

###### Proof.

We will use transfinite induction.
For @xmath an ordinal number let @xmath be the proposition, Lemma 4.1.17
holds at @xmath .
The base case @xmath is immediate and our inductive hypothesis is that
for all @xmath , @xmath holds.
Now for @xmath a successor ordinal we have @xmath and so @xmath is
immediate by the inductive hypothesis and Lemma 4.1.15 . Now suppose
@xmath is a limit ordinal. We have @xmath giving, for all @xmath ,
@xmath . Hence ( @xmath ,2) holds. Also for all @xmath we have @xmath by
( @xmath ,1.1). So @xmath showing that ( @xmath ,1.1) holds. To show (
@xmath ,1.2) we will use lemmas 4.1.12 and 4.1.13 .

1.  Now for all @xmath , @xmath is a nested increasing family of open
    discs by ( @xmath ,1.2) and ( @xmath ,4).

2.  Further, @xmath is a nested decreasing family of closed discs by (
    @xmath ,1.2) and ( @xmath ,4).

3.  Now for @xmath and @xmath we have
    @xmath , by ( @xmath ,1) and (ii). Hence @xmath . So by (i) and
    Lemma 4.1.12 we have for @xmath that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    is an open disc with,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

4.  Now for @xmath we have @xmath by ( @xmath ,1.3).
    Hence @xmath . So by De Morgan, (ii) and Lemma 4.1.13 we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    is a closed disc with,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Hence @xmath is the complement of a closed disc and so ( @xmath
    ,1.2) holds.

We now show that ( @xmath ,4) holds. By ( @xmath ,4) we have, for all
@xmath , @xmath is a nested increasing family of open sets. We also have
@xmath so, for all @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is an open set since (
@xmath ,1.2) holds. Hence ( @xmath ,4) holds. We will now show that (
@xmath ,1.3) holds. We first prove that, for all @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Let @xmath , and suppose, towards a contradiction, that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

noting that the right hand side of ( 4.1.4 ) is non-negative by ( @xmath
,1.3).
Set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then there exists @xmath such that for @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Further for each @xmath we have, by (iii), @xmath . Hence for each
@xmath there exists @xmath such that @xmath , for @xmath , @xmath by (
4.1.5 ). Let @xmath and note that this is a maximum over a finite set of
elements since @xmath is finite. Now for any @xmath with @xmath we have,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This contradicts ( @xmath ,1.3). Hence we have shown that, for all
@xmath , ( 4.1.3 ) holds.
Now by (iv) we have @xmath .
Hence we have @xmath and so ( @xmath ,1.3) holds.

We now show that ( @xmath ,3) holds. We will show that for all ordinals
@xmath ,
@xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath . Define,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By the definition of @xmath there exists @xmath with @xmath and @xmath .
We claim that the set @xmath is empty. To prove this suppose towards a
contradiction that we can define,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath since, by ( @xmath ,2), @xmath with @xmath . If @xmath is a
limit ordinal then @xmath giving @xmath , for some @xmath , and this
contradicts the definition of @xmath . If @xmath is a successor ordinal
then @xmath with @xmath by the definition of @xmath . By @xmath and
Definition 4.1.14 of @xmath , @xmath is not classical. Therefore by (
4.1.1 ) and ( 4.1.2 ) of Definition 4.1.14 there is @xmath with @xmath
and @xmath . Further for all @xmath with @xmath we have @xmath since
@xmath and, by ( @xmath ,2), @xmath . Hence we have @xmath . Now, by (
@xmath , 4), @xmath is a nested increasing family of sets giving @xmath
with @xmath . This contradicts the definition of @xmath since @xmath .
Hence we have shown that @xmath is empty giving @xmath . Therefore, by
Definition 4.1.16 and the definition of @xmath , we have @xmath as
required. Hence ( @xmath ,3) holds. Therefore we have shown, by the
principal of transfinite induction, that @xmath holds and this concludes
the proof of Lemma 4.1.17 . ∎

Recall that our aim is to prove that for every @xmath there is a
classical disc assignment function @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . We
have the following closing argument using cardinality. By ( @xmath ,2)
of Lemma 4.1.17 we obtain a nested ordinal sequence of domains @xmath ,
@xmath .
Now setting @xmath gives a nested ordinal sequence @xmath ,
@xmath .

###### Lemma 4.1.18.

For the disc assignment function @xmath we have,
@xmath is classical if and only if @xmath has stabilised at @xmath ,
i.e. @xmath .

###### Proof.

The proof follows directly from (ii) of Lemma 4.1.15 . ∎

Now let @xmath be the first uncountable ordinal. Suppose towards a
contradiction that, for all @xmath , @xmath has not stabilised at @xmath
. Then for each @xmath there exists some @xmath such that @xmath but
@xmath for all @xmath . Hence since there are uncountably many @xmath we
have @xmath uncountable with @xmath , a contradiction. Therefore there
exists @xmath such that @xmath has stabilised at @xmath and so, by Lemma
4.1.18 , @xmath is classical. Now by ( @xmath ,1) of Lemma 4.1.17 we
have @xmath with @xmath and by ( @xmath ,3) we have @xmath . In
particular this completes the proof of Theorem 4.1.9 and the
Feinstein-Heath Swiss cheese “Classicalisation” theorem. ∎

The proof of Theorem 4.1.8 as presented above proceeded without
reference to a theory of allocation maps. In the original proof of
Feinstein and Heath, [ FH10 ] , allocation maps play a central role. We
will recover a key allocation map from the original proof using the map
@xmath of Definition 4.1.14 . Here is the definition of an allocation
map as it appears in [ FH10 ] .

###### Definition 4.1.19.

Let @xmath be a Swiss cheese. We define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now let @xmath be a second Swiss cheese, and let @xmath . We define
@xmath . We say that @xmath is an allocation map if the following hold:

1.  for each @xmath , @xmath ;

2.  -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.  for each @xmath ,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the Swiss cheese of Theorem 4.1.8 and let @xmath be the
family of allocation maps defined on @xmath . In [ FH10 ] a partial
order is applied to @xmath and subsequently a maximal element @xmath is
obtained using Zorn’s lemma. The connection between allocation maps and
Swiss cheeses is then exploited. Towards a contradiction the
non-existence of the desired classical Swiss cheese @xmath of Theorem
4.1.8 is assumed. This assumption implies the existence of an allocation
map @xmath that is higher in the partial order applied to @xmath than
@xmath , a contradiction. The result follows. It is at the last stage of
the original proof where a connection to the new version can be found.
In the construction of Feinstein and Heath the allocation map @xmath
factorizes as @xmath where @xmath is also an allocation map. Let @xmath
be a non-classical Swiss cheese with @xmath . Using the same method of
construction that Feinstein and Heath use for @xmath , an allocation map
@xmath defined on @xmath can be obtained without contradiction. Clearly
@xmath . We will obtain @xmath using the map @xmath of Definition 4.1.14
. Let @xmath , @xmath , be an injective disc assignment function such
that @xmath and recall from Definition 4.1.14 that @xmath has @xmath
where @xmath is the minimum element of @xmath . Set @xmath . By
Definitions 4.1.7 and 4.1.19 we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now define a map @xmath by,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and note that this is well defined since @xmath is injective.

The commutative diagram in Figure 4.3 show how @xmath is obtained using
@xmath . The construction of @xmath in Definition 4.1.14 was developed
from the construction that Feinstein and Heath used for @xmath . The
method of combining discs in Lemma 4.1.10 also appears in [ Zha93 ] .

###### Remark 4.1.20.

Concerning classicalisation.

1.  Interestingly, as Heath points out in [ FH10 ] , every classical
    Swiss cheese set in @xmath with empty interior is homeomorphic to
    the Sierpiński carpet. Hence up to homeomorphism there is only 1
    Swiss cheese set of this type. In particular if @xmath is a Swiss
    cheese contained in @xmath with empty interior then either one of
    the conditions @xmath is classical or @xmath is enough for @xmath .

2.  I also anticipate the possibility of an analog of Theorem 4.1.9 on
    the sphere. Let @xmath be a sphere of finite positive radius @xmath
    and center @xmath . For @xmath let @xmath be the length of the
    geodesic path in @xmath from @xmath to @xmath . Now @xmath is a
    metric with respect to which we will define open and closed @xmath
    -discs contained in @xmath . With analogy to Definition 4.1.4 let
    @xmath be a Swiss cheese on @xmath . Then either @xmath or @xmath is
    a Swiss cheese on @xmath , since @xmath is an open @xmath -disc, for
    which @xmath in @xmath . Further we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and so for our choice of metric on @xmath we note that @xmath is
    independent of whether we use @xmath or @xmath . Hence the situation
    for the sphere is a little simpler than that for the plane since we
    can allow all Swiss cheeses on the sphere to have the form @xmath
    and avoid the need to handle a special closed @xmath -disc @xmath .
    Therefore on the sphere analogs of lemmas 4.1.11 and 4.1.13 are not
    required. We will not establish here whether the condition @xmath is
    sufficient for the analog of Theorem 4.1.9 on @xmath to hold since
    the next step in generalising this theorem should be to establish
    the class of all metric spaces for which a general version of the
    theorem holds. However the sphere is of particular interest in the
    context of uniform algebras since, less one point, the sphere is
    homeomorphic to the plane allowing many examples of uniform algebras
    to be defined on subsets of the sphere.

### 4.2 Non-complex analogs of uniform algebras

The most obvious non-complex analog of Definition 4.1.1 is obtained by
simply replacing the complex numbers in the definition by some other
complete valued field @xmath . In this case, whilst @xmath will be
complete and contain the constants, we need to take care concerning the
topology on @xmath when @xmath is non-Archimedean, e.g. @xmath only
contains the constant.

###### Theorem 4.2.1.

Let @xmath be a complete non-Archimedean valued field and let @xmath be
the unital Banach @xmath -algebra of all continuous @xmath -valued
functions defined on a compact, Hausdorff space @xmath . Then @xmath
separates the points of @xmath if and only if @xmath is totally
disconnected.

Before giving a proof of Theorem 4.2.1 we have the following version of
Urysohn’s lemma which will certainly already be known in some form
because of its simplicity.

###### Lemma 4.2.2.

Let @xmath be a totally disconnected, compact, Hausdorff space with
finite subset @xmath , @xmath for all @xmath where @xmath . Let @xmath
be any non-empty topological space and @xmath . Then there exists a
continuous map @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Since @xmath is a Hausdorff space, for each @xmath there are disjoint
open subsets @xmath and @xmath of @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . Hence
@xmath is an open subset of @xmath with @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath
. Now since @xmath is a totally disconnected, compact, Hausdorff space,
@xmath has a neighborhood base of clopen sets, see [ Wil04 , Theorem
29.7] noting that @xmath is locally compact by Theorem 2.1.22 . Hence
there is a clopen subset @xmath of @xmath with @xmath . The function
@xmath given by @xmath and @xmath is continuous as required. ∎

We now give the proof of Theorem 4.2.1 .

###### Proof.

With reference to Lemma 4.2.2 it remains to show that @xmath separates
the points of @xmath only if @xmath is totally disconnected. Let @xmath
be a compact, Hausdorff space such that @xmath separates the points of
@xmath . Let @xmath be a non-empty connected subset of @xmath and let
@xmath . We note that @xmath is a connected subset of @xmath since
@xmath is continuous. Now, since @xmath is non-Archimedean it is totally
disconnected i.e. its connected subsets are singletons. Hence @xmath is
a singleton and so @xmath is constant on @xmath . Therefore, since
@xmath separates the points of @xmath , @xmath is a singleton and @xmath
is totally disconnected. ∎

We next consider the constraints on @xmath revealed by generalisations
of the Stone-Weierstrass theorem. In the real case the Stone-Weierstrass
theorem for @xmath says that for every compact Hausdorff space @xmath ,
@xmath is without a proper subalgebra that is uniformly closed, contains
the real numbers and separates the points of @xmath . A proof can be
found in [ KL92 , p50] . The non-Archimedean case is given by a theorem
of Kaplansky, see [ Ber90 , p157] or [ Kap50 ] .

###### Theorem 4.2.3.

Let @xmath be a complete non-Archimedean valued field, let @xmath be a
totally disconnected compact Hausdorff space, and let @xmath be a @xmath
-subalgebra of @xmath which satisfies the following conditions:

1.   the elements of @xmath separate the points of @xmath ;

2.   for each @xmath there exists @xmath with @xmath .

Then @xmath is everywhere dense in @xmath .

Note that, in Theorem 4.2.3 , @xmath being a @xmath -subalgebra of
@xmath means that @xmath is a subalgebra of @xmath and a vector space
over @xmath . If we take @xmath to be unital then condition (ii) in
Theorem 4.2.3 is automatically satisfied and the theorem is analogous to
the real version of the Stone-Weierstrass theorem. In subsection 4.2.1
we will see that real function algebras are a useful example when
considering non-complex analogs of uniform algebras with qualifying
subalgebras.

#### 4.2.1 Real function algebras

Real function algebras were introduced by Kulkarni and Limaye in a paper
from 1981, see [ KL81 ] . For a thorough text on the theory see [ KL92 ]
. The following definition is a little more general than what we need in
this subsection.

###### Definition 4.2.4.

Let @xmath be a topological space and let @xmath be a homeomorphism.

1.  We will call @xmath a topological involution on @xmath if @xmath on
    @xmath .

2.  We will call @xmath a topological element of finite order on @xmath
    if @xmath has finite order but with @xmath .

Let @xmath and @xmath be complete valued fields such that @xmath is a
finite extension of @xmath as a valued field and let @xmath . Let @xmath
either be an @xmath -algebra or an @xmath -algebra for which @xmath is a
map satisfying @xmath and for all @xmath and scalars @xmath :

1.  @xmath ;

2.  @xmath ;

3.  @xmath .

1.  We will call @xmath a algebraic involution on @xmath if @xmath on
    @xmath .

2.  We will call @xmath a algebraic element of finite order on @xmath if
    @xmath has @xmath .

Note, in Definition 4.2.4 the requirement that @xmath be a homeomorphism
is satisfied if @xmath is continuous.

###### Definition 4.2.5.

Let @xmath be a compact Hausdorff space and @xmath a topological
involution on @xmath . A real function algebra on @xmath is a real
subalgebra @xmath of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

that is complete with respect to the sup norm, contains the real numbers
and separates the points of @xmath .

###### Remark 4.2.6.

Concerning real function algebras.

1.  Later, Theorem 5.2.1 will confirm that @xmath in Definition 4.2.5 is
    itself always a real function algebra on @xmath and in some sense it
    is to real function algebras as @xmath is to complex uniform
    algebras.

2.  Let @xmath be a compact Hausdorff space and @xmath a closed
    non-empty subset of @xmath . Then @xmath is a commutative real
    Banach algebra. As pointed out in [ KL92 , p2] , every such @xmath
    can be transformed into a real function algebra but the converse of
    this is false. Hence Definition 4.2.5 is a more general object.

3.  With reference to Definition 4.2.5 we have @xmath where @xmath .
    Moreover @xmath is an algebraic involution on @xmath and every
    algebraic involution on @xmath arises from a topological involution
    on @xmath in this way, see [ KL92 , p29] for a proof.

The following example is a useful standard.

###### Example 4.2.7.

Recall from Example 4.1.3 the disc algebra @xmath on the closed unit
disc and let @xmath be the map @xmath given by complex conjugation,
which we note is a Galois automorphism on @xmath . Now let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We see that @xmath is complete since both @xmath and @xmath are, and
similarly @xmath contains the real numbers. Further by the definition of
@xmath and the fact that @xmath we have that @xmath is the @xmath
-algebra of all uniform limits of polynomials on @xmath with real
coefficients. Hence @xmath separates the points of @xmath since it
contains the function @xmath . However whilst @xmath is in @xmath it is
not an element of @xmath . Therefore @xmath is a real function algebra
on @xmath and a proper subalgebra of @xmath . It is referred to as the
real disc algebra .

Finally for each compact Hausdorff space @xmath , @xmath can be put into
the form of a real function algebra as the following example shows. In
particular @xmath can be expressed as a real function algebra on a two
point set.

###### Example 4.2.8.

Let @xmath be a compact Hausdorff space, let @xmath have the trivial
topology and give @xmath the product topology. We note that the subspace
given by @xmath is homeomorphic to @xmath and similarly so is @xmath .
Define a topological involution @xmath by @xmath . Then @xmath is
isometrically isomorphic to @xmath by way of the mapping @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that for @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

showing that @xmath . The inverse mapping from @xmath to @xmath is given
by the restriction map @xmath . One might suspect that such a mapping
exists for every @xmath by restricting its elements to a compact
subspace of equivalence class representatives for the forward orbits of
@xmath . But this is not the case in general since there can be @xmath
with @xmath forcing all of the functions to be real valued at @xmath
preventing the representation of the complex constants in @xmath .

## Chapter 5 Commutative generalisation over complete valued fields

If @xmath is a maximal ideal of a commutative unital complex Banach
algebra @xmath then @xmath has codimension one since @xmath with the
quotient norm is isometrically isomorphic to the complex numbers. This
follows from the Gelfand-Mazur theorem noting that @xmath with the
quotient norm is unital since @xmath is closed as a subset of @xmath and
@xmath is different to @xmath , see Lemma 6.1.7 and [ Sto71 , p16] .
In contrast, for a complete non-Archimedean field @xmath , if @xmath is
a maximal ideal of a commutative unital Banach @xmath -algebra then
@xmath may have large finite or infinite codimension, note Corollary
2.2.4 . Hence, with Gelfand transform theory in mind, it makes sense to
consider non-Archimedean analogs of uniform algebras in the form
suggested by real function algebras where the functions take values in a
complete extension of the underlying field of scalars. Moreover when
there is a lattice of intermediate fields then these fields provide a
way for a lattice of extensions of the algebra to occur. See [ Ber90 ,
Ch1] and [ Esc03 , Ch15] for one form of the Gelfand transform in the
non-Archimedean setting. This chapter introduces the main definitions of
interest in the thesis. We will generalise the definitions made by
Kulkarni and Limaye to all complete valued fields, show that the
algebras obtained all qualify as generalisations of uniform algebras and
that restricting attention to the Archimedean setting recovers the
complex uniform algebras and real function algebras. Non-Archimedean
examples and residue algebras are also introduced.

### 5.1 Main definitions

The following definition gives the requirements for those commutative
algebras that are to be considered as generalisations of uniform
algebras.

###### Definition 5.1.1.

Let @xmath and @xmath be complete valued fields such that @xmath is an
extension of @xmath as a valued field. Let @xmath be a compact Hausdorff
space and let @xmath be the unital Banach @xmath -algebra of all
continuous @xmath -valued functions on @xmath with pointwise operations
and the sup norm. If a subset @xmath of @xmath satisfies:

1.  @xmath is an @xmath -algebra under pointwise operations;

2.  @xmath is complete with respect to @xmath ;

3.  @xmath ;

4.  @xmath separates the points of @xmath ,

then we will call @xmath an @xmath uniform algebra or just a uniform
algebra when convenient.

In the language of Definition 5.1.1 , an @xmath uniform algebra is a
Banach @xmath -algebra of @xmath -valued functions, also every @xmath
uniform algebra is an @xmath uniform algebra. We now generalise, in two
parts, Kulkarni and Limaye’s definition of a real function algebra.

###### Definition 5.1.2.

Let @xmath and @xmath be complete valued fields such that @xmath is a
finite extension of @xmath as a valued field. Let @xmath be a compact
Hausdorff space and totally disconnected if @xmath is non-Archimedean.
Define @xmath as the subset of elements @xmath for which the diagram in
Figure 5.1 commutes.

We will call @xmath the basic @xmath function algebra on @xmath or just
a basic function algebra when convenient.

###### Definition 5.1.3.

Let @xmath and @xmath be complete valued fields such that @xmath is a
finite extension of @xmath as a valued field. Let @xmath conform to the
conditions of Definition 5.1 and let @xmath be a subset of the basic
@xmath function algebra on @xmath . If @xmath is also an @xmath uniform
algebra then we will call @xmath an @xmath function algebra on @xmath .

###### Remark 5.1.4.

In definitions 5.1 and 5.1.3 the valued field @xmath is complete by
Remark 2.2.2 . The continuity of @xmath in Definition 5.1 is only an
observation since @xmath is an isometry on @xmath by Remark 2.2.6 . In
fact @xmath also acts as an isometric automorphism on @xmath .

### 5.2 Generalisation theorems

With Definition 5.1.3 in mind the following theorem, which is the main
theorem of this chapter, clarifies why an algebra conforming to the
conditions of Definition 5.1 is to be called a basic @xmath function
algebra on @xmath .

###### Theorem 5.2.1.

Let @xmath conform to the conditions of Definition 5.1 . Then the basic
@xmath function algebra on @xmath is always an @xmath uniform algebra.

###### Remark 5.2.2.

We will see in the proof of Theorem 5.2.1 that ord @xmath ord @xmath is
an optimum condition in Definition 5.1 since if we do not include it in
the definition then @xmath separates the points of @xmath if and only if
ord @xmath ord @xmath as per Figure 5.2 .

###### Proof of Theorem 5.2.1.

Let @xmath conform to the conditions of Definition 5.1 . It is immediate
that @xmath is a ring under pointwise operations and @xmath . We now
show that @xmath is complete with respect to the sup norm. First note
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is an isometry on @xmath since @xmath is surjective and
@xmath is an isometry on @xmath by Remark 2.2.6 . Further @xmath is
either an algebraic involution or a algebraic element of finite order on
@xmath . Hence since @xmath is commutative @xmath is in fact an
isometric automorphism on @xmath . Now let @xmath be a Cauchy sequence
in @xmath and let @xmath be its limit in @xmath . Then for each @xmath
there exists @xmath such that for all @xmath we have @xmath . But then
@xmath . Hence @xmath giving @xmath and so @xmath . Hence @xmath is
complete. It remains to show that @xmath separates the points of @xmath
and to this end we now show each of the implications in Figure 5.2 .
1: Let @xmath . It is immediate that @xmath and since @xmath we have
@xmath by Lemma 2.2.18 . We also note that the converse is immediate
since for each @xmath we have @xmath and so @xmath .
2: Note that @xmath and so, like a norm map, for every @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now if @xmath is the identity then @xmath which separates the points of
@xmath when @xmath is Archimedean by Urysohn’s lemma, since @xmath is
locally compact, and when @xmath is non-Archimedean by Theorem 4.2.1
since we required @xmath to be totally disconnected in this case. So now
suppose @xmath and let @xmath with @xmath . We need to check two cases.
Case 1: In this case @xmath for all @xmath with @xmath . By Urysohn’s
lemma in the Archimedean setting or Lemma 4.2.2 otherwise, there is
@xmath with @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath . Let @xmath so that @xmath
with @xmath , by construction, and @xmath by construction given that
@xmath . Then in this case @xmath and @xmath are separated by @xmath .
Case 2: In this case @xmath for some @xmath with @xmath . Let @xmath and
@xmath and note therefore that we have @xmath , since @xmath , and
@xmath for some @xmath . Further since @xmath there is @xmath with
@xmath . By Urysohn’s lemma in the Archimedean setting or Lemma 4.2.2
otherwise, there is @xmath with @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . We will
now check two sub-cases.
Case 2.1: The characteristic of the field @xmath is zero, i.e. @xmath .
Let @xmath so that we have @xmath with @xmath . This gives

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Hence since @xmath we have @xmath .
Case 2.2: The characteristic of @xmath is @xmath , i.e. @xmath , for
some prime @xmath . In this case the proof for Case 2.1 breaks down when
@xmath with @xmath , @xmath . So with respect to such circumstances
define @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will now show that @xmath so that @xmath and note that this is
satisfied if @xmath since @xmath . Indeed we have that @xmath with
@xmath so that @xmath giving @xmath . Now, for @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

since @xmath for @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath for @xmath , @xmath .
Hence

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

But for @xmath we also have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

since if @xmath then @xmath has the form @xmath and the exponents of
@xmath therefore also have the form @xmath , @xmath , giving

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and if @xmath then for @xmath an exponents of @xmath we also have @xmath
giving

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Hence

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Now since @xmath we have @xmath . Furthermore recall that since @xmath
and @xmath we have @xmath . Therefore it remains to show that @xmath in
order to conclude that @xmath . Recall that @xmath is a prime. For
@xmath the Frobenius @xmath , @xmath , is an injective endomorphism on
@xmath . We show that the Frobenius is injective on @xmath . Let @xmath
with @xmath .
The case @xmath gives @xmath .
The case @xmath gives @xmath .
In each case @xmath is an integral domain and so @xmath giving @xmath as
required. Therefore @xmath , @xmath , is also injective giving @xmath
since @xmath and this finishes the proof of implications 2 in Figure 5.2
.
3: We now show implication 3 in Figure 5.2 by showing the
contrapositive. Suppose @xmath . Then there exists some @xmath such that
@xmath . Let @xmath . Now for all @xmath we have for all @xmath that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore @xmath . Hence for all @xmath we have @xmath as required.
Hence having shown each of the implications in Figure 5.2 , @xmath is a
necessary and sufficient condition in Definition 5.1 in order that
@xmath separates the points of @xmath and this completes the proof of
Theorem 5.2.1 . ∎

###### Remark 5.2.3.

It’s worth noting that for @xmath the Frobenius is also a endomorphism
on @xmath . Moreover for @xmath of any characteristic we have seen in
the proof of Theorem 5.2.1 that @xmath , given by @xmath , is an
isometric automorphism on @xmath with fixed elements @xmath .

With reference to the complex, real and non-Archimedean
Stone-Weierstrass theorems from Chapter 4 , the following combined
Stone-Weierstrass theorem is immediate.

###### Theorem 5.2.4.

Let @xmath be a complete valued field. Let @xmath conform to Definition
5.1 and let @xmath be an @xmath function algebra on ( @xmath ,id,id).
Then either @xmath or @xmath and @xmath is not self adjoint, that is
there is @xmath with @xmath .

### 5.3 Examples

Our first example considers @xmath function algebras in the Archimedean
setting.

###### Example 5.3.1.

Let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be a compact Hausdorff space. We have
@xmath .
Setting @xmath in Definition 5.1 forces @xmath to be the identity on
@xmath . In this case it’s immediate that @xmath and each @xmath
function algebra on @xmath is a complex uniform algebra.
On the other hand, setting @xmath forces @xmath to be a topological
involution on @xmath . In this case the @xmath function algebras on
@xmath are precisely the real function algebras of Kulkarni and Limaye.

Our first non-Archimedean example is very straightforward involving the
trivial valuation.

###### Example 5.3.2.

Let @xmath , but with the trivial valuation instead of the absolute
valuation, and let @xmath with the trivial valuation where @xmath . With
reference to Theorem 2.2.7 , and having factorised @xmath in @xmath , we
have @xmath which gives @xmath . The roots of @xmath are the elements of
@xmath and so, with reference to Definition 2.2.8 , @xmath is a normal
extension of @xmath . Moreover with reference to Remark 2.2.9 @xmath is
a separable extension of @xmath and so @xmath is also a Galois extension
of @xmath with @xmath by Theorem 2.2.11 . Now for @xmath we must have
@xmath since, for @xmath , @xmath . Putting @xmath makes @xmath a
generator of @xmath and we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath is a cyclic extension of @xmath meaning that @xmath is a
cyclic group. Moreover

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

giving @xmath noting that the real part of each term is positive.
Further

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and so we have the intermediate field @xmath . Now let @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath all be non-empty finite sets such that for @xmath we
have @xmath . Put the trivial topology on @xmath so that @xmath is a
totally disconnected compact Hausdorff space noting that a set with the
trivial topology is compact if and only if it is finite. Define a
topological element of finite order @xmath on @xmath by @xmath and note
that for our choice of topology every self map on @xmath is continuous
as is every map from @xmath to @xmath . Hence @xmath is the @xmath
uniform algebra of all functions from @xmath to @xmath and we also have
@xmath by construction. Hence with reference to Definition 5.1 we have
@xmath as an example of a basic @xmath function algebra. For @xmath each
@xmath is such that

  -- -- -------- -- -------- --
        @xmath      @xmath   
        @xmath      @xmath   
        @xmath      @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -- -------- --

@xmath giving @xmath . Furthermore @xmath extends to @xmath which is a
basic @xmath function algebra. We will look at such extensions in the
next section. Finally note that in general if we use the trivial
valuation on @xmath then for every totally disconnected compact
Hausdorff space @xmath the sup norm @xmath is the trivial norm on @xmath
.

We now look at some non-Archimedean examples involving an order two
extension of the 5-adic numbers.

###### Example 5.3.3.

Let @xmath and @xmath . Suppose towards a contradiction that @xmath is
already an element of @xmath . With reference to Chapter 2 , we would
have @xmath giving @xmath . But then @xmath would have a 5-adic
expansion over @xmath of the form @xmath with @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

should be equal to 2. In particular @xmath should have the form @xmath
where @xmath is a natural number, with a factor of 5, that cancels with
the remaining terms of ( 5.3.1 ). But since @xmath we have @xmath , a
contradiction. Therefore we have @xmath giving @xmath and so @xmath as a
@xmath -vector space. It is immediate that @xmath is a Galois extension
of @xmath with @xmath where @xmath . The complete valuation on @xmath
has a unique extension to a complete valuation on @xmath , see Theorem
2.2.13 . Explicitly we have, for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

noting that @xmath . Moreover in terms of the valuation logarithm @xmath
on @xmath we have @xmath and so the valuation logarithm for @xmath is
@xmath for @xmath . Hence for @xmath , with @xmath , we have @xmath . We
show that this in fact gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

First recall that @xmath . If @xmath then @xmath .
If @xmath then @xmath , noting that @xmath since @xmath .
If @xmath and @xmath then by the above @xmath . Hence, by Lemma 2.1.7 ,
@xmath .
If @xmath and @xmath for some @xmath then the expansion @xmath over
@xmath has @xmath and so the expansion @xmath has @xmath in the residue
field @xmath giving @xmath . Similarly the expansion @xmath has @xmath
and so @xmath has @xmath in @xmath giving @xmath . Hence the expansion
@xmath has @xmath in @xmath giving @xmath . In particular @xmath and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and this completes the proof of ( 5.3.2 ). With reference to Remark
2.2.14 it follows that @xmath is an unramified extension of @xmath with
@xmath for @xmath . Further it follows easily from ( 5.3.2 ) that @xmath
is a set of representatives in @xmath of the elements in the residue
field @xmath . Hence @xmath since @xmath and @xmath . Therefore, by
Theorem 2.1.23 , @xmath is locally compact and the unit ball @xmath is a
totally disconnected compact Hausdorff space with respect to @xmath .
Further if we take @xmath to be the restriction of @xmath to @xmath
then, since @xmath is an isometry on @xmath , @xmath is a topological
involution on @xmath and the basic @xmath function algebra

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a non-Archimedean analog of the real disc algebra. Now let @xmath be
a power series in @xmath . Then for @xmath and @xmath from Remark 5.2.3
we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the last equality follows because the two series have identical
sequences of partial sums. Hence similarly we have, for @xmath , @xmath
. In the general case of such circumstance we can not immediately assume
that all the pairs of coefficients @xmath and @xmath are equal since
@xmath could be a set of roots of the series @xmath whilst there being
an element of @xmath in the region of convergence of the series that is
not a root. However since @xmath we have @xmath . Now let @xmath be such
that for all @xmath with @xmath we have @xmath . Then @xmath on @xmath
and @xmath on @xmath . Let @xmath be the radius of convergence of @xmath
. Then with reference to Theorem 3.1.2 , since @xmath with @xmath and
@xmath converges on @xmath we have @xmath . Hence @xmath converges
uniformly on the ball @xmath by Theorem 3.1.2 . Therefore @xmath is
continuous on @xmath and so @xmath at @xmath . Hence @xmath and by
induction we have shown that @xmath for all @xmath . In particular all
the power series in @xmath only have @xmath valued coefficients. However
since @xmath these functions take values in @xmath .

Whilst the last example of a basic function algebra included many
globally analytic functions the only globally analytic functions in the
following example are constants. However many locally analytic functions
are included.

###### Example 5.3.4.

Let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be as in Example 5.3.3
and therefore note that @xmath . Define @xmath and for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Let @xmath with @xmath . Then @xmath if @xmath . Similarly @xmath if
@xmath . Hence when @xmath we have @xmath giving @xmath . Further @xmath
since @xmath . Moreover @xmath and so to show that @xmath is a
topological involution on @xmath it remains to show that @xmath is
continuous. Let @xmath and @xmath be a sequence in @xmath such that
@xmath . Let @xmath . For @xmath there exists @xmath such that for all
@xmath we have @xmath since convergence in @xmath is from the side, see
Lemma 3.1.1 . With reference to ( 5.3.3 ) this gives, for all @xmath ,
@xmath . Further since @xmath there exists @xmath such that, for all
@xmath , @xmath . Hence for all @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand for @xmath note that @xmath for all @xmath . In this
case since @xmath there exists @xmath such that for all @xmath we have
@xmath giving

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as required. Hence @xmath is a topological involution on @xmath . We now
consider the basic @xmath function algebra

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We begin by proving that the only power series in @xmath are the
constants belonging to @xmath . Let @xmath be a power series in @xmath .
Since @xmath and @xmath we have @xmath giving @xmath and so @xmath .
Hence @xmath is also in @xmath . Suppose towards a contradiction that
@xmath is not identically zero on @xmath . Since @xmath , @xmath
converges and so by Lemma 3.1.1 we have @xmath . Hence we can define
@xmath . Also let @xmath . Now since @xmath we can find @xmath such that
@xmath and @xmath . Hence for every @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So, by Lemma 3.1.1 , @xmath . Hence @xmath by Lemma 2.1.7 . Similarly
for every @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

giving @xmath . Now @xmath and @xmath hence @xmath . But, since @xmath
is an isometry, @xmath and @xmath with @xmath which is a contradiction.
Therefore @xmath is identically zero on @xmath as required. However,
whilst the only power series in @xmath are constants belonging to @xmath
, it is easy to construct locally analytic elements of @xmath using
power series. Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

let @xmath be the even sequence in @xmath given by @xmath and let @xmath
. Now let @xmath be a sequence of power series with the following
properties:

1.  for all @xmath the coefficients of @xmath are elements of @xmath ;

2.  for all @xmath we have @xmath where @xmath is the radius of
    convergence of @xmath so that @xmath is convergent on @xmath ;

3.  we have @xmath .

We then define @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We show that @xmath is continuous. Let @xmath and let @xmath be a
sequence in @xmath such that @xmath .
If @xmath then by Lemma 3.1.1 there is @xmath such that for all @xmath
we have @xmath . If for some @xmath we have @xmath then @xmath and for
all @xmath we have @xmath since @xmath . Hence by the continuity of
@xmath on @xmath we have @xmath .
If for some @xmath we have @xmath then @xmath , with @xmath , and for
all @xmath we have @xmath , since @xmath , with @xmath . Now @xmath is
continuous on @xmath , @xmath is continuous on @xmath and @xmath is an
isometry on @xmath . Hence again we have @xmath .
If @xmath then by the definition of @xmath we have @xmath . Let @xmath .
We need to show that there is @xmath such that for all @xmath we have
@xmath . By property (iii) given in the construction of @xmath there is
@xmath such that for all @xmath we have @xmath . Since @xmath there is
@xmath such that for all @xmath we have @xmath . So let @xmath . Then
either @xmath , noting that @xmath , or there is @xmath with either
@xmath or @xmath .
For @xmath we have @xmath .
For @xmath we have @xmath since @xmath .
For @xmath define @xmath and note that @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Hence @xmath is continuous. We now show that @xmath . Let @xmath .
For @xmath we have @xmath since @xmath .
For @xmath , for some @xmath , we have @xmath . Define @xmath giving
@xmath . Then we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath , for some @xmath , we have @xmath . Put @xmath giving @xmath
. Then we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath as required. Now suppose there is @xmath such that for all
@xmath we have @xmath . Then @xmath will be locally analytic on @xmath
noting that convergence in @xmath is from the side, in particular see
the proof of Lemma 3.1.1 .

###### Remark 5.3.5.

Concerning examples 5.3.3 and 5.3.4 .

1.  Since @xmath is an isometry on @xmath and @xmath we note that @xmath
    is also a topological involution on @xmath with @xmath . For @xmath
    and @xmath we have @xmath which gives @xmath . But, with reference
    to Figure 5.2 , @xmath is not a basic function algebra since it
    fails to separate the points of @xmath noting that we have @xmath .
    Hence @xmath is not a @xmath function algebra on @xmath . However
    @xmath is a basic function algebra.

2.  We note that by Theorem 5.2.4 every element @xmath can be uniformly
    approximated by polynomials belonging to @xmath . However, apart
    from the elements of @xmath , none of these polynomials belong to
    @xmath .

In the next section we look at ways of obtaining more basic function
algebras.

### 5.4 Non-Archimedean new basic function algebras from old

#### 5.4.1 Basic extensions

The following theorem concerns extensions of basic function algebras
resulting from the field structure involved.

###### Theorem 5.4.1.

Let the basic @xmath function algebra on @xmath be such that @xmath and
@xmath are respectively at the top and bottom of a lattice of groups
with intermediate elements. Then @xmath and @xmath are respectively at
the top and bottom of a particular lattice of basic function algebras
with intermediate elements and there is a one-one correspondence between
the subgroups of @xmath and the elements of this lattice which we will
call the lattice of basic extensions of @xmath .

###### Proof.

With reference to Remark 5.2.3 , the automorphism @xmath , for @xmath ,
is such that @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now by the fundamental theorem of Galois theory we have @xmath and so
@xmath is a cyclic group. Moreover we have @xmath giving @xmath as
cyclic groups. It is standard from group theory that a subgroup of a
cyclic group is cyclic. In particular, for @xmath , @xmath is the unique
cyclic subgroup of @xmath of size @xmath . Moreover for @xmath a
subgroup of @xmath we have @xmath , by Lagrange’s theorem, and so for
@xmath we have @xmath with @xmath . Hence we define a map @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now let @xmath . Since @xmath we also have @xmath , see Figure 5.2 .
Hence @xmath giving @xmath and so @xmath is a basic function algebra.
Moreover since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the constants in @xmath are the elements of the field @xmath and so
@xmath is injective by the fundamental theorem of Galois theory. Finally
it is immediate that the elements of @xmath form a lattice as described
in the theorem and this completes the proof. ∎

###### Example 5.4.2.

Let @xmath and let @xmath where @xmath . Having factorised @xmath in
@xmath , we have @xmath with roots @xmath . Hence @xmath is the
splitting field of @xmath over @xmath and so @xmath is a Galois
extension of @xmath with @xmath by Theorem 2.2.11 . In fact putting
@xmath makes @xmath a generator of @xmath and so @xmath is a cyclic
extension of @xmath and @xmath since @xmath is a Galois extension. We
can take @xmath to be a basic @xmath function algebra constructed by
analogy with Example 5.3.2 where @xmath is non-empty and finite with
@xmath for all @xmath . In this case Figure 5.3 shows the lattice of
basic extensions of @xmath as given by Theorem 5.4.1 .

Finally we note that in this example @xmath , requiring the trivial
valuation, was chosen just to keep things simple.

#### 5.4.2 Residue algebras

We begin with an analog of Definition 2.1.10 .

###### Definition 5.4.3.

For @xmath a basic @xmath function algebra in the non-Archimedean
setting, with valuation logarithm @xmath on @xmath , we define:

1.  @xmath ;

2.  @xmath ;

3.  @xmath ;

4.  @xmath for @xmath .

In this subsection we will mainly be interested in the following two
theorems and their proofs. The main theorem is Theorem 5.4.5 which
concerns the residue algebra of particular basic function algebras.
Before proving these theorems we will need to prove several other
results that are also of interest in their own right.

###### Theorem 5.4.4.

If @xmath is a basic @xmath function algebra in the non-Archimedean
setting then:

1.  @xmath is a ring;

2.  @xmath is the multiplicative group of units of @xmath ;

3.  @xmath is an ideal of @xmath ;

4.  @xmath is a maximal ideal of @xmath for each @xmath .

###### Theorem 5.4.5.

Let @xmath be a locally compact complete non-Archimedean field of
characteristic zero with nontrivial valuation. Let @xmath be a finite
unramified extension of @xmath with @xmath for some @xmath and let
@xmath be a basic @xmath function algebra. Then there is an isometric
isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the basic @xmath function algebra on @xmath . Here
@xmath and @xmath are respectively the residue field of @xmath and
@xmath whilst @xmath is the residue automorphism on @xmath induced by
@xmath . More generally @xmath need not be an unramified extension of
@xmath for the above to hold provided that we impose the condition
@xmath directly.

###### Remark 5.4.6.

Concerning Theorem 5.4.5 .

1.  The conditions in Theorem 5.4.5 imply that @xmath contains a @xmath
    -adic field, up to a positive exponent of the valuation, since by
    Theorem 2.1.23 the residue field @xmath is finite and so the
    valuation on @xmath when restricted to @xmath can not be trivial.

2.  Since @xmath is finite the valuation on @xmath is the trivial
    valuation. In general the quotient norm on a residue field is the
    trivial valuation. In particular for @xmath with residue class
    representative @xmath we have, by Lemma 2.1.7 , that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.  To be thorough for the reader we show that @xmath is well defined,
    although this is covered in [ FV02 , p52] . Let @xmath with residue
    class representative @xmath . For @xmath we obtain @xmath by @xmath
    . Now let @xmath with @xmath but @xmath so that @xmath . By Remark
    2.2.6 , @xmath is an isometry on @xmath and so @xmath giving @xmath
    and so @xmath is well defined.

4.  The map @xmath is a homomorphism from @xmath to @xmath . Indeed for
    @xmath and @xmath we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Under the conditions of Theorem 5.4.5 this homomorphism becomes an
    isomorphism as per Lemma 5.4.7 below, see [ FV02 , p52] . In
    particular this ensures that @xmath , in Theorem 5.4.5 , is a basic
    function algebra since @xmath gives @xmath .

###### Lemma 5.4.7.

Let @xmath be a local field, as per Remark 2.1.24 , and let @xmath be a
finite unramified Galois extension of @xmath . Then @xmath giving @xmath
for all @xmath .

The following definition and lemma will be useful when proving Theorem
5.4.4 . Note that the first part of Lemma 5.4.9 makes sense even though
we have yet to show that @xmath is a ring.

###### Definition 5.4.8.

Let @xmath be a complete valued field with valuation logarithm @xmath
and let @xmath be a totally disconnected compact Hausdorff space.

1.  We call a map @xmath a value level function .

2.  We place a partial order on the set of all value level function by
    setting

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Lemma 5.4.9.

Let @xmath be a basic @xmath function algebra in the non-Archimedean
setting with valuation logarithm @xmath on @xmath and let @xmath be a
value level function. Then:

1.  @xmath is an ideal of @xmath ;

2.   for @xmath another value level function with @xmath we have @xmath
    .

###### Proof.

For (i), let @xmath and @xmath . Then for each @xmath we have @xmath
giving @xmath and @xmath giving @xmath as required. For (ii), this is
immediate. ∎

Note, the mapping @xmath is not assumed to be injective. We now prove
Theorem 5.4.4 .

###### Proof of Theorem 5.4.4.

For (i), note that since @xmath , @xmath and @xmath we have @xmath .
Further @xmath is closed under multiplication and addition by Lemma
5.4.9 since for the value level function that is constantly zero we have
@xmath . Hence @xmath is a ring.
For (ii), we need to show that @xmath . Let @xmath . Then for all @xmath
we have @xmath and @xmath since @xmath but we also have @xmath giving
@xmath . Hence @xmath . Now let @xmath . We have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for all @xmath and so it remains to show that @xmath is an element of
@xmath . We have @xmath giving @xmath and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For continuity let @xmath and @xmath be a sequence in @xmath with @xmath
in @xmath . Then by ( 5.4.1 ) we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Therefore by the continuity of @xmath we have @xmath from which it
follows that @xmath as required.
For (iii), taking into account that the valuation on @xmath could be
dense, @xmath is an ideal of @xmath by Lemma 5.4.9 since @xmath noting
that @xmath for all @xmath and that a union of nested ideals is an
ideal.
For (iv), @xmath is an ideal of @xmath by Lemma 5.4.9 since @xmath where
@xmath is the indicator function. Also by Lemma 5.4.9 , since @xmath for
all @xmath , we have @xmath . We now show that @xmath is a maximal ideal
of @xmath . Let @xmath be a, not necessarily proper, ideal of @xmath
with @xmath . Then there is @xmath with @xmath . Define on @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We show that @xmath is an element of @xmath and so @xmath . For
continuity let @xmath and @xmath be a sequence of elements of @xmath
with @xmath in @xmath . Since @xmath is continuous we have @xmath with
respect to @xmath . Hence if @xmath then there exists @xmath such that
for all @xmath we have @xmath . If @xmath then since convergence in
@xmath is from the side, see Lemma 3.1.1 , there exists @xmath such that
for all @xmath we have @xmath . Hence in every case there exists @xmath
such that for all @xmath we have @xmath and so @xmath is continuous. We
need to show that @xmath . Since @xmath is an isometry on @xmath we have
@xmath giving

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

noting that @xmath takes values only in @xmath . Now @xmath and @xmath
so that for all @xmath we have @xmath giving @xmath . Further since
@xmath we have @xmath and so we have shown that @xmath . Now since
@xmath is an ideal we have @xmath . Moreover by the definition of @xmath
, for each @xmath , if @xmath then @xmath and if @xmath then @xmath .
Hence for all @xmath , @xmath by Lemma 2.1.7 and so @xmath giving @xmath
. Therefore @xmath is a maximal ideal of @xmath and this completes the
proof of Theorem 5.4.4 . ∎

The following two lemmas will be used in the proof of Theorem 5.4.5 .
The first of these, Lemma 5.4.10 , will be known but we provide a proof
in the absence of a reference. The second, Lemma 5.4.12 , may be new,
since I have not seen it in the literature, however it could be known to
some number theorists.

###### Lemma 5.4.10.

Let @xmath be a complete non-Archimedean field with a nontrivial,
discrete valuation and valuation logarithm @xmath . Let @xmath be a
prime element and @xmath be a set of residue class representatives for
@xmath , as shown in Theorem 2.1.13 . Then, for @xmath a compact
Hausdorff space, each @xmath has a unique expansion, as a series of
locally constant @xmath -valued functions, of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, for @xmath and @xmath with @xmath , we have @xmath for all
@xmath in the interval @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and note that since @xmath is compact, @xmath is bounded.
Hence there is @xmath such that, for all @xmath , @xmath . Therefore by
allowing terms to be zero where necessary and by using the unique @xmath
-power series expansion over @xmath for elements of @xmath , as shown in
Theorem 2.1.13 , we have for each @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence for each @xmath we have obtained a function @xmath and the
resulting expansion @xmath is unique. Now for @xmath let @xmath be such
that we have @xmath . If we do not have @xmath for all @xmath then let
@xmath be the first integer for which @xmath . Therefore @xmath and
@xmath are representatives in @xmath of two different residue classes.
Hence @xmath showing that @xmath . Therefore by Lemma 2.1.7 and the
definition of @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Hence @xmath giving @xmath for all @xmath in the interval @xmath .
Finally we show, for all @xmath , that @xmath is a locally constant
function. For @xmath define the following ball in @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then since @xmath is continuous there exists an open subset @xmath of
@xmath with @xmath such that @xmath . Hence for each @xmath we have
@xmath and so @xmath . In particular @xmath is constant on @xmath and
this completes the proof of Lemma 5.4.10 . ∎

Lemma 5.4.10 has the following corollary which, for locally constant
functions, goes slightly further than Theorem 5.2.4 since it does not
assume that @xmath is totally disconnected.

###### Corollary 5.4.11.

Let @xmath and @xmath be as in Lemma 5.4.10 and let @xmath be the set of
all locally constant @xmath valued functions defined on @xmath . Then
@xmath is uniformly dense in @xmath .

###### Proof.

For @xmath let @xmath be the expansion from Lemma 5.4.10 . We note that
a finite sum of locally constant functions is locally constant. Hence,
for each @xmath , @xmath is an element of @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath
. Then we have @xmath as required. ∎

Here is the second of the two lemmas that will be used in the proof of
Theorem 5.4.5 .

###### Lemma 5.4.12.

Let @xmath and @xmath be non-Archimedean fields with @xmath a finite
extension of @xmath as a valued field such that the following holds:

1.   we have @xmath and the valuation logarithm @xmath on @xmath when
    restricted to @xmath is a @xmath -adic valuation logarithm;

2.   the residue field @xmath is finite and so @xmath is also finite;

3.   the elements of @xmath are isometric on @xmath , noting that this
    is automatically satisfied if @xmath is complete.

Then for each @xmath there exists a set @xmath of residue class
representatives for @xmath such that the restriction of @xmath to @xmath
is an endofunction @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the extension of @xmath to @xmath and let @xmath with
@xmath be an arbitrary set of residue class representatives for @xmath .
Fix @xmath and for @xmath denote the orbit of @xmath with respect to
@xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also denote @xmath . We will show that @xmath can be constructed from
@xmath . Clearly we can let @xmath represent @xmath and so include
@xmath in @xmath . More generally we need to make sure that:

1.  for each @xmath there is precisely one element @xmath such that
    @xmath , that is @xmath for some @xmath with @xmath ;

2.  for each @xmath we have @xmath .

To this end we will show that the following useful facts hold for Lemma
5.4.12 .

1.  For @xmath either @xmath or @xmath . Clearly, since @xmath is
    finite, if @xmath then @xmath .

2.  Let @xmath . Then there exists @xmath with @xmath such that if
    @xmath with @xmath then @xmath . Further since @xmath is an isometry
    we have @xmath for all @xmath . This ensures that every residue
    class that has a representative in @xmath has only one
    representative in @xmath .

Hence by applying (a) and (b) above we obtain @xmath as a disjoint union
of the orbits of finitely many elements form @xmath . Note if @xmath is
a set of residue class representatives for @xmath and @xmath then with
the above construction we can choose to have @xmath since @xmath
restricts to the identity map on @xmath . Also note that (b) is not in
general satisfied for all @xmath with @xmath . Indeed, in the case of
Example 5.3.3 where @xmath , for @xmath we have @xmath and yet @xmath .
We will now prove that (a) and (b) above hold.
For (a) it is enough to confirm that @xmath for all @xmath . Since
@xmath is an isometry, (iii) and (iv) of Remark 5.4.6 are applicable and
so we have for each @xmath that @xmath . Hence the result follows.
For (b) we first note that, for each @xmath , @xmath maps residue class
to residue class. That is @xmath restricts to a bijection @xmath and
@xmath also restricts to a bijection @xmath and so forth. This is
because @xmath restricts to a bijective endofunction on @xmath since
@xmath has finite order and is an isometry. Now for (b) to hold we need
to check that for each @xmath there is an @xmath such that when the
forward orbit of @xmath , with respect to @xmath , returns to a residue
class it has visited before then it returns to the same element of that
residue class. Let @xmath and let @xmath be the first element of @xmath
such that there exists an @xmath with @xmath in the same residue class
as @xmath . Hence @xmath and since @xmath is an isometry we have @xmath
giving @xmath by the definition of @xmath . Therefore @xmath for some
@xmath and @xmath restricts to @xmath .
Hence for (b) to hold it is enough to show that there is @xmath which is
a fixed point with respect to @xmath . To this end we more generally
show that for each @xmath with @xmath there is a fixed point @xmath of
@xmath . So for such a @xmath let @xmath . Now recall that we have
@xmath and that @xmath on @xmath when restricted to @xmath is a @xmath
-adic valuation logarithm for some prime @xmath . Hence we have two
cases, @xmath and @xmath .
Suppose @xmath . We have @xmath for some @xmath . Further then we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Hence consider

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Since @xmath we have @xmath giving @xmath . Moreover since @xmath we
have @xmath . Therefore

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Hence @xmath is an element of @xmath with @xmath as required.
Suppose @xmath . Then there is @xmath such that @xmath with @xmath .
Hence @xmath . Now suppose that the following holds.

1.  Let @xmath . Then for each @xmath with @xmath and @xmath there is a
    fixed point @xmath of @xmath .

Then by applying (b2) there is @xmath which is a fixed point of @xmath
and so we have @xmath . By repeated application of (b2) we can obtain an
element @xmath such that @xmath . Now, since the set @xmath was an
arbitrary set of residue class representatives for @xmath and @xmath
represents @xmath , we can apply the case @xmath for @xmath to obtain
@xmath with @xmath as required.
It remains to show that (b2) holds. So let @xmath and @xmath satisfy the
conditions of (b2). Hence for some @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Define @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and note that for all @xmath we
have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.4.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now since @xmath is the @xmath -adic valuation logarithm @xmath we have
@xmath . Therefore since @xmath is a finite field we have @xmath for
some @xmath . Hence we consider

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Now, by Lemma 2.1.7 and ( 5.4.2 ), we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The same inequality holds for later terms in the above expansion on
@xmath , hence for

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we have @xmath . This gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that for each @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

noting that @xmath since @xmath is the @xmath -adic valuation logarithm
@xmath . Hence for @xmath we have @xmath . Further since @xmath we have
@xmath by Lagrange’s theorem. In particular @xmath giving @xmath and
since @xmath with @xmath we have @xmath as required. This completes the
proof of Lemma 5.4.12 . ∎

We will now prove Theorem 5.4.5 .

###### Proof of Theorem 5.4.5.

For @xmath let @xmath denote the quotient class to which @xmath belongs
and let @xmath be a prime element of @xmath . Note, @xmath is endowed
with the usual quotient operations and the quotient norm which in this
case gives the trivial valuation. We begin by establishing a set @xmath
of quotient class representatives for @xmath . By Lemma 5.4.12 there is
a set @xmath of residue class representatives for @xmath such that
@xmath . Furthermore by Lemma 5.4.10 every @xmath has a unique expansion
of the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.4.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where, for each @xmath , @xmath is a locally constant function. Hence,
using expansion ( 5.4.3 ), for @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath with @xmath for all @xmath . Now note that @xmath and
@xmath give @xmath and @xmath . Further since @xmath is an isometry on
@xmath we have @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath . Hence since the
expansion of @xmath in the for of ( 5.4.3 ) is unique we have @xmath and
@xmath . Moreover @xmath is continuous since locally constant and, for
@xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular we have @xmath . Hence we also have @xmath since @xmath is
a ring. But since @xmath for all @xmath we in fact have @xmath giving

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now by the uniqueness of expansions in the form of ( 5.4.3 ) and since
@xmath is an ideal we have for any other element @xmath that @xmath if
and only if @xmath . Hence using expansion ( 5.4.3 ) we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

noting that @xmath since @xmath and @xmath . We now define a map @xmath
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where for @xmath we define @xmath . We show that @xmath is a ring
isomorphism by checking that:

1.  for all @xmath we have @xmath ;

2.  @xmath is multiplicative, linear and @xmath ;

3.  @xmath ensuring that @xmath is injective;

4.  @xmath is surjective.

For (i), since @xmath is a locally constant function on @xmath we have
@xmath . Furthermore we have already shown above that @xmath . Hence for
each @xmath we have @xmath and so @xmath .
For (ii), let @xmath . We show that @xmath is multiplicative. Set @xmath
giving @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . Hence for each @xmath we have
@xmath . Therefore for each @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Linearity, @xmath , is shown in much the same way. Showing that @xmath
is almost immediate. Let @xmath be the representative in @xmath of
@xmath . Then we have @xmath giving @xmath as required. In fact we can
always choose @xmath such that @xmath .
For (iii), let @xmath . If for all @xmath we have @xmath then @xmath for
all @xmath giving @xmath . Hence @xmath and so @xmath . In fact since
@xmath is an element of @xmath we have @xmath in this case.
For (iv), given @xmath and @xmath we have @xmath for some element @xmath
of @xmath since @xmath is a set of residue class representatives for
@xmath . Since the valuation on @xmath is the trivial valuation, @xmath
is a locally constant function and hence, when viewed as a function on
@xmath , so is @xmath . Therefore @xmath is a continuous @xmath valued
function noting that @xmath . Further since @xmath we have for each
@xmath that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now because @xmath we have @xmath giving @xmath for all @xmath . Hence,
as a function on @xmath , @xmath and so @xmath with @xmath as required.
Finally, since the valuation on @xmath is the trivial valuation, the sup
norm on @xmath is the trivial norm. Therefore it is immediate that
@xmath is an isometry and this completes the proof of Theorem 5.4.5 . ∎

The last result of this section follows easily from the preceding
results.

###### Corollary 5.4.13.

Let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath conform to Lemma 5.4.12 with @xmath and
@xmath having complete nontrivial discrete valuations and let @xmath be
a basic @xmath function algebra. Further let @xmath be the subset of all
locally constant @xmath valued functions. If there is a prime element
@xmath of @xmath such that @xmath then each @xmath has a unique series
expansion of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where for each @xmath we have @xmath . In particular the subset of all
locally constant functions, @xmath , is uniformly dense in @xmath .

###### Remark 5.4.14.

For @xmath an unramified extension of @xmath , every prime element
@xmath is a prime element of @xmath with @xmath . In particular
Corollary 5.4.13 holds when @xmath is a finite unramified extension of
@xmath as is the case for examples 5.3.3 and 5.3.4 .

###### Proof of Corollary 5.4.13.

Let @xmath be an element of @xmath and let @xmath be a prime element of
@xmath with @xmath . By Lemma 5.4.10 @xmath has a unique series
expansion of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath and @xmath a locally constant function for all @xmath .
Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore since @xmath restricts to an endofunction on @xmath and by the
uniqueness of the expansion we have @xmath for all @xmath . Hence @xmath
is an element of @xmath for all @xmath and for each @xmath we have
@xmath . Finally @xmath is a sequence of locally constant functions
which converges uniformly to @xmath as required. ∎

This brings us to the end of Chapter 5 . In the next chapter we will see
that @xmath function algebras have a part to play in representation
theory.

## Chapter 6 Representation theory

The first section of this chapter introduces several results from the
theory of Banach rings and Banach @xmath -algebras that we will use
later in the chapter. These results have been taken from [ Ber90 , Ch1]
. However I have provided a thorough proof of each result in order to
give significantly more detail than [ Ber90 ] since some of them may not
be widely known. The second section begins by recalling which Banach
@xmath -algebras can be represented by complex uniform algebras or real
function algebras in the Archimedean setting and one such result in the
non-Archimedean setting provided by [ Ber90 ] is also noted. We then
develop this theory further by identifying a large class of Banach
@xmath -algebras that can be represented by @xmath function algebras.
The resulting representation theorem is the main result of interest in
this chapter and the rest of the chapter is given over to the proof of
the theorem.

### 6.1 Further Banach rings and Banach F-algebras

Since the definition of a Banach ring was given in Definition 3.2.1 we
begin with the first lemma.

###### Lemma 6.1.1.

Let @xmath be a Banach ring and let @xmath be positive. Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then with the Cauchy product and usual addition:

1.   we have that @xmath is a Banach ring with respect to the norm

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.   for @xmath we have @xmath invertible in @xmath if and only if
    @xmath .

###### Proof.

For (i), let @xmath and @xmath be elements of @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

showing that @xmath is closed under addition and that the triangle
inequality holds for @xmath . Clearly @xmath if and only if @xmath .
Further

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

showing that @xmath is closed under multiplication and @xmath is
sub-multiplicative. Furthermore we have @xmath which gives @xmath and
similarly @xmath .
We now show that @xmath is complete. Let @xmath be a Cauchy sequence in
@xmath . Then for @xmath and @xmath there exists @xmath such that for
all @xmath we have @xmath . Hence for all @xmath we have @xmath and so
for all @xmath , @xmath is a Cauchy sequence in @xmath . Since @xmath is
a Banach ring @xmath converges to some @xmath .
We show that @xmath is an element of @xmath . Let @xmath . Then there
exists @xmath such that for all @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Now let @xmath and @xmath . Since for each @xmath , @xmath is a Cauchy
sequence in @xmath with limit @xmath , there is @xmath such that for all
@xmath we have @xmath . Hence letting @xmath gives

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Since @xmath was arbitrary we have @xmath . Since this holds for each
@xmath we have @xmath giving @xmath as required.
Let @xmath . We will show, for large enough @xmath , that @xmath and so
@xmath is complete. Since @xmath is a Cauchy sequence there exists
@xmath such that for all @xmath we have @xmath .
Let @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath are elements of @xmath there exists
@xmath such that @xmath and @xmath .
Since for each @xmath , @xmath is a Cauchy sequence in @xmath with limit
@xmath , there is @xmath such that for all @xmath we have @xmath . Let
@xmath and define @xmath , then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

For (ii), the result is obvious for @xmath and so suppose @xmath . If
@xmath then @xmath is an element of @xmath and by the definition of the
Cauchy product we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Similarly this holds for @xmath and so @xmath is invertible.
Now conversely if @xmath is invertible in @xmath then for @xmath the
inverse of @xmath in @xmath we have by the definition of the Cauchy
product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath and, for each @xmath , @xmath giving

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore for each @xmath , @xmath with @xmath giving @xmath by
induction. Hence @xmath is an element of @xmath and so @xmath as
required. ∎

###### Remark 6.1.2.

Since @xmath extends @xmath as a ring and by the definition of the
Cauchy product it is immediate that @xmath is commutative if and only if
@xmath is commutative. Similarly by the definition of the norm @xmath
and the Cauchy product, if @xmath is a unital Banach @xmath -algebra
then @xmath is also a unital Banach @xmath -algebra. These details are
easily checked.

The following definitions will be used many times in this chapter.

###### Definition 6.1.3.

Let @xmath be a Banach ring. A bounded multiplicative seminorm on @xmath
is a map @xmath taking non-negative values that is:

1.  bounded, @xmath for all @xmath , but not constantly zero on @xmath ;

2.  multiplicative, @xmath for all @xmath and hence @xmath by setting
    @xmath and @xmath ;

3.  a seminorm and so @xmath also satisfies the triangle inequality and
    @xmath but the kernel is not assumed to be a singleton.

###### Definition 6.1.4.

Let @xmath be a complete non-Archimedean field and let @xmath be a
commutative unital Banach @xmath -algebra. In this chapter @xmath will
denote the set of all proper closed prime ideals of @xmath that are the
kernels of bounded multiplicative seminorms on @xmath . For @xmath , or
any proper closed ideal of @xmath , we will denote the quotient norm on
@xmath by @xmath that is @xmath for @xmath .

We now proceed with a number of Lemmas. In particular towards the end of
Section 6.1 it will be show that @xmath is always nonempty.

###### Lemma 6.1.5.

Let @xmath be a unital Banach @xmath -algebra. If @xmath is a bounded
multiplicative seminorm on @xmath as a Banach ring then we have @xmath
for all @xmath . Hence since @xmath is multiplicative it is also a
vector space seminorm, that is @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

For @xmath we first note that @xmath and so @xmath and @xmath .
Similarly @xmath since @xmath is a valuation. Moreover since @xmath is
bounded we have @xmath . Since this holds for all @xmath we also have
@xmath giving @xmath and so @xmath for all @xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 6.1.6.

Let @xmath and @xmath be as in Definition 6.1.4 . For @xmath , or any
proper closed ideal of @xmath , the following holds:

1.   the quotient ring @xmath has @xmath and is an integral domain if
    @xmath is prime;

2.   the quotient norm is such that @xmath for all @xmath ;

3.   the quotient norm @xmath is an @xmath -vector space norm on @xmath
    , opposed to being merely a seminorm, and it is sub-multiplicative;

4.   if @xmath is square preserving, that is @xmath for all @xmath ,
    then both @xmath and @xmath observe the strong triangle inequality
    noting that @xmath is non-Archimedean;

5.   by way of the map @xmath , as a seminorm on @xmath , @xmath is
    bounded.

###### Proof.

For (i), if @xmath , @xmath with @xmath then we have @xmath . Hence if
@xmath is a prime ideal of @xmath then at least one of @xmath and @xmath
is equal to @xmath and so @xmath is an integral domain. It is immediate
that @xmath has a subset that is an isomorphic copy of @xmath since
@xmath is a proper ideal of @xmath .
For (ii), we first show that @xmath . Note that @xmath since @xmath . So
now suppose toward a contradiction that there is @xmath such that @xmath
. We have for all @xmath that @xmath is an element of @xmath since
@xmath is an ideal of @xmath . But @xmath with @xmath and so @xmath is
an element of @xmath since @xmath is closed which contradicts @xmath
being a proper ideal of @xmath . We conclude that @xmath for all @xmath
and so @xmath . Hence @xmath by the above. Now for @xmath we have @xmath
since @xmath is invertible where @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

as required. In a similar way for @xmath one shows that @xmath .
For (iii), we note that @xmath is a norm on @xmath because @xmath is
closed as a subset of @xmath so that for @xmath there is @xmath with
@xmath for all @xmath giving @xmath . We now show that @xmath is
sub-multiplicative. For @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

For (iv), suppose @xmath is square preserving. In this case the proof of
Theorem 2.1.2 also works for @xmath and so @xmath observes the strong
triangle inequality, see [ Sch06 , p18] for details. Hence for @xmath we
also have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

For (v), since we have @xmath it is immediate that @xmath for all @xmath
. ∎

###### Lemma 6.1.7.

Let @xmath be a commutative Banach ring. Then:

1.   if @xmath has @xmath then @xmath is invertible in @xmath ;

2.   for @xmath a proper ideal of @xmath the closure @xmath of @xmath ,
    as a subset of @xmath , is a proper ideal of @xmath ;

3.   each non-invertible element of @xmath is an element of some maximal
    ideal of @xmath . The maximal ideals of @xmath are proper, closed
    and prime.

###### Proof.

For (i), for @xmath with @xmath let @xmath be such that @xmath . Then
setting @xmath gives @xmath for all @xmath . Therefore we have @xmath
for each @xmath and so @xmath since @xmath is complete. Moreover

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Hence @xmath is invertible in @xmath since @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For (ii), let @xmath be a proper ideal of @xmath and @xmath its closure
as a subset. For @xmath there are sequences @xmath , @xmath of elements
of @xmath converging to @xmath and @xmath respectively with respect to
@xmath . Hence for @xmath , @xmath is a sequence in @xmath with @xmath
for each @xmath and so @xmath since @xmath . Similarly @xmath is a
sequence in @xmath with @xmath for each @xmath and so @xmath . Hence
@xmath is an ideal of @xmath . Now since @xmath is a proper ideal of
@xmath each element @xmath of the sequence @xmath is not invertible and
so @xmath for all @xmath by (i). Hence @xmath for all @xmath and so
@xmath for all @xmath giving @xmath . Hence @xmath is proper.
For (iii), let @xmath be a non-invertible element of @xmath noting that
we can always take @xmath . The principal ideal @xmath is proper since
for all @xmath , @xmath . By Zorn’s lemma @xmath is a subset of some
maximal ideal @xmath of @xmath . Every maximal ideal @xmath of @xmath is
proper and prime, noting that @xmath is a field or by other means, and
closed as a subset of @xmath by (ii). ∎

###### Remark 6.1.8.

We note that if @xmath is a commutative unital Banach @xmath -algebra
then Lemma 6.1.7 applies to @xmath and @xmath for each @xmath .

###### Lemma 6.1.9.

Let @xmath be a complete non-Archimedean field and let @xmath be a
commutative unital Banach @xmath -algebra with maximal ideal @xmath .
Let @xmath denote the set of all norms on the field @xmath that are also
unital bounded seminorms on @xmath as a Banach ring. That is if @xmath
is an element of @xmath then @xmath and @xmath conforms to Definition
6.1.3 except it need not be multiplicative merely sub-multiplicative. It
follows that:

1.   the set @xmath is non-empty;

2.   for @xmath , @xmath the completion of @xmath with respect to @xmath
    , @xmath and @xmath , if @xmath is non-invertible in @xmath then
    there is @xmath with @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Proof.

For (i), we note that the quotient norm @xmath is an element of @xmath
since (iii) of Lemma 6.1.7 shows that (ii), (iii) and (v) of Lemma 6.1.6
apply to @xmath .
For (ii), suppose that @xmath is non-invertible in @xmath . Then @xmath
is an element of some maximal ideal @xmath of @xmath by Lemma 6.1.7 .
Hence the quotient norm @xmath on @xmath is an element of @xmath by
Lemma 6.1.6 . Therefore since @xmath is closed and @xmath is a field,
@xmath , for @xmath , defines a norm on @xmath . Since @xmath is an
element of @xmath we have that @xmath is unital as a seminorm on @xmath
. Similarly since @xmath is bounded as a seminorm on @xmath we have for
all @xmath that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

noting that @xmath is an element of @xmath . Hence @xmath is bounded as
a seminorm on @xmath and so @xmath is an element of @xmath . Further
since @xmath is an element of @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally we have @xmath for all @xmath by ( 6.1.1 ). ∎

The following Lemma will be particularly useful in Section 6.2 .

###### Lemma 6.1.10.

Let @xmath be a complete non-Archimedean field and let @xmath be a
commutative unital Banach @xmath -algebra. With reference to Definition
6.1.4 the following holds:

1.   the set @xmath is non-empty since every maximal ideal of @xmath is
    an element of @xmath ;

2.   an element @xmath is invertible if and only if @xmath for all
    @xmath .

###### Proof.

Whilst this proof provides more detail, much of the following has been
taken from [ Ber90 , Ch1] . For (i), let @xmath be a maximal ideal of
@xmath . Hence the quotient ring @xmath is a field. Let @xmath be as in
Lemma 6.1.9 and note therefore that @xmath is non-empty. We put a
partial order on @xmath by @xmath if and only if @xmath for all @xmath .
Now let @xmath be a chain in @xmath , that is @xmath is a subset of
@xmath such that @xmath restricts to a total order on @xmath . Define a
map @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will show that @xmath is a lower bound for @xmath in @xmath . It is
immediate from the definition of @xmath that it is unital and bounded
since all of the elements of @xmath are. Hence it suffices to show that
@xmath is a sub-multiplicative norm on @xmath . Clearly @xmath so,
simplifying our notation slightly, let @xmath be an element of @xmath .
We show that @xmath . Let @xmath be an element of @xmath and suppose
towards a contradiction that there is @xmath such that @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence by the above we have @xmath and @xmath giving @xmath and @xmath
which contradicts both @xmath and @xmath being elements of @xmath .
Therefore for all @xmath we have @xmath . In particular @xmath . Now for
@xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where line @xmath follows from the line above it because if @xmath then
@xmath . Hence the triangle inequality holds for @xmath . Similarly we
have @xmath and so @xmath is sub-multiplicative as required. Hence
@xmath is a lower bound for @xmath in @xmath . Therefore by Zorn’s lemma
there exists a minimal element of @xmath with respect to @xmath . Let
@xmath be a minimal element of @xmath and denote by @xmath the
completion of @xmath with respect to @xmath . We will show that @xmath
is multiplicative on @xmath and hence satisfies (i) of Lemma 6.1.10 .
Note that for now we should only take @xmath to be an integral domain
and not a field since we can’t apply Theorem 2.1.4 .
Now since @xmath is a field @xmath will be multiplicative if @xmath for
all @xmath since for @xmath with @xmath we have @xmath giving @xmath and
since @xmath is sub-multiplicative we have @xmath . Hence we will show
that @xmath for all @xmath . To this end we first show that @xmath is
power multiplicative that is @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath . Suppose
towards a contradiction that there is @xmath with @xmath for some @xmath
. We claim that @xmath is non-invertible in the Banach ring @xmath with
@xmath . By Lemma 6.1.1 it suffices to show that the series @xmath does
not converge. Expressing @xmath as @xmath , for some @xmath , we have
@xmath and @xmath since @xmath . Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath for all @xmath . Therefore @xmath is non-invertible in
@xmath with @xmath . Now by Lemma 6.1.9 there exists @xmath such that
@xmath and @xmath for all @xmath . But, since @xmath , this gives @xmath
which contradicts @xmath being a minimal element of @xmath . Hence we
have shown that @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath .
Now suppose towards a contradiction that there exists an element @xmath
with @xmath . We claim that @xmath is non-invertible in @xmath with
@xmath . Again by Lemma 6.1.1 it suffices to show that the series @xmath
does not converge. Indeed since @xmath is power multiplicative we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath is non-invertible in @xmath with @xmath . Now again by
Lemma 6.1.9 there exists @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath for all
@xmath . But, since @xmath , this gives @xmath which contradicts @xmath
being a minimal element of @xmath . Hence we have shown that @xmath for
all @xmath and so @xmath is multiplicative. Finally @xmath is the kernel
of @xmath and as a maximal ideal of @xmath it is proper, closed and
prime by Lemma 6.1.7 . In particular since @xmath was an arbitrary
maximal ideal of @xmath every maximal ideal of @xmath is an element of
@xmath .
For (ii), for @xmath an invertible element of @xmath we have @xmath for
all @xmath since @xmath is a proper ideal of @xmath . Hence @xmath in
@xmath for all @xmath . On the other hand for @xmath a non-invertible
element of @xmath we have by Lemma 6.1.7 that @xmath is an element of a
maximal ideal @xmath of @xmath . By (i) above, @xmath is an element of
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath . Therefore for @xmath a non-invertible
element of @xmath we do not have @xmath in @xmath for all @xmath . ∎

With the preceding theory in place we can now turn our attention to the
main topic of this chapter.

### 6.2 Representations

#### 6.2.1 Established theorems

The particular well known representation theorems in the Archimedean
setting that we will find an analog of in the non-Archimedean setting
are as follows. See [ KL92 , p35] for details of Theorem 6.2.2 .

###### Theorem 6.2.1.

Let @xmath be a commutative unital complex Banach algebra with @xmath
for all @xmath . Then @xmath is isometrically isomorphic to a uniform
algebra on some compact Hausdorff space @xmath , in other words a @xmath
function algebra on @xmath .

###### Theorem 6.2.2.

Let @xmath be a commutative unital real Banach algebra with @xmath for
all @xmath . Then @xmath is isometrically isomorphic to a real function
algebra on some compact Hausdorff space @xmath with topological
involution @xmath on @xmath , in other words a @xmath function algebra
on @xmath .

We will now recall some of the theory behind Theorem 6.2.1 . For more
details see [ Sto71 , p29] or [ Gam69 , p4,p11] . The space @xmath is
the character space @xmath which as a set is the set of all non-zero,
complex-valued, multiplicative @xmath -linear functionals on @xmath . It
turns out that the characters on @xmath are all automatically
continuous. Note, in the case of Theorem 6.2.2 the functionals are
complex-valued but @xmath -linear and @xmath maps each such functional
to its complex conjugate. For a commutative unital complex Banach
algebra @xmath the Gelfand transform is a homomorphism from @xmath to a
space of complex valued functions @xmath defined by @xmath where @xmath
for all @xmath and @xmath . The topology on @xmath is the initial
topology given by the family of functions @xmath . Known in this case as
the Gelfand topology it is the weakest topology on @xmath such that all
the elements of @xmath are continuous giving @xmath . The norm given to
@xmath is the sup norm.
Now for a commutative unital complex Banach algebra @xmath the set of
maximal ideals of @xmath and the set of kernels of the elements of
@xmath agree. In Theorem 6.2.1 , @xmath being square preserving ensures
that @xmath is semisimple, that is that the Jacobson radical of @xmath
is @xmath where the Jacobson radical is the intersection of all maximal
ideals of @xmath and so the intersection of all the kernels of elements
of @xmath . Forcing @xmath to be semisimple ensures that the Gelfand
transform is injective since if @xmath is semisimple then the kernel of
the Gelfand transform is @xmath . Similarly to confirm that the Gelfand
transform is injective it is enough to show that it is an isometry.
Given Theorem 6.2.1 it is immediate that a commutative unital complex
Banach algebra @xmath is isometrically isomorphic to a uniform algebra
if and only if its norm is square preserving since the sup norm has this
property. Hence Theorem 6.2.1 provides a characterisation of uniform
algebras.
Now in the non-Archimedean setting Berkovich, the author of [ Ber90 ] ,
takes the following approach involving Definition 6.2.3 .

###### Definition 6.2.3.

Let @xmath be a complete non-Archimedean field and let @xmath be a
commutative unital Banach @xmath -algebra. Define @xmath to be the set
of all bounded multiplicative seminorms on @xmath . Further a character
on @xmath is a non-zero, multiplicative @xmath -linear functional on
@xmath that takes values in some complete field extending @xmath as a
valued field.

For an appropriate topology, @xmath plays the role for @xmath in
Definition 6.2.3 that the maximal ideal space, equivalently the
character space, plays in the Archimedean setting. For @xmath let @xmath
. Then @xmath is a proper closed prime ideal of @xmath . Hence the
quotient ring @xmath is an integral domain. Lemma 6.2.4 is useful here.

###### Lemma 6.2.4.

Let @xmath be a complete valued field and let @xmath be a commutative
unital Banach @xmath -algebra. For @xmath a bounded multiplicative
seminorm on @xmath with kernel @xmath the value @xmath of @xmath only
depends on the quotient class in @xmath to which @xmath belongs. Hence
@xmath is well defined when used as a valuation on @xmath by setting
@xmath . Further @xmath is a closed subset of @xmath .

###### Proof.

For @xmath and @xmath we have @xmath and @xmath hence @xmath as
required. Furthermore this also gives an easy way of seeing that @xmath
is a closed subset of @xmath . Let @xmath be an element of @xmath then
for all @xmath we have @xmath since @xmath is bounded and so @xmath is
closed. ∎

Now by Lemma 6.2.4 we can take @xmath to be a valuation on @xmath and
hence extend it to a valuation on the field of fractions @xmath . Hence
an element @xmath defines a character on @xmath by sending the elements
of @xmath to their image in the completion of @xmath with respect to
@xmath . With these details in place we have the following theorem by
Berkovich, see [ Ber90 , p157] .

###### Theorem 6.2.5.

Let @xmath be a complete non-Archimedean field. Let @xmath be a
commutative unital Banach @xmath -algebra with @xmath for all @xmath .
Suppose that all of the characters of @xmath take values in @xmath .
Then:

1.   the space @xmath is totally disconnected;

2.   the Gelfand transform gives an isomorphism from @xmath to @xmath .

As we move on to the next subsection it’s worth pointing out that the
Gelfand theory presented in [ Ber90 ] does not make use of any
definition such as that of @xmath function algebras.

#### 6.2.2 Motivation

For @xmath a commutative unital complex Banach algebra it is
straightforward to confirm that there is a one-one correspondence
between the elements of @xmath and the elements of the maximal ideal
space. Since @xmath is unital the complex constants are elements of
@xmath and for @xmath , @xmath restricts to the identity on @xmath .
Hence by the first isomorphism theorem for rings we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

showing that @xmath is a maximal ideal of @xmath . Therefore, by also
noting the prelude to Chapter 5 , the set of maximal ideals of @xmath
and the set of kernels of the elements of @xmath do indeed agree. It
remains to show that no two characters on @xmath have the same kernel
and this marks an important difference with the theory we are about to
present. First though let @xmath be elements of @xmath with @xmath . We
note that for each @xmath there is a unique @xmath representing the
quotient class @xmath by ( 6.2.1 ). Hence for some @xmath we have @xmath
giving

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so no two characters on @xmath have the same kernel.
Now let @xmath be a complete non-Archimedean field. We wish to identify
sufficient conditions for a commutative unital Banach @xmath -algebra to
be represented by some @xmath function algebra. In this respect the
following lemma is informative and motivates an appropriate choice of
character space in Subsection 6.2.3 .

###### Lemma 6.2.6.

For @xmath an @xmath function algebra on @xmath , where @xmath can be
Archimedean or non-Archimedean and @xmath is not assumed to be basic,
define a family of maps on @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then for each @xmath :

1.   the map @xmath is a bounded multiplicative seminorm on @xmath ;

2.   the kernel @xmath , which is the same as @xmath where @xmath is the
    evaluation character @xmath (f):=f(x) on @xmath , is not only a
    proper closed prime ideal of @xmath but it is also a maximal ideal;

3.   we have @xmath even if @xmath is not the identity and in general
    different evaluation characters can have the same kernel.

###### Proof.

For (i), it is immediate that @xmath is a bounded multiplicative
seminorm on @xmath since the norm on @xmath is the sup norm and @xmath
is a valuation on @xmath .
For (ii), it is immediate that @xmath is a proper ideal of @xmath noting
that @xmath . It remains to show that @xmath is a maximal ideal of
@xmath noting Lemma 6.1.7 . To this end we show that the quotient ring
@xmath is a field. We first note that @xmath and that @xmath is a ring
and so an integral domain. Further by the first isomorphism theorem for
rings we have @xmath and so @xmath contains an embedding of @xmath and
each element @xmath is an element of an algebraic extension of @xmath
since @xmath is a finite extension of @xmath . Therefore for @xmath with
@xmath we have by Lemma 2.2.19 that @xmath where @xmath is a simple
extension of @xmath and @xmath is the ring of polynomials over @xmath .
Hence, since @xmath , the inverse @xmath is an element of @xmath which
is therefore a field as required.
For (iii), we note that for all @xmath and @xmath we have @xmath since
@xmath is an element of @xmath . Further since @xmath we have @xmath if
and only if @xmath and so @xmath . However in general @xmath need not be
equal to @xmath and so different evaluation characters can have the same
kernel. ∎

#### 6.2.3 Representation under finite basic dimension

This subsection will involve the use of Definition 6.2.7 .

###### Definition 6.2.7.

Suppose @xmath and @xmath are extensions of a field @xmath such that
there exists an isomorphism @xmath with @xmath for all @xmath . Then
@xmath is called an @xmath - isomorphism and @xmath and @xmath are
called @xmath - isomorphic or with the same meaning @xmath - conjugate .
Similarly if @xmath is complete then we can talk of @xmath - isomorphic
Banach @xmath -algebras etc.

The following definition and theorem will be the focus of attention for
the rest of this chapter.

###### Definition 6.2.8.

Let @xmath be a complete valued field and let @xmath be a commutative
unital Banach @xmath -algebra. We say that @xmath has finite basic
dimension if there exists a finite extension @xmath of @xmath extending
@xmath as a valued field such that:

1.  for each proper closed prime ideal @xmath of @xmath , that is the
    kernel of a bounded multiplicative seminorm on @xmath , the field of
    fractions @xmath is @xmath -isomorphic to a subfield of @xmath ;

2.  there is @xmath with @xmath .

Cases where @xmath are allowed.

The purpose of Definition 6.2.8 is to generalise to the non-Archimedean
setting conditions that are innately present in the Archimedean case due
to the Gelfand Mazur theorem. We will discuss this in Remark 6.2.10 .

###### Theorem 6.2.9.

Let @xmath be a locally compact complete non-Archimedean field with
nontrivial valuation. Let @xmath be a commutative unital Banach @xmath
-algebra with @xmath for all @xmath and finite basic dimension. Then:

1.   for some finite extension @xmath of @xmath extending @xmath as a
    valued field, a character space @xmath of @xmath valued,
    multiplicative @xmath -linear functionals can be defined;

2.   the space @xmath is a totally disconnected compact Hausdorff space;

3.  @xmath is isometrically @xmath -isomorphic to a @xmath function
    algebra on @xmath for some @xmath .

###### Remark 6.2.10.

Concerning the condition of finite basic dimension.

1.  We first note that all commutative unital complex Banach algebras
    and commutative unital real Banach algebras have finite basic
    dimension. To see this let @xmath be such an algebra and let @xmath
    be a proper closed prime ideal of @xmath such that @xmath is the
    kernel of a bounded multiplicative seminorm @xmath on @xmath . Then,
    by Lemma 6.1.5 and Lemma 6.2.4 , @xmath extends the absolute
    valuation on @xmath to a valuation on the integral domain @xmath .
    Extending @xmath to a valuation on @xmath gives either @xmath or
    @xmath by the Gelfand Mazur theorem and noting Theorem 2.1.4 .
    Finally with consideration of @xmath the result follows. Hence we
    note that with little modification Theorem 6.2.1 , Theorem 6.2.2 and
    Theorem 6.2.9 could be combined into a single theorem.

2.  Now the argument in (i) was deliberately a little naive noting that
    for every commutative unital Banach @xmath -algebra @xmath with
    finite basic dimension the kernel of every bounded multiplicative
    seminorm on @xmath is a maximal ideal of @xmath . This follows
    easily from Lemma 2.2.19 since such a kernel @xmath is a proper
    closed prime ideal of @xmath and the elements of the quotient ring
    @xmath are algebraic over @xmath and so @xmath is a field.

3.  Finally if @xmath is a commutative unital Banach @xmath -algebra
    then in general the set of maximal ideals of @xmath is a subset of
    the set of kernels of bounded multiplicative seminorms on @xmath by
    Lemma 6.1.10 . Hence Theorem 6.2.9 might be strengthened if we can
    find a proof that accepts changing (i) in Definition 6.2.8 to the
    condition that for each maximal ideal @xmath of @xmath the field
    @xmath is @xmath -isomorphic to a subfield of @xmath . This is
    something for the future. The change only makes a difference for
    cases where there is a bounded multiplicative seminorm on @xmath
    with kernel @xmath such that @xmath has elements that are
    transcendental over @xmath since otherwise @xmath is a maximal ideal
    of @xmath .

###### Proof of Theorem 6.2.9.

Let @xmath be as in Definition 6.1.4 . Now @xmath has finite basic
dimension so for each @xmath the quotient ring @xmath is a field by
Remark 6.2.10 . Further there is a finite extension @xmath of @xmath
extending @xmath as a valued field such that for all @xmath the field
@xmath is @xmath -isomorphic to a subfield of @xmath . Moreover for
@xmath a bounded multiplicative seminorm on @xmath with kernel @xmath
the map @xmath , for @xmath , defines a valuation on @xmath extending
the valuation on @xmath by Lemma 6.2.4 and Lemma 6.1.5 . We note that
since @xmath and @xmath are both finite extensions of @xmath they are
complete valued fields. Further since @xmath is defined by a bounded
multiplicative seminorm on @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We now progress towards defining the character space of @xmath . Define
@xmath as the set of all pairs @xmath where @xmath and @xmath is an
@xmath -isomorphism from @xmath to a subfield of @xmath extending @xmath
. Then to each @xmath we associated a map @xmath given by @xmath for all
@xmath . Note that for each element @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

by the uniqueness of the valuation on @xmath extending the valuation on
@xmath , see Theorem 2.2.5 . In particular each @xmath -isomorphism from
@xmath to a subfield of @xmath extending @xmath is an isometry and
similarly we recall that each element of @xmath is isometric. Now for
the element @xmath with @xmath , or indeed any other element of @xmath ,
we note that @xmath can be considered as a map of finite order @xmath
given by @xmath . In particular for @xmath we have @xmath and so there
is @xmath with @xmath such that the diagram in Figure 6.1 commutes.

Note that in the case of Figure 6.1 the fields @xmath and @xmath are
@xmath -conjugate and could actually be the same subfield of @xmath if
the restriction @xmath is an element of @xmath . Now by construction for
each @xmath the map @xmath is a non-zero, @xmath -valued, multiplicative
@xmath -linear functional on @xmath . Hence @xmath is continuous since
we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

by ( 6.2.3 ) and ( 6.2.2 ). We now set up the Gelfand transform in the
usual manner by defining a map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the elements of @xmath are the functions @xmath given by @xmath .
We equip @xmath with the binary operations of pointwise addition and
multiplication and put the sup norm

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

on @xmath making @xmath a commutative unital normed @xmath -algebra.
Note that with these binary operations it is immediate that the Gelfand
transform is an @xmath -homomorphism and so @xmath is closed under
addition and multiplication. Later we will show that @xmath is an
isometry and so it is also injective. It then follows that @xmath is a
Banach @xmath -algebra since @xmath and @xmath are isometrically @xmath
-isomorphic.
Now we equip @xmath with the Gelfand topology which is the initial
topology of @xmath . Hence the elements of @xmath are continuous @xmath
-valued functions on the space @xmath . We show that @xmath separates
the points of @xmath and that @xmath is a compact Hausdorff space. Let
@xmath and @xmath be elements of @xmath with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
. If @xmath then there is @xmath such that @xmath for which precisely
one of @xmath and @xmath is zero. If @xmath then @xmath on @xmath .
Hence there is some @xmath such that @xmath giving

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so @xmath separates the points of @xmath . We now show that @xmath
is Hausdorff, note in fact that the proof is standard. Let @xmath and
@xmath be elements of @xmath with @xmath . Since @xmath separates the
points of @xmath there is @xmath such that @xmath . Further @xmath is
Hausdorff and so there are disjoint open subsets @xmath and @xmath of
@xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . Since the topology on @xmath is the
initial topology of @xmath the preimage @xmath is an open neighborhood
of @xmath in @xmath and the preimage @xmath is an open neighborhood of
@xmath in @xmath . Moreover @xmath and @xmath are disjoint because
@xmath and @xmath are, as required.
The following, showing that @xmath is compact, is an adaptation of part
of the proof of Theorem 6.2.2 from [ KL92 , p23] . For each @xmath
define @xmath and @xmath with the product topology. Each @xmath is
compact by Theorem 2.1.23 noting that @xmath is locally compact by
Remark 2.2.14 . Hence @xmath is compact by Tychonoff’s Theorem. Now by (
6.2.4 ) we have @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath . Therefore for each
@xmath we have @xmath and so @xmath is a point of @xmath and @xmath can
be considered as a subset of @xmath . Now the product topology on @xmath
is the initial topology of the family of coordinate projections @xmath ,
@xmath . Since we have @xmath the Gelfand topology on @xmath is the
initial topology of the family of coordinate projections restricted to
@xmath . Hence the topology on @xmath is the relative topology of @xmath
as a subspace of @xmath . Since @xmath is compact, any subspace of
@xmath that is closed as a subset is also compact. Hence it remains to
show that @xmath is a closed subset of @xmath . Let @xmath be in the
closure of @xmath . Hence we have @xmath for all @xmath and there is a
net @xmath in @xmath converging to @xmath . Now since @xmath has the
product topology, convergence in @xmath is coordinate-wise, see [ Wil04
, §8] . Therefore for @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly, @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath . Now since
@xmath takes values in @xmath and @xmath is a finite extension of @xmath
we have that @xmath is a subfield of @xmath extending @xmath by Lemma
2.2.19 . Hence since @xmath , by the first isomorphism theorem for
rings, the kernel of @xmath is a maximal ideal of @xmath . Therefore
@xmath is an element of @xmath . Further @xmath defines an @xmath
-isomorphism from @xmath to a subfield of @xmath extending @xmath by
@xmath . Hence we have obtained @xmath which is an element of @xmath
with @xmath and so @xmath is closed as a subset on @xmath .
We will now show that @xmath is continuous. The set of preimages

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a sub-base for the Gelfand topology on @xmath . To show that @xmath
is continuous it is enough to show that for each @xmath the preimage
@xmath is also an element of @xmath . We note that @xmath is a bijection
since @xmath has finite order. So let @xmath be an element of @xmath for
some @xmath and open @xmath . We have @xmath an element of @xmath if and
only if @xmath is an element of @xmath . Now consider the elements of
the preimage @xmath and note that they are the elements @xmath such that
@xmath . These are precisely the elements of @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

And so @xmath and since @xmath is an isometry on @xmath we note that
@xmath is an open subset of @xmath . Hence @xmath is an element of
@xmath as required.
We now show that the Gelfand transform is an isometry. Note that the
following adapts material that can be found in [ Ber90 , Ch1] . Let
@xmath be an element of @xmath . By ( 6.2.4 ) we have @xmath for all
@xmath and so @xmath . For the reverse inequality let @xmath and set
@xmath . Then for all @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for some @xmath by @xmath and noting that @xmath has finite basic
dimension. Now consider the commutative unital Banach @xmath -algebra
@xmath . Let @xmath be the set of all proper closed prime ideals of
@xmath that are the kernels of bounded multiplicative seminorms on
@xmath . Note that @xmath is non-empty by Lemma 6.1.10 . We recall that
the elements of @xmath are of the form @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath for all @xmath . Hence @xmath is a subring of @xmath since
for each @xmath we have @xmath an element of @xmath . Now for @xmath let
@xmath be a bounded multiplicative seminorm on @xmath with @xmath .
Since @xmath is bounded we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Moreover since for @xmath we have @xmath , the restriction @xmath is a
bounded multiplicative seminorm on @xmath . Further @xmath is closed as
a subset of @xmath by Lemma 6.2.4 and so @xmath is an element of @xmath
. Hence @xmath is a maximal ideal of @xmath by remark 6.2.10 . In
particular @xmath , for @xmath , is the unique valuation on @xmath
extending the valuation on @xmath as we have seen earlier in this proof
for other elements of @xmath . Therefore by ( 6.2.5 ) and ( 6.2.6 ) we
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore @xmath and so we have @xmath . Therefore @xmath is not an
element of @xmath since @xmath is the kernel of @xmath . Since @xmath
was any element of @xmath we have @xmath for all @xmath . Hence by Lemma
6.1.10 we note that @xmath is invertible in @xmath . Therefore by Lemma
6.1.1 the series @xmath converges. In particular we can find @xmath such
that for all @xmath we have @xmath giving @xmath since @xmath is square
preserving. Hence @xmath and since @xmath was arbitrary we have @xmath
and so @xmath as required.
What remains to be shown is that the elements of @xmath are also
elements of @xmath and that @xmath is totally disconnected. For @xmath
and @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and so @xmath is an element of @xmath . Finally it is immediate that
@xmath is totally disconnected since @xmath separates the points of
@xmath , the elements of @xmath are continuous functions from @xmath to
@xmath , the image of a connected component is connected for continuous
functions and @xmath is totally disconnected. In particular see the
proof of Theorem 4.2.1 . This completes the proof of Theorem 6.2.9 . ∎

In the next chapter we will survey some existing results in the
Archimedean non-commutative setting and also consider the possibility of
their generalisation to the non-Archimedean setting. We will then finish
by noting some of the open questions arising from the Thesis.

## Chapter 7 Non-commutative generalisation and open questions

In recent years a theory of non-commutative real function algebras has
been developed by Jarosz, see [ Jar08 ] and [ AJ04 ] . In the first
section of this short chapter we survey and remark upon some of this
non-commutative Archimedean theory and consider the possibility of
non-commutative non-Archimedean analogs. In the second section we note
some of the open questions arising from the thesis.

### 7.1 Non-commutative generalisation

#### 7.1.1 Non-commutative real function algebras

In the recent theory of non-commutative real function algebras the
continuous functions involved take values in Hamilton’s real
quaternions, @xmath , which are an example of a non-commutative complete
Archimedean division ring and @xmath -algebra. Viewing @xmath as a real
vector space, the valuation on @xmath is the Euclidean norm which is
complete, Archimedean and indeed a valuation since being multiplicative
on @xmath . To put @xmath into context, as in the case of complete
Archimedean fields, there are very few unital division algebras over the
reals with the Euclidean norm as a valuation. Up to isomorphism they are
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and the octonions @xmath . We note that the
octonions are non-associative. The proof that there are no other unital
division algebras over the reals with the Euclidean norm as a valuation
is given by Hurwitz’s 1, 2, 4, 8 Theorem, see [ Sha00 , Ch1] and [ Lew06
] . In particular for such an algebra @xmath the square of the Euclidean
norm is a regular quadratic form on @xmath and since for @xmath the
Euclidean norm is a valuation it is multiplicative. This shows that
@xmath is a real composition algebra to which Hurwitz’s 1, 2, 4, 8
Theorem can be applied.
Here we only briefly consider non-commutative real function algebras and
hence the reader is also referred to [ Jar08 ] . Note I am unaware of
any such developments involving the octonions. Here is Jarosz’s analog
of @xmath from Definition 4.2.5 .

###### Definition 7.1.1.

Let @xmath be the group of all automorphisms on @xmath that are the
identity on @xmath . Let @xmath be a compact space and @xmath be the
group of homeomorphisms on @xmath . For a group homomorphism @xmath ,
@xmath , we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark 7.1.2.

Concerning Definition 7.1.1 .

1.  The groups @xmath and @xmath in Definition 7.1.1 have composition as
    their group operation. We note that the map @xmath given by @xmath
    is similar to a group action on @xmath only with the usual
    associativity replaced by @xmath .

2.  There is an interesting similarity between Definition 7.1.1 and
    Definition 5.1 of Basic function algebras. Let @xmath be a compact
    Hausdorff space, @xmath a complete valued field and @xmath a finite
    extension of @xmath . Further let @xmath be the cyclic group
    generated by some @xmath and similarly let @xmath be the cyclic
    group generated by some homeomorphism @xmath . Then there exists a
    surjective group homomorphism @xmath if and only if @xmath . To see
    this suppose such a surjective group homomorphism exists. Then there
    are @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . This gives

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

    and so @xmath . Conversely if @xmath then @xmath defined by @xmath
    will do. It is an interesting question then whether the definition
    of basic function algebras can be further generalised by utilizing
    group homomorphisms as Definition 7.1.1 suggests noting that @xmath
    is onto for some subgroup of @xmath . In particular, with reference
    to Definition 5.1 , we have considered basic @xmath function
    algebras where @xmath is an element of @xmath . We note that @xmath
    is a cyclic extension of @xmath by the fundamental theorem of Galois
    theory. Therefore it is interesting to consider the possibility of
    basic @xmath function algebras where @xmath is a Galois extension of
    @xmath but not necessarily a cyclic extension. Such group
    homomorphisms might also be useful in cases involving infinite
    extensions of @xmath .

3.  Turning our attention back to the non-commutative setting, as a
    conjecture I suggests that Definition 7.1.1 may also be useful if
    @xmath is replaced by a subgroup, particularly when considering
    extensions of the algebra.

Definition 7.1.1 has been used by Jarosz in the representation of
non-commutative real Banach algebras with square preserving norm as
follows.

###### Definition 7.1.3.

A real algebra @xmath is fully non-commutative if every nonzero
multiplicative, linear functional @xmath is surjective.

###### Theorem 7.1.4.

Let @xmath be a non-commutative real Banach algebra with @xmath for all
@xmath . Then there is a compact set @xmath and an isomorphism @xmath
such that @xmath is isometrically isomorphic with a subalgebra @xmath of
@xmath . Furthermore @xmath is invertible if and only if the
corresponding element @xmath does not vanish on @xmath . If @xmath is
fully non-commutative then @xmath .

Jarosz also gives the following Stone-Weierstrass theorem type result.

###### Theorem 7.1.5.

Let @xmath be a compact Hausdorff space and let @xmath be a fully
non-commutative closed subalgebra of @xmath . Then @xmath if and only if
@xmath strongly separates the points of @xmath , that is for all @xmath
with @xmath there is @xmath satisfying @xmath .

#### 7.1.2 Non-commutative non-Archimedean analogs

Non-commutative, non-Archimedean analogs of uniform algebras have yet to
be seen. Hence in this subsection we give an example of a
non-commutative extension of a complete non-Archimedean field which
would be appropriate when considering such analogs of uniform algebras.
We first have the following definition from the general theory of
quaternion algebras. The main reference for this subsection is [ Lam05 ,
Ch3] but [ Lew06 ] is also useful.

###### Definition 7.1.6.

Let @xmath be a field, with characteristic not equal to 2, and @xmath
where @xmath is allowed. We define the quaternion @xmath -algebra @xmath
as follows. As a 4-dimensional vector space over @xmath we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath as a natural basis giving the standard coordinate-wise
addition and scalar multiplication. As an @xmath -algebra,
multiplication in @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

together with the usual distributive law and multiplication in @xmath .

Hamilton’s real quaternions, @xmath with the Euclidean norm, is an
example of a non-commutative, complete valued, Archimedean division
algebra over @xmath . It is not the case that every quaternion algebra
@xmath will be a division algebra, although there are many examples that
are. For our purposes we have the following example.

###### Example 7.1.7.

Using @xmath , the complete non-Archimedean field of 5-adic numbers,
define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then for @xmath , @xmath , the conjugation on @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is such that @xmath , @xmath , @xmath with @xmath . Further

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a complete non-Archimedean valuation on @xmath , where @xmath is the
5-adic valuation on @xmath . In particular @xmath , together with @xmath
, is an example of a non-commutative, complete valued, non-Archimedean
division algebra over @xmath . When showing this directly it is useful
to know that for @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the 5-adic valuation logarithm as defined in Example
2.1.18 . Given the above, we will confirm that @xmath is multiplicative.
For more details please see the suggested references [ Lam05 , Ch3] and
[ Lew06 ] . Let @xmath and note that we have @xmath since @xmath is an
element of @xmath . Therefore

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

as required.

More generally for the @xmath -adic field @xmath the quaternion algebra
@xmath will be a division algebra as long as @xmath is a unit of @xmath
, i.e. @xmath , and @xmath is a quadratic extension of @xmath .

### 7.2 Open questions

There are many open questions related to the content of this thesis and
I had intended to investigate more of them but there was no time. Many
of these questions come from the need to generalise established
Archimedean results whilst others arise from the developing theory
itself. We now consider some of these questions and note that several of
them appear to be quite accessible.

1.  J. Wermer gave the following theorem in 1963.

    ###### Theorem 7.2.1.
    Let @xmath be a compact Hausdorff space, @xmath a complex uniform
    algebra and @xmath the set of the real components of the functions
    in @xmath . If @xmath is a ring then @xmath .

    The following analog of Theorem 7.2.1 for real function algebras was
    given by S. H. Kulkarni and N. Srinivasan in [ KS90 ] , although I
    have not used their notation.

    ###### Theorem 7.2.2.
    Let @xmath be a compact Hausdorff space, @xmath a topological
    involution on @xmath and @xmath a @xmath function algebra on @xmath
    , i.e. a real function algebra. If @xmath is a ring then @xmath .

    It is interesting to know whether Theorem 7.2.2 can be generalised
    to all @xmath function algebras on @xmath . Of course the result
    would be trivial if, in the non-Archimedean setting, the basic
    @xmath function algebra on @xmath is the only @xmath function
    algebra on @xmath . With analogy to @xmath above, in this case we
    should ask whether the set of @xmath components of the functions in
    @xmath form a ring.

2.  As alluded to in (Q1) we have not given an example in the
    non-Archimedean setting of a @xmath function algebra on @xmath that
    is not basic. We need to know whether the basic function algebras
    are the only such examples. Theorem 4.2.3 , Kaplansky’s version of
    the Stone Weierstrass Theorem, may be important here. Further even
    if in the non-Archimedean setting there is a @xmath function algebra
    on @xmath that is not basic, such an algebra might still be
    isometrically isomorphic to some Basic function algebras.

3.  With reference to Theorem 6.2.9 we note that there are plenty of
    examples of commutative, unital Banach @xmath -algebras with finite
    basic dimension in the non-Archimedean setting. Indeed if @xmath is
    not only a finite Galois extension of @xmath but also a cyclic
    extension then taking @xmath gives such an algebra. In this case the
    character space @xmath will be finite with each element given by an
    element of @xmath , see the proof of Theorem 6.2.9 for details.
    However such examples are not particularly interesting and it would
    be good to know whether all @xmath function algebras on @xmath have
    finite basic dimension so that Theorem 6.2.9 becomes closer to a
    characterisation result. We recall that all commutative unital
    complex Banach algebras and commutative unital real Banach algebras
    have finite basic dimension, see Remark 6.2.10 .

4.  With reference to Definition 5.1 of the basic @xmath function
    algebra on @xmath the map @xmath on @xmath is such that each @xmath
    is an element of @xmath if and only if @xmath . We have seen that
    @xmath is either an algebraic involution on @xmath or a algebraic
    element of finite order on @xmath . It should be established whether
    every such involution and element of finite order on @xmath has the
    form of @xmath for some @xmath and @xmath . This is the case for
    real function algebras, see [ KL92 , p29] .

5.  As described in Remark 7.1.2 it might be possible to generalise the
    definition of Basic function algebras by involving a group
    homomorphism in the definition. The algebras currently given by
    Definition 5.1 could then appropriately be referred to as cyclic
    basic function algebras given that the group @xmath is cyclic.
    Further the possibility of generalising the definition of Basic
    function algebras to the case where the functions take values in
    some infinite extension of the underlying field over which the
    algebra is a vector space should also be considered. The involvement
    of a group homomorphism might also be useful in this case as well as
    some more of the theory from [ Ber90 ] .

6.  As seen in Subsection 7.1.2 the general theory of quaternion
    algebras provides the necessary structures for generalising the
    theory of non-commutative real function algebras to the
    non-Archimedean setting. Further with reference to Subsection 5.4.1
    it would be interesting to see what sort of lattice of basic
    extensions the non-commutative real function algebras have. We can
    also look at this in the non-Archimedean setting along with the
    residue algebra.

7.  A proof of the following theorem can be found in [ KL92 , p18] .

    ###### Theorem 7.2.3.
    Let @xmath be a unital Banach algebra in the Archimedean setting
    satisfying one of the following conditions:

    1.   the algebra @xmath is a complex algebra and there exists some
        positive constant @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath ;

    2.   the algebra @xmath is a real algebra and there exists some
        positive constant @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath with
        @xmath .

    Then @xmath is commutative.

    It would be interesting to establish whether there is such a theorem
    for all unital Banach @xmath -algebras. If not then perhaps some
    special cases are possible in the non-Archimedean setting. The proof
    of theorem 7.2.3 uses Liouville’s theorem and some spectral theory
    in the Archimedean setting. Both of these are different in the
    non-Archimedean setting, see Theorem 3.1.9 and Subsection 3.2.1 .

8.  It might be interesting to investigate the isomorphism classes of
    basic function algebras. That is for a given basic function algebra
    @xmath are there other basic function algebras that are
    isometrically isomorphic to @xmath .

9.  It is interesting to consider whether the Kaplansky spectrum of
    Remark 3.2.13 can be used for some cases in the non-Archimedean
    setting and, if so, whether it is one such definition in some larger
    family of definitions of spectrum applicable in the non-Archimedean
    setting.

10. More broadly the established theory of Banach algebras provides a
    large supply of topics that can be considered for generalisation
    over complete valued fields. In addition to several of the other
    references included in this thesis [ Dal00 ] will be of much
    interest when considering such possibilities. One obvious example is
    the generalisation of automatic continuity results. That is what
    conditions on a Banach @xmath -algebra force homomorphisms from, or
    to, that algebra to be continuous. There is one such result in this
    thesis noting that in Theorem 6.2.9 the elements of @xmath are
    automatically continuous. Further [ BBN73 ] may also be of interest
    concerning function algebras.

11. As mentioned in Remark 4.1.20 there is a possible generalisation of
    the Swiss cheese classicalisation theorem to the Riemann sphere and
    possibly to a more general class of metric spaces.

12. It might be interesting to consider generalising over all complete
    valued fields the theory of algebraic extensions of commutative
    unital normed algebras. See the survey paper [ Daw03 ] for details.

13. The possibility of generalising @xmath -Algebras over complete
    valued fields is interesting but perhaps not straightforward. The
    Levi-Civita field might be of interest here since it is totally
    ordered such that the order topology agrees with the valuation
    topology. Hence it might be possible to define positive elements in
    this case. Perhaps the algebraic elements of finite order mentioned
    in (Q4) are relevant. Also there is a monograph by Goodearl from
    1982 that considers real @xmath -Algebras that might be of use. The
    possibility of a non-Archimedean theory of Von Neumann algebras
    might also be a good place to start.