In this thesis we study early universe in the frame work of M theory. We
assume that the early universe is homogeneous, anisotropic, and is
dominated by the mutually BPS intersecting branes of M theory. Certain
class of black holes can be described by string/M theory have similar
structure of intersecting BPS branes configurations. We are motivated by
such black holes to make a similar model for early universe.

But due to the lack of knowledge of the exact brane dynamics, we use U
duality symmetry of the M theory to get an equation of states. We also
verify the equations of states obtained by duality also hold for known
case like black holes. Then we solve Einstein equations to get evolution
of early universe.

In particular We assume that the early universe is homogeneous,
anisotropic, and is dominated by the mutually BPS @xmath intersecting
branes of M theory. The spatial directions are all taken to be toroidal.
Using analytical and numerical methods, we study the evolution of such
an universe. We find that, asymptotically, three spatial directions
expand to infinity and the remaining spatial directions reach stabilised
values. From string theory perspective, the dilaton is hence stabilised
also. We give a physical description of the stabilisation mechanism.

Any stabilised values can be obtained by a fine tuning of initial brane
densities. The constant sizes depend on certain imbalance among initial
values. One naturally obtains @xmath within a few orders of magnitude.
Smaller numbers, for example @xmath , are also possible but require fine
tuning.

In some sense our @xmath configuration is special. We give some example
of other configurations for which stabilisation can not be achieved. We
give their asymptotic time evolution. We find only @xmath and its U dual
configuration can achieved stabilisation of 7 spacelike dimensions.

Also, from the perspective of four dimensional spacetime, the effective
four dimensional Newtonâ€™s constant @xmath is now time varying. Its time
dependence will follow from explicit solutions. We find in the present
case that, asymptotically, @xmath exhibits characteristic log periodic
oscillations.
