###### Contents

-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 Background
    -    1.2 Preliminaries
    -    1.3 Present Work
    -    1.4 Organisation of the Thesis
-    2 Black Holes and Duality in M-Theory and String Theory
    -    2.1 Black Brane Energy Momentum Tensor and Solutions
    -    2.2 General Black Brane solutions
    -    2.3 Energy-Momentum Tensor of Black Brane Solution
        -    2.3.1 @xmath Branes
        -    2.3.2 BPS Intersection of 2 Sets of @xmath Branes
        -    2.3.3 @xmath Branes
        -    2.3.4 BPS Intersection of @xmath Branes and @xmath Branes
        -    2.3.5 Non-BPS Intersection of Branes
    -    2.4 @xmath Black Holes
    -    2.5 U Duality Relations In M Theory
    -    2.6 Application of U duality relations in Black Holes
    -    2.7 S and T Dualities in String Theory
-    3 Evolution of Early Universe
    -    3.1 Equations of Motion for Our Cosmological Model
    -    3.2 Equations of States as Consequence of U Duality
    -    3.3 A General Result
    -    3.4 Ansatz for @xmath
    -    3.5 General Analysis of Evolution Equations
        -    3.5.1 @xmath Case
        -    3.5.2 @xmath Case
            -    3.5.2.1 Asymptotic evolution: @xmath
            -    3.5.2.2 Asymptotic evolution: @xmath
        -    3.5.3 Deviations from @xmath Asymptotics
    -    3.6 Intersecting Branes
        -    3.6.1 Evolution Equations
        -    3.6.2 @xmath Case
    -    3.7 Asymptotic Evolution
        -    3.7.1 Asymptotic Evolution: @xmath
        -    3.7.2 Asymptotic Evolution: @xmath
    -    3.8 Mechanism of Stabilisation
    -    3.9 Stabilised Sizes of Brane Directions
    -    3.10 Discussion with Other Intersecting Configurations
    -    3.11 Time Varying Newton’s Constant
    -    3.12 Numerical Results
    -    3.13 Summary and Conclusions
-    A T and S duality rules
    -    A.1 T duality rules for background fields
    -    A.2 S duality rules for background fields
-    B BPS Intersection Rules
-    C To Show @xmath
-    D Signs and non vanishing of @xmath
-    E Set of @xmath which maximises @xmath

###### List of Figures

-    3.1 The plots of @xmath with respect to @xmath . The lines continue
    with no further crossings for negative values of @xmath not shown in
    the figure. All @xmath diverge at @xmath . All figures in this
    thesis are for the data set (3) given in Tables 3.7 and 3.8 .
-    3.2 (a), (b) The magnified plots of @xmath with respect to @xmath
    for @xmath and for @xmath showing the continually criss-crossing
    evolution of @xmath . Near @xmath , these crossings are well
    described by equation ( 3.106 ).
-    3.3 The plots of @xmath with respect to @xmath . The lines, from
    top to bottom at the right most end, correspond to @xmath . @xmath
    all stabilise to constant values as @xmath .
-    3.4 The plots of @xmath with respect to @xmath . The seven
    dimensional volume of the brane directions @xmath . The evolution of
    @xmath as @xmath is same as that of the corresponding ones in a four
    dimensional radiation dominated FRW universe.
-    3.5 (a), (b) The magnified plots of @xmath with respect to @xmath
    for @xmath and for @xmath showing log periodic oscillations and the
    internode separation which is @xmath .

###### List of Tables

-    3.1 Table for various type of intersection vs @xmath , for @xmath .
-    3.2 Table for various type of intersection vs @xmath , for @xmath .
-    3.3 Table for various type of intersection vs @xmath , for @xmath .
-    3.4 Table for various type of intersection vs @xmath , for @xmath .
-    3.5 Table for various type of intersection vs @xmath , for @xmath .
-    3.6 Table for various type of intersection vs @xmath , for @xmath .
-    3.7 The initial values @xmath and the resulting values of @xmath ,
    @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . The values in the last four columns
    have been rounded off to two decimal places.
-    3.8 The initial values of @xmath for the data shown in Table 3.7 ,
    tabulated here up to overall positive constants. These constants and
    the remaining @xmath s are to be fixed as explained in the text.
-    B.1 BPS intersections in 10 dimensions.
-    B.2 BPS intersections in 11 dimensions.

## Chapter 1 Introduction

### 1.1 Background

In physics one of the problems, mankind has been wondering for all time
is “how universe evolves?” In last century advancement of physics gave
us enormous amount of knowledge to address such question in a scientific
framework. So the study of evolution of universe began, which is known
as cosmology .

It is understood that gravity plays main role in evolution of universe,
because it is long ranged and unlike electromagnetic force, it is only
attractive. After the discovery of general relativity people understand
that, spacetime has a rich geometric structure and is dynamic in nature.
This dynamics is governed by Einstein equation.

It is assumed in cosmology that spacetime is homogeneous and isotropic.
On the basis of this fact a well known model has been made after the
work of Friedmann, Robertson and Walker. This is known as FRW model. In
this model matter is taken as homogeneous and isotropic fluids
distributed over the whole space like surface. FRW model is very
successful to describe universe for large interval of time , except very
early universe, and possibly present day universe (late time
acceleration).

Another striking discovery in physics of last century is quantum
mechanics. It describes motion of atom and subatomic particle with
extraordinary precision. Nevertheless GR, the theory of gravity is
classical. So a challenge posed to physicist is to make a quantum theory
of gravity. Toward the end of last century string/M theory [ 1 , 2 , 3 ]
emerges as the most promising candidate for quantum gravity.

String/M -theory unifies all the forces of the nature. In string theory
fundamental building blocks of nature are one or higher dimensional
objects, (open and closed string – 1 dimensional, @xmath -branes –
@xmath dimensional, @xmath -branes – 5 dimensional) instead of point
like particle. In M-theory there are two types of objects @xmath brane
and @xmath branes which are 2 and 5 dimensional object respectively. But
a new problem appears in this new theory – spacetime now become higher
dimensional. In string theory spacetime is @xmath dimensional and in M
theory spacetime is @xmath dimensional. On the other hand the large
spacetime we observe is @xmath . So other 7 dimensions of M theory must
be curled up to a very tiny scale, beyond the reach of present day
experiment. So now cosmology has to explain evolution of all 10 space
like dimension and how dynamically 7 of them stabilised whereas other 3
continues to expand. We studied this problem in this thesis.

### 1.2 Preliminaries

M theory is a 11 dimensional theory which consists of @xmath branes and
@xmath branes. Various string theories are various limits of M theory.
Until very recently almost nothing was known about full quantum
mechanics of M-branes. Even now we do not have any clear idea. But
11-dimensional supergravity which is supposed to be low energy limit of
M theory is well understood.

11 dim supergravity is basically a theory of gravity with super
symmetry. It is governed by the action

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Where @xmath is a 4 form field strength such that, @xmath . @xmath is
fermionic part of the action and @xmath is Chern-Simon term. @xmath
brane and @xmath brane are respectively, electrically and magnetically
charged under @xmath . This theory contains black hole solutions. Black
holes are made of stacks of @xmath or @xmath branes or intersecting
combination of them. These black hole solutions of single @xmath branes
or @xmath branes preserve all dynamical supersymmetries, that is half of
the supersymmetries of the action. For intersection, if they follow
certain rules then they also preserve same amount of supersymmetries.
These configurations are called BPS configuration. This black hole
solutions are well known and will be discussed in some details in later
chapter. We are motivated by this black hole set up to make a model for
early universe.

Another novel feature of M theory is duality symmetries. For details of
this duality see for example [ 4 , 2 , 5 ] . M theory, compactified on
one of the ten space like dimension gives type IIA string theory. In
string theory there are S and T duality which connect various string
theories. For example T duality on type IIA theory transforms it to a
type IIB theory and vice versa.

Unlike point partials closed string can wind aground compact direction.
So beside momentum it has another quantum number called winding number.
Let @xmath and @xmath be the momentum and winding of a closed string. It
wraps a compact direction of radius @xmath . Then T duality is a
symmetry where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Where @xmath is string length. In case of open string T duality
transforms a @xmath brane @xmath or @xmath depending on whether T
duality is applied along the brane direction or normal to it
respectively. In this case also @xmath .

In type IIB string theory there is another symmetry called S duality.
This is a symmetry between strong coupling and weak coupling. That is
under S duality @xmath .

Those symmetries also hold in supergravity level, in some cases with a
slightly larger symmetry group. When 11 dimensional supergravity
compactified on an @xmath , it gives type IIA supergravity. Which is
governed by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Where @xmath is dilaton, a scalar field which comes from compactified
dimension of M theory. @xmath is NS-NS 3-form field strength and @xmath
’s are R-R field strength. @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is Chern-Simons term, given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is the action for fermionic fields.

This theory contains @xmath branes with @xmath even. They are charged
under RR fields, @xmath . Under T duality IIA SuGra becomes IIB SuGra
theory. IIB theory also contains @xmath branes with @xmath odd. Again S
duality is a symmetry of IIB theory with symmetry group @xmath . Under
these duality operations metric, NS-NS and R-R fields changes. In
Appendix A we listed the rules for this changes.

### 1.3 Present Work

In early universe, temperatures and densities reach Planckian scales.
Its description then requires a quantum theory of gravity. A promising
candidate for such a theory is string/M theory. When the temperatures
and densities reach string/M theory scales, the appropriate description
is expected to be given in terms of highly energetic and highly
interacting string/M theory excitations [ 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 ,
13 , 14 , 15 ] . ¹ ¹ 1 Only string theory is considered in these
references. But their arguments can be extended for M theory also
leading to similar conclusions. In this context, it has been proposed in
an earlier work an entropic principle according to which the final
spacetime configuration that emerges from such high temperature string/M
theory phase is the one that has maximum entropy for a given energy.
This principle implies, under certain assumptions, that the number of
large spacetime dimensions is @xmath [ 15 ] .

High densities and high temperatures also arise near black hole
singularities. In string theory black holes are made of branes. These
branes have their excitations. So in terms of this excitations black
holes have temperature. Since branes stays near singularity, high
temperature of black holes near singularity has meaning. Therefore, it
is reasonable to expect that the string/M theory configurations which
describe such regions of black holes will describe the early universe
also.

Consider the case of black holes. Various properties of a class of black
holes have been successfully described using mutually BPS intersecting
configurations of string/M theory branes. ² ² 2 Mutually BPS
intersecting configurations means, for example, that in M theory two
stacks of 2 branes intersect at a point; two stacks of 5 branes
intersect along three common spatial directions; a stack of 2 branes
intersect a stack of 5 branes along one common spatial direction; waves,
if present, will be along a common intersection direction; and each
stack of branes is smeared uniformly along the other brane directions.
See [ 16 ] for more details and for other such string/M theory
configurations. Black hole entropies are calculated from counting
excitations of such configurations, and Hawking radiation is calculated
from interactions between them.

In the extremal limit, such brane configurations consist of only branes
and no antibranes. In the near extremal limit, they consist of a small
number of antibranes also. It is the interaction between branes and
antibranes which give rise to Hawking radiation. String theory
calculations are tractable and match those of Bekenstein and Hawking in
the extremal and near extremal limits. But they are not tractable in the
far extremal limit where the numbers of branes and antibranes are
comparable. However, even in the far extremal limit, black hole dynamics
is expected to be described by mutually BPS intersecting brane
configurations where they now consist of branes, antibranes, and other
excitations living on them, all at non zero temperature and in dynamical
equilibrium with each other [ 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25
, 26 ] . For the sake of brevity, we will refer to such far extremal
configurations also as brane configurations even though they may now
consist of branes and antibranes, left moving and right moving waves,
and other excitations.

The entropy @xmath of N stacks of mutually BPS intersecting brane
configurations, in the limit where @xmath , is expected to be given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , denote the numbers of branes and
antibranes of @xmath type, @xmath is the total energy, and the second
expression applies for the charge neutral case where @xmath for all
@xmath . The proof for this expression is given by comparing it in
various limits with the entropy of the corresponding black holes [ 17 ,
18 ] , see also [ 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 ,
28 ] . For @xmath and when other calculable factors omitted here are
restored, this expression matches that for the corresponding black holes
in the extremal and near extremal limit and, in the models based on that
of Danielsson et al [ 19 ] , matches upto a numerical factor in the far
extremal limit [ 17 ] – [ 28 ] also. However, no such proof exists for
@xmath since no analogous object, black hole or otherwise, is known
whose entropy is @xmath with @xmath .

Note that, in the limit of large @xmath , the entropy @xmath is @xmath
for radiation in a finite volume and is @xmath for strings in the
Hagedorn regime. In comparison, the entropy given in ( 1.6 ) is much
larger when @xmath . This is because the branes in the mutually BPS
intersecting brane configurations form bound states, become fractional,
³ ³ 3 Fractionation of branes states is familiar phenomena in string
theory [ 29 ] , see also [ 30 ] . Consider for example a string of
length @xmath with an wave on it. it wraps a compact direction @xmath
times. Each cycle has a length say @xmath , so @xmath . Total momentum
of the wave say @xmath . This momentum can be distributed all of these
cycles. So strings along each of these cycles behaves like a fractional
string and total entropy, @xmath . This is called fractionation. Similar
thing happens in branes also. and support very low energy excitations
which lead to a large entropy. Thus, for a given energy, such brane
configurations are highly entropic.

Another novel consequence of fractional branes is the following.
According to the ‘fuzz ball’ picture for black holes [ 30 ] , the
fractional branes arising from the bound states formed by intersecting
brane configurations have non trivial transverse spatial extensions due
to quantum dynamics. The size of their transverse extent is of the order
of Schwarzschild radius of the black holes. Therefore, essentially, the
region inside the ‘horizon’ of the black hole is not empty but is filled
with fuzz ball whose fuzz arise from the quantum dynamics of fractional
strings/branes.

Chowdhury and Mathur have recently extended the fuzz ball picture to the
early universe [ 27 , 28 ] . They have argued that the early universe is
filled with fractional branes arising from the bound states of the
intersecting brane configurations, and that the brane configurations
with highest @xmath are entropically favourable, see equation ( 1.6 ).

However, as mentioned below equation ( 1.6 ) and noted also in [ 27 , 28
] , the entropy expression in ( 1.6 ) is proved in various limits for
@xmath only and no proof exists for @xmath . Also, we are not certain of
the existence of any system whose entropy @xmath is parametrically
larger than @xmath for large @xmath . See related discussions in [ 31 ,
32 ] . Therefore, in the following we will assume that @xmath . Then, a
homogeneous early universe in string/M theory may be taken to be
dominated by the maximum entropic @xmath brane configurations
distributed uniformly in the common transverse space.

Such @xmath mutually BPS intersecting brane configurations in the early
universe may then provide a concrete realisation of the entropic
principle proposed earlier by one of us to determine the number @xmath
of large spacetime dimensions [ 15 ] . Indeed, in further works [ 31 ,
32 , 33 , 34 ] , using M theory symmetries and certain natural
assumptions, it has been shown that these configurations lead to three
spatial directions expanding and the remaining seven spatial directions
stabilising to constant sizes.

In this thesis, we assume that the early universe in M theory is
homogeneous and anisotropic and that it is dominated by @xmath mutually
BPS intersecting brane configurations. ⁴ ⁴ 4 There is an enormous amount
of work on the study of early universe in string/M theory. For a small,
non exhaustive, sample of such works, see [ 35 , 36 , 37 , 38 , 39 , 40
, 41 , 42 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 ] . In this context, it is natural to
assume that all spatial directions are on equal footing to begin with.
Therefore we assume that the ten dimensional space is toroidal. We then
present a thorough analysis of the evolution of such an universe.

The corresponding energy momentum tensor @xmath has been calculated in [
27 ] under certain assumptions. However, general relations among the
components of @xmath may be obtained [ 32 ] using U duality symmetries
of M theory which are, therefore, valid more generally. We show in this
thesis that these U duality relations alone imply, under a technical
assumption, that the @xmath mutually BPS intersecting brane
configurations with identical numbers of branes and antibranes will
asymptotically lead to an effective @xmath dimensional expanding
universe.

In order to proceed further, and to obtain the details of the evolution,
we make further assumptions about @xmath . We then analyse the evolution
equations in D dimensions in general, and then specialise to the eleven
dimensional case of interest here.

We are unable to solve explicitly the relevant equations. However,
applying the general analysis mentioned above, we describe the
qualitative features of the evolution of the @xmath brane configuration.
In the asymptotic limit, three spatial directions expand as in the
standard FRW universe and the remaining seven spatial directions reach
constant, stabilised values. These values depend on the initial
conditions and can be obtained numerically. Also, we find that any
stabilised values may be obtained, but requires a fine tuning of the
initial brane densities.

Using the analysis given here, we present a physical description of the
mechanism of stabilisation of the seven brane directions. The
stabilisation is due, in essence, to the relations among the components
of @xmath which follow from U duality symmetries, and to each of the
brane directions in the @xmath configuration being wrapped by, and being
transverse to, just the right number and kind of branes. This mechanism
is very different from the ones proposed in string theory or in brane
gas models [ 37 ] – [ 40 ] to obtain large @xmath dimensional spacetime.
(See section I A below also.)

In the asymptotic limit, the eleven dimensional universe being studied
here can also be considered from the perspective of four dimensional
spacetime. One then obtains an effective four dimensional Newton’s
constant @xmath which is now time varying. Its precise time dependence
will follow from explicit solutions of the eleven dimensional evolution
equations.

We find that, in the case of @xmath brane configuration, @xmath has a
characteristic asymptotic time dependence : the fractional deviation
@xmath of @xmath from its asymptotic value exhibits log periodic
oscillations given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The proportionality constant and the phase angle @xmath depend on
initial conditions and matching details of the asymptotics, but the
exponents @xmath and @xmath depend only on the configuration parameters.
Such log periodic oscillations seem to be ubiquitous and occur in a
variety of physical systems [ 48 , 49 , 50 ] . But, to our knowledge,
this is the first time it appears in a cosmological context. One expects
such a behaviour to leave some novel imprint in the late time universe,
but its implications are not clear to us.

Since we are unable to solve the evolution equations explicitly, we
analyse them using numerical methods. We present the results of the
numerical analysis of the evolution. We illustrate the typical evolution
of the scale factors showing stabilisation and the log periodic
oscillations mentioned above. By way of illustration, we choose a few
sets of initial values and present the resulting values for the sizes of
the stabilised directions and ratios of the string/M theory scales to
the effective four dimensional scale.

We also discuss critically the implications of our assumptions. As we
will explain, many important dynamical questions must be answered before
one understands how our known @xmath dimensional universe may emerge
from M theory. Until these questions are answered and our assumptions
justified, our assumptions are to be regarded conservatively as
amounting to a choice of initial conditions which are fine tuned and may
not arise naturally.

### 1.4 Organisation of the Thesis

The organisation of this thesis is as follows:

In chapter 2 we discuss various black hole solution and their energy
momentum tensor. Then we discuss U duality relations in M theory and
string theory.

In first part of chapter 2 (sections 2.1 to 2.4 ) we discuss some known
result of black holes in M theory. In the second part (sections 2.5 to
2.7 ) we discuss U duality in M and string theory, and their
applications in black hole solution.

In chapter 3 , evolution of early universe has been discussed. In
section 3.1 , we present equations of motion fro our cosmological model.
In section 3.2 , we discuss consequences of U duality in our
cosmological model, and consequently in section 3.3 and 3.4 , we give a
general result and make our ansatz for @xmath .

In section 3.5 to section 3.7 , we present first a general analysis of
@xmath dimensional evolution equations and then we specialise to eleven
dimensional case of @xmath intersecting brane configurations and
described various result mentioned above.

In section 3.8 , we present mechanism of stabilisation in details and
then in section 3.9 , we discuss stabilised values of the brane
directions, their ranges, and the necessity of fine tuning.

In section 3.10 , we discuss consequences of some example of
intersecting configurations which are not @xmath , and we showed in
these cases stabilisation can not be achieved.

In section 3.11 , we present the four dimensional perspective and the
time variations of @xmath . In section 3.12 , we present the results of
numerical analysis. In section 3.13 , we conclude by presenting a brief
summary, a few comments on the assumptions made, and by mentioning a few
issues which may be studied further.

## Chapter 2 Black Holes and Duality in M-Theory and String Theory

U-duality is a symmetry of M-theory which consists of T-duality,
S-duality of string theory and dimensional reduction and dimension
upliftment. In certain cases of supergravity solutions this symmetries
can be used to get relations among various metric component. Theses
relations can be used to get relations among various components of
energy-momentum tensors. We will describe the procedure in detail in
this chapter. In our model for early universe we use these relations to
find equations of states.

We here discuss intersecting M branes system. In this chapter we study
black holes made by mutually BPS intersecting M-branes. In chapter 3 we
discuss mutually BPS intersecting M-branes dominated universe. To be
specific, we consider @xmath configurations. ⁵ ⁵ 5 In our notation,
@xmath denotes two stacks each of 2 branes and 5 branes, all
intersecting each other in a mutually BPS configuration. Similarly for
other configurations, e.g. @xmath denotes three stacks of 5 branes
intersecting in a mutually BPS configuration with a wave along the
common intersection direction.

Such system is dictated by a @xmath dimensional effective action given,
in the standard notation, by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the action for the fields corresponding to the branes.
The corresponding equations of motion are given, in the standard
notation and in units where @xmath , by ⁶ ⁶ 6 In the following, the
convention of summing over repeated indices is not always applicable.
Hence, we will always write the summation indices explicitly. Unless
indicated otherwise, the indices @xmath run from @xmath to @xmath , the
indices @xmath from @xmath to @xmath , and the indices @xmath from
@xmath to @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath with @xmath and @xmath is the energy momentum tensor
corresponding to the action @xmath , defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the variation with respect to gravitational fields
@xmath . Equations of motion for the brane fields can be found varying
the action with respect to brane fields.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

If we know brane fields explicitly we can find equation of motion. For
example in black hole cases we show them in next section.

### 2.1 Black Brane Energy Momentum Tensor and Solutions

For black hole case, @xmath is obtained from the action for higher form
gauge fields. That is @xmath is known. With a suitable ansatz for the
metric, equations of motion ( 2.2 ) can be solved to obtain black hole
solutions.

To explain the process consider 11-dimensional supergravity action. The
bosonic part of the action is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a 4 form field, @xmath . So @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The existence of 3-form gauge potential suggests that the theory
contains 2-branes which couples to 3-form via

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are world volume coordinates of 2-brane. Equations of
motion for @xmath are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where right hand side is set to zero because fermionic currents
corresponding to branes are set to zero. This 4-form field also satisfy
Bianchi identity,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The theory given by ( 2.5 ) contains a 2 dimensional and a 5 dimensional
objects @xmath and @xmath brane. @xmath branes are electrically charged
and @xmath branes are magnetically charged under @xmath . For this
matter field, @xmath energy-momentum tensor, @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Second equation of equation ( 2.2 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

now follows from equations ( 2.8 ), ( 2.9 ) and ( 2.10 ). to show this
consider

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

First term is 0 by equation ( 2.8 ). Last two terms can be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is zero by equation ( 2.9 ).

This theory contains black brane solution, which are solutions with
solitonic objects. These black holes are actually made of stack of
@xmath or @xmath branes or BPS intersecting combinations of them. With a
suitable ansatz for metric and fields Einstein equation can be solved to
obtain black hole solutions. First we calculate energy momentum tensor
for various intersecting brane configurations. To do that we make
suitable ansatz for metric and justify it.

### 2.2 General Black Brane solutions

Now we are in a position to get black hole solution for BPS
configuration. *[reference] To get the solutions, let the spacetime
coordinates be @xmath where @xmath with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath . The @xmath directions may be taken to be toroidal, some or all
of which are wrapped by branes, and @xmath are coordinates for an @xmath
dimensional space of constant curvature given by @xmath or @xmath . The
metric and brane fields depend only on @xmath coordinate, and defined by
@xmath . We write the line element @xmath , in an obvious notation, as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Black hole solutions are given by @xmath . But the analysis is true for
any maximally symmetric non-compact space.

The independent non vanishing components of @xmath are given by @xmath
and @xmath where @xmath . These components can be calculated explicitly
using the action @xmath . For example, for an electric @xmath -brane
along @xmath directions, they are given by (see equation ( 2.10 ))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath for @xmath , @xmath for @xmath , and note that @xmath is
negative. For mutually BPS @xmath intersecting brane configurations, it
turns out [ 51 , 52 , 53 , 54 , 55 , 56 , 57 , 58 , 59 , 60 ] that the
respective energy momentum tensors @xmath and @xmath obey conservation
equations separately. We explained this point in detail in previous
section.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equations of motion may now be obtained from equations ( 2.2 ) and (
2.14 ). After some manipulations, they may be written as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.15)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.16)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath and the subscripts @xmath denote @xmath -derivatives. One
can see equation ( 2.17 ), which is same as ( 2.11 ) in this case is
consequence of equations of motion for 4-form gauge field and definition
of energy momentum tensor. In case of intersecting branes @xmath ,
@xmath and equation ( 2.17 ) may be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is because of, as we already claimed, @xmath obey conservation
equation separately. See [ 59 ] particularly, whose set up and the
equations of motions are closest to the present ones.

The other equations of motion are the equations for 4-form field., which
is same as equations ( 2.8 ) and ( 2.9 ). Equation ( 2.18 ) can be
derived from equations ( 2.8 ) and ( 2.9 ).

If we assume @xmath , then equation ( 2.18 ) can be solved. The solution
is found to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we define the matrices @xmath and @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the inverse of @xmath and is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we define a new coordinate @xmath by @xmath , equation ( 2.16 )
becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

If one multiplies both side by @xmath and take a sum over @xmath and
then use equation ( 2.19 ) in ( 2.22 ) one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Specific values of @xmath depend on intersecting configuration. In case
of black holes we can calculate them from explicit calculation of energy
momentum tensor or by using duality. In section 2.6 we discuss this
point in detail.

If the components of energy momentum tensor follow a relation like

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

then this immediately implies a relation among metric components @xmath
and @xmath . We will see, for various brane solutions from explicit
calculation and also using duality same type of relations come. For
example, when @xmath , then equations ( 2.22 ) and ( 2.24 ) implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Explicit intersecting configurations give values of @xmath and @xmath .
We will see some examples in the next section.

### 2.3 Energy-Momentum Tensor of Black Brane Solution

In this section we calculate Energy-Momentum Tensor for various black
brane configurations. First we calculate for @xmath and @xmath brane
case. Then we also give energy-momentum tensor of various intersecting
combinations of them, both BPS and non-BPS.

We show here that, for BPS intersecting brane configurations, total
energy momentum tensor is just sum of energy momentum tensors created by
individual set of branes. On the other hand we give an example of 2 sets
of intersecting @xmath branes configuration, which does not follow BPS
rule, total energy momentum tensor is not just sum over that of
individual brane solutions.

In BPS cases we also notice, certain relations hold among various
components of @xmath . In a later section we will show that, these
relations can be obtained by using U duality without computing explicit
form of @xmath .

#### 2.3.1 @xmath Branes

Consider a stack of @xmath branes along @xmath directions. @xmath and
@xmath are taken to be compact. @xmath and @xmath are also taken to be
compact. In this case the solution is known, it is given by in extremal
case

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . In general line element of this solution can
be taken to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Ansatz for field, @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

which gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath indicate derivative with respect to @xmath . This actually
means @xmath branes are electrically charged under the field @xmath .
Energy momentum tensor is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where indices @xmath and @xmath indicate parallel and perpendicular to
the brane directions and @xmath indicates directions in @xmath
respectively.

As we have shown in last section that, conservation equation follows
from equations ( 2.8 ), ( 2.9 ) and ( 2.10 ) here also conservation
equation @xmath is satisfied.

One can see from equations ( 2.30 ) and ( 2.16 ) that the constraining
relation among scale factor, mentioned before turns out to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 2.3.2 BPS Intersection of 2 Sets of @xmath Branes

Now consider 2 sets of intersecting @xmath branes along @xmath and
@xmath . we denote first set by 2 and second set by @xmath . Black brane
solution of intersecting branes was first identified in [ 61 ] , then
many solutions were quickly constructed and governing rules of their
existence were studied. For a review of intersecting branes solution see
book [ 5 ] and reference there in. This intersecting configuration
follows BPS rules. BPS intersecting solution the intersection rules are
discussed in Appendix C . For this configuration our metric ansatz
remains same as above.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Nevertheless, we have now two sets of electrically charged branes, so
our ansatz for @xmath gets changed. Now we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

So now non vanishing components are @xmath and @xmath and their cyclic
permutations. Above potential gives field strength of the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Energy momentum tensors in this case found to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

One can see easily from above equations, that total energy momentum
tensors are just the sum of individual brane configurations,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From general analysis of section 2.1 we can say that conservation
equation @xmath is satisfied for total energy momentum tensor as well as
individual energy momentum tensors. Last conclusion is confirmed by the
fact that, conservation of @xmath is verified in section 2.3.1 .

Like in previous subsection here also a relation among scale factors
comes out using equations ( 2.3.2 ) and equation of motion.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

#### 2.3.3 @xmath Branes

In case of @xmath brane, just like @xmath brane case metric ansatz is
taken of the same form, except now 5 of the 10 spacelike dimensions
@xmath are compact and @xmath branes wrap them. In general we may take
some of the other directions are also compact. In that case they will be
treated as directions perpendicular to branes and will be in same
footing as directions of @xmath . Metric ansatz is taken to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where now @xmath . @xmath branes are magnetically charged under the
gauge field @xmath . Its dual field is a 7-form field @xmath . It is
electrically charged under this 7-form @xmath . @xmath and @xmath are
related by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

So one may take ansatz for for 3-form potential is of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

So @xmath takes non zero value only when @xmath . For computational
simplicity and to match with standard notations, we take @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the metric, @xmath is its inverse and @xmath is its
determinant. With this ansatz energy momentum tensor turns out to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where index @xmath indicates parallel to brane directions and @xmath
indicates directions in @xmath respectively.

Here we have only one type of branes. Again general argument of section
2.1 is applicable. So

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is true.

Equations ( 2.40 ) and equations of motion imply relations among scale
factors. These equations are same as ( 2.31 ).

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 2.3.4 BPS Intersection of @xmath Branes and @xmath Branes

In this subsection we give an example of BPS intersecting configuration
of a stack of @xmath branes, stretched along @xmath and that of @xmath
branes are stretched along @xmath . As before all these @xmath are
compact, and the system is localised in common transverse space @xmath .
Again ansatz for black brane metric is similar to previous cases. It is
taken of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath . Under 4-form gauge field @xmath branes are electrically
charged and @xmath branes are charged magnetically. So we take an ansatz
for our gauge potential as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where again @xmath is taken of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that, here @xmath can take value in @xmath and @xmath , otherwise
@xmath will be zero. Now the non-zero components of energy momentum
tensor for this set of fields are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

So it is again just the sum of individual @xmath created by @xmath
branes and @xmath branes separately. Same argument of section 2.1 goes
through about conservation equation. Also and @xmath ’s are conserved
separately as they are, for single @xmath brane and single @xmath brane
case.

Equations ( 2.3.4 ) and equation of motion imply constraining relations,
like before, among scale factors.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

#### 2.3.5 Non-BPS Intersection of Branes

Now we will consider an almost similar configuration of subsection 2.3.2
, except now our configuration is non-BPS. In this case lets take two
sets of 2 branes along @xmath and @xmath . It is a non-BPS intersection
of branes. We take @xmath and @xmath as compact. Both set are
electrically charged. So the 3-form potential components in this case
are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

So corresponding fields are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

For metric we may start with an ansatz like ( 2.42 ), but it turns out
that this ansatz is inconsistent. The reason is explained below. Because
of the first term in the expression of energy momentum tensor (equations
( 2.10 )), @xmath is non-zero,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

But since the metric is diagonal, @xmath is zero. So obviously Einstein
equations are not satisfied. Therefore one has to take a different
ansatz, simplest one is diagonal metric with only @xmath non-zero. That
is,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

With this ansatz it turns out non vanishing components of Einstein
tensor are all diagonal components and @xmath . So now we can equate
@xmath and @xmath . So we will take the above line element as our
ansatz.

We calculate here @xmath . The non-zero components of them turn out to
be

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where index @xmath denotes coordinates in @xmath . There is another
component @xmath . Now because of @xmath and @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
are not symmetric. They turned out to be various combination of @xmath
and @xmath , and are non-zero. From above equations one can see clearly
that, total energy momentum tensor is not just the sum of individual
energy momentum tensors created by each sets of branes separately. For
example in equations ( 2.3.5 ) first two terms in each equation give
energy momentum tensor for individual brane configuration, but the third
term is extra. Also @xmath is a new component, which was not in case of
single @xmath brane system. So we may conclude that, for non-BPS
intersection equation ( 2.14 ) is not satisfied.

### 2.4 @xmath Black Holes

BPS intersection of multiple branes describes multicharge extremal black
holes. We will now discuss of 2 @xmath branes and 2 @xmath branes
intersecting configuration. This @xmath configuration is the matter of
our cosmological model. Here we take @xmath to @xmath are compact. First
set of @xmath branes wrap @xmath directions, second set of @xmath branes
wrap @xmath , first @xmath branes wrap @xmath and second @xmath branes
wrap @xmath . @xmath branes are electrically charged and @xmath branes
are magnetically charged under @xmath . Let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath are the 4 parameter which determine mass and charges of the
extremal black hole solution we get. So the components of the gauge
field potential are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.52)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.53)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.54)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.56)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath are the harmonic function, and given by @xmath . For this
configuration geometry turns out to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.58)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here one can calculate energy momentum tensor for each type of branes
separately using equation ( 2.10 ). They are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then one can see they satisfy conservation equation separately. Total
@xmath is just sum of individual contributions as we have seen in
previous examples.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 2.5 U Duality Relations In M Theory

We now describe the relations which follow from U duality symmetries,
involving chains of dimensional reduction and uplifting and T and S
dualities of string theory. See [ 32 ] . To explain the concept let us
consider a solution of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we assume for @xmath @xmath are compact and metric does not
depends on them. That is @xmath , where @xmath includes space like
coordinates except @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath denote
dimensional reduction and uplifting along @xmath direction between M
theory and type IIA string theory. We are applying operation @xmath . To
do that we write @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is 10 dimensional line element of type IIA theory. Type IIA
string theory metric is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is dilaton and is independent of @xmath and @xmath . It is
function of @xmath only. If we integrate over @xmath with above metric
we will get type IIA super gravity action. Here comparing equations (
2.64 ), ( 2.65 ) and ( 2.66 ) one can see @xmath and @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Now in string theory one can perform T duality along a compact
direction. It converts type IIA theory to type IIB theory and back. It
also converts a @xmath brane to @xmath or @xmath branes depending on
whether T duality is applied along brane or perpendicular to brane
respectively. This is a symmetry of the IIA/IIB string theory. A
solution, for example, ( 2.66 ) breaks it. So applying this
transformation generates new solution. We denote T duality operation
along @xmath direction by @xmath . S duality is a symmetry of type IIB
theory. This is asymmetry between @xmath . Rules for the these duality
transformations are listed in Appendix A .

Applying a T duality along say, @xmath which we denote by @xmath ,
generates a new solution, given by (see equation ( A.2 ) and ( A.7 ))

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where equation ( 2.5 ) has been used. Note that metric along @xmath ,
@xmath goes to @xmath according to equation ( A.2 ). This solution is of
type IIB theory. Again application of @xmath generate a new solution of
IIA theory.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Again @xmath goes to @xmath according to equation ( A.2 ).

Now dimensional upliftment to 11 dimensional theory can be done via

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using equation ( 2.5 ) in ( 2.70 ) one gets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

where these @xmath ’s are given in terms of @xmath ’s by (using equation
( 2.5 )),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.72)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In general, simplifying notation, we can write, application of U duality
@xmath in ( 2.64 ),transforms the @xmath s in the scale factors to
@xmath s given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 2.6 Application of U duality relations in Black Holes

Note that, as can be seen from the above steps, the U duality relations
follow as long as the directions involved in the U duality operations
are isometry directions. Since none of the common transverse directions
are involved in obtaining the relations above, it follows that they are
valid even if the common transverse directions are not compact. Thus the
U duality relations are applicable in such cases also.

Similarly, the time dependence of @xmath s played no role in obtaining
the U duality relations here. Hence, these relations may be expected to
arise for the black hole case also. We will describe this case in detail
in this section.

Consider black holes in @xmath dimensional spacetime described by
mutually BPS intersecting brane configurations in M theory. The brane
action @xmath in equation ( 2.1 ) is the standard one for higher form
gauge fields and given by equation ( 2.6 ). Corresponding black hole
solutions are given in section 2.3 . So here we only highlight the
points related to U duality symmetries. Also, for illustration, we
consider only 2 branes and 5 branes.

As mentioned in section 2.5 , the method of U duality symmetries applies
here also and leads to the same relations between @xmath . They are best
seen in the extremal case. (The non extremal case requires further
analysis and is more involved.)

The eleven dimensional line element @xmath for 2 brane is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

For @xmath brane @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.75)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are harmonic function and function of @xmath .

In general line element for 2 or 5 brane can be written in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath depend on @xmath , the radial coordinate of the @xmath
dimensional transverse space. For 2 branes and 5 branes, as can be seen
from, equation ( 2.74 ) and ( 2.75 ), the @xmath s may be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.77)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.78)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the corresponding harmonic function and @xmath is the
charge. See, for example, [ 62 ] for more detail.

We see now relations among @xmath ’s [equations ( 2.77 ) or ( 2.78 )]
follow from U duality relations. Consider a solution of @xmath brane
along @xmath . Also take @xmath as compact and are isometry direction.
An obvious symmetry implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

It also implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

Directions @xmath @xmath are also transverse to brane directions. So we
may assume

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now apply U duality operations @xmath . It transforms @xmath brane to
@xmath brane.

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

This new solution is @xmath branes may be given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

Where using equations ( 2.5 ) we find these @xmath ’s are given in terms
of @xmath ’s by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.83)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

There are also obvious symmetry relation for @xmath brane.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

So now one can see equations ( 2.77 ) and ( 2.78 ) are satisfied by the
metric components of black hole solutions. in short we can write the
relations among @xmath ’s as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the superscripts @xmath and @xmath denote spatial directions along
and transverse to the branes respectively. Note that, to find these
relation we have use duality relations only. Explicit form of @xmath can
only be known by solving equations of motion and putting proper boundary
conditions, like asymptotic flatness.

For the extremal @xmath configuration @xmath , the transverse space is
three dimensional and the @xmath s may be written as [ 62 ] (see
equation 2.58 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.86)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the corresponding harmonic functions and @xmath s are
the charges. Furthermore, if 2 and @xmath branes are identical then
@xmath and we get @xmath , and similarly other relations when different
sets of branes are identical.

Note that obvious symmetry relations for @xmath black hole are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the U duality relation comes out following above steps are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

These equations ( 2.87 ) and ( 2.88 ) lead to equation ( 2.86 ).

We further illustrate the U duality methods by interpreting a U duality
relation @xmath as implying a relation among the components of the
energy momentum tensor @xmath . The relations thus obtained are indeed
obeyed by the components of @xmath calculated explicitly using the
corresponding higher form gauge field action @xmath in section 2.3 .

Consider now the case of @xmath branes or 5 branes. We assume that
@xmath which is natural since @xmath directions are transverse to the
branes. Applying the U duality relations in equation ( 2.85 ) then
implies, for both 2 branes and 5 branes, the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

among the components of their energy momentum tensors. See equations (
2.30 ) and ( 2.40 ). Note that it is also natural to take @xmath since
@xmath is one of the worldvolume coordinates and may naturally be taken
to be on the same footing as the other ones @xmath . Equation ( 2.89 )
then implies that @xmath . The relation between @xmath and @xmath is to
be specified by an equation of state which, in the black hole case, is
that given in equations ( 2.30 ) and ( 2.40 ).

For now, however, we take @xmath and @xmath to be different. Keeping in
mind that @xmath is negative, we assume the equations of state to be of
the form @xmath where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are constants,
mentioned in section 2.2 . Here we give explicitly @xmath ’s for 2 and 5
black brane solution.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.90)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath superscripts have been omitted here and @xmath which
follows from equation ( 2.89 ). Note that @xmath and @xmath in the black
hole case given in equation ( 2.13 ) or specifically for 2 brane and 5
brane in equations ( 2.30 ) and ( 2.40 ).

Using definition of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath equation ( 2.23 ) now
becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

We will see that same type of equation will appear in cosmological case.
Since now we know @xmath ’s, using equations ( 2.90 ) and ( 2.20 ), it
is now straightforward to calculate @xmath for @xmath intersecting brane
configurations. les first calculate @xmath for 2 brane using ( 2.20 ).

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

Same expression comes for 5 brane. It turns out, for any BPS
intersecting configuration that, @xmath is of the same form, namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

The corresponding @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now take @xmath . Then equation ( 2.89 ) gives @xmath . In terms of
@xmath , we now have @xmath and @xmath . Clearly, then @xmath and
equations ( 2.91 ) can be solved for @xmath . See [ 59 ] for such
solutions, with @xmath as follows from equation ( 2.13 ), and their
analysis.

### 2.7 S and T Dualities in String Theory

String theory has S and T duality symmetries. T duality transforms type
IIA theory to type IIB and back. So it is a symmetry of IIA and IIB
theory combined together. S duality is a symmetry of type IIB theory
which transform coupling constant to @xmath . Just like M-theory case,
for certain supergravity solutions these symmetries can be used to get
relations among various metric components and dilaton, and hence
relations among energy-momentum tensors. To illustrate this, we consider
a general solution of string theory (type IIA or IIB supergravity). Line
element @xmath in Einstein frame is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

and dilaton, @xmath . here we assume @xmath are compact and are isometry
direction, and @xmath are directions parallel to Dp-branes. Obvious
symmetries ensure us to take all @xmath parallel to branes are equal and
we denote them as before by @xmath , similarly for @xmath . Here all
@xmath s, @xmath and @xmath are function of @xmath . @xmath is metric of
constant curvature @xmath -dimensional space. In fact we don’t even need
non-compact directions in above form. It can be any curved geometry.

Here to illustrate duality relation we consider black @xmath -brane
solution and this is of the form given in equation ( 2.95 ). The
subscript @xmath indicate metric is for @xmath -branes. This metric is a
of general black @xmath -brane solution. @xmath is the total number of
compact directions, and @xmath . This system physically describes
geometry created by @xmath -brane localised in space. Technically
relations we will get in this section can be used when @xmath ’s are
function of @xmath only. So if we consider no noncompact direction and
@xmath we can as well describe cosmological case.

This solution is in Einstein frame. To apply duality rules we first
convert it in string frame. String frame metric is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.96)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Now if we perform a T-duality along @xmath direction we get @xmath
branes solution.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.97)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.98)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Note that in @xmath direction metric component changes sign according to
equation ( A.2 ). Equation ( 2.98 ) can be found using equation ( A.7 ).

The Einstein frame metric for @xmath solution can be found by
multiplying @xmath to @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.99)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is metric for transverse space. Equations ( 2.97 ) and (
2.98 have been used to get above expression. This line element can be
written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath can be given in terms of @xmath by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.101)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.102)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Simplification of equation ( 2.102 ) shows that,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now consider a @xmath brane, S-duality of @xmath brane gives @xmath
brane. So S duality rule ( A.14 ) gives @xmath , which implies @xmath .
Consider @xmath brane solution now, @xmath , (using equation ( 2.103 )).
Equation ( 2.104 ) gives @xmath . Denoting @xmath by @xmath , one find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In general using induction it is easy to show that,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is now the only parameter determining full line element. If
one uses different set of duality operations one can also find similar
relations for @xmath -string or @xmath -brane. In general

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath for @xmath -brane and @xmath for @xmath -string or @xmath
-brane.

Just like before we take energy-momentum tensors has only diagonal
component.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath for @xmath ; @xmath for @xmath ; @xmath and @xmath . It is
natural to assume @xmath because all of them are transverse to brane
direction but for the time being we keep this notation. We also have
another component, @xmath coming from @xmath -variation of action

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath denote variation with respect to @xmath . Equation of
motions are now Einstein equations ( 2.2 ) together with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The equations of motion for the black brane case (metric given by ( 2.95
)) turns out to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.111)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.112)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath .

Using equation ( 2.107 ) in equation ( 2.111 ) one finds

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which on simplification gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Similarly use of equation ( 2.107 ) in equation ( 2.112 ) gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Just like black brane in M-theory case taking @xmath , one can do the
same calculation to solve for black @xmath -brane or black string
solution. Also note that in cosmological case there is no transverse
metric and @xmath . Then above relation will translate to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.116)
     @xmath      (2.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is taken as @xmath . Then again same analysis can be done
as in both cosmological case and black hole case of M-theory to get same
conclusions.

## Chapter 3 Evolution of Early Universe

In this chapter we discuss evolution of early universe made of mutually
BPS intersecting @xmath and @xmath branes. To be specific, we consider
@xmath configurations. To do this we use duality relations discuss in
previous chapter. Before going into details analysis we give a general
consequences U duality in our cosmological context.

### 3.1 Equations of Motion for Our Cosmological Model

For cosmological case, @xmath is often determined using equations of
state of the dominant constituent of the universe. Such equations of
state may be obtained if the underlying physics is known; or, one may
assume a general ansatz for them and proceed. ⁷ ⁷ 7 This is similar to
the FRW case. Equation of state @xmath for radiation, or @xmath for
pressureless dust, may be obtained from the physics of radiation or of
massive particles; or, one may assume a general ansatz @xmath and
proceed.

@xmath for intersecting branes in the early universe has been calculated
in [ 27 ] assuming that the branes and antibranes in the intersecting
brane configurations are non interacting and that their numbers are all
equal, i.e. @xmath for @xmath and @xmath . However, general relations
among the components of @xmath may be obtained [ 32 ] using U duality
symmetries of M theory, involving chains of dimensional reduction and
uplifting and T and S dualities of string theory, using which 2 branes
and 5 branes or @xmath and @xmath configurations can be interchanged.
Such relations are valid more generally, for example even when @xmath
and @xmath are all different.

These general relations on the equations of state are sufficient to
show, under a technical assumption, that the @xmath mutually BPS
intersecting brane configurations with identical numbers of branes and
antibranes, i.e. with @xmath and @xmath , will asymptotically lead to an
effective @xmath dimensional expanding universe. To obtain the details
of the evolution, however, we need further assumptions and an ansatz of
the type @xmath [ 32 , 33 , 34 ] .

We now present the details. Let the line element @xmath be given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are scale factors and, due to homogeneity, @xmath are
functions of the physical time @xmath only. (Parametrising the scale
factors as @xmath turns out to be convenient for our purposes.) It then
follows that @xmath depends on @xmath only and that it is of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

We assume that @xmath . From equations ( 2.2 ) one now obtains

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and the subscripts @xmath denote time derivatives. Note,
from equation ( 3.3 ), that @xmath cannot vanish. Hence, if @xmath at an
initial time @xmath then it follows that @xmath increases monotonically
for @xmath . We assume the evolution to be such that @xmath eventually.

In the context of early universe in M theory, it is natural to assume
that all spatial directions are on equal footing to begin with.
Therefore we assume that the ten dimensional space is toroidal. Further,
we assume that the early universe is homogeneous and is dominated by the
@xmath configuration where, with no loss of generality, we take two
stacks each of @xmath branes and @xmath branes to be along @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath directions respectively, and take these
intersecting branes to be distributed uniformly along the common
transverse space directions @xmath . Note that the total brane charges
must vanish, i.e. @xmath for all @xmath , since the common transverse
space is compact. We denote this @xmath configuration as @xmath . The
meaning of this notation is clear and, below, such a notation will be
used to denote other configurations also.

### 3.2 Equations of States as Consequence of U Duality

Application of such U duality operations generate new solution from old
one. We discuss this technique in section 2.6 , but for we repeat the
steps since here they are our main tools to find equations of states.
Lets take an example of @xmath brane along @xmath . We consider
cosmological solution of the form,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we assume all the special directions are compact and toroidal.
Here obvious symmetry implies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

If we apply a chain of operations @xmath in the way mentioned in
previous section, 2.5 , we can generate a @xmath brane solution.

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

This new solution is @xmath branes may be given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Where using equations ( 2.5 ) we find these @xmath ’s are given in terms
of @xmath ’s by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Note that in case of our cosmological solution we can always redefine
our time coordinate to go to comoving frame, as we have redefine time as
@xmath here.

Obvious symmetry of @xmath brane solution demands

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

So using equations ( 3.7 ), ( 3.10 ) and the relations among @xmath and
@xmath one can show that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the superscripts @xmath and @xmath denote spatial directions along
and transverse to the branes respectively.

Putting back these relations in the equation of motion ( 3.4 ) one can
show

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

In general @xmath brane or @xmath brane or wave above relation turns out
to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath for 2 and 5 branes and @xmath for waves.

Similarly one can go through all such operations in intersecting brane
configuration to generate new solutions. In case of our @xmath
configuration @xmath the obvious symmetry relations are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Proceeding as in the case of 2 and 5 branes above, and using the U
duality @xmath which relates the @xmath and @xmath configurations, one
obtains two more relations given by [ 32 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Clearly, the U duality relations in equations ( 2.87 ) and ( 2.88 ) are
valid here also. Then again like before, use of equation ( 3.4 ) yields
relations among various components of energy momentum tensor.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
     @xmath      (3.17)
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

In general, for an @xmath intersecting brane configuration, the U
duality symmetries will lead to @xmath relations among the @xmath s,
leaving only @xmath of them independent. These relations are of the form
@xmath where @xmath are constants. Clearly, such a relation can be
violated by constant scaling of @xmath coordinates. Hence, we interpret
it as implying a relation among the components of @xmath . In view of
equation ( 3.4 ), we interpret a U duality relation @xmath as implying
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting equation ( 3.19 ) in equation ( 3.4 ), it follows upon an
integration that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an integration constant. If @xmath initially at @xmath
then @xmath . In such cases then @xmath for all @xmath and, hence,
@xmath where @xmath is another integration constant.

In general @xmath initially at @xmath and, hence, @xmath . Let the
evolution be such that @xmath in the limit @xmath . Then it follows from
equation ( 3.20 ) that @xmath in this limit. If, furthermore, @xmath
then equation ( 3.20 ) also gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an integration constant. If @xmath then @xmath is a
function of @xmath . We will see later that, in the solutions we obtain
with further assumptions, @xmath turns out to be @xmath for @xmath .

Note that, in previous chapter, for black hole case we showed that U
duality relations hold by calculating @xmath explicitly. On the other
hand here we use U duality to get equations of states.

### 3.3 A General Result

We now consider a general result for the @xmath configuration that
follows from the U duality relations alone [ 32 ] . The @xmath s for
this configuration obey the relations given in equations ( 3.14 ) and (
3.15 ). Note that a suitable U duality, for example @xmath , can
transform 2 branes and 5 branes into each other. Hence, we will refer to
two types of branes as being identical if they have identical numbers of
branes and antibranes, i.e. @xmath type is identical to @xmath type if
@xmath and @xmath .

Consider the case when 2 and @xmath branes in the @xmath configurations
are identical. This will enhance the obvious symmetry relations. It is
easy to see that we now have one more independent relation @xmath . If,
instead, 5 and @xmath branes are identical, then the extra independent
relation is @xmath . Similarly, if 2 and @xmath branes are identical
then, after a few steps involving U duality @xmath which interchanges 2
and @xmath branes, it follows that the extra independent relation is
@xmath .

Now if all the four types of branes in the @xmath configuration are
identical, i.e. if @xmath and @xmath , then, we have three extra
independent relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Combined with equations ( 3.14 ) and ( 3.15 ), we get @xmath which is to
be interpreted as @xmath , see equation ( 3.19 ). Hence, as described
earlier, it follows for @xmath that if @xmath initially at @xmath then
@xmath and @xmath for all @xmath where @xmath are constants. Or, if
@xmath in the limit @xmath with @xmath , it then follows for @xmath that
@xmath and @xmath in this limit. Obtaining the values of the asymptotic
constants @xmath , however, requires knowing the details of evolution.
It also follows similarly that @xmath for @xmath . It is straightforward
to show that same results are obtained for the equivalent @xmath
configuration also.

Thus, assuming either that @xmath initially at @xmath or that @xmath in
the limit @xmath with @xmath , we obtain that the @xmath mutually BPS
intersecting brane configurations with identical numbers of branes and
antibranes, i.e. with @xmath and @xmath , will asymptotically lead to an
effective @xmath dimensional expanding universe with the remaining seven
spatial directions reaching constant sizes. This result follows as a
consequence of U duality symmetries alone, which imply relations of the
type given in equation ( 3.19 ) among the components of the energy
momentum tensor @xmath . This result is otherwise independent of the
details of the equations of state, and also of the ansatzes for @xmath
we make in the following in order to proceed further.

### 3.4 Ansatz for @xmath

The dynamics underlying the general result given above may be understood
in more detail, and the asymptotic constants @xmath can be obtained, if
an explicit solution for the evolution is available. In the following,
we will make a few assumptions which enable us to obtain such details.

Consider now the case of @xmath branes or 5 branes only. From the U
duality relations, it follows from equation ( 3.12 ), that @xmath . For
the case of waves, the relation is given by equation ( 3.13 ). A similar
relation for black hole is derived in equation ( 2.89 ). In general,
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are functions of the numbers @xmath and
@xmath of branes and antibranes, satisfying the U duality relations (
3.13 ). If @xmath then @xmath and @xmath may be thought of as functions
of @xmath satisfying equation ( 3.13 ) [ 32 ] .

Consider now mutually BPS @xmath intersecting brane configuration. In
the black hole case, following the discussion of section 2.1 and 2.6 ,
it turns out that the energy momentum tensors @xmath of the @xmath type
of branes are mutually non interacting and separately conserved [ 51 ] –
[ 60 ] . That is,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

We assume that this is the case in the context of early universe also
where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath satisfy the U duality
relations in ( 3.13 ) for all @xmath . Equations ( 2.14 ) now give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have verified explicitly for a variety of mutually BPS @xmath
intersecting brane configurations that equations ( 3.13 ) and ( 3.24 )
are sufficient to satisfy all the relations of the type @xmath implied
by U duality symmetries. See [ 32 ] for more details.

To solve the evolution equations ( 3.3 ), ( 3.4 ), ( 3.24 ), and ( 3.25
), we need the functions @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . To proceed
further, we assume that @xmath for all @xmath . This is necessary if, as
is the case here, the common transverse directions are compact and hence
the net charges must vanish. Then @xmath and @xmath may be thought of as
functions of @xmath satisfying equation ( 3.13 ).

It is natural to expect that @xmath is the same function for waves, 2
branes, and 5 branes since they can all be transformed into each other
by U duality operations which do not involve the transverse directions.
We assume that this is the case. We further assume that this function
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a constant. Such a parametrisation of the equation of
state, instead of the usual one @xmath , leads to elegant expressions as
will become clear in the following, see [ 41 , 42 ] also. The results of
[ 27 ] correspond to the case where @xmath . Here, we assume only that
@xmath . The constant @xmath is arbitrary otherwise.

It now follows that @xmath in equation ( 3.24 ) are of the form @xmath
and that the constants @xmath can be obtained in terms of @xmath using
equations ( 3.13 ) and ( 3.26 ). Thus, for 2 branes, 5 branes, and
waves, we have @xmath , @xmath , and hence

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath superscripts have been omitted since @xmath .
Similarly, @xmath for the @xmath configuration are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This completes our ansatz for the energy momentum tensor @xmath for the
intersecting brane configurations in the early universe.

### 3.5 General Analysis of Evolution Equations

The evolution of the universe can now be analysed. In this section, we
first present the analysis in a general form which is applicable to a
@xmath dimensional homogeneous, anisotropic universe. We specialise to
the intersecting brane configurations in the next section.

The @xmath dimensional line element @xmath is given by equation ( 3.1 ),
now with @xmath . The total energy momentum tensor @xmath of the
dominant constituents of the universe is given by equation ( 3.2 ). The
equations of motion for the evolution of the universe is given, in units
where @xmath , by equations ( 3.3 ) – ( 3.5 ) with @xmath in equation (
3.4 ) now replaced by @xmath . Defining

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

the equations ( 3.3 ) and ( 3.4 ), with @xmath replaced by @xmath , may
be written compactly as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath run from @xmath to @xmath .

Let the universe be dominated by @xmath types of mutually non
interacting and separately conserved matter labelled by @xmath . Then
the corresponding energy momentum tensors @xmath and their components
@xmath and @xmath satisfy equations ( 3.23 ) – ( 3.25 ).

Further, let the equations of state be given by @xmath where @xmath are
constants. Equations ( 3.25 ), ( 3.30 ), and ( 3.31 ) may now be
simplified and cast in various useful forms as follow.

Using @xmath , equation ( 3.25 ) can be integrated to give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are integration constants. Further using equations ( 3.24 )
and ( 3.32 ), equations ( 3.30 ) and ( 3.31 ) become

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.33)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Let the initial conditions at an initial time @xmath be
given, with no loss of generality, by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equations ( 3.33 ) and ( 3.34 ) may now be solved for the @xmath
variables @xmath with the above initial conditions. Or, instead, these
equations may be manipulated so that one needs to solve for @xmath
variables @xmath only, see equations ( 3.37 ), ( 3.41 ), ( 3.44 ), and (
3.46 ) below. We now perform these manipulations.

First define a variable @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, for @xmath or equivalently @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the subscripts @xmath denote @xmath –derivatives. Note that the
initial values at @xmath remain unchanged since @xmath , and hence
@xmath at @xmath . Equations ( 3.33 ) and ( 3.34 ) now become

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.39)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Also, from @xmath , it follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

We assume that @xmath exists such that @xmath , i.e. that the matrix
@xmath formed by @xmath is invertible. ⁸ ⁸ 8 This is not always the
case. For example, @xmath for all @xmath in the isotropic case. Then
@xmath and @xmath is not invertible. This is not a problem, it just
means that the set of variables @xmath can be reduced to a smaller
independent set; one then proceeds with the smaller set. Then, from
equation ( 3.41 ), we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that equation ( 3.41 ) is of the form equation ( 2.91 ). But here
we can not calculate @xmath explicitly because we do not know explicit
form of @xmath now. But using equation of states and duality relations
we will be able to calculate it, it turns out @xmath is not diagonal in
this case. Substituting this expression for @xmath into equation ( 3.40
), then integrating it twice and incorporating the initial conditions
given in equation ( 3.35 ), we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are integration constants. It follows from @xmath that
@xmath are related to initial values @xmath and @xmath by @xmath . Using
this expression for @xmath in the relation @xmath , or substituting the
expression for @xmath given in equation ( 3.44 ) into the equation (
3.32 ) for @xmath , leads to the following @xmath constraints on @xmath
:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, using equations ( 3.44 ) and ( 3.45 ), equation ( 3.39 ) may be
written in terms of @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

One may now solve equations ( 3.41 ) and ( 3.46 ) for @xmath variables
@xmath . Then @xmath are obtained from equation ( 3.44 ) and @xmath from
equation ( 3.37 ). Inverting @xmath then gives @xmath , and thereby
@xmath .

#### 3.5.1 @xmath Case

Consider the @xmath case. Note that we are still considering the general
@xmath dimensional universe, not the eleven dimensional one. We assume
here that @xmath . Now, as shown in Appendix C , it follows in general
that if @xmath and @xmath then @xmath and @xmath vanishes if and only if
@xmath all vanish. Since @xmath , see equation ( 3.45 ), and we assume
that @xmath , we have @xmath . We further assume that @xmath ,
equivalently that @xmath s do not all vanish.

Omitting the @xmath labels, equations ( 3.41 ) and ( 3.46 ) for @xmath
become

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

The initial values are @xmath and @xmath obeying @xmath . We take @xmath
with no loss of generality. Then the solution for @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

The sign of @xmath is immaterial but, just to be definite, we take it to
be positive. The sign of @xmath is same as that of @xmath , hence @xmath
. Also, @xmath and @xmath may now be obtained but are not needed here
for our purposes.

Note that @xmath and vanishes in the limit @xmath , whereas @xmath and
diverges in the limit @xmath . The value of @xmath depends on the
initial values @xmath and @xmath , or equivalently @xmath , as given in
equations ( 3.49 ). It is finite and can be evaluated exactly. However,
if @xmath then @xmath may be approximated in a way that will be useful
later on.

From the exact solution given above, we have @xmath and @xmath . In the
limit @xmath , we then have @xmath and @xmath . It, therefore, follows
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the limit @xmath , the evolution of @xmath may also be thought of as
follows. Consider @xmath to be fixed and @xmath to be very small so that
@xmath . It then follows from equations ( 3.47 ) that, at initial times,
@xmath is very small and that @xmath is independent of @xmath . Hence,
@xmath evolves as if there is no ‘force’, i.e. @xmath where @xmath is
the initial ‘velocity’. Once @xmath becomes of @xmath then it affects
@xmath . But, from then on, @xmath evolves quickly and diverges soon
after.

This suggests that one may well approximate @xmath by the time @xmath
required for @xmath , which starts from @xmath with a velocity @xmath
and evolves freely with no force, to reach @xmath – namely, to reach a
value where @xmath . In other words, if @xmath then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

A comparison with equation ( 3.50 ) shows that the exact @xmath which
follows from solving the evolution equations is indeed well approximated
by @xmath in equation ( 3.51 ) in the limit @xmath . Note that @xmath is
calculated using only the initial values, requiring no knowledge of the
exact solution.

#### 3.5.2 @xmath Case

When @xmath , the equations of motion can be solved if @xmath are of
certain form [ 41 ] – [ 47 ] . For example, if @xmath then the solutions
are similar to those in the @xmath case described above. For general
forms of @xmath , we are unable to obtain explicit solutions.
Nevertheless, the general evolution can still be analysed if one assumes
suitable asymptotic forms for the scale factors @xmath .

It follows from equations ( 3.29 ) and ( 3.30 ) that @xmath cannot
vanish. With no loss of generality, let @xmath initially at @xmath .
Then @xmath decreases monotonically for @xmath , equivalently @xmath ,
and increases monotonically for @xmath , equivalently @xmath . Further
features of the evolution depend on the structure of @xmath and @xmath .
In the cases of interest here, it turns out that @xmath and also all
@xmath vanish in the limit @xmath , and diverge in the limit @xmath
where @xmath is finite. We assume such a behaviour and analyse the
asymptotic solutions.

##### 3.5.2.1 Asymptotic evolution: @xmath

We assume that @xmath in the limit @xmath . Then, equations ( 3.40 ) and
( 3.41 ) can be solved since their right hand sides depend only on
@xmath s which now vanish. Hence, in the limit @xmath , we write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

which are valid up to multiplicative constants and where @xmath are
constants. Also, the equalities in the asymptotic expressions here and
in the following are valid only up to the leading order. Equation ( 3.44
) now implies that @xmath . Also, @xmath where @xmath . Then it follows
from equation ( 3.37 ) that @xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, equation ( 3.39 ) implies that @xmath . Thus the evolution
is of Kasner type in the limit @xmath . The constants @xmath s in
equations ( 3.52 ) must be such that the resulting @xmath , but are
otherwise arbitrary. In an actual evolution, however, @xmath s can be
determined in terms of the initial values @xmath and @xmath with no
arbitrariness, but this requires complete solution for @xmath .

##### 3.5.2.2 Asymptotic evolution: @xmath

We assume that @xmath in the limit @xmath where @xmath is finite.
Whether this limit is reached at a finite or infinite physical time
@xmath depends on the values of @xmath , see below. @xmath may be
obtained in terms of @xmath using equation ( 3.44 ). Hence, in the limit
@xmath , some or all of the @xmath s diverge. Consider the following
ansatz in the limit @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are constants, and some or all of the @xmath s
must be @xmath so that some or all of the @xmath s diverge. Equation (
3.44 ) now implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

Also, @xmath where @xmath and @xmath . For the ansatz in equations (
3.54 ) to be consistent, it is necessary that @xmath so that @xmath in
the limit @xmath . Now @xmath follows from equation ( 3.37 ) and is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a finite constant. If @xmath then @xmath which means
that @xmath at a finite physical time @xmath . If @xmath then @xmath in
the limit @xmath . Which case is realised, i.e. whether @xmath or @xmath
, depends on the values of @xmath .

Using equation ( 3.56 ), the asymptotic behaviour of @xmath and @xmath
can be obtained in terms of @xmath . For example, let @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the limit @xmath . It then follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that, in this case, we have @xmath in the limit @xmath with @xmath
. See the discussion below equation ( 3.19 ) for the relevance of this
feature.

To obtain the values of @xmath , and thereby @xmath , in equation ( 3.54
), consider equation ( 3.43 ) from which it follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

The left hand side in the above equation is a constant but the right
hand side depends on @xmath . This is consistent if @xmath in which case
the right hand side becomes a positive constant, or if @xmath in which
case the right hand side vanishes in the limit @xmath . Thus, there are
two possibilities:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.60)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

For a given @xmath , the possible consistent solutions for @xmath are to
be obtained as follows. Assume that some @xmath ’s are of type (i) and
the remaining ones are of type (ii) . Then solve equations ( 3.60 ) and
( 3.61 ) for @xmath in type (i) and for @xmath in type (ii) . Such a
solution is consistent if the resulting @xmath satisfy @xmath for @xmath
s in type (i) and @xmath for @xmath s in type (ii) . Also, some or all
of the @xmath s must be @xmath as required in equation ( 3.54 ). (It is
further necessary that the resulting @xmath so that @xmath , but
calculating @xmath requires @xmath .)

Consider an example, which will be useful later, where @xmath and @xmath
are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath . It is then easy to show that the only
possibility is the one given in (i) . Also @xmath , and thus @xmath for
all @xmath is a consistent solution as required by equation ( 3.60 ). In
the @xmath case, we get @xmath , and @xmath in the limit @xmath obtained
as described above agrees with that obtained from the explicit solution,
see below equation ( 3.49 ).

Thus @xmath and @xmath , and thereby @xmath and @xmath , are all
determined ultimately by @xmath . The constants @xmath are given by
equation ( 3.55 ) and they depend on @xmath , on the initial values
@xmath and @xmath , and also on @xmath . But determining @xmath , and
hence determining @xmath when @xmath do not all vanish, requires
complete solution for @xmath .

#### 3.5.3 Deviations from @xmath Asymptotics

We consider the deviations of @xmath from its asymptotic behaviour given
in equation ( 3.54 ), which will turn out to be of interest. Let the
deviations @xmath for @xmath be defined, in the limit @xmath , by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are determined as described earlier. For the
purpose of illustration, and also for later use, we now assume that all
the @xmath s are of type (i) , namely that @xmath and @xmath for all
@xmath . It then follows straightforwardly from equation ( 3.41 ) that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

Consider the example of @xmath given in equation ( 3.62 ). Then @xmath
and, for any @xmath , one has

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

In equation ( 3.64 ), @xmath . It now follows easily that, up to the
leading order in @xmath , the difference @xmath obeys the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

The solutions to these equations are of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath since @xmath and @xmath are same for all @xmath , see
equation ( 3.63 ). Hence, equations ( 3.66 ) and ( 3.67 ) can be used to
understand in more detail the behaviour of @xmath s as they all diverge
in the limit @xmath as given in equation ( 3.54 ). We will discuss these
features in next two sections.

### 3.6 Intersecting Branes

We now analyse the evolution of the universe dominated by mutually BPS
@xmath intersecting brane configurations of M theory. The number of
spacetime dimensions @xmath . We describe general case first, then we
specialise on @xmath configuration. The equations of state are assumed
to be given by @xmath where, as a consequence of U duality symmetries,
@xmath are parametrised in terms of one constant @xmath . The indices
@xmath run from @xmath to @xmath and the indices @xmath from @xmath to
@xmath . For 2 branes, 5 branes, and waves, @xmath and the corresponding
@xmath are given in equations ( 3.27 ). For @xmath configuration, @xmath
and the corresponding @xmath are given in equations ( 3.7 ).

#### 3.6.1 Evolution Equations

The evolution of @xmath describing the scale factors is given by the
equations described earlier which, for ease of reference, we summarise
below:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.68)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.69)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.70)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath as defined earlier, and @xmath are arbitrary
constants satisfying the constraints @xmath for all @xmath . Also,
@xmath obey the constraint

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Equations ( 3.69 ) and ( 3.72 ) are to be solved for
@xmath with initial conditions @xmath and @xmath where @xmath are
initial densities and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then @xmath follow from equation ( 3.70 ) and the physical time @xmath
from @xmath . Inverting @xmath then gives @xmath , and thereby @xmath .

We can now calculate @xmath for the mutually BPS intersecting brane
configurations. As explained in footnote 2 , in the BPS configurations
two stacks of 2 branes intersect at a point; two stacks of 5 branes
intersect along three common spatial directions; a stack of 2 branes
intersects a stack of 5 branes along one common spatial direction; and,
waves, if present, will be along a common intersection direction. With
these rules given, it is now straightforward to calculate @xmath using
equations ( 3.27 ) and ( 3.71 ). It turns out because of the BPS
intersection rules that the resulting @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

The corresponding @xmath exists for @xmath , and is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that, for @xmath , the above @xmath is a special case of the
example considered earlier in equation ( 3.62 ), now with @xmath and
@xmath ,

#### 3.6.2 @xmath Case

It is also straightforward to calculate @xmath and @xmath for the @xmath
configuration using the definitions in equation ( 3.71 ) and the @xmath
in equation ( 3.7 ). They are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.76)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the proportionality constant is @xmath , and by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.77)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the proportionality constant is @xmath .

We are unable to solve equations ( 3.69 ), ( 3.72 ), and ( 3.74 ) for
@xmath . ⁹ ⁹ 9 In the case of black holes, the equations of motion for
the corresponding harmonic functions @xmath can also be written in a
form similar to that of equation ( 3.69 ). The main steps are indicated
in Appendix 2.6 . The analogous @xmath in the black hole case turns out
to be @xmath , and the equations can then be solved. Also, note that if
@xmath for all @xmath then @xmath in equation ( 3.70 ) here may be
written as in equation ( 2.86 ) in Appendix 2.6 . The role of @xmath
there is played by the functions @xmath here. Such a similarity is
present for other intersecting brane configurations also. However,
applying the general analysis described in section 3.5 and making
further use of the explicit forms of @xmath and @xmath given in
equations ( 3.7 ) and ( 3.74 ), one can understand the qualitative
features of the evolution of the @xmath configuration.

We first make several remarks which will lead to an immediate
understanding of the evolution of this configuration.

(1) @xmath Let @xmath . It can then be checked that @xmath . Also,
@xmath since @xmath for all @xmath . Hence, as shown in Appendix C , it
follows that @xmath given in equation ( 3.72 ) is @xmath and that it
vanishes if and only if @xmath all vanish.

(2) @xmath The constraints @xmath imply that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, for example, we may take @xmath to be independent. The remaining
@xmath s are then determined by the above equations. Also, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using equations ( 3.78 ), ( 3.79 ), and the Schwarz inequality ( C.1 )
in Appendix C , we write @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.80)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the first line is the definition of @xmath , @xmath if and only if
@xmath , and @xmath if and only if @xmath . See the Schwarz inequality
given in equation ( C.1 ). It is easy to show that the above expressions
for @xmath imply that @xmath for all @xmath are bounded above by @xmath
as follows: @xmath where @xmath are constants of @xmath . In particular,
note the inequality @xmath which is required in Appendix D .

(3) @xmath It follows from equations ( 3.70 ), ( 3.77 ), and ( 3.79 )
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the explicit form of @xmath given in equation ( 3.75 ) with @xmath
, equation ( 3.72 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the inequality follows since @xmath and @xmath . We show in
Appendix D that this inequality implies that none of @xmath may vanish,
and that they must all have same sign. Hence, for all @xmath throughout
the evolution, @xmath must all be non vanishing, and be all positive or
all negative.

### 3.7 Asymptotic Evolution

With no loss of generality, let @xmath initially at @xmath . Then it
follows from the above result that @xmath must all be positive and non
vanishing for all @xmath . Hence, @xmath are all monotonically
increasing functions for all @xmath throughout the evolution.

Equation ( 3.69 ) may be written, using equation ( 3.74 ), as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the past, @xmath and all @xmath decrease continuously. Hence, the
right hand side in equation ( 3.83 ) becomes more and more negligible.
The asymptotic solution in the limit @xmath is then given by @xmath
where @xmath . Thus @xmath in this limit.

Similarly, in the future, @xmath and all @xmath increase continuously.
However, the right hand side in equation ( 3.83 ) increases
exponentially now. It is then obvious that all @xmath within a finite
interval of @xmath , i.e. at a finite value @xmath of @xmath . In this
context, see equations ( 3.47 ) and ( 3.48 ), and the general analysis
given in asymptotic evolution in section 3.5.2.2 .

We now analyse the corresponding asymptotic solutions.

#### 3.7.1 Asymptotic Evolution: @xmath

It follows from the above discussion that @xmath in the limit @xmath .
Also, in this limit, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

up to multiplicative constants where @xmath are constants. The evolution
is then of Kasner type and is similar to that described in section
3.5.2.1 . The constants @xmath s are determined by the initial values
@xmath and @xmath , but obtaining the exact dependence in the general
case requires complete solution for @xmath . However, if the initial
values @xmath are large and negative then we have @xmath for all @xmath
and, hence, @xmath to a good approximation.

#### 3.7.2 Asymptotic Evolution: @xmath

It follows from the above discussion that @xmath in the limit @xmath
where @xmath is finite. Also, @xmath in this limit and @xmath depends on
the initial values @xmath and @xmath .

Although solutions for @xmath are not known, their asymptotic forms in
the limit @xmath , and hence those of @xmath , may be obtained following
the analysis given in section 3.5.2.2 . @xmath in equation ( 3.74 ) is a
special case of the example ( 3.62 ) where, now, @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath . Hence, it can be shown to correspond to the possibility (i)
given in equation ( 3.60 ). Therefore, we have @xmath and @xmath .

It then follows from equation ( 3.54 ) that @xmath and @xmath are given
in the limit @xmath by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.85)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.86)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where, since @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

Also, since @xmath , we have from equation ( 3.56 ) that the physical
time @xmath is given in this limit by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are finite constants. Clearly, @xmath in the
limit @xmath since it is assumed that @xmath . In this limit, the scale
factors @xmath may be written in terms of @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a constant and @xmath . Using equation ( 3.77 ) for
@xmath , the exponents @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the proportionality constant is @xmath . Note that @xmath . Hence,
we have @xmath in the limit @xmath with @xmath . See the discussion
below equation ( 3.19 ) for the relevance of this feature.

Thus, asymptotically in the limit @xmath , we obtain that @xmath for the
common transverse directions @xmath . Hence, these directions continue
to expand, their expansion being precisely that of a @xmath –
dimensional homogeneous, isotropic universe containing a perfect fluid
whose equation of state is @xmath . Also, @xmath for the brane
directions @xmath . Hence, these directions cease to expand or contract.
Their sizes are thus stabilised and are given by @xmath . Note that this
result is in accord with the general result described in section 3.3
since, in the limit @xmath , the brane densities @xmath all become equal
and hence the four types of branes all become identical; and, @xmath and
@xmath with @xmath .

### 3.8 Mechanism of Stabilisation

Using the asymptotic solutions, we can now give a physical
interpretation of the dynamical mechanism underlying the stabilisation
of the brane directions seen above for the @xmath configuration.

We first study the stabilisation process. Consider equation ( 3.68 ) for
@xmath , for example. Using the values of @xmath given in equation (
3.76 ), we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the @xmath configuration, @xmath direction is wrapped by 2 branes and
5 branes and is transverse to @xmath branes and @xmath branes. Thus,
from the above equation for @xmath and from similar equations for @xmath
, we see that 2 brane and 5 brane directions ‘contract with a force’
proportional to @xmath and @xmath respectively, whereas the directions
transverse to them ‘expand with a force’ proportional to @xmath and
@xmath respectively, where @xmath are the time dependent densities of
the corresponding branes.

When @xmath all become equal, the forces of expansion cancel the forces
of contraction resulting in vanishing net force for the @xmath
direction. Then, using equation ( 3.38 ), one has

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, as described earlier in the context of equations ( 3.20 ) and (
3.21 ), the transient ‘velocity’ @xmath is damped and @xmath reaches a
constant value in the expanding universe here since we have @xmath in
the limit @xmath with @xmath . The result is the stabilisation of the
@xmath direction.

The stabilised size @xmath of @xmath direction is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

see equation ( 3.87 ). Note that @xmath can be interpreted as arising
from the imbalance among the initial brane densities @xmath , and from
the parts @xmath of @xmath which indicate the transients. The above
analysis can be similarly applied to the stabilisation of other brane
directions @xmath in the @xmath configuration.

Thus, three conditions need to be satisfied for stabilisation: (1) the
time dependent brane densities @xmath all become equal; (2) the forces
of expansion and contraction for each of the brane directions be just
right so that the net force vanishes; (3) the universe be expanding as
@xmath in the limit @xmath with @xmath so that the transient velocities
are damped and the corresponding scale factors reach constant values.

For any mutually BPS @xmath intersecting brane configurations with the
equations of state as assumed here, it is straightforward to show using
the earlier analysis that the evolution equations ensure that @xmath all
become equal asymptotically even if they were unequal initially, and
that @xmath in the limit @xmath with @xmath . Thus conditions (1) and
(3) are satisfied. Condition (2) requires the brane configuration to be
such that each of the brane directions is wrapped by, and is transverse
to, just the right number and kind of branes. This condition is
satisfied for the @xmath configurations @xmath and @xmath , both of
which result in the stabilisation of seven brane directions and the
expansion of the remaining three spatial directions. To our knowledge,
the only other configurations which satisfy the condition (2) are the
@xmath configurations @xmath and @xmath , both of which result in the
stabilisation of six brane directions and the expansion of the remaining
four spatial directions [ 32 ] . However it is the @xmath configurations
that are entropically favourable, see equation ( 1.6 ).

Note that, as described in section 3.3 and up to certain technical
assumptions regarding the equality of brane densities and the asymptotic
behaviour of @xmath , the stabilisation here follows essentially as a
consequence of U duality symmetries. In particular, it is independent of
the ansatz for energy momentum tensors, or of the assumptions about
equations of state, as long as the components of the energy momentum
tensors obey the U duality constraints of the type given in equation (
3.19 ). Obtaining the details of the stabilisation, however, requires
further assumptions e.g. of the type made here.

Note also that the present mechanism of stabilisation of seven brane
directions, and the consequent emergence of three large spatial
directions, is very different from the ones proposed in string theory or
in brane gas models [ 37 , 38 , 39 , 40 ] .

### 3.9 Stabilised Sizes of Brane Directions

We thus see for the @xmath configuration that, asymptotically in the
limit @xmath , the initial @xmath – dimensional universe effectively
becomes @xmath – dimensional. Also, if @xmath then a dimensional
reduction of the @xmath – dimensional M theory along the corresponding
@xmath direction gives type IIA string theory with its dilaton now
stabilised. Using the standard relations, one can obtain the string
coupling constant @xmath , the string scale @xmath , and the four
dimensional Planck scale @xmath in terms of the M theory scale @xmath
and the stabilised values @xmath . Defining @xmath and assuming, with no
loss of generality, that the coordinate sizes of all spatial directions
are of @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the equalities are valid up to numerical factors of @xmath only
and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

as follows from equations ( 3.77 ), ( 3.87 ), and @xmath . Also, note
that @xmath .

Since we have an asymptotically @xmath dimensional universe evolving
from a @xmath dimensional one, it is of interest to study the resulting
ratios @xmath and @xmath , and study their dependence on the initial
values @xmath . In particular, one may like to know the generic values
of these ratios and to know whether arbitrarily small values are
possible. Setting @xmath , one then knows the generic scales of @xmath
and @xmath and, for example, whether @xmath is possible.

In view of the relations between @xmath given in equation ( 3.94 ), this
requires studying the stabilised values @xmath and @xmath , their
dependence on @xmath , and knowing whether they can be arbitrarily
large. Note that if @xmath for all @xmath then @xmath are all determined
in terms of @xmath only, see equation ( 3.87 ). It is then obvious from
equations ( 3.87 ) and ( 3.95 ) that any values for @xmath and @xmath ,
no matter how large, may be obtained by fine tuning @xmath
correspondingly. ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 It follows from equation ( 3.73 ) and the
definition of @xmath that the generic ranges of the initial values may
be taken to be given by @xmath within a couple of orders of magnitude.
If the initial values lie way beyond such a range then we consider it as
fine tuning.

This statement remains true even when @xmath s do not all vanish. In
this case, however, one may question the necessity of fine tuning since,
for example, the relation @xmath suggests that large values such as
@xmath may be obtained by tuning @xmath s, or @xmath , or both to within
a couple of orders of magnitude only. It turns out, as we explain below,
that fine tuning is still necessary to obtain such large values.

Consider first the possibility of tuning @xmath . Note that equations (
3.69 ) and ( 3.72 ) are invariant under the scaling

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a positive constant. The initial values scale
correspondingly as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

It then follows from equation ( 3.70 ) that @xmath , and hence @xmath ,
remain invariant. ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 This invariance is equivalent to that of
equations ( 3.30 ) and ( 3.31 ) under the scaling @xmath . This scaling
property merely reflects the choice of a scale for time. For example,
using this scaling, one may set @xmath or, when @xmath as is the case
here, set @xmath . The corresponding @xmath then provides a natural time
scale for evolution. We set @xmath using the above scaling.

With @xmath , the value of @xmath now depends only on @xmath and @xmath
. Since @xmath , it is still plausible to have a range of non zero
measure where @xmath are large and @xmath , and thereby obtain large
values for @xmath and @xmath . However, @xmath s are further constrained
by @xmath , @xmath , and consequently their magnitudes are all bounded
from above. For example, with @xmath , we obtain @xmath . See remark (2)
in section 3.6.1 . Thus, large values of @xmath cannot be obtained by
tuning @xmath alone.

Consider now the possibility of tuning @xmath . Obtaining the dependence
of @xmath on @xmath requires explicit solutions which are not available.
Hence, we obtain @xmath numerically. We will present the numerical
results in the next section. Here we point out that an approximate
expression for @xmath can be given in the limit when @xmath for all
@xmath . The reasoning involved is analogous to that used in obtaining
@xmath in equation ( 3.51 ). Using similar reasoning and setting @xmath
now, we have that if @xmath for all @xmath then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath can be calculated easily and requires no knowledge of
explicit solutions. Our numerical results show that @xmath given above
indeed provides a good approximation to @xmath when @xmath for all
@xmath .

Note also that @xmath must satisfy equation ( 3.73 ) with @xmath . It
then follows from an analysis similar to that given in Appendix D that
@xmath are all positive, cannot be too small, and are of @xmath
generically. Hence, in the limit @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath in
equation ( 3.98 ) are of @xmath . This indicates that large values of
@xmath , and hence of @xmath , cannot be obtained by tuning @xmath
alone; a tuning of @xmath , which translates to fine tuning of @xmath ,
is required. Our numerical analysis also supports this conclusion.

We thus find that, even when @xmath s do not all vanish, a fine tuning
of @xmath is necessary to obtain large values for @xmath and @xmath . We
will see some example in section 3.12 .

### 3.10 Discussion with Other Intersecting Configurations

In this section we will discuss some intersecting configuration which
are not @xmath distributed in said way. We mentioned all our assumption
in last section. There we say our @xmath is actually a fine tuned
initial condition, and how this configuration comes out naturally form M
theory is not understood. To discuss this point we here give some
example configuration where stabilisation of 7 directions is not
achieved.

Even @xmath branes intersecting in some other way following BPS
intersection rule may not produces required stabilisation. As an example
consider following configuration:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes brane direction and @xmath direction are
perpendicular to brane. For this configuration general analysis of
section 3.5 gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

So one can see here only @xmath and @xmath get stabilised. This
configuration is different from ours. Here stabilisation is achieved
only in the directions where exactly two branes are presents. But in our
@xmath case exactly 2 sets of branes are present in all 7 directions.
Similarly we can also do the analysis for @xmath case. None of these
cases stabilisation of 7 directions occurs. As discussed in section 3.5
, using equations ( 3.58 ), ( 3.60 ), ( 3.61 ) and ( 3.62 ) one can find
general formula for @xmath . In our case all @xmath . So in this case if
we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath will be given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are defined in equation ( 3.44 ). @xmath ’s depend on
particular intersection. For our ansatz of: @xmath , mentioned in
section 3.4 , @xmath ’s are given by equation ( 3.27 ).

All possible configurations are given for example in [ 63 ] . In Table
3.2 , 3.3 , 3.4 , 3.5 and 3.6 we list a few intersecting M brane
configurations and their corresponding late time evolution. We use
notation of [ 63 ] , which is following: in square bracket numbers of
each type of branes are indicated. For example @xmath means @xmath
number of 2 branes and @xmath number of 5 branes. In curly bracket how
many branes are there in each direction is indicated. Position of the
number indicates number of branes and corresponding number indicates
number of directions. For example @xmath means there is only 1 brane in
@xmath directions, there are 2 branes presents in @xmath directions and
so on. For example take @xmath . This is the configuration we discuss in
last page. This means 2 sets of 2 branes and 2 sets of 5 branes. Then
@xmath denotes following: 1)there are 1 brane in 3 directions, in this
case @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . 2) There are 2 branes in 4 directions,
namely @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . 3) There are 3 branes in 1
direction, namely @xmath . 4) And there is no direction which is
populated by 4 branes. We also list the configurations explicitly for
the shake of reader’s convenience.

We first give some example for @xmath case in Table 3.1 and 3.2 . Next
we give some example for @xmath in Table 3.3 . Finally we give example
of @xmath in table 3.4 , 3.5 and 3.6 .

The explicit configuration mentioned in above table, 3.1 given below:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The explicit configuration mention in above table, 3.2 given below:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The explicit configuration mentioned in above table, 3.3 given below:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The explicit configuration mentioned in above table, 3.4 given below:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The explicit configuration mention in above table, 3.5 given below:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The explicit configuration mentioned in above table, 3.6 given below:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 3.11 Time Varying Newton’s Constant

The evolution of the eleven dimensional early universe which is
dominated by the @xmath configuration described here can also be
considered from the perspective of four dimensional spacetime. Indeed,
in general, let the eleven dimensional line element @xmath be given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , with @xmath , describes the four dimensional spacetime,
and the fields @xmath and @xmath , @xmath depend on @xmath only. Also,
let @xmath . It is then straightforward to show that the gravitational
part of the eleven dimensional action @xmath given in equation ( 2.1 )
becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the coordinate volume of the seven dimensional space and
the subscripts @xmath indicate that the corresponding quantities are
with respect to the four dimensional metric @xmath . The action @xmath
describes four dimensional spacetime in which the effective Newton’s
constant @xmath is spacetime dependent and is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the case of early universe, the fields @xmath and @xmath depend on
@xmath only. Then @xmath is time dependent and we have, for @xmath and
its fractional time derivative,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For the four dimensional spacetime arising from the @xmath
configuration, the @xmath fields are just the scale factors @xmath for
@xmath directions, and all @xmath are given in equation ( 3.70 ) in
terms of @xmath , @xmath . Then, using equation ( 3.77 ) and the
definitions of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the limit @xmath , we have from the results given earlier that @xmath
and the fields @xmath all become equal. Then @xmath where @xmath is
given in equation ( 3.95 ), and the three dimensional scale factors
evolve as in the standard FRW case, namely @xmath as given in equations
( 3.89 ) and ( 3.90 ).

It thus follows that the effective Newton’s constant @xmath varies with
time in the early universe and, in the case of @xmath configuration,
approaches a constant value @xmath as the four dimensional universe
expands to large size. The precise time dependence of @xmath will follow
from explicit solutions to equations ( 3.69 ) and ( 3.72 ). The
consequences of a such a time dependent @xmath are clearly interesting,
and are likely to be important too. But their study is beyond the scope
of the present thesis.

However, we like to point out here a characteristic feature of the time
dependence of @xmath which arises in the case of @xmath configuration.
Consider the behaviour of the differences @xmath in the limit @xmath
which, in our case, vanish to the leading order. These quantities have
been analysed in section 3.5.3 and, for the example of the @xmath given
in equation ( 3.62 ), they are given by equations ( 3.66 ) and ( 3.67 )
to the non trivial leading order. The case of @xmath configuration
corresponds to @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Noting that @xmath and
that @xmath in our case, equation ( 3.67 ) now gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

to the leading order. Clearly, @xmath given in equation ( 3.105 ) will
also have the same form as above to the non trivial leading order. Thus,
taking the real part and writing in terms of @xmath using equation (
3.88 ), we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

to the non trivial leading order in the limit @xmath where @xmath and
@xmath are constants, @xmath , and @xmath . Correspondingly, the time
varying Newton’s constant is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

to the leading order in the limit @xmath . Note that the constants
@xmath and @xmath depend on the details of matching. The constants
@xmath and @xmath arise as real and imaginary parts of an exponent on
time variable, see equation ( 3.106 ). They do not depend on the initial
values @xmath and thus are independent of the details of evolution, but
depend only on the configuration parameters @xmath and @xmath .

The amplitude of time variation of @xmath is dictated by @xmath , and it
vanishes in the limit @xmath . Hence, the time variation of @xmath in
equation ( 3.108 ) is unlikely to contradict any late time observations.
The time variation of @xmath has log periodic oscillations also: @xmath
has an oscillatory behaviour where the @xmath and @xmath nodes occur at
times @xmath and @xmath which are related by @xmath , i.e. by @xmath .
The characteristic signatures and observational consequences of such log
periodic variations of @xmath are not clear to us.

Log periodic behaviour occurs in many physical systems with ‘discrete
self similarity’ or ‘discrete scale symmetry’: for example, in quantum
mechanical systems with strongly attractive @xmath potentials near zero
energy [ 48 ] ; in Choptuik scaling and brane – black hole merger
transitions [ 49 ] ; and in a variety of dynamical systems [ 50 ] .
Algebraically, the log periodicity arises when an exponent on an
independent variable becomes complex for certain values of system
parameters. The relevant equations and solutions can often be cast in a
form given in equations ( 3.66 ) and ( 3.67 ). But we are not aware of a
physical reason which explains the ubiquity of the log periodicity.

To our knowledge, this is the first time a log periodic behaviour
appears in a cosmological context. One expects such a behaviour to leave
some novel imprint in the universe. But it is not clear to us which
effects to look for, or which observables are sensitive to the log
periodic variations of @xmath .

### 3.12 Numerical Results

We are unable to solve explicitly the equations ( 3.69 ) – ( 3.72 )
describing the early universe evolution. Hence, we have analysed these
equations numerically. In this section, we briefly describe our
procedure and present a few illustrative results. We have analysed both
the @xmath and @xmath cases which would correspond to four dimensional
universe dominated by radiation and pressureless dust respectively. The
results are qualitatively the same and, hence, we take @xmath in the
following. Note that @xmath in equation ( 3.108 ) is then determined
and, for @xmath , the @xmath and @xmath nodes in the log periodic
oscillations occur at times @xmath and @xmath related by @xmath .

We proceed as follows. We start at an initial time @xmath and choose a
set of initial values @xmath . For each set of @xmath , we further
choose numerous arbitrary sets of @xmath such that @xmath , @xmath , and
equations ( 3.73 ) and ( 3.78 ) are satisfied. ¹³ ¹³ 13 There are two
special choices for the set of @xmath . One is where @xmath and another
is the one which maximises the approximation @xmath given in equation (
3.98 ). The later set may be determined by the algorithm given in
Appendix E . For each set of initial values @xmath , we then numerically
analyse the evolution for @xmath and obtain the value of @xmath ; the
evolution of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ; the stabilised values @xmath
; and the resulting values for @xmath . For a few sets of initial
values, we have analysed the evolution for @xmath also.

We find that the numerical results we have obtained confirm the
asymptotic features described in this thesis:

(1) @xmath and @xmath all vanish in the limit @xmath . In this limit,
the evolution of the scale factors @xmath is of Kasner type.

(2) @xmath and the physical time @xmath all diverge in the limit @xmath
where @xmath is finite. In this limit, the scale factors @xmath evolve
as in the standard FRW case and @xmath reach constant values.

(3) @xmath given in equation ( 3.98 ) provides a good approximation to
@xmath when @xmath for all @xmath .

(4) Any values for the ratios @xmath and @xmath can be obtained, but a
corresponding fine tuning of @xmath is necessary.

(5) The log periodic oscillations of @xmath , equivalently of @xmath ,
can also be seen in the limit @xmath . They can be matched to solutions
of the type given in equation ( 3.106 ).

To illustrate the values of @xmath and the ratios @xmath one obtains,
and to give an idea of their dependence on the initial values @xmath ,
we tabulate these quantities in Table 3.7 for a few sets of initial
values @xmath . We have also tabulated the values of @xmath as given by
equation ( 3.98 ). The value of @xmath follows from @xmath and, hence,
is not tabulated.

In Table 3.8 , the corresponding initial values @xmath , @xmath , are
tabulated up to overall positive constants. The remaining @xmath s are
given by equations ( 3.78 ) and the overall positive constants are
determined by @xmath and equation ( 3.73 ). All the sets of initial
values @xmath are chosen arbitrarily with no particular pattern and are
presented here to give an idea of the typical results.

We find, by analysing numerous sets of initial values, that changing the
values of @xmath for a given set of @xmath changes the values of @xmath
and @xmath only up to about four orders of magnitude. Any bigger change
requires changing @xmath to a similar order, confirming that any values
for @xmath and @xmath can be obtained but only by fine tuning @xmath .

We illustrate the evolution of the universe for the data set (3) given
in Tables 3.7 and 3.8 where many features can be seen clearly. The
evolution with respect to @xmath of @xmath is shown in Figures 3.1 , 3.2
a , and 3.2 b . For negative values of @xmath not shown in Figure 3.1 ,
all @xmath evolve along straight lines with no further crossings and
their evolution is of Kasner type. Also, all @xmath diverge at a finite
value @xmath of @xmath . The magnified plots in Figures 3.2 a and 3.2 b
for @xmath and for @xmath respectively show the continually
criss-crossing evolution of @xmath which, near @xmath , represent the
log periodic oscillations and are well described by equation ( 3.106 ).

The evolution with respect to @xmath of @xmath is shown in Figure 3.3 .
It can be seen that @xmath , and hence the scale factors @xmath of the
brane directions, all stabilise to constant values as @xmath .

The evolution with respect to @xmath of @xmath and @xmath is shown in
Figure 3.4 . Note that the seven dimensional volume of the brane
directions @xmath and that it stabilises to a constant value @xmath as
@xmath . We have also verified that the evolution of @xmath as @xmath is
same as that of the corresponding ones in a four dimensional radiation
dominated FRW universe.

The log periodic oscillations of @xmath are illustrated in Figures 3.5 a
and 3.5 b by magnifying the plots of @xmath with respect to @xmath for
@xmath and for @xmath . The internode separations can be seen in these
figures, and they match the value @xmath obtained in equation ( 3.107 )
from the asymptotic analysis.

In all the cases we have analysed, the evolutions of @xmath are
qualitatively similar to the ones shown in the figures above. The
details, such as the rise and fall of @xmath in the initial times or the
value of @xmath or the stabilised values of the brane directions, depend
on the initial values but the asymptotic features described in the
beginning of this section are all the same. Hence, we have presented the
plots for one illustrative set of initial values only.

### 3.13 Summary and Conclusions

We summarise the main results of this thesis. We assume that the early
universe in M theory is homogeneous, anisotropic, and is dominated by
@xmath mutually BPS @xmath intersecting brane configurations which are
assumed to be the most entropic ones. Also, the ten dimensional space is
assumed to be toroidal. We further assumed that the brane antibrane
annihilation effects are negligible during the evolution of the universe
at least until the brane directions are stabilised resulting in an
effective @xmath dimensional universe.

We then present a thorough analysis of the evolution of such an
universe. We obtain general relations among the components of the energy
momentum tensor @xmath using U duality symmetries of M theory and show
that these relations alone imply, under a technical assumption, that the
@xmath mutually BPS @xmath intersecting brane configurations with
identical numbers of branes and antibranes will asymptotically lead to
an effective @xmath dimensional expanding universe.

To obtain further details of the evolution, we make further assumptions
about @xmath . We then analyse the evolution equations in D dimensions
in general, and then specialise to the eleven dimensional case of
interest here. Since explicit solutions are not available, we apply the
general analysis and describe the qualitative features of the evolution
of the @xmath brane configuration : In the asymptotic limit, three
spatial directions expand as in the standard FRW universe and the
remaining seven spatial directions reach constant, stabilised values.
These values depend on the initial conditions and can be obtained
numerically. Also, any stabilised values may be obtained but it requires
a fine tuning of the initial brane densities.

We also present a physical description of the mechanism of stabilisation
of the seven brane directions. The stabilisation is due, in essence, to
the relations among the components of @xmath which follow from U duality
symmetries, and to each of the brane directions in the @xmath
configuration being wrapped by, and being transverse to, just the right
number and kind of branes. This mechanism is very different from the
ones proposed in string theory or in brane gas models.

In the asymptotic limit, from the perspective of four dimensional
spacetime, we obtain an effective four dimensional Newton’s constant
@xmath which is now time varying. Its precise time dependence will
follow from explicit solutions of the eleven dimensional evolution
equations. We find that, in the case of @xmath brane configuration,
@xmath has characteristic log periodic oscillations. The oscillation
‘period’ depends only on the configuration parameters.

Using numerical analysis, we have confirmed the qualitative features
mentioned above.

We now make a few comments on the assumptions made in this thesis. Note
that the assumptions mentioned above in the first paragraph of this
section pull a rug over many important dynamical questions that must be
answered in a final analysis. Some of these questions, ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 Many of
the questions listed below have been raised by the referee also. in the
context of M theory, are:

* Starting from the highly energetic and highly interacting M theory
excitations, which are expected to describe the high temperature state
of the universe, how does a eleven dimensional spacetime emerge?

* What determines the topology of the ten dimensional space? Here, we
assumed it to be toroidal. How does the universe evolve if its spatial
topology is not toroidal?

* From what stage onwards, is the eleven dimensional ‘low energy’
effective action a good description of further evolution?

* What are the relevant ‘low energy’ configurations of M theory? Here,
based on the black hole studies, we have assumed that the @xmath
mutually BPS @xmath intersecting brane configurations are the most
entropic ones and, hence, that they are the dominant configurations in
the early universe studied here.

This raises further questions: Are the @xmath , and not some other
mutually BPS @xmath or some other non BPS, configurations really the
most entropic and the dominant ones? Even assuming that mutually BPS
@xmath is the answer, are there other @xmath configurations beside the
@xmath ones and, if so, how do they affect the evolution described here?
What are the effects of the sub-dominant configurations? In particular,
will the effects of other brane configurations mentioned above undo the
stabilisation of seven directions presented here?

Note that unless these questions are answered and, furthermore, it is
shown that other brane configurations mentioned above do not undo the
stabilisation presented here, our assumption that the evolution of the
universe is dictated by the @xmath configuration amounts to a fine
tuning: The @xmath configuration assumed here, where the sets of 2
branes and 5 branes wrap the directions @xmath homogeneously everywhere
in the mutually transverse three dimensional space, may not arise
generically. Also, the implicitly required absence of other brane
configurations is not natural in the context of early universe. Then the
problem of the emergence of an effective @xmath dimensional universe, a
solution for which is presented here, gets shifted to answering how the
required, finely tuned, initial conditions may arise naturally from M
theory.

* What is the time scale of brane antibrane annihilations in the @xmath
configuration studied here? Is it long enough for the brane directions
to be stabilised as described in this thesis? Here, based on the black
hole studies, we have assumed it to be long enough.

* A related question, but applicable after stabilisation of brane
directions, is the following: If all the branes and antibranes will
eventually decay, as seems natural, then what are the decay products?
How can one obtain the known constituents of our present universe?

Although one of us have presented a principle in [ 15 ] that may be of
help, the fact is that we do not know even where to begin in answering
these questions quantitatively, much less know the answers. Nevertheless
we present the above list of questions, unlikely to be complete, in
order to emphasise the further work required to understand how our known
@xmath dimensional universe may emerge from M theory.

In the present work, with many attendant assumptions, we considered the
@xmath configurations and explained a mechanism by which seven
directions stabilise and an effective @xmath dimensional universe
results. Clearly, it is important to answer the questions listed above
and thereby determine the relevance of this mechanism.

Within the present framework, there are many other issues that may be
studied further. We conclude by mentioning a sample of them. We have
shown here that a large stabilised seven dimensional volume can be
obtained but it requires a corresponding fine tuning of initial brane
densities. This is within the context of our ansatzes for @xmath and the
equations of state. It will be of interest to prove or disprove the
necessity of such a fine tuning in more general contexts.

The @xmath intersecting brane configuration studied here is the
entropically favourable one and, as proposed in [ 15 ] , may be thought
of as emerging from the high temperature phase of M theory in the early
universe. Such an emergence suggests that there may be novel solutions
to the horizon problem and to the primordial density fluctuations,
perhaps similar to those explored recently in the Hagedorn phase of
string theory by Nayeri et al [ 64 ] (see also [ 65 ] ). Note that this
involves answering many of the questions listed above.

It may be of interest to study further the consequences of time varying
Newton’s constant which appears here, in particular possible imprints of
its asymptotic log periodic oscillations.

In the case of a class of black holes, the brane configurations describe
well their entropy and Hawking radiation. In the present description of
a four dimensional early universe in terms of @xmath intersecting
branes, it is not clear which quantities to calculate which, analogously
to entropy or Hawking radiation in the black hole case, may provide
further validation. It is important to study this further.

## Appendix A T and S duality rules

### a.1 T duality rules for background fields

Lets take a solution of type II supergravity in string frame

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath vary from 0 to 9. For simplicity assume all
special dimensions are compact. NS sector fields @xmath and dilaton
@xmath are switched on. Consider a metric such that it does not depend
on @xmath . we denote @xmath by @xmath . Now @xmath , @xmath run over
@xmath . Under T duality background fields transform to a new set of
fields. Rule for this transformation is known as Buscher’s rules. See
for more details [ 4 , 5 , 2 ] for example. According to these set of
rules fields goes like following:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

When R-R fields are switched on they also transform under T-duality. As
T duality transform IIA theory to IIB theory and vice versa, it
transform odd form fields to even form and even to odd. If we start with
a type IIA theory, transformation rules are given by [ 2 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

So we see the theory goes to type IIB theory.

### a.2 S duality rules for background fields

S duality is a duality of type IIB theory. This duality relates strongly
coupled theory to weakly coupled theory. Assuming solution of the form
equation ( A.1 ) in string frame rules for transformation of background
fields under S duality are following:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

So we see it transform @xmath brane to @xmath string and @xmath brane to
@xmath brane. @xmath brane remains unchanged and coupling constant goes
to @xmath .

## Appendix B BPS Intersection Rules

In general a single @xmath -brane solutions break half of the
supersymmetries present in the theory. If we add another set of @xmath
-branes intersecting the first set, the new solution breaks another half
of the supersymmetries. But it is possible to add second set in such a
way that, it breaks the same supersymmetries as the first set does. Then
we have a solution which preserves half of the total supersymmetries. We
call, this particular way of adding more sets of branes, BPS
intersection rules. A compact form of these rules can be found in [ 5 ]
, [See also reference given in [ 5 ] .]

We list a few of these rules hare. We give for both 10-dimensional and
11-dimensional theory.

The notation of the above tables is follows:

@xmath means @xmath and @xmath type branes are considered. @xmath brane
is @xmath dimensional and @xmath brane is @xmath dimensional. @xmath
indicates all of the worldvolume directions of @xmath and @xmath are
parallel. @xmath means @xmath and @xmath branes worldvolume intersects
only in @xmath directions.

## Appendix C To Show @xmath

Let @xmath and @xmath be the standard @xmath – component vectors with
the standard vector product. Let @xmath be the angle between them. Then
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and we have the Schwarz inequality in the
form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . The equality is valid, i.e. @xmath , if and only if
@xmath , equivalently @xmath .

We now show the following:

Let @xmath and @xmath be given by equation ( 3.29 ). If @xmath and
@xmath satisfy the relations @xmath and @xmath then @xmath . @xmath
vanishes if and only if @xmath all vanish.

Proof : It is clear that @xmath vanishes if @xmath all vanish. Now, let
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath be the angle between them. Then @xmath .
Hence, @xmath implies that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The vector @xmath is perpendicular to @xmath since @xmath . Let @xmath
where @xmath is perpendicular to the plane defined by @xmath and @xmath
, and @xmath lies in it. Then @xmath where @xmath and @xmath . Since
@xmath and @xmath are perpendicular and @xmath lies in the plane defined
by @xmath and @xmath , it follows that @xmath is perpendicular to @xmath
, and that the angle between the vectors @xmath and @xmath is @xmath .
We then have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the inequality follows from equation ( C.2 ). The equality holds,
and hence @xmath vanishes, only when @xmath , i.e. only when @xmath all
vanish. This completes the proof.

## Appendix D Signs and non vanishing of @xmath

Here, we show that the inequality in equation ( 3.82 ) implies that none
of @xmath may vanish, and that they must all have same sign.

Setting @xmath , equation ( 3.82 ) becomes @xmath where the polynomial
@xmath . Now, if any of the @xmath vanishes then @xmath , see the
Schwarz inequality given in equation ( C.1 ). Hence, none of the @xmath
may vanish. Rewrite @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and note that @xmath for each curly bracket, see equation ( C.1 ).
Hence, the necessary conditions for @xmath are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let one of the @xmath , e.g. @xmath , be negative and the other three
positive. This violates the first inequality above and, hence, is not
possible. Let two of the @xmath , e.g. @xmath and @xmath , be negative
and the other two positive. This violates the second inequality above
and, hence, is not possible. Similarly, three of the @xmath being
negative and one positive is also not possible. Thus, the only
possibility is that all @xmath have same sign. Thus we have that none of
the @xmath may vanish, and that they must all have same sign.

With @xmath denoted as @xmath , equation ( 3.81 ) for @xmath becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that @xmath . If @xmath then it follows that @xmath does not vanish
and has the same sign as @xmath . Consider now the case where @xmath .
Using equation ( C.1 ) to eliminate @xmath in the polynomial @xmath , we
obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the inequality @xmath , see equation ( 3.80 ), it follows that
@xmath . Combined with the earlier result on @xmath , this inequality
implies that @xmath , and hence @xmath given above, may not vanish and
must have the same sign as @xmath , irrespective of whether @xmath is
positive or negative. This completes the proof.

## Appendix E Set of @xmath which maximises @xmath

With no loss of generality, let @xmath . The corresponding set of @xmath
which satisfies equation ( 3.73 ), with @xmath , and which maximises
@xmath , where @xmath , may be obtained by the following algorithm. The
required analysis is straightforward but a little tedious and, hence, is
omitted.

-   Let @xmath . It will turn out that @xmath .

-   Choose @xmath . Then @xmath .

-   If @xmath then choose @xmath . Then @xmath .

-   If @xmath then choose @xmath . Then @xmath .

-   If @xmath and if @xmath then choose @xmath . Then @xmath .

-   If @xmath and if @xmath then choose @xmath . Then @xmath .

-   @xmath are all thus determined in terms of @xmath . Equation ( 3.73
    ), with @xmath , will now determine @xmath .
