##### Contents

-    I Introduction
    -    I Introduction
    -    II Modifying Gravity
        -    II.1 Modifying Gravity with Mass Terms:
        -    II.2 Modifying Gravity with Higher Curvature Terms:
        -    II.3 Topologically Massive Gravity
        -    II.4 New Massive Gravity and Critical Gravity
    -    III Constant Curvature Spacetimes
    -    IV Canonical Analysis
        -    IV.1 The Klein-Gordon Equation
        -    IV.2 Pais-Uhlenbeck Oscillators
    -    V Conventions
        -    V.1 Flat Spacetime:
        -    V.2 The Curved Spacetime:
-    II Massive Higher Derivative Gravity in @xmath -dimensional Anti-de
    Sitter Spacetimes
    -    VI Introduction
    -    VII Linearized Equations
        -    VII.1 Massive case:
        -    VII.2 Massless case:
    -    VIII Tree-level Amplitude
    -    IX Massive theory in flat spacetime:
    -    X Massless theory in flat spacetime:
    -    XI Conclusion and Discussion for Chapter-2
-    III CANONICAL STRUCTURE OF HIGHER DERIVATIVE GRAVITY IN 3D
    -    XII Introduction
    -    XIII Higher-derivative spin-2 in flat spacetime
        -    XIII.1 @xmath case:
        -    XIII.2 @xmath case:
        -    XIII.3 Adding static and spinning sources
            -    XIII.3.1 Static Sources:
            -    XIII.3.2 Spinning masses:
        -    XIII.4 Weak field approximation
        -    XIII.5 Higher-derivative gravity plus a Chern-Simons term
    -    XIV Higher-derivative spin-2 in a de Sitter background
        -    XIV.1 Masses from the nonrelativistic limit
        -    XIV.2 Equations of motions in the NMG case
    -    XV Conclusions and Discussion for Chapter-3
-    IV Conclusion
    -    A Metric Decomposition and The Higher Curvature Action in dS
        Background
        -    A.1 Introduction
        -    A.2 The Gauge-Invariance of Metric Decomposition:
            -    A.2.1 The @xmath Component:
            -    A.2.2 The @xmath Component:
            -    A.2.3 The @xmath Component:
        -    A.3 Gauge-Invariant Combinations:
            -    A.3.1 Ricci Tensor:
            -    A.3.2 The @xmath Component:
            -    A.3.3 The @xmath Component:
            -    A.3.4 The @xmath Component:
        -    A.4 Ricci Scalar
        -    A.5 The Einstein Tensor
            -    A.5.1 The @xmath Term:
            -    A.5.2 The @xmath Term:
            -    A.5.3 The @xmath Term:
        -    A.6 Gauge-Invariance of the Defined Functions
        -    A.7 Ricci Scalar in Terms of Gauge Invariant functions
        -    A.8 The Bianchi Identity
        -    A.9 Metric Decomposition and Gauge-Invariant Form Of The
            Higher Derivative Action
            -    A.9.1 The Einstein-Hilbert Part
            -    A.9.2 Decomposition of @xmath term
            -    A.9.3 Decomposition of @xmath term
            -    A.9.4 Decomposition of @xmath term
            -    A.9.5 Decomposed form of Einstein-Hilbert Action
            -    A.9.6 The Gauge-Invariant form of the Einstein-Hilbert
                term:
        -    A.10 The @xmath Part of The Higher Derivative Action
        -    A.11 The @xmath Part of the Higher Derivative Action
            -    A.11.1 The Gauge-Invariant form of @xmath :
            -    A.11.2 The Gauge-Invariant Form of the @xmath Action:
        -    A.12 The Total Gauge-Invariant Action
        -    A.13 Gauge Invariance of The Field Equations
            -    A.13.1 The @xmath Term
            -    A.13.2 The @xmath Term
            -    A.13.3 The @xmath Term

###### Acknowledgements. I express sincere appreciation to Prof. Dr.
Bayram Tekin for his guidance and insight throughout the research. I
thank him to teach me how to think and cope with research problems. I am
also grateful to him for giving me the feeling of creating and proposing
research areas. I am grateful to my collaborator Tahsin Çagrı Şişman for
studying and doing research with me. I also thank TUBİTAK for supporting
me as a research student in two projects, 110T339 ( The Classical and
Quantum Mechanical Structures of Higher Derivative Gravity Theories )
and 104T177 ( Research on the Mathematical Background of Nonperturbative
Superstring Theories ), during my PhD work. I also sincerely thank all
the jury members for participating in my thesis defense and reading and
doing corrections in my thesis. To my girlfriend, Pınar Yaran , I offer
sincere thanks for her great understanding and motivation throughout the
writing process. I am also grateful to my friends Ertan Zaferoğlu , Ozan
Keysan , Hüseyin Kapukaya and Kurtuluş Yılmaz for their moral support
and for sharing life with me during the most difficult part of my PhD
work. I am indebted to my family for their moral and logistic supports,
encouragement and love throughout the time that has gone for getting my
PhD degree.

## Part I Introduction

### I Introduction

General Relativity (GR) Einstein can be thought as a modification
(albeit a major one) of Newtonian gravity. The history of gravity starts
with Newton’s @xmath force law in @xmath . The precise form of this law
is

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath is the universal Newton’s constant and @xmath are the
masses of the interacting particles. The minus sign indicates that the
force is attractive. The Celestial mechanics gave successful
verifications of this law. A well-known example of the success of
Newton’s theory is the prediction of a new planet. After the discovery
of the orbit of Uranus there were attempts to calculate this orbit
theoretically. However, these attempts did not work exactly since there
were deviations between the calculated and observed orbits Grosser ;
Goldhaber . Using Newton’s law ( 1 ) the location of Neptune was
predicted and just after this calculation it was observed exactly at
that location Grosser ; Goldhaber . Hence an “outer” mass was
responsible for the perturbations of the orbit of Uranus. Newton’s law,
with the help of “dark matter” (Neptune in this case) worked well for
the case of Uranus. After this resolution, there were studies of all
planets. When Mercury was studied, another problem was found: The
calculations of precession of Mercury’s perihelion was in contradiction
with the observed value. The calculations gave larger value than the
observed ones. The first attempt to solve this problem was again to
invoke the “dark matter” idea. It was thought that there must be a
planet, Vulcan, in the solar system Goldhaber ; Verrier . However, this
did not solve the problem since Vulcan was never found. The solution
came with modifying gravity: replacing Newtonian gravity with the
Einsteinian one Goldhaber .

In GR the spacetime geometry is determined by the matter, energy,
pressure etc. and the dynamics of matter or light is determined by the
geometry of spacetime. GR is constructed with the idea of equivalence
principle and the general coordinate invariance (and with the added
assumption that the equations are wave-type equations with second
derivatives on the basic fields). The Einstein equation is

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

where the left hand side is the geometry part and it is known as the
Einstein tensor and the right hand side is the matter part. In ( 2 ),
@xmath and @xmath are the Ricci tensor and Ricci scalar, respectively.
These quantities can be thought as a measure of the curvature of
spacetime. They depend on the spacetime metric @xmath and its
derivatives. The connection is taken to be metric compatible ( @xmath ).
In the right hand side, there is a coupling constant related to the
Newton’s constant which in four dimensions is @xmath , and @xmath is the
energy-momentum tensor coming from the matter sector.

Einstein’s equation, right after was introduced, was immediately applied
to solve the then more-than fifty year old problem of Mercury’s orbit.
After the Schwarzschild solution was found, which is the unique static
spherically symmetric time-independent solution to ( 2 ), the perihelion
precession of Mercury was calculated and the answer was found to be
compatible with the observed value Goldhaber ; Weinberg3 ; Inverno ;
Carroll . There were also other predictions that came out from GR such
as the bending of light passing by the sun and the gravitational
redshift of light which were also supported by observations. Inspite of
these successful solutions and predictions there are some observations
that GR in its basic form as given in ( 2 ) cannot explain. The data
taken from supernova explosions Risse ; Perlmutter ; Hinterbichler show
that the universe has an accelerated expansion. GR cannot explain this
phenomenon in its pure form ¹ ¹ 1 @xmath is taken as the standard
energy-momentum tensor of the matter. .

If GR is taken as the correct theory, there must exist a dark energy
component in the matter-energy budget of the universe which can be
represented as a constant term, the cosmological constant, @xmath . The
density of the dark energy is estimated to be @xmath of the total energy
density of the universe and numerically it reads

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

which is very small compared to the vacuum energy density that comes
from the energy density of the vacuum of quantum field theory (QFT);

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (4)
  -- -------- -- -----

Hinterbichler ; Rubakov ; Weinberg . This mismatch of the “experimental”
and “theoretical” values of the energy density of the vacuum is known as
the cosmological constant problem. Therefore, it can be thought that GR
is not the full theory and it must be modified in the infrared (IR),
namely at ultra-large distances or ultra-weak interacting regimes, such
that without a need of dark energy the accelerating expansion of the
universe happens. [Admittedly, this alone will not solve the question of
why QFT vacuum is almost empty.] One of the suitable candidates for this
modification is to give a tiny mass to the graviton in the theory, in
such a way that massive GR still passes the solar system tests.

From the perspective of QFT, at low energies, GR can be thought as a
weakly interacting massless spin-2 field. The story starts with the
classification of particles with respect to their spins and masses, as
degrees of freedom Hinterbichler ; Weinberg1 . The representations of
these degrees of freedom are fields. For spin-0 mode of massless
particles the representations is a scalar field, and for spin-1 it is a
vector field. For spin-2 mode the symmetry is the general coordinate
invariance when the interactions are taken into account, and around flat
and maximally symmetric spaces, one has a massless helicity-2 particle.
This points to GR Hinterbichler ; Gupta ; Kraichnan ; Weinberg2 ; Deser1
; Boulware ; Fang ; Wald with the action

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (5)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath is the determinant of the spacetime metric and the rest are
defined in section V.2 . Therefore, it is also natural to combine the
quantum theory with GR.

There are other motivations to try to modify GR and perhaps construct a
quantum gravity theory. The Schwarzschild solution of ( 2 ) is a black
hole with a curvature singularity, to explain or resolve this type of
singularities a quantum gravity theory is needed. Also, to understand
the very early universe when both the quantum effects and gravitational
effects are dominant at the same time, a unification of gravity and
quantum mechanics is necessary. There are attempts to construct quantum
gravity theories. String theory is one such candidate. Higher curvature
gravity theories also are candidates. With this motivation it is also
possible to add higher curvature terms to Einstein gravity ( 5 ). The
higher curvature terms are negligible at low energies, but they dominate
at high energy domains. Another reason to introduce the higher curvature
terms is that the Einstein-Hilbert action ( 5 ) is not renormalizable.
Higher curvature terms make the theory renormalizable but ruin the
unitarity, namely yields negative norm states in the scattering matrix
Stelle1 ; Stelle2 .

To summarize the argument, we can say that GR needs modification at both
the IR and ultraviolet (UV) regimes. Therefore, in this thesis Einstein
gravity will be modified both by adding mass and higher curvature terms.
Hence we modify the theory at both the UV and IR regimes.

The outline of the thesis is as follows: In the next sections of this
chapter the massive gravity and higher derivative gravity models are
discussed separately. In the massive gravity model mainly the
Pauli-Fierz Pauli1 ; Pauli2 model is studied and also the nature of the
van Dam-Veltman-Zakharov vanDam ; Zakharov discontinuity between the
strictly massless theory and the arbitrarily small mass theory is
discussed. Then some specific three dimensional massive theories are
studied. After that, some technical details will be given about the
relevant spacetimes, the cosmological constant and the higher
dimensional gravity models. At the end of this Chapter the higher
derivative Pais-Uhlenbeck oscillators are briefly reviewed. In the
second chapter the general higher curvature massive gravity theory is
analyzed. Its unitarity structure is studied by computing the tree level
scattering amplitude in generic @xmath dimensions. Also, the Newtonian
potentials are calculated. The third chapter is devoted to the analysis
of the three dimensional unitary theory. These two chapters are based on
the papers “ Massive Higher Derivative Gravity in D-dimensional Anti-de
Sitter Spacetimes ” Gullu1 and “ Canonical Structure of Higher
Derivative Gravity in 3D ” Gullu2 respectively. Then, the conclusion
part comes. Also, an appendix part is added so that some of the
calculations can be followed easily.

### Ii Modifying Gravity

In this part the modification of the Einstein theory is discussed. By
modifying gravity we mean that we change the degrees of freedom of the
theory in some way. First the mass term is added to the theory which
changes the degrees of freedom from two to five in @xmath dimensions.
Also, adding higher derivative terms change the degrees of freedom. The
massive gravity theory is discussed first. Then the higher derivative
gravity theory is considered. At the end of this part, two 3-dimensional
massive higher derivative gravity theories are introduced.

#### ii.1 Modifying Gravity with Mass Terms:

There are two ways to give mass to a gravity theory. One is to add
directly the mass to the action. The other way is to introduce scalar
fields. When these fields are evaluated at the background the general
covariance is broken and the graviton gets mass. Both ways end up in the
same class of theories. In this discussion we will follow the first way.
The mass is added to the Einstein-Hilbert theory in a Lorentz invariant
way as follows

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (6)
  -- -------- -- -----

which is known as the Pauli-Fierz (PF) action, the second part is the PF
mass term Pauli1 ; Pauli2 and @xmath is the mass parameter. We first
consider this theory in a flat background. In ( 6 ) @xmath is the flat
spacetime metric and @xmath is the linear part of the metric
perturbation, @xmath , and @xmath is trace of this metric perturbation.
To see more explicitly how the added PF part gives mass to the graviton,
we should linearize the theory around the background spacetime. From
both ( 2 ) and ( 5 ), the linearized Einstein tensor can be written in
the absence of sources as

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (7)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath and the linear parts of the Ricci tensor and Ricci scalar
are

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (8)
  -- -------- -- -----

If the metric perturbation is constrained to be transverse and
traceless, that are @xmath and @xmath , then ( 7 ) yields

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (9)
  -- -------- -- -----

and for massive particles it is known that the Klein-Gordon equation
must hold that is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (10)
  -- -------- -- ------

for the mostly plus signature of the metric. To write ( 9 ) as a massive
field equation, the PF term must be added:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (11)
  -- -------- -- ------

Since this term cannot be obtained from the curvature terms, it is added
to the action ( 5 ) by brute force. Later on, it will be seen that
modifying GR with higher curvature terms will generate this mass term
automatically when the coupling constants of the higher curvature terms
have a special combination. From the transverse and traceless conditions
it can be seen easily that the PF theory describes a massive spin-2
field. The metric perturbation is a symmetric rank-2 tensor, so that it
has ten independent degrees of freedom in @xmath dimensions. However,
from the transversality condition there are four constraints which
eliminate four degrees of freedom leaving six. The tracelessness
condition also eliminates one degree of freedom and the theory has five
degrees of freedom. We must also note that this mass term is the unique
ghost and tachyon-free Lorentz-invariant combination. When the sign is
changed in the middle of the PF mass term, then it produces tachyons in
its propagator structure Hinterbichler .

The massless limit of the PF theory must tend to Einstein gravity as the
usual continuity arguments in physics dictate. However, the @xmath limit
does not give the results of the @xmath theory. For two point sources
the interaction potential, in the Newtonian limit of GR, in four
dimensions is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (12)
  -- -------- -- ------

However, the massive theory gives

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (13)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the Newtonian potential is greater than the usual one. This effect
is known as the van Dam-Veltman-Zakharov (vDVZ) discontinuity ² ² 2
Redefinition of the Newton’s constant does not solve the problem, since
then the deflection of light changes by @xmath . vanDam ; Zakharov . The
linearized PF theory is different from the linearized GR in the massless
limit. This discontinuity appears in flat backgrounds higuchi ; Porrati1
; kogan . However, in curved spacetime this discontinuity does not
appear. From the general amplitude equation ( VIII ) it can be seen more
explicitly. There is a @xmath fraction by which the flat spacetime limit
and massless limit do not commute. Going to flat spacetime limit first
the vDVZ discontinuity appears in the massless limit, but taking the
massless limit first the discontinuity disappears in four dimensions
Gullu1 ; Porrati1 . Hence, the introduction of a cosmological constant
to the theory solves this problem since the smallness of the mass can be
compared with another measurable quantity. [One could argue that
discontinuity has been mainly replaced by the non-commutativity of the
limits, which is a valid objection.] From the pole structure of the
general amplitude equation ( VIII ), it can be seen that for de Sitter
spacetime ( @xmath ) a pole produces a tachyon and it is absent for
anti-de Sitter ( @xmath ) spacetime ³ ³ 3 We should also note that
Vainshtein claimed that vainshtein the discontinuity disappears at the
nonlinear level once the finite Schwarzschild radius of one of the
scattering particles is taken into account. .

#### ii.2 Modifying Gravity with Higher Curvature Terms:

To make GR perturbatively renormalizable, quadratic curvature terms
@xmath must be added to the Einstein-Hilbert action ( 5 ) Stelle1 . But
adding these terms makes the theory nonunitary because of the
non-decoupling ghost introduced by the middle term @xmath Stelle2 . When
this term is excluded the unitarity of the theory is regained but the
theory becomes nonrenormalizable. To have a consistent quantum gravity,
both of these properties must be provided.

Before discussing further, the notion of unitarity must be explained.
With unitarity, it is meant that the theory must be both ghost and
tachyon free. Ghost is a particle that has a negative kinetic energy and
tachyon is a particle that has negative mass-squared (in flat space). In
a more technical language the signs of the propagators must be correct
that is (for the @xmath signature) the (scalar propagator)

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (14)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the four-momentum. In the canonical form, the Lagrangian
should be

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (15)
  -- -------- -- ------

the kinetic term is the d’Alembertian operator and it must be positive.
The mass-squared must again be greater than zero. Note that only the
tree-level unitarity is considered here. The Feynman diagram of the
tree-level scattering amplitude is shown in the figure

.

#### ii.3 Topologically Massive Gravity

In the discussion to follow, we will need a specific 3D theory that has
been studied a lot in the literature. This is the topologically massive
gravity (TMG) theory introduced in Djt1 ; Djt2 with the action

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (16)
  -- -------- -- ------

Here @xmath is the coupling constant of the gravitational Chern-Simons
term. The sign of @xmath is not fixed. @xmath is the three dimensional
anti-symmetric tensor which is connected to the Levi-Civita symbol as
@xmath . The pure Einstein-Hilbert action does not propagate any degrees
of freedom in 3D. After the gravitational Chern-Simons term is
introduced, TMG propagates a single massive particle with helicity
@xmath or @xmath (not both since the theory is not parity-invariant).
The action for this theory can be written in terms of the
gauge-invariant functions ⁴ ⁴ 4 Note that the gauge-invariant functions
will be discussed later in the third chapter. ( 134 ) as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (17)
  -- -------- -- ------

Taking the variation with respect to the @xmath field one of the other
fields can be eliminated. This variation yields

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (18)
  -- -------- -- ------

from which @xmath follows. Putting this result back into ( 17 ) yields
the action

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (19)
  -- -------- -- ------

From ( 19 ) it can be seen that this theory propagates only a single
massive degree of freedom with mass @xmath . Not to have a negative
kinetic energy term, @xmath must be chosen negative which yields the
“wrong-sign” Einstein-Hilbert term. In fact this model propagates a
single massive scalar spin-2 mode Djt1 . Since the spin of the particle
depends on the sign of @xmath , this model is a parity violating theory,
as noted above. The detailed discussion and calculations for this model
is given in Chapter 3.

#### ii.4 New Massive Gravity and Critical Gravity

Another interesting higher derivative massive gravity theory is the
recently introduced “New Massive Gravity” Bht1 ; Bht2 . The action for
this model is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (20)
  -- -------- -- ------

where there is a relation between the coupling constants of the higher
curvature terms as @xmath and the mass reads in terms of the coupling
constants as @xmath . For the unitarity of the theory, @xmath must be
negative, and @xmath . This model also implies the wrong-sign
Einstein-Hilbert term.

This model is not a higher derivative theory at the linearized level.
The canonical form of ( 20 ) is (see more details in section XIII )

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (21)
  -- -------- -- ------

where it can be seen that this model has two modes propagating with the
same masses. Therefore, this theory is parity invariant. Also, in this
form the necessity of negative @xmath can be seen explicitly.

After this theory was introduced Bht1 a research activity started in
massive 3D gravity theories. Especially in Anti-de Sitter (AdS)
backgrounds some classical solutions and conserved charges of this
theory was given Gullu1 ; Bht2 ; Clement1 ; Sun1 ; Sun2 ; Giribet1 ;
Oliva ; gurses ; Aliev_Ahmedov1 ; Aliev_Ahmedov2 ; Aliev_Ahmedov3 ;
Gurses_Sisman . The question of how the theory gains mass was answered
in Suat ; Suat_Tanhayi . In this work Higgs mechanism of the general
quadratic theory in three dimensions was given by writing the theory in
a Weyl invariant form. Breaking the Weyl invariance in the background,
graviton gains mass, scalar field remains massless and the Weyl gauge
field gains mass or can remain massless depending on the parameters.

The four and higher dimensional extensions of this theory, called “the
critical gravity”, was also investigated in Lu ; Sisman ; Porrati2 . For
these cases the special points are again set to zero @xmath and @xmath
for four and the generic @xmath dimensional cases respectively, for
which the massive scalar mode vanishes Gullu1 . In the critical gravity,
the mass of spin-2 is set to zero and the energy of black holes become
zero for the AdS vacuum. It is also found that the energy of the
massless spin-2 modes vanishes on-shell. There remains only spin-2
logarithmic modes with positive energy.

### Iii Constant Curvature Spacetimes

In our discussion we will need the maximally symmetric backgrounds which
are the flat, Anti-de Sitter (AdS) and de Sitter (dS) geometries.
Maximally symmetric means that the curvature of the spacetime is
constant everywhere and in any direction. Therefore, if the curvature is
known in one point it is enough to know the curvature at every point.
There are only three maximally symmetric spacetimes that are Minkowski,
which is flat so that the curvature is zero everywhere, dS and AdS.
These spacetimes are classified with respect to the curvature scalar
@xmath , the dimensionality of spacetime and the signature of the
metric. De Sitter space is a @xmath -dimensional surface embedded into a
@xmath dimensional flat spacetime for which the signature of the metric
reads @xmath . For the AdS spacetime the signature of the embedding
metric reads @xmath . For AdS spacetime there is no horizon but for dS
there is a horizon Abbott ; Witten ; Strominger . Examples of the
maximally symmetric flat spaces are planes with Euclidean signature
@xmath and its higher dimensional generalizations. Spheres @xmath are dS
or positively curved spacetimes, and hyperboloids @xmath are negatively
curved or AdS spacetimes.

The Riemann tensor of a maximally symmetric @xmath -dimensional
spacetime is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (22)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the curvature scalar @xmath is constant and @xmath is the
dimensionality of the spacetime Carroll . For AdS or dS the curvature
scalar is @xmath . Here, @xmath is the cosmological constant and for
@xmath the spacetime becomes AdS, negatively curved spacetime, and for
@xmath it is dS, positively curved spacetime. If @xmath then the
spacetime is flat.

The cosmological constant is related to the vacuum energy density in
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -- ------

Here @xmath is the energy density of the vacuum which is proportional to
the pressure of a perfect fluid @xmath . To see this proportionality the
energy-momentum tensor in the Einstein equation is divided into matter
and vacuum pieces,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (24)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the vacuum energy-momentum tensor is @xmath . The vacuum
energy-momentum tensor becomes a perfect if @xmath . The Einstein
equation can be written with a cosmological constant term as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (25)
  -- -------- -- ------

The relation between the vacuum energy density and the cosmological
constant can be seen from these equations Carroll . The maximally
symmetric solutions of this equation are dS and AdS (and also Minkowski)
spacetimes, for the pure vacuum case.

In the first part of the analysis the higher curvature massive gravity
is studied in a @xmath dimensional (A)dS spacetime @xmath . In this way
the effects of higher dimensions can be seen. Also, with this general
approach a unitary theory may be found in @xmath .

### Iv Canonical Analysis

In this part some technical details of the canonical analysis are given.
To put a Lagrangian into the canonical form means to write it in terms
of scalar fields that are in the form of harmonic oscillator
Lagrangians. The field equations of these Lagrangians are Klein-Gordon
equation. So that, KG equation can be seen as simple harmonic
oscillators. From these oscillators the particle spectrum can be
studied. Also, for investigation of the unitarity of a theory, this form
is useful. Therefore, first the KG equation for free particle is
reviewed. Then the generalization to higher derivative of this equation
known as Pais-Uhlenbeck oscillator is discussed.

#### iv.1 The Klein-Gordon Equation

The story starts from the quantization of the non-relativistic energy
equation for a free particle. The energy of a free particle is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (26)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the energy and @xmath is the momentum of the particle.
To quantize this, the variables are promoted to being operators by
taking @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is the reduced Planck constant,
and @xmath , @xmath for one dimensional space ⁵ ⁵ 5 Here the derivative
is @xmath and the four momentum is @xmath in the natural units. . With
these substitutions ( 26 ) turns to the well known Schrödinger equation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (27)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is a complex function. A relativistic version of this
equation can be obtained by upgrading the relativistic dispersion
relation ⁶ ⁶ 6 If the equation is not squared the operators will be
inside the square root @xmath . This form has some problems in
evaluating the operators. Also, it is nonlocal. Griffiths

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (28)
  -- -------- -- ------

to an operator equation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (29)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the speed of light. Going to natural units @xmath and
defining the d’Alembertian operator @xmath , where the components of the
partial derivative is @xmath (in Minkowski background with the signature
@xmath ) yields ⁷ ⁷ 7 Note that for the signature @xmath the KG equation
reads @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (30)
  -- -------- -- ------

which is the classical relativistic wave equation of a massive particle.
Taking the Fourier transform of @xmath and putting it into ( 29 ), the
equation of motion for a harmonic oscillator is found with the frequency
@xmath , that is Peskin ; Reinhardt

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (31)
  -- -------- -- ------

In the field theoretical approach the same result can be found by taking
the real spin-0 particle Lagrangian density with mass @xmath

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (32)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the field depends both on time and space @xmath . The
Euler-Lagrange equations @xmath of ( 32 ) gives ( 30 ) Peskin ;
Reinhardt .

After getting some basic informations about the relativistic wave
equation, the higher derivative terms can be added to the Lagrangian to
generalize this discussion. The field equations of the higher derivative
Lagrangians are known as the Pais-Uhlenbeck oscillators Pais .

#### iv.2 Pais-Uhlenbeck Oscillators

The Lagrangian density of the higher derivative real scalar field is
Sarioglu

  -- -- -- ------
           (33)
  -- -- -- ------

For simplicity @xmath is set to two, i. e. @xmath , and the examination
is done in the nonrelativistic limit, that is all the space derivatives
are dropped. For these conditions the Lagrangian density becomes

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (34)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is used instead of @xmath . Also, note that the @xmath case
will be different from the @xmath case, where the first case is the
degenerate case and the Lagrangian density becomes purely quadratic

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (35)
  -- -------- -- ------

The Euler-Lagrange equation for ( 34 ) is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (36)
  -- -------- -- ------

which can be obtained by taking the variation of ( 34 ) with respect to
the variable @xmath . For n-th order variational problem ( 36 ) takes
the form

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (37)
  -- -------- -- ------

in the non-relativistic limit. This equation ( 37 ) can be obtained by
taking the variation of the general Lagrangian @xmath , which is
Ostrogradski ; Simon

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (38)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (39)
  -- -------- -- ------

The Hamiltonian for the generic case is written Ostrogradski ; Simon as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (40)
  -- -------- -- ------

From ( 37 ) the equations of motion can be found for @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (41)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the fourth time derivative of @xmath . The Hamiltonian (
40 ) and the momentum ( 39 ) of the system for @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (42)
  -- -------- -- ------

and

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (43)
  -- -------- -- ------

respectively. For the non-degenerate case @xmath with the Pais-Uhlenbeck
variables @xmath and @xmath can be diagonalized as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (44)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the second term is a ghost term. However, for the degenerate case
there can be a unitary region for proper constants Sarioglu .

### V Conventions

In what follows we will use the following conventions:

#### v.1 Flat Spacetime:

The flat spacetime metric has the mostly positive signature @xmath in
its diagonal components. Since the spacetime is flat, the curvature
tensors and scalars are zero @xmath . The partial derivative reads
@xmath and @xmath . The d’Alembertian operator becomes @xmath . The
Greek indices run as @xmath that counts all the coordinates of the
spacetime. The Latin indices run as @xmath and they denote the spatial
coordinates.

#### v.2 The Curved Spacetime:

The metric has the signature @xmath and the Christoffel connection reads

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (45)
  -- -------- -- ------

and the commutation relation of the covariant derivatives are

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (46)
  -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (47)
  -- -------- -- ------

is Riemann tensor. The covariant derivative acts on the covariant and
contravariant vectors as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (48)
  -- -------- -- ------

The Ricci tensor and Ricci scalar are defined as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (49)
  -- -------- -- ------

respectively. The d’Alembertian is @xmath . The Greek and Latin indices
have the same meaning as in the flat spacetime case.

## Part II Massive Higher Derivative Gravity in @xmath-dimensional
Anti-de Sitter Spacetimes

### Vi Introduction

In gravity there is no theory which is unitary and renormalizable at the
same time. To get a renormalizable theory in four dimensions, higher
derivative terms, @xmath , are added to Einstein-Hilbert action Stelle1
. In doing so one can gain renormalizability but loses unitary. The
coupling constant of the square of the Ricci tensor introduces a
non-decoupling ghost term. However, if we omit this term then we gain
unitary yet lose renormalizability. If a theory is non-unitary it shows
itself as a repulsive force in the Newtonian limit between static
sources. Therefore the theory has a better UV behaviour because of this
repulsive force. In field theory this is what usually happens: To have a
better behaved theory, ghosts are introduced during the renormalization
process but they decouple at the end if the theory is unitary.
Therefore, bartering unitarity with renormalizability can not be
accepted.

In three dimensions there is a perturbatively renormalizable and
tree-level unitary theory Bht1 ; Bht2 in flat background for a special
choice of coupling constants of higher derivative terms that is @xmath
and for a reversed sign of Einstein-Hilbert term nakason ; oda ;
nakasonoda ; Deser2 and this theory is named as “New Massive Gravity”
(NMG), that is a parity-preserving spin-2 theory. However, we do not
know that if this special ratio between @xmath and @xmath will survive
renormalization at a given loop level. Another interesting thing about
this theory is that at the linearized level the theory has a massive
graviton with helicities @xmath in its spectrum. Therefore, the theory
has a non-linear extension to the Pauli-Fierz (PF) mass term. For this
reason this theory solves an old problem of finding a non-linear
extension of PF mass term. The equivalence of NMG and PF was shown in
Bht1 ⁸ ⁸ 8 Note that, beside this parity-preserving theory, there is
also the parity violating Topologically Massive Gravity (TMG) Djt1 ;
Djt2 . . The physical meaning of this equivalence must be well
understood since NMG theory is background diffeomorphism invariant not
only at non-linear level but also at the linear level. However, PF
theory is invariant under Killing symmetries of the @xmath dimensional
Minkowski spacetime. To have a better understanding about these
symmetries a quite interesting approach was put forward in Deser2 : In
the absence of the Einstein-Hilbert term, the Weyl invariant form of the
linearized NMG is written. Therefore, introducing the Einstein-Hilbert
term at the linearized level breaks this symmetry and produces the mass
of the graviton. As a result one can think that Einstein-Hilbert term
provides the mass and the higher derivative terms gives the kinetic
energy. This perspective explains the sign change of Einstein-Hilbert
term. Looking back, this result is expected since pure Einstein gravity
is non-dynamical and does not give any propagation in three dimensions.
It is like the mass term in a scalar field theory at the linearized
level. When a kinetic energy is introduced to the theory then it plays a
role in the dynamics. In the case of NMG the kinetic energy comes from
the higher derivative terms. Consequently, the mass of the graviton
comes from Einstein-Hilbert term by breaking Weyl invariance. This point
may be important for constructing massive gravity theories in other
dimensions.

In this chapter, the most general quadratic curvature gravity theory
will be considered in a @xmath dimensional (anti)-de Sitter background.
We also augment this theory with a PF mass term. We will study the
propagator structure of this theory by finding its one-particle exchange
amplitude between two covariantly conserved sources. For this reason we
first linearize the action

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (50)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where @xmath is the bare cosmological constant. @xmath is related to the
@xmath -dimensional Newton’s constant as @xmath where @xmath is the
@xmath dimensional solid angle. The other parameters are the coupling
constants @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is the mass parameter. In
total we have a seven parameter theory which is the most general
quadratic model including the dimensions and cosmological constants ⁹ ⁹
9 In the absence of the source terms and at the linearized level, one
can reduce the number of parameters in the action vas1 ; vas2 , but here
for the sake of generality we shall work with ( 50 ). . Because of these
parameters the theory potentially has various interesting limits and
discontinuities. At this level, there are no constraints on the
parameters. They may be positive, negative or zero. After computing the
tree-level amplitude we will constrain the parameters not to have any
ghosts or tachyons in the theory. Also, some terms do not contribute to
the equations of motion for some specific dimensions. For example, for
@xmath the Gauss-Bonnet term becomes a surface term and for @xmath it
vanishes identically. Therefore, in three dimensions all the information
is carried by the Ricci tensor and the Riemann tensor has no more
information. In three dimensions the model can be extended by adding the
Chern-Simons term @xmath to ( 50 ). But here we will stick to ( 50 ). In
the next chapter we study this case in detail ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 See Sarioglu ;
dest for this case, without the higher curvature terms. . The theory
reduces to @xmath model with the PF term for two dimensions. In this
chapter we consider @xmath . The theory that we consider has general
covariance except for the PF mass term.

Various limits of the spin-2 model which is defined by the linearization
of ( 50 ) have been studied in the literature. Though, for some certain
limits of the above action there may still be some interesting new
models. One of them is NMG which is the case for @xmath and in flat
background without the PF mass term and @xmath . Apart from finding such
new models we will also explore discontinuities of the full seven
parameter theory. The discontinuities come out while the order of limits
are changed when some of the parameters approach zero. One such
discontinuity is the so called van vDVZ discontinuity. The resolution of
this discontinuity comes from the introduction of the cosmological
constant. Then taking @xmath limit GR results are recovered at
tree-level higuchi ; Porrati1 ; kogan ; vainshtein ; deserwaldron2 ¹¹ ¹¹
11 Another resolution of the discontinuity may follow even in flat space
if the Schwarzschild radius of the scattering objects is taken as a
second mass scale in the theory vainshtein . . However, the
discontinuity reappears when the quantum corrections are taken into
account duff . Up to now the linear theory has been considered. Once, we
consider the non-linear theory a ghost arises in massive gravity and
this effect is known as the Boulware-Deser instability bouldeser .

The ingredients of this chapter is as follows: In the second section we
will analyze the linear equations of motion which is obtained around an
AdS background. We also discuss certain special limits. In the next
section we calculate the one-particle scattering amplitude and the
following sections will be devoted to the discussions of some limits and
discontinuities. At the last section the conclusions and discussions
will be given.

### Vii Linearized Equations

The field equations can be found by taking the variation of the action (
50 ) with respect to the metric. After variation we get the field
equations as follows:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (51)
  -- -------- -- ------

Here @xmath is energy-momentum tensor coming from the source terms, etc…
. The background metric @xmath namely the vacuum, is a non-singular
solution to the field equations in the absence of the matter terms. The
vacuum is the (anti)-de Sitter space which is the maximally symmetric
vacuum with the Riemann, Ricci tensors and Ricci scalar curvature given
respectively as

  -- -- -- ------
           (52)
  -- -- -- ------

We made all the contractions with respect to the background metric. If
we put the background metric ( 52 ) in the field equations ( 51 ), the
effective cosmological constant @xmath can be found in terms of @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (53)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath . This is a second order equation with respect to @xmath .
Therefore it has two solutions which are

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (54)
  -- -------- -- ------

and for reality of the vacuum @xmath . Hence the spacetime can be both
dS or AdS. One of these solutions vanishes in the absence of @xmath . In
this case the non-vanishing root becomes @xmath . There are some
exceptional points of this equation of motion for which the effective
cosmological constant becomes equal to the bare cosmological constant.
In four dimensions @xmath since @xmath becomes zero. Also, in three
dimensions if we set @xmath then we again have @xmath and @xmath .
Moreover, if we set @xmath and @xmath , which gives @xmath , the theory
again has @xmath . In three dimensions without setting @xmath , we have
@xmath and for @xmath to be real @xmath .

The next step is to find the linear equation of motion of ( 51 ) around
the constant curvature background, @xmath . By using ( 54 ) we eliminate
the bare cosmological constant and after linearization the equation of
motion becomes dt2

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (55)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

Note that the PF term is already linear. Here we define a new constant
in terms of the other coupling constants as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (56)
  -- -------- -- ------

@xmath is the energy-momentum tensor which contains all higher order
terms and the source @xmath . @xmath is the linear cosmological Einstein
tensor

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (57)
  -- -------- -- ------

@xmath and @xmath are the linearized Ricci tensor and the linearized
scalar curvature @xmath , respectively. They read

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (58)
  -- -------- -- ------

To calculate the scattering amplitude we need the trace of ( 55 ), that
is @xmath and it reads

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (59)
  -- -------- -- ------

This equation is a wave equation, and for @xmath something special
happens, since the dynamical part of this equation vanishes. Actually,
for @xmath this choice will lead us to the NMG. After computing the tree
level scattering amplitude between two sources, and constraining the
theory to have no ghosts or tachyons will give us this special point.
Before moving on we can still analyze some limits of the theory at the
linearized level. For this purpose we drop the sources. Since there are
no sources we can not get the unitarity regions but we can capture the
ranges of the parameters in which tachyons drop out. The discussion
bifurcates whether @xmath is zero or not. First we will consider @xmath
.

#### vii.1 Massive case:

We take the divergence and double divergence of ( 55 ) to find the
constraints on the deviation part of the metric, @xmath . Since, ( 55 )
is divergence free without the mass term, the constraints come from the
divergence of the mass term as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (60)
  -- -------- -- ------

Replacing the covariant derivatives that appear in the background Ricci
scalar in ( 58 ) which is

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and using the first equation in ( 60 ) lead to @xmath . For the flat
space case we have @xmath . This choice forces the field to be traceless
( 59 ), and from the first equation of ( 60 ) it becomes transverse. The
field @xmath has @xmath independent components. The transverse-traceless
condition gives @xmath equations that eliminates @xmath of the
independent components. Thus we are left with the remaining @xmath
independent components. The linear Einstein tensor becomes @xmath ,
where we have changed the places of the covariant derivatives in ( 58 ).
With these constraints the field equation for the remaining independent
components of the field becomes

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (61)
  -- -------- -- ------

which is a quadratic equation that describes two massive excitations
with masses

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (62)
  -- -------- -- ------

To have real masses @xmath , and at the saturation point the two masses
become equal. These masses become non-tachyonic when the parameters are
chosen properly. If @xmath and @xmath have the same sign, one of the
excitation becomes negative and produces a tachyon. If they have
opposite signs, the term inside the square root must be @xmath . In this
case both excitations become non-tachyonic. However, this theory is not
unitary as we will see.

For the generic @xmath case the trace equation reads

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (63)
  -- -------- -- ------

In this equation we can see that @xmath becomes a dynamical scalar
field. The dynamical part can be eliminated by setting @xmath . After
choosing this special point we still have two options to satisfy ( 63 ).
We may set @xmath and the field becomes again transverse and traceless,
and the field equations read

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (64)
  -- -------- -- ------

and it has generically two excitations

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (65)
  -- -------- -- ------

After computing the one-particle exchange amplitude we will again
discuss this theory and see that for special points, this theory will
give us a ghost and tachyon free theory. The other option to satisfy (
63 ) is tuning the mass as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (66)
  -- -------- -- ------

which is the partially massless point, vanishes for flat background and
for curved background a higher derivative gauge invariance appears
deserwaldron . Therefore, the field has one less degree of freedom (DOF)
compared to the massive one. Moreover, the mass is allowed to be
negative in AdS as long as it satisfies the Breitenlohner-Freedman type
bound. In four dimensions higher derivative terms vanish and the mass
only depends on the cosmological constant, @xmath . In higher dimensions
the partially massless theory depends on the higher derivative terms.

#### vii.2 Massless case:

Without the Pauli-Fierz mass term the theory becomes invariant under
background diffeomorphisms @xmath , since @xmath and @xmath . As we
mentioned above the divergence and double divergence of ( 55 ) do not
give any constraint on @xmath . Therefore, @xmath becomes a dynamical
variable for @xmath . If the coefficient in front of the d’Alembertian
operator is fixed to zero than the dynamics of @xmath vanishes. The
equation ( 59 ) is satisfied for two conditions: @xmath can be zero or
the coefficient, @xmath , can be set to zero in which case @xmath need
not vanish. The later one is not acceptable because the field equations
leave a gauge invariant object undetermined.

### Viii Tree-level Amplitude

To find the Newton potentials and to analyze the particle spectrum of (
50 ), we are going to find the tree-level scattering amplitude between
two covariantly conserved sources which is defined as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (67)
  -- -------- -- ------

by considering the full theory ( 55 ). In this equation @xmath is one of
the sources and @xmath is the deviation which is produced by the
unprimed source. The factor @xmath is put to get the correct Newton’s
constant. Since the field has independent components we need to
decompose @xmath to eliminate the unphysical parts of it. Therefore, the
decomposition must be done in such a way that the physical components of
@xmath will be determined by @xmath . The usual choice is to define

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (68)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the transverse and traceless part of the deviation.
@xmath is the vector part with a symmetrization that is defined with a
@xmath factor and it is divergence free. @xmath and @xmath are scalar
functions. With this definition ( 68 ), the amplitude equation becomes

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (69)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the terms in the middle of ( 68 ) vanish since we have covariantly
conserved sources and the total derivative vanishes at the boundary by
use of Stoke’s theorem. In ( 69 ) the tensorial quantities and @xmath
must be written in terms of the trace of energy momentum tensor. In
order to get this we take the trace, divergence and double divergence of
( 68 )

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (70)
  -- -------- -- ------

where we used @xmath . This condition comes from the nonzero mass term
and it is not a gauge condition. From these two equations we can write
@xmath in terms of @xmath . We hit the first equation with the @xmath
operator and subtract it from the second one which gives us

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (71)
  -- -------- -- ------

which can be put into the first equation in ( 70 ) yielding

  -- -- -- ------
           (72)
  -- -- -- ------

This equation can be inserted into ( 59 ) so that @xmath can be written
in terms of the trace of the energy momentum tensor as follows

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (73)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath . Now we will write @xmath such that it is determined by
the trace of the energy momentum tensor. First of all, we will find the
transverse and traceless part of the field equations by using the
Lichnerowicz operator @xmath acting on spin-2 symmetric tensors

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (74)
  -- -------- -- ------

Some properties of this operator (that we need) were collected in
Porrati1

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (75)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

Using these properties we have

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (76)
  -- -------- -- ------

With this equation the transverse traceless part of the deviation can be
written in terms of the transverse traceless part of the energy momentum
tensor as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (77)
  -- -------- -- ------

The only thing that is left is to decompose the energy momentum tensor
so that we can connect @xmath with the energy momentum tensor. To find
this we first decompose the energy momentum tensor as ( 68 ). Then we
take the double divergence of this equation, keeping in mind that we
have covariantly conserved sources. Also taking the trace, one can find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (78)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

We are ready to compute the scattering amplitude by putting ( 73 , 77 ,
78 ) into ( 69 ). After doing manipulations by using ( 75 ) and
suppressing the integral sign the amplitude equation becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

From this main result we can consider various limits. Solving this
integral for non zero cosmological constant is highly nontrivial.
However, the particle spectrum of the theory can be considered by
analyzing the pole structure of the amplitude. For the general case
there are four poles which read as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (80)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

To have tachyon free theory these poles must be positive. By choosing
the constants properly such a theory can be found. However, this is not
the only restriction on the parameters that appear in the general
quadratic theory. With these poles the residues can be found. These
residues must be negative in order not to have any ghost terms. This is
the other restriction that we use while finding a ghost and tachyon free
model. However, in the most general form the residues are cumbersome.
Therefore, we will restrict the theory and compute the poles and
residues for some interesting limits. Also, we will compute the
Newtonian potentials for these limits.

### Ix Massive theory in flat spacetime:

Looking at ( VIII ), we can see that the massless limit and the flat
space limit do not commute because of the @xmath term. Therefore, if we
want to get the usual Newtonian potentials in flat space and without
mass term, the flat space limit must be taken before the massless limit.
Otherwise, we encounter the well known vDVZ discontinuity. Let us first
look at the limits which produce the vDVZ discontinuity that means we
first take the flat space limit @xmath and go to massless limit @xmath .
With the flat space limit ( VIII ) becomes;

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (81)
  -- -------- -- ------

here the Lichnerowicz operator goes to @xmath and this can be seen from
( 74 ). The spectrum of ( 81 ) has two massive excitations which can be
found by solving the second order equation for @xmath and the masses are
the same as ( 62 ). Modifying ( 81 ) with the mass terms give

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (82)
  -- -------- -- ------

For @xmath and @xmath , ( 82 ) produces a massive ghost. Therefore,
@xmath must be set to zero to avoid ghost terms. The Newtonian potential
energy (U) can be calculated by use of Green’s function technique. For
simplicity we take the sources as @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath and
@xmath are masses of the sources, and the other terms of the
energy-momentum tensor are taken to be zero. Moreover, we calculate
these potentials in four and three dimensions. The Green’s function for
modified Helmholtz equation @xmath reads @xmath and @xmath Arfken for
two and three space dimensions, respectively. Then the potential
energies read

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (83)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath are defined in ( 62 ). If we take the @xmath
limit to take care of the ghost term, ( 83 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (84)
  -- -------- -- ------

The first equation of ( 84 ) is the Newtonian limit of massive gravity
in three dimensions and it gives attractive force when @xmath is
positive. For this case the @xmath limit does not exist. As @xmath ,
@xmath , which gives the expected @xmath force for small separation of
the sources. The second equation of ( 84 ) is the Newtonian limit of
massive gravity in four dimensions. Unlike the three dimensional case,
@xmath limit exists. However, the @xmath term indicates the famous vDVZ
discontinuity. @xmath is the Newton constant and it is taken as @xmath .
Therefore, in three dimensions massive gravity gives the correct
Newtonian limit despite that in four dimensions it does not give the
expected limit.

### X Massless theory in flat spacetime:

In the above discussion we see that first taking the flat space limit
and then going to massless limit does not give us the expected Newtonian
limit. In this section we first take the massless limit and then go to
the flat space limit. When we set @xmath and @xmath in ( VIII ), we get

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- ------
        @xmath   @xmath            (85)
                          @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- ------

Unlike ( 81 ), ( 85 ) has three poles that are

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (86)
  -- -------- -- ------

To make a full analysis we need the residues of these poles which read

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

From the second pole we see that @xmath for not having tachyon and form
the residue of this pole @xmath not to have a ghost. For negative @xmath
the residue of the massless pole fixes the dimension to three, since for
@xmath makes the residue positive in which case it produces a massless
ghost. The residue of the third pole becomes positive for negative
@xmath . To eliminate this residue one has to set @xmath . For these
conditions the theory becomes unitary and has its special name as New
Massive Gravity (NMG). If we look to the Newtonian potential which is
written as

  -- -- -- ------
           (87)
  -- -- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath . For negative @xmath , the second term gives a
massive ghost which decouples in the case of @xmath . In this case only
the first term lives and gives an attractive force. Also, if we choose
the Pauli-Fierz mass term as @xmath the NMG has the same Newtonian limit
as the usual massive gravity. For @xmath , a massive ghost comes out and
does not decouple unless @xmath . For example we can look at @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (88)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath . The term in the middle is the ghost term Stelle1 . When
we take @xmath the ghost term vanishes and taking @xmath the last term
drops out and we are left with the usual Newtonian potential in which
case the vDVZ discontinuity does not appear. Therefore, vDVZ
discontinuity does not appear in a curved background, since we can
compare the smallness of the mass of graviton with another scale that is
the cosmological constant. We can also generalize the Newtonian
potentials to @xmath dimensions. For this we need the general Green’s
function for the operators @xmath and @xmath . They are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

respectively. @xmath is the gamma function and @xmath is the modified
Bessel function. We first write the amplitude equation ( 85 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (89)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

Taking again static sources, we find the potential as

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          
              @xmath      (90)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

For any desired dimension this equation gives the Newtonian potential in
flat spacetime and without any mass term. For @xmath the first term
signals the ghost problem for all dimensions and the last two terms give
attractive forces. We can confirm Stelle1 that in any dimension the
quadratic curvature gravity theory is not unitary except for the NMG
point.

For curved backgrounds the calculation of the Newtonian potential is
complicated because of the Lichnerowicz operator. Nonetheless, we can
say that in curved backgrounds there will be an additional term to the
Newtonian potentials. Apart from the term that contains Lichnerowicz
operator, other terms can be calculated as above.

### Xi Conclusion and Discussion for Chapter-2

The tree level scattering amplitude of the general quadratic gravity
theory with a Pauli-Fierz mass term in @xmath dimensions is found and
various limits of this amplitude equation is studied. For these limits
the Newtonian potentials for three and four dimensions are calculated.
First the flat space limit is taken and then the massless limit. Looking
at the potential energies it is seen that the theory is not unitary. For
taking care of the ghost term the @xmath limit is taken. In this limit
the theory becomes unitary but the theory suffers from the vDVZ
discontinuity in four dimensions. Massive gravity gives the correct
Newtonian potentials in three dimensions since the @xmath limit does not
exist. The second limit that is taken is the massless limit and then the
flat space limit. Analyzing the pole structure and the residues of the
amplitude and calculating the Newtonian potential energies it is seen
that the theory is unitary for a special condition for the coupling
constants of the theory that is @xmath in three dimensions. Also, the
coupling constant of Hilbert-Einstein term becomes negative. Apart from
three dimensions the general quadratic theory is non-unitary. To make
the theory unitary again the @xmath limit is taken and for this case it
becomes unitary. The usual Newtonian potential is obtained in four
dimensions by taking all coupling constants of higher derivative terms
to zero. Also, the Newtonian potentials for generic dimensions in flat
space time are calculated.

## Part III Canonical Structure of Higher Derivative Gravity in 3d

### Xii Introduction

In the previous chapter we saw that the general quadratic gravity theory
has a special case in three dimensions. This special case is @xmath and
@xmath for the Lagrangian @xmath and named as New Massive Gravity (NMG)
Bht1 ; Bht2 . Also, the parity violating extension of NMG is found Bht1
; Bht2 by adding a gravitational Chern-Simons term to the theory. These
theories have massive ghost-free spin-2 particles in their free spectrum
around both flat and (anti)-de Sitter (A)dS. The most interesting
property of NMG is that it gives a non linear extension to the
Pauli-Fierz mass term for spin-2 particles. It is the only known example
which provides this nonlinear extension. Thus, NMG is a suitable
candidate to be a perturbatively well defined quantum gravity theory in
three dimensions if it is unitary beyond tree level.

The theory is studied in many directions. Its ghost-freedom and tree
level unitarity Deser1 ; Gullu1 ; Bht1 ; Bht2 ; nakason and Newtonian
limits Gullu1 have been studied out. Furthermore, its classical
solutions and issues related to the classical solutions were studied
Bht1 ; Bht2 ; Clement1 ; Sun1 ; Giribet1 ; Oliva ; gurses . Also, its
supergravity extension were given in andringa .

In this chapter we study the canonical structure of the general
quadratic curvature theory and give an explicitly gauge invariant
analysis of it in three dimensions. The analysis is done for both flat
and de Sitter (dS) spacetimes. In the flat space analysis the
gravitational Chern-Simons term is added to the theory. By writing the
canonical form of the general quadratic action we can easily see how NMG
is singled out among all other higher curvature theories as a regular
“harmonic oscillator” which can be thought as massive free field. These
type oscillators do not have the Ostragradskian instability which spoil
every higher time derivative theory woodard ¹² ¹² 12 It was claimed that
adding interactions might yield stable higher-time derivative theories
smilga . . Except of NMG, at the linearized level, all the other
quadratic theories are ghost-ridden Pais-Uhlenbeck oscillators.
Moreover, the discussion is extended by discussing the Newtonian limits,
weak fields, the scattering of particles with mass and spin at the tree
level.

The content of this chapter is as follows: In the first section the flat
spacetime analysis is done by writing the canonical structure for both
quadratic curvature theory with and without the gravitational
Chern-Simons term. Also, the effects of static sources are analyzed in
detail. Moreover, the weak field solutions are obtained in circularly
symmetric case. In the second section the discussion is extended to
curved spacetimes namely to de Sitter spacetime. Some of the useful
calculations are given in the Appendix.

### Xiii Higher-derivative spin-2 in flat spacetime

We start the analysis with the flat space case since it is simpler than
the curved space background which is discussed in the next section.
Without any constraints on the parameters the general action is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (91)
  -- -------- -- ------

To get the desired spin-2 model the action must be expanded around flat
background @xmath , where @xmath is the usual flat spacetime metric with
signature @xmath and @xmath is the spin-2 field which actually is a
symmetric rank-2 tensor and without any constraints has not only spin-2
component but also spin-1 and spin-0 components. In this section we do
not consider the gravitational Chern-Simons term. However, in the next
section we add it to ( 91 ). To get the action for @xmath we first
linearize the field equations that comes from the variation of ( 91 )
and then integrate the linear field equations. While integrating them,
one must pay attention to the overall sign factor since the signs will
become important in the discussion of unitarity. Up to boundary terms (
91 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (92)
  -- -------- -- ------

Here, @xmath is the linearized Einstein tensor and @xmath is the
linearized Ricci scalar which is defined as @xmath . The linearized
Einstein and Ricci tensors, and linearized curvature scalar are as
follows

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (93)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the D’Alembertian operator that is @xmath . Since the
metric is perturbed around flat background, we raise and lower the
indices with the flat metric @xmath . To analyze the canonical structure
and explore the free fields @xmath must be decomposed. This is done as
follows:

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (94)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath @xmath are free functions of time and space @xmath and
@xmath .

After decomposing the spin-2 field, the components of the linearized
Einstein tensor must be written in terms of these free functions. Let us
give some details of these calculations.

We first write the trace of the spin-2 field:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (95)
  -- -------- -- ------

Putting ( 94 ) in ( 95 ) gives us

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we have used @xmath and note that @xmath . The linear Einstein
tensor has three components that are @xmath and @xmath . Using ( 93 )
and summing the repeated indices these components can be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

After using ( 94 ) these components can be written in terms of gauge
invariant objects as follows

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (96)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

where “ @xmath ” means differentiation with respect to time @xmath and
@xmath are defined as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (97)
  -- -------- -- ------

which are gauge invariant under the transformation @xmath and the
Laplacian operator is @xmath . Note that, @xmath is already a gauge
invariant component of @xmath .

Let us show this invariance of these objects: First we define the three
vector as @xmath and then we transform the components of the spin-2
fields. From the transformations of @xmath and @xmath we get

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (98)
  -- -------- -- ------

From the last component we get three more equations by multiplying
@xmath with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath that are

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (99)
  -- -------- -- ------

respectively. From here we can see explicitly the gauge invariance of
@xmath . Using ( 98 ) and ( 99 ), one can get ( 97 ). The linearized
Ricci scalar can be written in terms of the gauge invariant functions:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

again using ( 94 ) the scalar curvature becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Putting the first equation of ( 97 ) finally we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (100)
  -- -------- -- -------

Although we have six free functions, the Bianchi identity @xmath reduces
the number of arbitrary functions to three. Therefore, there are two
sets of functions that can be used which are @xmath and @xmath . We can
write the total action in terms of these gauge invariant free functions.
Let us start with the Einstein-Hilbert part of the action that is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then doing the summation about the repeated indices and using ( 94 ), (
96 ) and ( 97 ) we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (101)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here we can see that the pure Einstein theory does not have any
propagating degrees of freedom since there is not a dynamical part which
shows itself as a D’Alembertian operator. With the same route we can
find the other two parts of the action. Instead of using this technique
one can also use the self-adjointness of the operators. In both ways one
can write the quadratic parts of the action in explicitly gauge
invariant forms. They are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (102)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (103)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In the first action we move all the derivatives on @xmath and that
combination gives us again the linearized Ricci scalar. In the second
action @xmath , first the derivatives are moved on the spin-2 field and
then ( 93 ) is used. Finally using the Bianchi identity one can achieve
( 103 ). Adding ( 101 ), ( 102 ) and ( 103 ) the total action comes out
in gauge invariant combinations as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (104)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

From this equation, it can be seen immediately that @xmath shows itself
as a single massive scalar field with mass @xmath . Not to have negative
mass @xmath must be negative and not to have ghost @xmath must be
positive for the @xmath field. For these signs @xmath must be chosen
negative. For the remaining part of the action the discussion bifurcates
whether @xmath , or not. Let us discuss these cases separately:

#### xiii.1 @xmath case:

In this case the @xmath field can be eliminated by taking the variation
with respect to it. Doing so gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (105)
  -- -------- -- -------

and inserting the @xmath field into ( 104 ), the action for the @xmath
field becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (106)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this action there are some special limits. The first limit is the NMG
limit @xmath . For this limit the higher derivative term drops out and
the @xmath field describes a single massive degree of freedom

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (107)
  -- -------- -- -------

which has the same mass as the @xmath field. Since both degrees of
freedom have the same masses in the NMG limit, the theory is
parity-invariant. Note that, not to have a ghost @xmath must again be
negative. Also, NMG is not a higher derivative theory at the linearized
level. The theory does not have the Ostragradski instability which
appears in theories that have higher order derivatives.

Another interesting limit is @xmath . The middle term in ( 106 ) drops
out and the action ( 106 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (108)
  -- -------- -- -------

This theory is tachyonic for @xmath and gives a ghost term for @xmath ,
keeping in mind that @xmath .

Taking @xmath also drops the higher derivative term. For this case the
action reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (109)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this case, to avoid ghost term @xmath and not to have tachyon @xmath
, where the mass can be defined as @xmath .

For the general coupling constants, the above action ( 106 ) is a higher
derivative Pais-Uhlenbeck oscillator. In order to decouple the fields we
define new fields that are linear in terms of old fields. By inspection
the fields can be defined as follows

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (110)
  -- -------- -- -------

and with these definitions the uncoupled Lagrangian must be as follows

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath and @xmath are unknowns. To find these unknown terms we put
( 110 ) into above Lagrangian and compare that result with ( 106 ).
After getting the unknown factors the action can be written in terms of
simple oscillators and ( 106 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (111)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the two fields @xmath have masses @xmath and @xmath respectively.
@xmath is defined above and @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that for the general case the only restriction on the coupling
constants is @xmath . For @xmath the @xmath field gives ghost and for
@xmath the @xmath has negative kinetic energy. Also, not to have
negative mass term @xmath must be positive for positive @xmath and
negative for negative @xmath .

#### xiii.2 @xmath case:

In this case we can follow two routes: we either start from ( 104 ) or
from ( 111 ). These two actions give different results and as we have
seen above in the second action this limit provides a singular theory,
while in the first action it does not.

We start with ( 111 ) and take @xmath limit. By this limit @xmath where
in the last step we have taken the Taylor expansion around small @xmath
. Note that @xmath does not depend on @xmath . With the same limit we
can write the decoupled fields in terms of @xmath as @xmath and again
@xmath does not depend on @xmath . With these expansions, ( 111 ) gives
us up to second order

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (112)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

This action is a degenerate Pais-Uhlenbeck oscillator which is known as
ghost free for some parameter ranges. However, if we start from ( 104 )
and set @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (113)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Taking variation with respect to @xmath or @xmath gives us a massive
wave equation. However, these equations do not say anything about the
ghost structure or tachyonic behaviour of the theory. So that, we must
again separate the fields by redefining the fields such that @xmath and
@xmath . With these definitions ( 113 ) turns into

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (114)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

From the above discussion we know that @xmath must be positive not to
have ghost term, but in this case if it is taken positive, @xmath
becomes a ghost excitation. As we discussed in the previous chapter the
Newtonian limit of this theory is interesting Gullu1 . The Newtonian
potential of this theory becomes zero when two static sources are taken
into account, since the ghost excitation that is the repulsive component
cancels the spin-2 part which is the attractive component. This is the
same situation that happens in the pure Einstein gravity.

#### xiii.3 Adding static and spinning sources

Up to now the analysis depended on theories without any interaction.
However, when interaction enters into the picture it may change the
particle spectrum of the theory. So that, we turn our analysis to source
dependent higher derivative gravity. First we add static sources to our
analysis and then we generalize this analysis by adding spinning masses
in flat spacetime.

##### xiii.3.1 Static Sources:

The matter can be added to the theory by the usual gravity-matter
coupling that is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (115)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the static source case we take @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and the
above action becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (116)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we used @xmath . After dropping the boundary terms and taking the
source terms static, that is @xmath , and using the symmetry property of
the Green’s function in the first term of ( 116 ), the source action
becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We add this action to the general total action ( 104 )

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (117)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the action that is only constructed from the @xmath
field and is already in the simple harmonic oscillator form. To
eliminate the last term in the parenthesis of ( 117 ) we define new
fields so that we can decouple the fields easily. The last and the first
terms can be combined and redefined as a new field @xmath and by
inspection the @xmath field can be redefined as @xmath . Putting these
new fields into ( 117 ) and taking @xmath , we get the total action as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (118)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Let us concentrate on the NMG case, that is @xmath . For this case
@xmath . Taking variation with respect to @xmath field, the following
equation comes out

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From this equation @xmath can be defined in terms of the other fields as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (119)
  -- -------- -- -------

Putting ( 119 ) into ( 118 ) the full action becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (120)
  -- -------- -- -------

The last term in the action is the interaction part and it gives an
attractive potential energy for negative @xmath . In order to find the
potential we take the variation of ( 120 ) with respect to @xmath field
that gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (121)
  -- -------- -- -------

Putting the @xmath into the interaction part of ( 120 ) the potential
energy reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (122)
  -- -------- -- -------

From this equation it can be seen easily that for negative @xmath the
interaction part gives an attractive potential energy, that means in NMG
case adding static sources does not spoil the unitarity structure or the
tachyonic behaviour. In ( 122 ) the sources are defined as @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath is the modified Bessel function of the second kind.
This result also matches with the result that we found in the previous
chapter Gullu1 .

##### xiii.3.2 Spinning masses:

For this case the energy-momentum tensor must be written as

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where @xmath is the mass and @xmath is the spin of the point-like
source. The general amplitude and Newtonian potential was calculated for
static sources at flat spacetime in @xmath -dimensions in the previous
chapter Gullu1 . They become

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in three dimensions. The only added part from the spin will come from
the @xmath components of the energy-momentum tensor. It will read as

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The Newtonian potential of these operators was calculated in the
previous chapter. Using that result the potential energy reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Using @xmath the spinning part of the amplitude becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Using the Green’s function of these operators and taking the
differentiations in front of the functions and carrying the space
integrations, we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Note that @xmath and if we assume that the sources are in separate
positions, that is @xmath the first term in the above equation vanishes
and the second term becomes @xmath and the amplitude takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (123)
  -- -------- -- -------

With this spinning part, the total Newtonian potential energy, @xmath ,
can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (124)
  -- -------- -- -------

The signs of @xmath and @xmath are not fixed so that they can be both
positive or negative. Therefore, potential energy coming from this part
could be both attractive or repulsive. In the NMG case this situation
does not change since for this case only the last term in ( 124 ) drops
out.

#### xiii.4 Weak field approximation

Up to this point we have found some results from the linearized theory.
In this section we will try to get some of the above results from the
nonlinear theory ( 91 ). We start with the ansatz

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (125)
  -- -------- -- -------

and insert it to ( 91 ). Here @xmath and @xmath are functions and the
action will be varied with respect to these functions ¹³ ¹³ 13 See the
details of this Weyl trick in dt3 . We will consider only the NMG
theory. To find an approximate solution the functions can be defined as
follows: @xmath , @xmath . Here, @xmath and @xmath are small functions.
Putting the ansatz into ( 91 ) with the defined functions we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (126)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (127)
  -- -------- -- -------

up to first order in @xmath and @xmath . Here, @xmath denotes
differentiation with respect to @xmath . From ( 126 ) and ( 127 ),
@xmath can be written in terms of @xmath as @xmath . To have an ordinary
differential equation we put @xmath into ( 127 ) and we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (128)
  -- -------- -- -------

By solving this equation we can find @xmath as @xmath , where @xmath and
@xmath are constants. From this equation also @xmath can be determined
using @xmath . From the above ansatz we know that @xmath . For @xmath we
first take the square of @xmath and drop the second order term. Then we
expand @xmath up to first order that is @xmath . Combining these
approximations we get @xmath . We know that for decaying fields that is
for @xmath , @xmath . Since @xmath diverges to infinity for decaying
fields @xmath must vanish, and the metric components become

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (129)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath and @xmath are constants. When we compare these components
with Schwarzschild solution we see that the constants must be related to
the mass of the sources. This is consistent with our earlier result (
122 ).

#### xiii.5 Higher-derivative gravity plus a Chern-Simons term

In this part the above discussion will be extended by adding the
gravitational Chern-Simons term to the quadratic gravity theory in flat
space. We will follow the same route; first we will decompose the linear
form of the action that comes from the gravitational Chern-Simons term.
Then the coupled field will be decomposed by taking the Fourier
transform of the Lagrangian and writing it in a matrix form and
diagonalizing this matrix. The general quadratic action with
gravitational Chern-Simons term is Djt1 ; Djt2

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (130)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , and @xmath is the Chern-Simons coupling with an arbitrary
sign ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 Without the @xmath , @xmath terms, but with a Pauli-Fierz
mass term, canonical analysis was carried out in Sarioglu ; dest . .

The linearization of the gravitational Chern-Simons bit yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

First we write all the summations that is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (131)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . Using ( 94 ) and ( 96 ) the terms that appear in the last
line in the above equation are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (132)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have taken out total derivatives in the needed steps and
dropped the boundary terms. With these equations the action of the
gravitational Chern-Simons term takes the form

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (133)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where we have defined the @xmath and @xmath terms in the previous
section. With these, action ( 130 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (134)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where all the fields are gauge invariant. For the general case, that is
@xmath and both @xmath , we eliminate the @xmath field by taking the
variation of ( 134 ) with respect to the @xmath field. From this
equation of motion we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (135)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (136)
  -- -------- -- -------

Putting ( 136 ) in ( 134 ), the general action takes the following form

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath               
              @xmath      (137)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

For a proper analysis we must decouple the @xmath and the @xmath fields.
This decoupling procedure can be done mathematically for generic @xmath
and @xmath but since we are interested in the NMG case we take the
@xmath point. For this case the action reads

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

To decouple these fields we will follow a different route: First we take
the Fourier transform of the fields and put the Lagrangian in a matrix
form then we diagonalize this matrix.

Taking the Fourier transform of the Lagrangian and putting in the matrix
form yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the eigenvalue equation @xmath the eigenvalues of the @xmath
matrix can be found where @xmath is @xmath identity matrix, @xmath is
the above matrix and @xmath is the eigenvalues of the @xmath matrix.
Solving the eigenvalue equation for @xmath we get

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

with roots

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (138)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, let’s find eigenvectors. For @xmath ;

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (139)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (140)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the normalization factors. Then we construct a modal
matrix from the components of the eigenvectors such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (141)
  -- -------- -- -------

and since the eigenvectors are orthogonal to each other the inverse of
the modal matrix is equal to its transpose. With the inverse of this
modal matrix we can define new fields such that @xmath , where @xmath is
the original field,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (142)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, the diagonalized @xmath matrix can be constructed as @xmath which
is just @xmath , from which the transformed Lagrangian reads @xmath .
Then, the action in the decoupled form becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (143)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

or in a more concrete form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (144)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the masses read

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (145)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the fields are inverse Fourier transformed. The masses are same with
those of Bht1 ; Bht2 ; andringa . Since masses of the helicity modes are
different this theory is a parity violating theory. To check the results
of topologically massive gravity we take @xmath limit. In this limit
@xmath diverges and drops out, therefore we are left with a single
degree of freedom that has a mass @xmath Djt1 ; Djt2 . This result can
be seen by Taylor expanding the square root part of ( 145 ) up to third
order.

### Xiv Higher-derivative spin-2 in a de Sitter background

Up to now our analysis was based on the flat space time. Now, we will
change the background to a constant curvature background. Specifically
we will study the canonical structure of higher derivative gravity whose
action is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (146)
  -- -------- -- -------

in an (anti)-de Sitter background. Here @xmath is the bare cosmological
constant. The linearization of ( 146 ) yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (147)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the cosmological constant and @xmath . The cosmological
constant can be related to the coupling constants @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and the bare cosmological constant as @xmath Gullu1 ; dt2 ; dt1 .
We will carry the analysis in a de Sitter (dS) background since it is
simpler than an anti-de Sitter (AdS) background. Nevertheless, from
these expressions one can find the results in AdS spacetime by taking
@xmath transformation. This transformation can be taken since the
results that come in the dS background are analytic in @xmath ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15
To keep the signature intact, one also needs to Wick rotate a space
coordinate . For dS, we define the background metric @xmath in the
Poincaré form as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (148)
  -- -------- -- -------

by which all the raising and lowering operations and covariant
derivatives will be made. The perturbation can be defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (149)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath is the flat spacetime metric. With this
perturbation the linearized forms of Einstein and Ricci tensors and
scalar curvature can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (150)
  -- -------- -- -------

where D’Alembertian operator defined as @xmath . The deviation part of
the metric @xmath can be decomposed into its “spatial” tensor @xmath ,
vector @xmath and “scalar” @xmath parts as follows

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (151)
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and the covariant derivative is defined for the
two-dimensional space metric @xmath . The Latin indices are @xmath for
space dimensions. Since the components of the two dimensional metric has
no space dependence and is flat, the covariant derivative reduces to
partial derivative, @xmath , and @xmath . @xmath is the Levi-Civita
tensor which is related to the corresponding tensor density as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (152)
  -- -------- -- -------

The convention for @xmath is @xmath (the convention for Levi-Civita
tensor density for the upper indices is @xmath naturally with the
induced metric). Therefore, the final result of the above decomposition
becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (153)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The raising and lowering operations for spatial indices are done with
@xmath . Note that, the specific choice of decomposition involves @xmath
coefficients and these coefficients help us to check the flat space
limit, @xmath , @xmath at every step in our calculations.

At this stage we will find the gauge invariant combinations that will be
constructed from the six scalar functions. In flat space case @xmath is
gauge invariant. However, for curved background it is not gauge
invariant anymore. The components of @xmath transforms under the gauge
transformations @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (154)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where the components of @xmath are defined as @xmath . Looking at the
linearized Bianchi identity, @xmath , there should be at least three
independent gauge invariant combinations which are constructed out of
the six scalar fields and their derivatives. These combinations can be
found by inspections. However, looking at the independent components of
the gauge-invariant tensor @xmath the gauge-invariant combinations can
be found easily. Following this route four gauge-invariant functions can
be found:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (155)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and from the Bianchi identity we get a relation between these functions
as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (156)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can find the components of the linearized Einstein tensor in terms of
these gauge invariant fields, that are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (157)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can also write the linearized curvature scalar in terms of the
gauge-invariant fields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (158)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the second equality we used the Bianchi identity ( 156 ).

Using the above relations ( 147 ) can be written in terms of the
gauge-invariant functions. The Einstein-Hilbert part of the action takes
the following form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (159)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the @xmath part of the action, using the self-adjointness of the
involved operators, @xmath can be replaced by some gauge-invariant
combinations. Also, doing so makes the computations simpler as in the
flat space case. With this trick, the @xmath part of the action becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (160)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the @xmath part of the general action, we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

First, writing @xmath ( 150 ) such that the indices of covariant
derivatives @xmath and @xmath stay at the left, and then using the
Bianchi identity, the following action can be found for the @xmath part

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we had not used this method and computed @xmath directly, to put the
result into an explicitly gauge-invariant form would have been more
difficult and taken more time. Finally, the general action can be
written in terms of the gauge-invariant form by collecting all the parts
that are computed above as follows

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (161)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The above action gives ( 104 ) when the flat space limit is taken. Also,
the fields that appear in ( 161 ) are not independent. However, defining
new field such that @xmath , and after using the Bianchi identity ( 156
), the above action ( 161 ) takes a rather simple form in which the
@xmath field decouples

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (162)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath action is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (163)
  -- -------- -- -------

In flat spacetime, cosmological Einstein theory does not have any
propagating degrees of freedom for vanishing @xmath and @xmath in @xmath
. Just like the flat spacetime, without higher curvature terms the total
action does not have any propagating degrees of freedom. For
non-vanishing @xmath and @xmath , ( 162 ) has three degrees of freedom.
From the decoupled field we can read the mass if ( 163 ) is put in a
correct canonical form. For a minimally coupled scalar field the correct
canonical form is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (164)
  -- -------- -- -------

To get the correct canonical dimension the @xmath field is rescaled as
@xmath . After this rescaling, ( 163 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (165)
  -- -------- -- -------

and for the @xmath field the mass reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (166)
  -- -------- -- -------

Unlike the flat space case, diagonalizing the @xmath , @xmath action is
complicated for the general coupling constants. Since we want to see the
oscillators of this theory we can use other methods. One of the methods
is to Fourier transform the fields in the @xmath space and then
computing the zero-momentum limit, that is dropping the Laplacians in
the action. The action does not change the number of degrees of freedom
by doing this manipulation, since, @xmath is not the lowest order term
anymore. Another method is to directly work on the equations of motion.
Both methods will be studied separately below.

#### xiv.1 Masses from the nonrelativistic limit

In this part we take the nonrelativistic limit of the general action (
162 ) by dropping the @xmath terms. Since the @xmath part of the action
is already in an oscillator form, it is not taken into account. Then the
action becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (167)
  -- -------- -- -------

At this step we must decouple the @xmath and @xmath fields. For this
reason we rescale the @xmath field as @xmath . Also, we separate the
constant @xmath to see clearly the NMG limit. With these ( 167 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (168)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

However, this rescaling is not enough to separate the fields. Therefore,
we define a new field @xmath . With this definition the @xmath and
@xmath fields decouple. The @xmath field action can be read as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (169)
  -- -------- -- -------

and gives the same mass as the @xmath field ( 166 ). Therefore, the
@xmath field becomes the spin-2 helicity partner of the @xmath field.
The action for the @xmath field reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (170)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is the spin-0 mode. To read the mass of this mode, we must put it
into the canonical form. For this reason we again rescale the @xmath
field @xmath . After this rescaling the mass can be read as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (171)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the NMG case this mode drops out and we are left with the @xmath and
this result matches with Bht1 . Note that in Bht1 the analysis was
carried out by introducing auxiliary fields, and these fields can be
eliminated in such a way that the action gives spin-2 field with a
Pauli-Fierz mass. However, we reach the same results by using canonical
analysis. For general coupling constants, to make the same analysis as
in Bht1 we must introduce two auxiliary fields and rewrite the action (
91 ) in terms of these fields:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (172)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are auxiliary fields and the masses are @xmath
and @xmath . Then we linearize ( 172 ) around flat background, that is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (173)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Here we can see explicitly that for the NMG limit the @xmath field drops
out and @xmath can be chosen as @xmath . However, for the generic case
it is not clear how the fields @xmath , @xmath and @xmath decouples. One
possible way is to rescale the @xmath field hindawi .

In this section we have discussed the canonical structure of the generic
action in the nonrelativistic limit. It would also be interesting to get
the same results from the analysis of the relativistic equations. The
next section is devoted to the discussion of the relativistic equations
for the NMG limit.

#### xiv.2 Equations of motions in the NMG case

The action ( 162 ) for the @xmath case becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (174)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where we dropped the @xmath field. From this action one can claim that
there are two degrees of freedom, which is in conflict with our earlier
results Bht1 ; Bht2 . However, if we look at the Hessian matrix @xmath ,
that is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (175)
  -- -------- -- -------

and compute its determinant, @xmath , we see that there should be a
constraint in this model. Therefore the time derivatives of the fields
cannot be separated in terms of the canonical momenta

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since the equations of motion are needed we take the variations of ( 174
) with respect to @xmath and @xmath fields which yield

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (176)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (177)
  -- -------- -- -------

To decouple the fields, we define @xmath with a hint that this choice
makes @xmath . With this definition, the other equation becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (178)
  -- -------- -- -------

This equation is not in the canonical wave equation form in dS. We again
rescale the field @xmath to have canonical wave equation and this
rescaling yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (179)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is the same as the @xmath field. From the relativistic equations,
we again see that for NMG limit the quadratic gravity theory is parity
preserving theory in three dimensions.

### Xv Conclusions and Discussion for Chapter-3

In this chapter the canonical structure of the linearized quadratic
gravity theories have been studied. The analysis is done in an
explicitly gauge-invariant way. Moreover, the analysis is made both for
flat and dS backgrounds in three dimensions. In flat background case,
the general quadratic action has been written in canonical wave equation
form. After the fields are decoupled they generate three harmonic
oscillators. The coupling constants @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are chosen
to have a ghost-free and non-tachyonic theory. When the coupling
constants are fixed in this way, the NMG theory is singled out as the
unique unitary higher derivative massive gravity (but not a higher-time
derivative theory). Apart from this theory, all other higher derivative
gravity models are higher-derivative Pais-Uhlenbeck oscillators which
have ghost modes.

The analysis is also extended by adding static sources and spinning
masses to the theory. The effects of the sources are described by
computing the Newtonian potentials for both cases. In addition, the weak
field limit of the theory is computed at the nonlinear level by using
the circularly symmetric ansatz. Another extension that is done for the
flat spacetime is adding the gravitational Chern-Simons term to the
general quadratic theory. With this addition the NMG theory is
investigated and in this limit it is found that the oscillators decouple
with different masses. Therefore, this model is parity violating theory
as expected.

In dS spacetime case, the general action is written in terms of three
gauge-invariant functions. These functions are constructed from the
derivatives of the components of metric perturbation. The fields are
decoupled by two different ways. The first way to decouple fields is to
go to the nonrelativistic limit by dropping out the two dimensional
Laplacians in the action. The second decoupling way is to get the field
equations in the relativistic form.

These gauge-invariant actions that are constructed in this chapter may
be useful when nonlinearities and interactions are introduced to the
theory. Apart from this usefulness there are other interesting points
about the theories that we discussed in this chapter. Tuned values of
the parameters give rise to uncommon phenomena, for instance partial
masslessness or chiral gravity, which especially arise in (anti)-de
Sitter spacetimes. These matters are open to study.

## Part IV Conclusion

In this dissertation, the most general quadratic curvature massive
gravity theory is analyzed to find a specific unitary theory. For this
aim the one-particle scattering amplitude is calculated. Also, to
understand the found unitary theory, that is NMG, the most quadratic
curvature theory is written in canonical form in three dimensions for
both flat and constant curvature spacetimes.

In the second chapter we have studied the @xmath dimensional quadratic
gravity theory augmented with a Pauli-Fierz mass term. First the linear
theory without sources is studied for both massive and massless limits.
For the massive case, a wave equation is found with two massive
excitations in flat spacetime. In curved spacetime the trace of the
metric perturbation becomes a dynamical scalar field. When the dynamical
part is dropped by fixing the coupling constants one solution of this
equation is the partially massless point which comes out only in curved
backgrounds. For the massless limit both the linearized Einstein tensor
and the linearized Ricci scalar are background diffeomorphism invariant.
Also, the scalar curvature must be zero in flat spacetime, but need not
be zero in curved background when the dynamical part of the equation is
eliminated by fixing the constants.

After the analysis in the linearized level, we have moved on to compute
the one-particle scattering amplitude between two covariantly conserved
sources. To find the exchange amplitude the perturbation part must be
expressed in terms of the energy-momentum tensor. However, the
components of the perturbation part of the metric are not independent.
Hence, it is decomposed into its parts to obtain the independent
components. After computing the necessary elements, the scattering
amplitude is calculated. From this general amplitude equation, the poles
and residues can be calculated to have an idea about the particle
spectrum of the most general theory. Moreover, the Newtonian potentials
can be computed from this amplitude equation. Nevertheless, the
equations are very complicated for the most general case. The
calculations are done only for some interesting limits. First the
massive theory is considered in flat spacetime. For this case it is seen
that the theory suffers from ghosts, and to get rid of the ghost term
the coupling constant of the square of Ricci tensor must be taken to
zero. Also, the Newtonian potentials are calculated for static point
sources in four and three dimensions. From the four dimensional
Newtonian potential, the vDVZ discontinuity is obtained. The massive
gravity theory does not fit in with the pure Einstein theory. But in
three dimensions it works well with the pure Einstein theory for small
separations of the sources since the massless limit does not exist. The
other interesting limit is the massless theory in flat spacetime. In
this case first mass is set to zero and then the flat spacetime limit is
taken. For this case the poles, corresponding residues and Newtonian
potential energies are calculated. When the theory is constrained to
ghost and tachyon freedom, from the poles, residues and Newtonian
potentials, it is seen that the dimension must be set to three, the
coupling constant of the Einstein-Hilbert term must taken to be negative
and there must be a relation between the coupling constants of the
higher curvature terms as @xmath . This theory is known as NMG.
Therefore, this theory is obtained from a different perspective than
that of Bht1 ; Bht2 . In three dimensions the Newtonian potential energy
again has the same potential energy as the Einstein gravity at the NMG
limit. The Newtonian potential energy in four dimensions has a ghost
term and to get rid of this term @xmath limit must be taken. Also, for
this limit the general Newtonian potential energy is calculated for
@xmath dimensions. From this equation it can be seen that for all
dimensions there is a ghost term.

In the third chapter, the three dimensional quadratic curvature theory
is studied in more detail. To understand how the NMG theory is singled
out among other three dimensional theories, the most general action is
written in canonical form in both flat and dS spacetimes. First the flat
spacetime case is studied. To get the canonical form, the metric
perturbation is decomposed in terms of six scalar functions. From these
functions three gauge-invariant functions are constructed by the help of
Bianchi identity. The components of linearized Einstein tensor is
written in terms of these gauge-invariant combinations. With the help of
these components and the linearized Ricci scalar, the most general
quadratic action is written in the canonical form with these three
gauge-invariant fields, one of which is automatically decoupled from the
others. The decoupling of the other two fields depends on whether @xmath
is zero or not. These two cases are discussed separately. When this
constant is set to a generic value apart from zero, one of the fields
that has no dynamics in the action can be written in terms of the other
dynamical field. After this manipulation, a decoupled action is
computed. This action is analyzed for some special points and it is
found that for NMG case, the higher-derivative term disappears and we
are left with a parity-invariant theory. Except for the NMG case, this
theory describes a ghost like excitation. When we set @xmath at the
action level and define a new field, a decoupled action can be written
which has a ghost excitation. Then the discussion is extended by adding
static sources and spinning masses to the action separately. For the
static case an interaction part comes to the theory. The Newtonian
potential energy of this interaction part becomes attractive for
negative @xmath . By adding spinning masses, the spin-spin interaction
part is also found. Unfortunately, this interaction can be repulsive or
attractive depending on the signs of the spins. Moreover, some of the
found results are also obtained from the nonlinear theory for the NMG
limit. The last part for the flat spacetime discussion is to add the
gravitational Chern-Simons term to the general quadratic action. For
this case the masses of the excitations are found. Since, these masses
are different, this is a parity-violating theory. Also, for the
topologically massive gravity limit, the expected result is found.

In the second part of the third chapter, the discussion is extended to
curved backgrounds, namely to dS backgrounds. In this part the
calculations are repeated for this case and again three gauge invariant
functions are found. With the help of these functions the generic action
is written with one decoupled field and two coupled fields. For the
decoupled field the mass is computed, and for the coupled fields the
mass is obtained from both the nonrelativistic limit and the equations
of motion.

In the Appendix A, we give some details of the computation which can be
helpful to follow the discussion.

### Appendix A Metric Decomposition and The Higher Curvature Action in
dS Background

#### a.1 Introduction

In this chapter some of the calculations are given to follow the bulk of
the dissertation. Here the gauge invariant action is calculated in dS
spacetime. For this purpose, first the gauge invariance of the metric
perturbation is written, then from the components of the Einstein tensor
the gauge-invariant functions are defined. Then the action is written in
terms of these gauge-invariant functions. In this part all the raising
and lowering operations are made by the background metric and all
covariant derivatives are defined with the background metric.

The metric is taken as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (180)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the background metric and @xmath is the flat spacetime
metric. The perturbation part of the metric @xmath is decomposed as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (181)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the tensor density with the convention @xmath .

The trace of the perturbation metric is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (182)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Some useful identities are as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath               
              @xmath      (183)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Later the six free functions are redefined as @xmath , to get simple
form of the results. With this redefinition, the metric ( 180 ) takes
the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (184)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this appendix only the calculations of the dS part is given but the
flat spacetime part is given at the needed steps by taking the limits
@xmath .

#### a.2 The Gauge-Invariance of Metric Decomposition:

The gauge transformation is @xmath where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (185)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath is the Levi-Civita tensor density with the convention @xmath
. To calculate the gauge-invariance of the metric components the
connection coefficients are needed. For ( 180 ) the coefficients can be
calculated by use of

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (186)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where for notational simplicity we omit the bar sign on @xmath and in
what follows we shall also omit the bar on the covariant derivatives.
There are only three non-trivial components of ( 186 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (187)
  -- -------- -- -------

All other components of the connection coefficients are zero. For the
full tensor the gauge invariance can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (188)
  -- -------- -- -------

after decomposing the covariant derivative.

##### a.2.1 The @xmath Component:

Let start with the @xmath component. Using ( 188 );

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (189)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where in the second line, ( 187 ) is used. Taking @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (190)
  -- -------- -- -------

##### a.2.2 The @xmath Component:

The @xmath component can be transformed again using ( 188 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (191)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where we have used ( 181 ) and ( 187 ) in the left and right hand sides
of the second line, respectively. Equating both sides with respect to
their coefficients, we found

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (192)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and for the redefinition of the metric perturbation, ( 192 ) take the
following form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (193)
  -- -------- -- -------

##### a.2.3 The @xmath Component:

From ( 188 ) the last term is can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (194)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where we have again used ( 181 ),( 185 ) and ( 187 ). The ( 194 ) is
multiplied with @xmath in order to eliminate @xmath field. Note that
@xmath and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (195)
  -- -------- -- -------

and equating both sides with respect to their coefficients, we get

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (196)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (197)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

For the redefined metric, ( 196 ) and ( 197 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (198)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (199)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can eliminate @xmath field by multiplying ( 194 ) with @xmath and
using ( 196 ) we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (200)
  -- -------- -- -------

and for the redefined metric perturbation ( 200 ) reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (201)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the flat spacetime case the non-gauge-invariant functions become

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (202)
  -- -------- -- -------

From ( 202 ) it can be seen that apart from @xmath function all other
functions are not gauge-invariant.

In this part we see that the functions are not gauge-invariant.
Therefore, the next section is devoted to find gauge invariant
functions. For this purpose, we need to find the components of the
linear Einstein tensor in terms of the free functions since it is known
that linear Einstein tensor must satisfy the Bianchi identity.
Therefore, its components must be gauge invariant.

In the next section we first find the components of Ricci tensor and
scalar in terms of these six free functions. Then using these
components, the components of the linear Einstein tensor are written.
Then we define the gauge invariant functions and also check their
invariance. Moreover, we see that Bianchi identity give us a relation
between these gauge invariant functions.

#### a.3 Gauge-Invariant Combinations:

The Bianchi identity gives a clue to finding these gauge invariant
combinations, constructed from the six free functions, since @xmath .
Therefore, the components of the linear Einstein tensor must be composed
of such combinations that are invariant under a gauge transformation.
The components of the linear Einstein tensor are found one by one.

Before calculating the components of Einstein tensor the components of
the linear Ricci tensor and the Scalar curvature must be calculated.

##### a.3.1 Ricci Tensor:

The Ricci tensor is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (203)
  -- -------- -- -------

Extracting the covariant derivatives, the Ricci tensor becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (204)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (205)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

after collecting terms in parenthesis we obtain,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
                          (206)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Putting @xmath and summing @xmath and @xmath indices we get

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (207)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

With the help of ( 187 ), ( 207 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (208)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

finally, we end up with

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (209)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

With this result the components of the Ricci tensor can be calculated.

##### a.3.2 The @xmath Component:

Using ( 209 ), @xmath component becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (210)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

rearranging and doing some cancellations yield

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (211)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Summing the repeated indices and using ( 187 ) gives

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (212)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Putting ( 181 ) in ( 212 ) yields,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (213)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and after the cancellations the final answer of @xmath component becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (214)
  -- -------- -- -------

Also, taking the @xmath and @xmath limits the flat spacetime case of
this component can be got

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (215)
  -- -------- -- -------

##### a.3.3 The @xmath Component:

From ( 209 ) @xmath term can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (216)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

rearranging and doing some cancellations we get

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (217)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Again, using ( 187 ) in ( 217 ) gives us

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (218)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

doing cancellations and summing the same terms yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (219)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Putting ( 181 ) in ( 219 ) bring forth

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (220)
                          
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Rearranging and opening the parenthesis in the last line in ( 220 )
gives us

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (221)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and the overall result comes out as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (222)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The flat spacetime limit, @xmath and @xmath , of this expression is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (223)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

##### a.3.4 The @xmath Component:

The last term is @xmath and it can be written from ( 209 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (224)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and using ( 187 ) yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (225)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Putting ( 181 ) in ( 225 ) gives us

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (226)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath should be eliminated due to the fact that @xmath and @xmath
are symmetric. Then the final form for @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (227)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The flat spacetime result of this component is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (228)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath and @xmath limits are used.

In order to calculate the components of Einstein tensor the Ricci scalar
is also needed. The next section is devoted to the calculation of Ricci
scalar.

#### a.4 Ricci Scalar

Now, let us work on the @xmath term: It is defined as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (229)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where in the second line the upper indices are lowered. In ( 229 ) there
are two terms that must be written in terms of the free functions. These
are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (230)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (231)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

After the application of contractions, using ( 187 ) and doing some
simple manipulations these terms become

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (232)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
                          
              @xmath      
                          
              @xmath      
                          
              @xmath      (233)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Summing the repeated indices in ( 233 ) and again using ( 187 ) yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (234)
  -- -------- -- -------

Putting ( 232 ) and ( 234 ) into ( 229 ) and using @xmath gives us

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (235)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Putting ( 181 ) in ( 229 ) yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (236)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and finally the scalar curvature read

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (237)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the flat spacetime limit ( 237 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (238)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is the flat spacetime result for the scalar curvature.

With the results that we found in the above calculations, ( 214 ), ( 222
), ( 227 ) and ( 237 ), we are ready to find the components of the
Einstein tensor in terms of the free functions of metric perturbation.

#### a.5 The Einstein Tensor

The linear Einstein tensor is defined as follows

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (239)
  -- -------- -- -------

The components of the Einstein tensor is investigated term by term.

##### a.5.1 The @xmath Term:

The @xmath -component of linear Einstein tensor, @xmath , can be written
by using ( 214 ), ( 237 ) and ( 181 ) as follows,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (240)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and doing cancellations and summations we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (241)
  -- -------- -- -------

To simplify ( 241 ), the metric perturbation functions are redefined as
@xmath and the time derivative transforms as @xmath . With these
redefinitions the @xmath -component of the Einstein tensor becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (242)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

From the last line of ( 242 ) a gauge invariant function can be defined:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (243)
  -- -------- -- -------

then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (244)
  -- -------- -- -------

Also, for flat spacetime this term becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (245)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath for the flat spacetime background.

##### a.5.2 The @xmath Term:

The @xmath -component of linear Einstein tensor, @xmath , can be written
by using ( 222 ) and ( 181 ) as follows,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (246)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Again doing the same redefinitions, @xmath and @xmath , ( 246 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (247)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

From ( 247 ) two gauge-invariant combinations can be defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (248)
  -- -------- -- -------

With these definitions, ( 248 ), the @xmath -component of the linear
Einstein tensor reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (249)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the flat spacetime this component yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (250)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the flat spacetime version of the gauge-invariant functions, that
are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (251)
  -- -------- -- -------

##### a.5.3 The @xmath Term:

The @xmath -component of linear Einstein tensor, @xmath , can be written
by putting ( 227 ), ( 237 ) and ( 181 ) into the following equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (252)
  -- -------- -- -------

that yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (253)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and with some cancellations it takes the following form

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (254)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

After redefining all the functions as @xmath for which the first second
derivatives are @xmath , and @xmath respectively, ( 254 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (255)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Since the @xmath and @xmath indices are symmetric, the first term can be
manipulated such that

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (256)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where in the second line the unit derivatives are introduced. After this
manipulation ( 255 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (257)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where the terms @xmath and @xmath are added and subtracted. The second
parenthesis in the first term is @xmath and the second term is @xmath .
The last term can be defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (258)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is also gauge-invariant function. Finally, the @xmath -component
of the linear Einstein tensor becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (259)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The flat spacetime version of this component is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (260)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the function @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (261)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### a.6 Gauge-Invariance of the Defined Functions

The functions can be checked whether they are gauge-invariant or not.
Let us start with,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (262)
  -- -------- -- -------

and using ( 190 , 193 , 198 , 199 , 201 ) and their derivatives ( 262 )
becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (263)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have used @xmath Again using ( 190 , 193 , 198 , 199 , 201 )
the @xmath function reads

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (264)
     @xmath   @xmath      (265)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where we have again used the derivative of fields, @xmath . The other
two functions can be handled in the same way.

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (266)
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          (267)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where we have used @xmath . The @xmath function is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (268)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (269)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Therefore, these functions are indeed invariant under gauge
transformations.

#### a.7 Ricci Scalar in Terms of Gauge Invariant functions

The Ricci scalar can also be written in terms of the gauge-invariant
functions. We first write ( 237 ) with the modified functions, @xmath .
With these functions the Ricci scalar takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (270)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using the definitions of the gauge-invariant functions, ( 243 ), ( 248 )
and ( 258 ), the Ricci scalar can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (271)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the flat spacetime case

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (272)
  -- -------- -- -------

and using @xmath the Ricci scalar becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (273)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### a.8 The Bianchi Identity

The Bianchi identity can also be written in terms of the gauge-invariant
functions. First the identity is decomposed into its components by doing
the summation in the repeated indices:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (274)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (275)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

There is two equations depending on the @xmath index. For @xmath , ( 275
) yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (276)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and using ( 187 ),

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (277)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Using the gauge-invariant form of the components of the Einstein tensor
and their derivatives, that are

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (278)
     @xmath   @xmath      (279)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (280)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

With these equations, ( 278 ), ( 279 ) and ( 280 ), the Bianchi identity
yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (281)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and finally

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (282)
  -- -------- -- -------

Also, @xmath can be taken as @xmath . For this choice ( 275 ) reads

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (283)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Again using ( 279 ) and the derivative of ( 259 ), that is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (284)
  -- -------- -- -------

( 283 ) yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (285)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (286)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using ( 282 ), ( 271 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (287)
  -- -------- -- -------

Up to now, we write the components of linearized Ricci tensor and linear
Einstein tensor in terms of gauge invariant functions. Moreover, the
linear Ricci scalar is also written in a gauge invariant form. Now we
can write ( 147 ) in terms of gauge invariant functions by using these
identities. The next section is devoted to find a gauge invariant
action.

#### a.9 Metric Decomposition and Gauge-Invariant Form Of The Higher
Derivative Action

Linearized action is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (288)
  -- -------- -- -------

where background metric is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (289)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that the term in the parenthesis is the field equations of the
quadratic curvature theory. The constant @xmath in front of @xmath is
Gullu1

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (290)
  -- -------- -- -------

Linearized form of Einstein and Ricci tensors, and Ricci scalar are
given in ( 239 , 203 , 229 ) with the definition @xmath .

##### a.9.1 The Einstein-Hilbert Part

Let us work on the Einstein-Hilbert part first:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (291)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Writing Einstein-Hilbert part in terms of tensor components yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (292)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Let us calculate term by term this action:

##### a.9.2 Decomposition of @xmath term

Let’s start with the first term, that is @xmath where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (293)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using ( 241 ) and ( 181 ), ( 294 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (294)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the flat spacetime case ( 294 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (295)
  -- -------- -- -------

##### a.9.3 Decomposition of @xmath term

Let us move to second term in Einstein-Hilbert action which is @xmath .
Using ( 246 ) and ( 181 ) @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath               
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (296)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where the integral sign is suppressed and at the last line the boundary
terms dropped. Also note that,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (297)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (298)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Then ( 296 ) yields,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (299)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In @xmath and @xmath limits ( 299 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (300)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

which is the result for the flat spacetime case.

##### a.9.4 Decomposition of @xmath term

Using ( 254 ) and the first equation in ( 181 ), @xmath takes the
following form

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (301)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Note that @xmath and @xmath and again the integral sign is suppressed.
Taking the space derivative in front of the metric perturbation in the
first term with dropping the boundary terms the equation becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath               
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (302)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The multiplication of the metric perturbation with the middle term is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath      (303)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes time derivative and @xmath . Putting this equation
with suitable derivative signs and doing the cancellations ( 302 ) turns
to be

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (304)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In the flat spacetime limit ( 304 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (305)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and with integration by parts on time differentiations ( 305 ) yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (306)
  -- -------- -- -------

##### a.9.5 Decomposed form of Einstein-Hilbert Action

To get the final form of Einstein-Hilbert term, all the found results (
294 ), ( 299 ), ( 304 ) are put in ( 292 ) to get

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (307)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

To see the terms that may cancel or sum after integration by parts
operation, ( 307 ) is written in the following form

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (308)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

After doing integration by parts in the terms @xmath and @xmath , ( 308
) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (309)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and the final form of ( 309 ) in terms of metric perturbation functions
is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (310)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

which is not gauge invariant yet. In flat spacetime limit ( 310 ) yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (311)
  -- -------- -- -------

##### a.9.6 The Gauge-Invariant form of the Einstein-Hilbert term:

From ( 310 ) the gauge-invariant form of the Einstein-Hilbert action can
be written. For this aim, first the functions are redefined as @xmath .
With this redefinition ( 310 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (312)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and doing integration by parts in the last term

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (313)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have dropped the boundary term in the last equality. Then the
Einstein-Hilbert action becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (314)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where the integral sign and the overall coefficients are suppressed.
Using ( 248 ) and adding and subtracting the terms @xmath yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (315)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Again doing integration by parts with respect to time in the following
terms terms @xmath @xmath and adding the term @xmath freely, since it is
a boundary term, to the action yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (316)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

With reordering the terms ( 316 ) can be written as follows

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (317)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and putting ( 243 ) in ( 317 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (318)
  -- -------- -- -------

Finally, using ( 248 ) we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (319)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can also do some manipulations to write ( 319 ) in terms of the Ricci
Scalar. When we look at the gauge-invariant Bianchi identity, we see
that the term @xmath must be added to the action ( 319 ). Since this
term is boundary term it can be added freely. Therefore, the action
becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (320)
  -- -------- -- -------

and using Bianchi identity ( 320 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (321)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, we add and subtract @xmath in ( 321 ) and using ( 271 ) we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (322)
  -- -------- -- -------

and in the formal form we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (323)
  -- -------- -- -------

The flat spacetime limit of this action is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (324)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the flat space version of the gauge-invariant form of the Ricci
scalar ( 273 ) and @xmath are used. Then

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (325)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where in the first line integration by parts is done and in the second
line the definition of the D’Alembertian @xmath is used. Also, at the
flat spacetime limit the coefficient @xmath becomes @xmath , after
taking @xmath in ( 290 ).

#### a.10 The @xmath Part of The Higher Derivative Action

The @xmath of the action is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (326)
  -- -------- -- -------

and doing integration by parts and dropping the boundary terms the
action becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (327)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the term in the parenthesis is @xmath . Therefore, the action
becomes,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (328)
  -- -------- -- -------

since @xmath is already gauge-invariant this part of the action is also
gauge-invariant. The flat spacetime version of this action is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (329)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is taken.

#### a.11 The @xmath Part of the Higher Derivative Action

Now, let us move to the @xmath term of ( 288 );

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (330)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where in the second line the D’Alembertian is moved in front of the
metric perturbation and the boundary terms were dropped. Observe that,
the definition of @xmath , ( 203 ), involves @xmath , therefore it can
be written in terms of @xmath . From ( 203 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (331)
  -- -------- -- -------

and changing the order of the covariant derivatives yield

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (332)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where we have used

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (333)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and in the second line we have put the following identities

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (334)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (335)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where in the second line we have used ( 239 ). Then the first term in (
330 ) becomes,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (336)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The last three terms in ( 336 ) becomes boundary term and drops out by
the use of Bianchi identity, @xmath . Also, note that

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (337)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and using

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (338)
     @xmath   @xmath      (339)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

( 337 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (340)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Putting ( 340 ) in ( 336 ) yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (341)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The total action for the @xmath part of ( 288 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (342)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is used. The gauge-invariant form of the last term is known
since it is the same as Einstein-Hilbert part. The middle term is
already gauge-invariant. To have a total gauge-invariant action the
first term must be written in that form.

##### a.11.1 The Gauge-Invariant form of @xmath:

Decomposing @xmath gives us

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (343)
  -- -------- -- -------

From ( 244 , 249 , 259 ), we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (344)
  -- -------- -- -------

and using ( 344 ) in the action ( 343 ) we get,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (345)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and note that we lowered the upper indices by using the
background metric.

##### a.11.2 The Gauge-Invariant Form of the @xmath Action:

Adding ( 345 ), square of ( 271 ) and ( 323 ) the action ( 342 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (346)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In this action there is five gauge-invariant functions. By using the
gauge-invariant form of @xmath the number of functions can be reduced to
four. Here, it is preferred to eliminate the @xmath variable by using
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (347)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

This action is the final result for the @xmath part of the total action.
Now everything is ready to write ( 288 ) in terms of the gauge-invariant
functions.

Before going on, the flat spacetime limit of ( 347 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (348)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where in the second line we have done integration by parts and used (
273 ), in the third line some suitable combinations have done and in the
last line the definition of the D’Alembertian operator , @xmath , have
been used. Finally, for the flat spacetime limit ( 347 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (349)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### a.12 The Total Gauge-Invariant Action

Summing ( 323 ), ( 328 ) and ( 347 ) the total action can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (350)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

This result is the gauge-invariant action for the general quadratic
curvature theory in three dimensions. This action can also be simplified
by defining @xmath and using ( 271 ). For the first term

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (351)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

using the Bianchi identity ( 282 )

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (352)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and observe that @xmath after dropping the boundary term. Then ( 352 )
becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (353)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The second term of ( 350 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (354)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where it has been used @xmath which comes from using Bianchi identity (
282 ) in the gauge-invariant form of Ricci scalar. The last term of (
350 ) can be written without taking care of the @xmath field by using (
287 ),

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath               
     @xmath               (355)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where in the last line the integration by parts is used for the term
@xmath . Again using the Bianchi identity ( 282 ) @xmath . Then, ( 355 )
can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (356)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where in the last line the integration by parts is used for @xmath . The
final form of ( 350 ) becomes with ( 352 ), ( 354 ) and ( 356 )

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (357)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where we have defined

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (358)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the flat spacetime limit, ( 357 ) becomes by summing ( 325 ), ( 329 )
and ( 349 )

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (359)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

#### a.13 Gauge Invariance of The Field Equations

The field equations of the action can also be written in terms
gauge-invariant functions. In the field equation only the @xmath is
unknown in terms of the gauge-invariant functions. Therefore in this
part only this term is written in terms of gauge invariant functions.
First the covariant derivatives are extracted

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (360)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where we have used @xmath in the third line. Doing the summations in the
repeated indices ( 360 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (361)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and using Christoffel connections ( 187 ), ( 361 ) yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (362)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Doing the essential cancellations ( 362 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (363)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Again doing summations in the repeated indices and dropping the
derivatives of the Christoffel connections, @xmath , ( 363 ) yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (364)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

By using ( 364 ) we can calculate the components term by term.

##### a.13.1 The @xmath Term

Setting @xmath in ( 364 ) and using ( 187 ) we have

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (365)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and after simple manipulations ( 365 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (366)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Putting ( 244 ) and its derivatives, the derivative of ( 249 ) and the
trace of ( 259 ), which are

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (367)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

into ( 366 ) yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (368)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and from Bianchi identity ( 282 ) the last term is @xmath and the final
result becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (369)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

For the flat spacetime case ( 369 ) yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (370)
  -- -------- -- -------

##### a.13.2 The @xmath Term

Let us continue with @xmath component. Inserting @xmath and @xmath , the
equation ( 364 ) becomes,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (371)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Using ( 249 ) and its derivatives, which are

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (372)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

the derivative of ( 259 ), that is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (373)
  -- -------- -- -------

and ( 187 ) into ( 371 ) yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (374)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          (375)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The flat spacetime version of ( 375 ) is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (376)
  -- -------- -- -------

##### a.13.3 The @xmath Term

The last component can be calculated in the same way. The indices are
renamed in ( 364 ) as @xmath and @xmath . After using ( 187 )

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (377)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

After calculating the derivatives and doing suitable cancellations the
final answer comes out as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (378)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In the flat spacetime limit ( 378 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (379)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

With ( 369 ), ( 375 ), ( 378 ) and the results that are computed for
@xmath and @xmath are enough to write the gauge-invariant form of the
equations of motion.