## Acknowledgements

My biggest thanks and gratitude must go to Charles Livingston, without
whom this thesis would not have been possible. For the past four years
he has given selflessly his time, his ideas, his moral support and his
patience, and I cannot describe how much these things have meant to me.

I am also incredibly grateful to my supervisor, Andrew Ranicki, for
supporting me through the whole of my studies (and indeed, my career),
even though I veered off from the path he originally envisaged for me.
Through his encouragement I have become a better public speaker, better
expositor and better graphic designer. I have had the privilege of
meeting some of the world’s greatest mathematicians at Andrew and Ida’s
wonderful dinner parties and at the high-level conferences he has
organised. No graduate student could have had a supervisor who did more
for them than mine did for me.

On the academic side I must also thank Paul Kirk for many illuminating
conversations on the ideas in this thesis, and Chris Smyth for helping
me out with the number theory side of things. Thanks go to my examiners
Brendan Owens and Mark Grant for carefully reading the thesis and
offering many valuable suggestions for improvement.

My mathematical brothers Mark Powell and Spiros Adams-Florou have been a
constant source of inspiration and help to me throughout my thesis. Mark
has given much of his time in helping me to understand the finer points
of knot concordance, whilst Spiros deserves the credit for finding the
slice movie for @xmath and for helping me out when I was stuck in
Section 6.3 . Their unfailing enthusiasm for mathematics and topology,
and their readiness to help out a friend in need, have been much
appreciated.

Many thanks go to my officemates Florian Pokorny, Thomas Köppe and (more
recently!) Patrick Orson for keeping me cheerful, joining me for lunch
every day and for putting up with the ever-increasing numbers of
sheep-based objects in the room. A huge extra thanks goes to Thomas for
always being there to help with computer and LaTeX-related queries and
for helping me to make the classification website described in Chapter 7
. I feel privileged to have known such a generous and talented person.

My time in Edinburgh would not have been so wonderful without the
presence of the friends who have been here (and elsewhere), who have
kept me smiling and cheered along my research efforts. Graeme Taylor
(the best housemate and friend I’ll ever have), Shona Yu, Erik Jan de
Vries, Berian James, Nathan Ryder, and the incomparable Paul Reynolds.

Many thanks to my parents and sister, who have always supported me in
everything I chose to do, and who have done well in putting up with me
talking about maths whenever I came home. Without their insistence on
booking tickets to my graduation before I had even handed in, this
thesis might never have been finished.

Last, but not least, my love and thanks goes to Michael Wharmby for his
unfailing support in my thesis-writing, even when it meant many months
of boring weekends spent working. Not only that, but he has the honour
of being the one person (other than my examiners) who has read my thesis
fully from cover to cover. I hope that one day I will be able to repay
the time he spent in meticulously proofreading this document.

Even more lastly, I could not end these acknowledgements without a
thanks to my sheep Haggis for being my constant companion and mastermind
behind all my ideas. And, of course, EPSRC and the University of
Edinburgh for financially supporting me through the long years of my
PhD.

###### Contents

-    Abstract
-    Declaration
-    Acknowledgements
-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 What is knot concordance?
    -    1.2 An algebraic approach to slicing
        -    1.2.1 Problems with the algebraic method
    -    1.3 The structure of @xmath
    -    1.4 Smooth vs topological?
    -    1.5 Outline and main results of the thesis
        -    1.5.1 How to prove that a knot has infinite order in @xmath
        -    1.5.2 A concordance classification of 9-crossing prime
            knots
        -    1.5.3 Second-order slice obstructions
        -    1.5.4 Outline
-    2 Background
    -    2.1 The knot concordance group
        -    2.1.1 How to tell if a knot is slice
    -    2.2 Algebraic concordance
        -    2.2.1 Seifert surfaces and Seifert matrices
        -    2.2.2 Seifert matrices for slice knots
        -    2.2.3 The algebraic concordance group
    -    2.3 Higher dimensions
    -    2.4 Casson-Gordon invariants
        -    2.4.1 Casson-Gordon signatures
        -    2.4.2 Casson-Gordon discriminants
-    3 Finding the algebraic concordance class of a knot
    -    3.1 Symmetric bilinear forms and Witt groups
    -    3.2 The algebraic concordance group
    -    3.3 The Witt groups @xmath and @xmath
    -    3.4 Invariants of algebraic knot concordance
        -    3.4.1 Detecting infinite order elements in @xmath
        -    3.4.2 Detecting order 4 elements in @xmath
        -    3.4.3 Detecting order 2 elements in @xmath
-    4 Algebraic concordance classification of @xmath -crossing knots
    -    4.1 Analysing the signature function
    -    4.2 Elements of algebraic order 4
    -    4.3 The exponent map
    -    4.4 More Witt group analysis
    -    4.5 Summary
-    5 Topological techniques
    -    5.1 Twisted Alexander polynomials
    -    5.2 Twisted polynomials as slicing obstructions
    -    5.3 Detecting infinite order
        -    5.3.1 From metabolisers to polynomials
        -    5.3.2 Odd vectors and the main theorem
    -    5.4 Prime powers
    -    5.5 Higher order covers
-    6 Geometric concordance classification of @xmath -crossing knots
    -    6.1 Knots of infinite order
    -    6.2 Linear independence
    -    6.3 Combining prime powers
    -    6.4 Summary
-    7 Examples
    -    7.1 Question 1: Finding the concordance order of @xmath
    -    7.2 Question 2: Finding a decomposition of @xmath in terms of
        elements of @xmath
        -    7.2.1 Signatures
        -    7.2.2 The Alexander Polynomial
        -    7.2.3 Witt groups for primes @xmath mod 4
        -    7.2.4 Witt groups for primes @xmath mod 4
        -    7.2.5 Twisted Alexander polynomials
        -    7.2.6 Limitations
-    8 Unknown concordance orders
    -    8.1 Finding the concordance orders of prime knots up to 12
        crossings
    -    8.2 Summary
-    9 Torus signatures
    -    9.1 Introduction
    -    9.2 Signatures and jump functions
    -    9.3 Torus knot signatures
    -    9.4 Twist knots
-    10 Further work
    -    10.1 The algebraic concordance group
    -    10.2 Developing twisted Alexander polynomials
    -    10.3 Signatures vs twisted polynomials
    -    10.4 Structure of the concordance group @xmath
    -    10.5 Where do order 2 knots come from?
    -    10.6 Second-order slice obstructions
-    A Signature calculations
-    B Factorised Alexander polynomials for knots in @xmath
-    C Witt group calculations for @xmath mod 4
-    D Witt group calculations for @xmath mod 4
-    E Twisted Alexander polynomial calculations
-    F Slice movies

## List of symbols

  Symbol             Meaning
  ------------------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  @xmath             The @xmath -dimensional sphere, homeomorphic to @xmath
  @xmath             The @xmath -dimensional disc, homeomorphic to @xmath
  @xmath             Connected sum of manifolds
  @xmath             The transpose of a matrix @xmath
  @xmath             The mirror image of the knot @xmath with reversed orientation
  @xmath             The knot @xmath with reversed orientation
  @xmath             The knot complement @xmath (or the knot exterior @xmath )
  @xmath             The @xmath -fold cyclic cover of the knot complement @xmath
  @xmath             The @xmath -fold branched cover of a knot
  @xmath             The linking form of a knot
  @xmath             The @xmath -dimensional knot concordance group
  @xmath             The (integral) algebraic concordance group
  @xmath             The rational algebraic concordance group
  @xmath             Cobordism classes of isometric structures over a field @xmath
  @xmath             The group of algebraically slice knots in @xmath
  @xmath             The field with @xmath elements
  @xmath             The group of units of the field @xmath
  @xmath             The integers modulo @xmath , otherwise known as @xmath
  @xmath             The @xmath -adic rationals
  @xmath             The @xmath -adic integers
  @xmath             The integers @xmath localised at @xmath , i.e. rationals with odd denominator
  @xmath             A complex number which is a @xmath root of unity
  @xmath             The Witt group over a ring @xmath
  @xmath             The discriminant of a polynomial @xmath
  @xmath             The Alexander polynomial of a knot @xmath
  @xmath             The twisted Alexander polynomial of a knot @xmath corresponding to
                     the map @xmath
  @xmath             Equal up to norms, in the context of twisted Alexander polynomials
  @xmath             Galois conjugation of a polynomial @xmath .
  @xmath             The Casson-Gordon invariant of a @xmath -manifold @xmath and
                     map @xmath
  @xmath             The signature of a knot
  @xmath             The @xmath - or Tristram-Levine signature of a knot @xmath
  @xmath             The Casson-Gordon signature of a class @xmath at the unit
                     complex number @xmath
  @xmath             The Casson-Gordon discriminant of a class @xmath
  @xmath or @xmath   The jump at @xmath of the signature function @xmath
  @xmath             The set of prime @xmath -crossing knots, including any distinct reverses
  @xmath             The subgroup of @xmath generated by @xmath
  @xmath             The free abelian group generated by @xmath
  @xmath             The kernel of the map @xmath

## Chapter 1 Introduction

In this chapter we give an overview of the subject of knot concordance:
what it is, why it is interesting, and how mathematicians have gone
about studying it. We highlight the difficulties of working in this
field and how the results of this thesis fit into the general picture we
have of the structure of the knot concordance group.

Other good surveys of knot concordance may be found in Livingston [
Liv05 ] and in the unpublished lecture notes of Peter Teichner [ Tei01 ]
. Surveys of smooth knot concordance can be found in the introduction to
the thesis of Adam Levine [ Lev10 ] and in Jabuka [ Jab07 ] .

### 1.1 What is knot concordance?

Every knot @xmath bounds a surface in @xmath , but only the unknot
bounds a disc; that is, a surface without any holes in (see Figure 1.1
). Is it possible that knots could bound discs if the discs were allowed
to sit in the 4th dimension? This is the motivation behind the
definition of a slice knot.

A slice knot is a knot which bounds a locally flat disc @xmath in the
4-ball @xmath . Such a disc is called a slice disc . Locally flat means
that every point of the disc has a neighbourhood around it which looks
like the standard embedding of a disc @xmath into @xmath . This
restriction is necessary in order to make the definition non-trivial.
For without the requirement that the disc be locally flat, every knot
would bound a disc in @xmath .

To see this, simply take the cone over the knot, as in Figure 1.2 . The
cone over the knot is homeomorphic to a disc @xmath and, because of the
embedding into 4 dimensions, there are no intersections of the surface
with itself (as are visible in the 3-dimensional picture). However, the
vertex of the cone is not locally flat, and this is where the knot gets
‘squashed’ to a point. Slice knots are special kinds of knots where it
is possible to find discs that they bound which avoid these kinds of
singularities.

The definition of a slice knot was first made by Fox [ Fox62 ] , who
used the word ‘slice’ because he thought of slice knots as being those
which were the cross-sections of locally flat @xmath -spheres in @xmath
, sliced by 3-dimensional hyperplanes. Indeed, the original purpose of
slice knots was to help study knotted @xmath -spheres in @xmath -space,
non-trivial examples of which had been found by Artin in 1925 [ Art25 ]
. Slice knots remain important in the study of embeddings of surfaces in
4 dimensions and in the classification of 4-manifolds.

Another reason why slice knots are interesting is that we can use them
to make the set of knots into a group. The problem with doing this
usually is that, under the operation @xmath of connected sum, a knot has
no inverse. Two knots can never be tied into a single piece of string so
that the first cancels out the second. To remedy this fact, we change
our definition of a ‘trivial’ knot. Instead of the unknot being the only
trivial knot, we consider all slice knots to be trivial. Formally, we
say that two knots @xmath and @xmath are concordant if @xmath is slice,
where @xmath is the mirror image of @xmath with reversed orientation.
Then we make a group, called the concordance group and denoted by @xmath
, which is defined to be the set of knots under connected sum, modulo
the equivalence class of slice knots. One of the reasons this works is
because @xmath is always slice, so knots do now have inverses.

Now that we have a group, the natural question to ask is “What is the
structure of this group?”. Is it trivial: is every knot slice? Is any
knot slice other than the unknot? Are there elements of finite order? Is
it infinitely generated? Slowly we are coming to understand the answers
to these questions but the structure of @xmath remains a mystery to the
mathematical community.

### 1.2 An algebraic approach to slicing

If a knot is slice then we can show this by simply exhibiting a slice
disc for the knot. But if it isn’t slice then we need a topological
obstruction to prove it.

An idea proposed by Michel Kervaire [ Ker65 ] was that instead of
looking for a slice disc straightaway, we should first find an arbitrary
surface that the knot bounds (such surfaces are called Seifert surfaces
and there is an algorithm for constructing them) and then perform
surgery to reduce the genus of that surface so that it becomes a disc in
the @xmath dimension. To be able to perform surgery to reduce the genus
of a surface @xmath , one needs to be able to find @xmath closed curves
on the surface which represent different elements in @xmath , which do
not link with each other and which are each slice. If such a set of
curves exists, we can remove an annulus around each curve (i.e. remove
@xmath ) and glue in a double set of slice discs (a @xmath ) to remove
the homology class represented by that curve. (See Figure 1.3 .)

To implement this programme, Jerome Levine [ Lev69b ] defined an object
called the algebraic concordance group @xmath . The elements of this
group are square integral matrices @xmath with the property that @xmath
where @xmath . A matrix is zero, or null cobordant , in this group if it
is congruent to a matrix of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are square matrices of the same size.
Addition in the group is by block sum, and two matrices @xmath are
considered equivalent, or cobordant , if @xmath is null-cobordant. By
analysing this group with the theory of quadratic forms, Levine [ Lev69a
] proved that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Every knot has an associated matrix in @xmath , called a Seifert matrix,
and it can be proved (see Chapter 2, Theorem 2.2.9 ) that slice knots
have null-cobordant Seifert matrices. This means there is a group
epimorphism from @xmath to @xmath . A knot whose image in @xmath is zero
is called algebraically slice .

#### 1.2.1 Problems with the algebraic method

Is the information contained in the algebraic concordance group enough
to classify knots in @xmath ? In other words, if a knot is algebraically
slice, does that mean it is geometrically slice? The evidence points
towards a negative answer:

-   The zeros in a Seifert matrix of an algebraically slice knot
    correspond to curves with zero linking number. However, two knots
    with zero linking number may still be non-trivially linked (for
    example, the Whitehead link).

-   Even if the zeros in the matrix do correspond to knots which are
    unlinked, there is no guarantee that the knots in question are slice
    knots. This means that surgery along these curves may not reduce the
    genus of the surface.

On the other hand, for slice knots in higher dimensions (i.e. @xmath ,
where @xmath ) Levine and Kervaire proved that the algebra was
equivalent to the geometry (see Section 2.3 ). Their surgery-theoretic
techniques worked perfectly in dimensions of 5 and above, but somehow
there was always a problem when people tried applying it to 4
dimensions. This problem was called the Whitney trick, which in high
dimensions allows cancellation of opposite pairs of singularities
(meaning that manifolds with ‘linking number’ zero really have no
intersections), but which fails to work in 4 dimensions. Could there be
a way of making it work for slice knots?

In the 1970s the first example was found of a knot which was
algebraically slice but not geometrically slice. Andrew Casson and
Cameron Gordon [ CG86 ] devised a concordance invariant which looked at
intersection forms on @xmath -manifolds whose boundaries were
appropriate @xmath -manifolds associated to the knot. It sounds
complicated, and it is: their invariant is almost incalculable for knots
of genus higher than @xmath , but it sufficed to prove that the map
@xmath has a non-trivial kernel. The knots which were the first elements
to be found in this kernel were the @xmath -twisted doubles of the
unknot (otherwise known simply as the twist knots), shown in Figure 1.4
.

A natural question following this discovery was: how much of the
structure of the algebraic concordance group is present in the geometric
concordance group? For example, there are knots of algebraic order
@xmath and algebraic order @xmath ; does this mean there are knots of
geometric order @xmath and geometric order @xmath ?

The existence of order @xmath knots turned out to be easy to prove: any
non-slice negative amphicheiral knot (that is, a knot @xmath where
@xmath ) is of order @xmath , because @xmath is always slice. For
example, the Figure-8 knot @xmath is not slice but is of order @xmath
because it is negative amphicheiral. The orientation of the knot is
important: positive amphicheiral knots (where @xmath ) are not
necessarily of order @xmath , as Charles Livingston found [ Liv01 ] .

A further question concerning @xmath -torsion in @xmath is whether all
of it is generated by amphicheiral knots. It was an interesting
discovery that not all knots of order @xmath are themselves amphicheiral
(and there are examples of this in Chapter 8 ), but all of these
examples have been found to be concordant to (negative) amphicheiral
knots.

The question of whether there is @xmath -torsion in @xmath continues to
elude mathematicians. The prevailing conjecture, put forward by
Livingston and Naik [ LN01 ] , is that all knots of algebraic order
@xmath have infinite order in @xmath . This conjecture has been proven
for infinite families of algebraic order @xmath knots, but a general
proof for all knots is yet to appear. Interestingly, the techniques for
proving that such knots are of infinite order have usually hinged on
number-theoretic arguments that make use of primes which are equivalent
to @xmath modulo @xmath . The number fields @xmath of such primes have
the property that @xmath is not a square; it is fascinating that such a
simple and esoteric fact can have such far-reaching consequences in the
theory of knot concordance.

### 1.3 The structure of @xmath

As a group, we know little more than that @xmath . Rather than analysing
the structure of @xmath , a more interesting project is to analyse the
structure of the kernel of the map @xmath to the algebraic concordance
group. This group also has a factor @xmath because there are
algebraically slice knots of infinite order [ Jia81 ] and algebraically
slice knots of order @xmath in @xmath [ Liv99 ] . But are all the knots
in this kernel detected by Casson-Gordon invariants? Could there be
knots which are non-trivial in @xmath , but which are algebraically
slice and have vanishing Casson-Gordon invariants?

The answer to this latter question is ‘yes’, and indeed, there are
infinitely many of them. What about the invariant that detects such
knots? Could that be zero and yet the knot still not be slice? Again,
‘yes’. Three mathematicians, Tim Cochran, Kent Orr and Peter Teichner [
COT03 ] , constructed an infinite tower of such invariants, creating
what is known as the filtration of the knot concordance group:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The first few stages of the filtration are relatively well understood:
@xmath consists of those knots with vanishing Arf invariant; @xmath
contains those knots which are algebraically slice; @xmath consists
(roughly) of those knots with vanishing Casson-Gordon invariants. The
higher levels of the filtration are poorly understood by all except a
few people. Let us discuss some geometric intuition for what this
filtration is measuring.

The idea behind algebraic sliceness is to say “We don’t know how to find
a slice disc for a knot, so let’s start with a higher genus surface and
try to perform surgery to turn it into a disc.” To be able to perform
successful surgery on a genus @xmath surface, we have to find @xmath
curves representing different homology classes on the surface, and each
of those curves needs to be slice and unlinked with the other curves.
The algebraic concordance group measures the ability to find these
@xmath unlinked curves; a better invariant might also try to measure
whether the curves are slice.

But deciding whether these curves are slice is the same problem as we
had with the initial knot! We have simply pushed the problem down a
level, as it were, in the hopes that these new curves might be simpler
to deal with than the first knot.

So here is an iterative procedure for deciding if a knot @xmath is
slice: find a genus @xmath surface @xmath that @xmath bounds, find
@xmath unlinked curves of different homology classes on @xmath (if you
can’t, @xmath is not slice, so stop), then for each of these @xmath
curves, repeat the procedure as for @xmath . The resulting ‘surface’ is
(amusingly) known as a grope since it appears to have ‘multitudinous
fingers’ (see Figure 1.5 and [ Tei04 ] ).

If the procedure stops after @xmath iterations, then the knot should
intuitively be in level @xmath of the filtration, i.e. @xmath (although
the Cochran-Orr-Teichner filtration is more complicated than this). If a
knot is slice, it should intuitively be in @xmath because eventually the
curves in some level will be slice and bound genus @xmath surfaces,
which makes finding the requisite @xmath curves a triviality. However,
one of the open questions with the filtration is whether @xmath consists
exactly of the slice knots. That is, is it possible that there should be
knots which are not slice, and yet for which this procedure never
terminates?

Cochran, Orr and Teichner have proved that the number of knots in each
level of the filtration does not decrease, as one might hope/expect.
Indeed, each quotient @xmath is not only infinite but is infinitely
generated [ CT07 , CHL09 ] . There are very few examples of knots which
occur high up in the filtration (i.e. above the Casson-Gordon @xmath
level), and those which we know of have been constructed artificially
rather than found naturally in a table of knots. This is because proving
that a knot lies in a particular level of the filtration is conceptually
and computationally very difficult. One would have to analyse all
possible metabolising curves (i.e. sets of @xmath unlinked curves) on a
surface at every level and show that every one of them was obstructed
from being slice. At the moment this is only possible for genus @xmath
knots at the first level of curves [ COT04 ] .

### 1.4 Smooth vs topological?

So far we have discussed knot concordance in the context of the
topological locally flat category. We could instead work in the smooth
category, where slice discs and embeddings are smooth (i.e. @xmath ). It
is one of the interesting things about @xmath -dimensional slice knots
(with slice discs embedded in @xmath dimensions) that the two categories
are not equivalent.

One of the cornerstone theorems of algebraic topology is the @xmath
-cobordism theorem. Given a compact cobordism @xmath between two @xmath
-dimensional manifolds @xmath and @xmath where the inclusion maps @xmath
and @xmath are homotopy equivalences, the @xmath -cobordism theorem
states that if @xmath and @xmath are simply connected then @xmath is
diffeomorphic to @xmath . The Generalized Poincaré conjecture turned out
to be a special case of the @xmath -cobordism theorem; it said that
objects which are homotopy equivalent to @xmath are homeomorphic to
@xmath .

Of course, given that the proof of the Poincaré Conjecture was worth
@xmath million in 2003 and the @xmath -cobordism theorem was proved by
Smale in @xmath [ Sma61 ] , there has to be a caveat. The caveat is that
@xmath must be greater than or equal to @xmath . The proof relies on the
Whitney trick (mentioned in Section 1.2.1 and further explained in
Section 2.3 ), and the Whitney trick fails in dimension @xmath . Despite
this, in @xmath Michael Freedman was able to prove that the @xmath
-cobordism theorem is true topologically when @xmath [ FQ90 ] .
Donaldson’s work in 1987 [ Don87 ] then showed that the theorem was not
true smoothly; a result which has implications for knot concordance.

A consequence of Freedman’s work was that any knot whose Alexander
polynomial @xmath (an algebraic invariant derived from the Seifert
matrix - see Definition 2.2.8 ) is equal to @xmath is slice. For
example, the Whitehead double of any knot must be topologically slice
(see Figure 1.6 ).

However, using invariants derived from Donaldson’s work, Akbulut
[unpublished] proved that the Whitehead double of the right-handed
trefoil was not smoothly slice, thus providing the first example of a
difference between the two categories of knot concordance. This was
followed by Rudolph [ Rud93 ] who showed that any strongly quasipositive
knot could not be smoothly slice. This provided examples of
topologically slice knots that are of infinite order in the smooth
concordance category.

Since then there have been many invariants developed to detect the
non-triviality of knots in the smooth knot concordance group. Ozsváth
and Szabó developed Heegaard-Floer homology [ OS04 ] , which is a @xmath
-manifold invariant and a powerful knot invariant which in some sense
categorifies the Alexander polynomial. Two integer-valued concordance
invariants derived from it are the Oszváth-Szabó @xmath invariant [ OS03
] and the Manolescu-Owens @xmath invariant [ MO07 ] . There is also
Khovanov homology, which categorifies the Jones polynomial, and from it
we obtain the integer-valued Rasmussen @xmath -invariant [ Ras04 ] .
Each of these invariants will vanish on torsion elements in the smooth
concordance group, so their non-triviality will detect elements of
infinite order. However, it means that they are not powerful enough to
distinguish, for example, between knots which are slice and knots which
are of order 2.

Yet Heegaard-Floer homology is strong enough to detect elements of
finite order. By using correction terms coming from Heegaard-Floer
homology, Jabuka and Naik [ JN07 ] were able to find elements of
(smooth) finite order. Their argument was somewhat similar to the
Casson-Gordon one, in the sense that both were trying to obstruct
intersection forms of @xmath -manifolds which are bounded by cyclic
branched covers of the knot. The Casson-Gordon invariants themselves
were developed for the smooth category of knot concordance, but with
Freedman’s work were shown to also obstruct sliceness in the topological
category.

The relationship between finite order elements in the topological
concordance group @xmath and the smooth concordance group @xmath remains
unknown. For example, what is the kernel of the map @xmath ? All that is
currently known is that it contains a subgroup isomorphic to @xmath ,
via the three maps @xmath , @xmath and @xmath above. It is possible that
there could exist examples of knots which have different finite orders
in the different categories, but none have yet been found.

### 1.5 Outline and main results of the thesis

In this thesis we set out to probe the structure of the knot concordance
group by developing computational techniques to decide whether a knot is
of infinite order in @xmath . The obstructions – twisted Alexander
polynomials – are special cases of Casson-Gordon invariants, which means
they find knots in level @xmath of the Cochran-Orr-Teichner concordance
filtration. It also means that they are both smooth and topological
obstructions. Out of @xmath prime knots of unknown concordance order,
these techniques are powerful enough to find the slice status of all but
two of them.

All calculations for this thesis were done in Maple 13 and in Sage;
copies of the programs are available on request from the University of
Edinburgh library or from the author. In all the theorems and results
given here, we need to assume that Maple’s polynomial factorisation
algorithm (over @xmath ) is accurate.

###### Theorem.

(Chapter 8 ) Of the prime knots of 12 or fewer crossings listed as
having unknown concordance order, they are all of infinite order with
the exception of the following:

-   @xmath is slice because it has Alexander polynomial equal to 1.

-   @xmath is of order 2 because it is fully amphicheiral.

-   @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are all of order @xmath
    , concordant to the Figure Eight knot @xmath .

-   @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are all of order @xmath , concordant to
    the knot @xmath .

-   @xmath remains of unknown order, but is suspected to be finite order
    and possibly slice.

-   @xmath remains of unknown order, and there are no suspicions as to
    whether it is of finite or infinite order.

The remaining two knots look to be strong candidates for examples of
knots lying in the higher levels of the Cochran-Orr-Teichner concordance
filtration, and as such will be interesting objects of further study.

#### 1.5.1 How to prove that a knot has infinite order in @xmath

What are the techniques that we developed to determine the concordance
orders of these @xmath prime knots? We summarise here the main results
from Chapter 5 , which give a series of criteria for deciding if a knot
has infinite order in the concordance group @xmath . The idea is to look
at metabolisers of the first homology of the @xmath -fold branched cover
@xmath of a knot, for a prime @xmath , and to show that under certain
circumstances there is always a twisted Alexander polynomial @xmath
which obstructs the knot from being slice. In what follows @xmath is
always a complex @xmath root of unity, a norm is an element of @xmath of
the form @xmath and @xmath means ‘up to norms’.

In the first case we concentrate on the @xmath -fold branched cover.

###### Theorem 5.3.6.

Suppose that we have a knot @xmath where @xmath for some prime @xmath
mod @xmath , where the order of @xmath is coprime to @xmath . Let @xmath
be the trivial map and @xmath be @xmath . Then @xmath is of infinite
order if it satisfies the following conditions:

1.  @xmath is not a norm in @xmath .

2.  There is a non-trivial irreducible factor @xmath of @xmath for which
    @xmath is not a factor of @xmath for any @xmath .

3.  @xmath , where @xmath (mod @xmath ).

This theorem is extended to give criteria for a sum of knots to be of
infinite order. This is necessary for proving that knots are independent
within @xmath .

###### Theorem 5.3.10.

Let @xmath with @xmath having @xmath with the order of the @xmath
coprime to @xmath , and the remainder of the @xmath having @xmath with
the order of the @xmath coprime to @xmath . Then @xmath has infinite
order in @xmath if the twisted Alexander polynomials (as defined in
Theorem 5.3.6 ) satisfy:

1.  @xmath does not factorise over @xmath as a norm for any @xmath .

2.  There is a non-trivial irreducible factor @xmath of @xmath for which
    @xmath is not a factor of @xmath for all @xmath and all @xmath .

3.  @xmath where @xmath with @xmath and @xmath , for all @xmath where
    @xmath is defined. This means that if @xmath mod @xmath then @xmath
    and @xmath must be the same modulo squares and if @xmath mod 4 then
    @xmath and @xmath must be different modulo squares.

Next we look at criteria for finding infinite order knots using branched
covers whose homology has a more complicated structure.

###### Theorem 5.4.2.

Suppose that we have a knot @xmath where @xmath for some prime @xmath ,
where the order of @xmath is coprime to @xmath . Let @xmath be the
trivial map and @xmath be @xmath (mod @xmath ). Then @xmath is of
infinite order if it satisfies the following conditions:

1.  If @xmath , @xmath is not a norm.

2.  @xmath is not a norm.

3.  @xmath is coprime, up to norms in @xmath , to @xmath for all @xmath
    .

4.  If @xmath (mod @xmath ) then @xmath , where @xmath (mod @xmath ).

Next we look at twisted Alexander polynomials associated to branched
covers @xmath of a knot @xmath with @xmath .

###### Theorem 5.5.1.

Suppose @xmath where @xmath and @xmath are the eigenspaces of the deck
transformation @xmath . Let @xmath be an @xmath -eigenvector (i.e.
@xmath ) and @xmath be a @xmath -eigenvector. Now define @xmath by
@xmath and @xmath . Similarly, @xmath is defined by @xmath and @xmath .
The knot @xmath is of infinite order in @xmath if the following
conditions on the twisted Alexander polynomial of @xmath are satisfied:

1.  @xmath is coprime, up to norms, to both @xmath and @xmath , and
    @xmath is not a norm.

2.  @xmath for any @xmath .

An extension of this theorem gives a procedure to decide whether a knot
is concordant to its reverse – a very subtle and difficult problem in
knot theory which has previously been solved for only a few special
cases of knots by Kirk, Livingston and Naik [ Liv83 ] , [ Nai96 ] , [
KL99b ] . In this next theorem we give criteria not only to tell if a
knot is distinct (in @xmath ) from its reverse, but whether the
difference is of infinite order in @xmath . The notation @xmath means
the map taking @xmath to @xmath in the coefficients of @xmath .

###### Theorem 5.5.2.

The knot @xmath is of infinite order in @xmath if the following
conditions on the twisted Alexander polynomial of @xmath are satisfied:

1.  @xmath is coprime, up to norms, to both @xmath and @xmath , and none
    of these polynomials are themselves norms.

2.  @xmath for any @xmath

3.  @xmath for any @xmath .

Finally, we have a theorem which gives criteria for a connected sum of
knots to be of infinite order, using higher-order branched covers. The
set-up is again the same as in Theorem 5.5.1 .

###### Theorem 5.5.3.

The knot @xmath is of infinite order in @xmath if the following
conditions on the twisted Alexander polynomial of the @xmath are
satisfied:

1.  @xmath is not a norm for any @xmath .

2.  @xmath is coprime, up to norms, to @xmath and @xmath for every
    @xmath and @xmath .

3.  @xmath (or @xmath ) for any @xmath and any @xmath .

4.  @xmath for any @xmath and any @xmath .

The combination of all these theorems allows us to attempt a full
classification of all the prime knots with 9 or fewer crossings, which
we will describe in the next section.

#### 1.5.2 A concordance classification of 9-crossing prime knots

We wish to find the structure of the subgroups of @xmath and @xmath
generated by all prime knots with 9 or fewer crossings. Such a result
would allow us, given any linear combination of @xmath -crossing prime
knots, to instantly be able to decide the algebraic and geometric
concordance orders of that knot. The reason that @xmath -crossing knots
were chosen is that there are sufficiently many to throw up interesting
challenges and phenomena, whilst being a small enough set to allow us to
perform many of the calculations by hand. Now that the groundwork and
algorithms have been laid out, it should not be too difficult, in future
work, to automate the process and produce a classification for @xmath -,
@xmath - and even @xmath -crossing knots.

Let @xmath , where @xmath since the list includes the distinct reverses
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

###### Notation.

Let @xmath denote the subgroup of @xmath generated by @xmath . Denote by
@xmath the free abelian group generated by @xmath .

There are natural maps @xmath . We use the term ‘concordance
classification’ of @xmath to mean finding the kernel of both @xmath and
@xmath , since knowing these kernels would enable us to identify whether
any linear combination of knots in @xmath were slice (algebraically and
geometrically).

The following result, which is labelled as a conjecture because part of
it remains unproved, writes @xmath in terms of a basis from which it is
possible to read off the orders of any linear combination of knots. It
is an amalgamation of the results of Chapters 4 and 6 .

###### Conjecture 1.5.1.

A basis of @xmath consists of the union of the following independent
sets. In the notation, the superscript gives the order of the elements
in the @xmath =‘algebraic’ or @xmath =‘topological’ concordance groups.
For example, @xmath means knots which represent elements of order @xmath
in @xmath .

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

A basis for the kernel @xmath of @xmath is the union of @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

A basis for the kernel of @xmath is the union of @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath .

###### Corollary 1.5.2.

The image of @xmath in the algebraic concordance group @xmath is @xmath
.

The image of @xmath (the kernel of @xmath ) in the geometric concordance
group @xmath is @xmath .

The only part of this conjecture which remains unproven is whether the
knots @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are linearly
independent in @xmath . That is, could there be some linear combination
of these knots which is slice? We have not yet been able to extend the
theorems of Chapter 5 to deal with this case, which is where the
homology of the @xmath -fold branched cover of the knot is isomorphic to
@xmath , with the order of @xmath coprime to @xmath . (Alternatively,
where the homology of the @xmath -fold branched cover, for @xmath , is
isomorphic to @xmath .)

Although algebraic concordance is well-understood, and a complete set of
invariants exists to classify knots in @xmath , this investigation of
@xmath -crossings knots has raised more subtle questions about the
structure of @xmath and these invariants. For example, is knowledge of
the image of a knot in @xmath necessary for the classification of the
knot in @xmath , and can we find a prime knot which represents an
element of order @xmath in @xmath but which is twice another prime knot
of order @xmath ?

The nature of the invariants which are developed in this investigation
also provide more evidence that knots which are of algebraic order
@xmath will be of infinite order in @xmath .

#### 1.5.3 Second-order slice obstructions

We end the thesis with a look at the computationally feasible
second-order invariants provided by Cochran, Orr and Teichner. The
metabolising curves for the twist knots have been shown to be torus
knots, so by calculating signatures for the torus knots we provide
another proof that the twist knots are not slice.

###### Theorem 9.3.3.

Let @xmath and @xmath be coprime positive integers. Then the integral of
the @xmath -signatures of the @xmath torus knot is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Corollary 9.4.3.

The twist knots @xmath are not slice unless @xmath or @xmath .

This result was already known to Casson and Gordon in the 1970s but the
new proof given in this thesis is much shorter and generalises to larger
classes of knots, such as the @xmath -twisted doubles of an arbitrary
knot @xmath .

###### Corollary 9.4.4.

Let @xmath be a knot and @xmath the @xmath -twisted double ( @xmath ) of
@xmath as shown in Figure 1.7 .

-   @xmath cannot be slice unless @xmath for some @xmath and @xmath . In
    particular, @xmath can only be slice if @xmath .

-   For any given @xmath with @xmath , there is at most one @xmath which
    can be slice.

#### 1.5.4 Outline

The structure of this thesis is summarised below:

-    Chapter 2: A rigorous introduction to the required background
    knowledge for the thesis; including a definition of the knot
    concordance group, how to prove when a knot is slice, details of the
    algebraic concordance group, a discussion of results in
    higher-dimensional knot concordance, and a description of
    Casson-Gordon invariants.

-    Chapter 3: A full and detailed description of the algebraic
    concordance group, focusing on the work of Levine and the invariants
    needed to find the image of a knot in @xmath .

-    Chapter 4: The classification of the prime @xmath -crossing knots
    in @xmath , using the results from Chapter 3.

-    Chapter 5: A detailed description of twisted Alexander polynomials
    as slicing obstructions, followed by the main results which use
    these polynomials to provide criteria for a knot to be of infinite
    order in @xmath .

-    Chapter 6: The classification of the prime @xmath -crossing knots
    in @xmath , using the results from Chapters 4 and 5.

-    Chapter 7: Detailed examples of how to use the classifications
    provided in Chapters 4 and 6 to find the concordance order of any
    linear combination of @xmath -crossing knots. Discussion of how this
    procedure might fail when dealing with larger classes of knots.

-    Chapter 8: A description of how the theorems in Chapter 5 have been
    applied to the prime knots of @xmath or fewer crossings of unknown
    concordance order, along with slice diagrams for those knots which
    have been shown to be of finite order.

-    Chapter 9: How solving an elementary but difficult number-theoretic
    problem is found to be equivalent to looking at signatures of torus
    knots, and how these signatures are successful in obstructing the
    twist knots from being slice. Extensions of this result to
    obstructing the @xmath -twisted doubles of an arbitrary knot from
    being slice.

-    Chapter 10: A look at the open problems related to work in this
    thesis and suggestions on how these might be attacked.

## Chapter 2 Background

In this chapter we give rigorous definitions of what it means for a knot
to be (geometrically) slice and algebraically slice. We discuss the map
from the geometric to the algebraic concordance group, and see that this
is an isomorphism in higher dimensions. It is the failure of the Whitney
trick in dimension 4 which causes the map @xmath to have a non-trivial
kernel, and we look at the work of Casson and Gordon who first exhibited
non-trivial elements in this kernel.

### 2.1 The knot concordance group

###### Definition 2.1.1.

A knot is a locally flat embedding of a circle @xmath into the @xmath
-sphere @xmath , under the equivalence relation of ambient isotopy. That
is, two knots @xmath and @xmath are considered equivalent if there is a
homotopy of (orientation-preserving) homeomorphisms @xmath such that
@xmath is the identity and @xmath carries @xmath to @xmath .

We will abuse the terminology in the standard way, with the word ‘knot’
sometimes referring to the embedding and sometimes to the image of the
embedding.

###### Definition 2.1.2.

An embedding of manifolds @xmath is called locally flat if for each
point @xmath there is a neighbourhood @xmath of @xmath and a
neighbourhood @xmath of @xmath such that the pair @xmath can be mapped
homeomorphically onto @xmath .

###### Definition 2.1.3.

A knot @xmath is topologically (smoothly) slice if it is the boundary of
a locally flat (smooth) disc @xmath embedded into the 4-ball @xmath .

###### Definition 2.1.4.

Two knots @xmath and @xmath are called concordant if @xmath is slice,
where @xmath means the mirror image of @xmath with reversed orientation.
An alternative and equivalent definition is that two knots are
concordant if @xmath and @xmath cobound a locally flat annulus @xmath
embedded in @xmath .

###### Remark 2.1.5.

To see that the two different definitions in 2.1.4 are equivalent,
suppose that @xmath and @xmath cobound an annulus @xmath . Remove @xmath
from @xmath . This turns the annulus into a slice disc in @xmath ,
bounded by the connected sum @xmath – see Figure 2.1 .

###### Proposition 2.1.6.

Concordance is an equivalence relation on the set of all knots.

###### Proof.

A knot is concordant to itself; to see the slice disc, construct the
connected sum of the knot and its reversed mirror image, then join with
lines the points which would be identified across a mirror. These lines
together trace out a smoothly immersed disc in @xmath , which can be
turned into an embedded disc by pushing the interior into @xmath .

###### Example 2.1.7.

Here is the connected sum of the trefoil and its mirror image, followed
by the corresponding slice disc.

If @xmath is concordant to @xmath , then @xmath bounds a slice disc. By
reversing the orientation of the slice disc we get a slice disc for
@xmath , so @xmath is concordant to @xmath .

Finally, if @xmath is concordant to @xmath and @xmath is concordant to
@xmath , then @xmath and @xmath cobound an annulus @xmath whilst @xmath
and @xmath bound another annulus @xmath . We may glue the annuli @xmath
and @xmath together to create one large annulus with boundary @xmath .
Thus @xmath is concordant to @xmath . ∎

###### Definition 2.1.8.

The knot concordance group @xmath is the set of knots with the operation
of connected sum modulo the equivalence relation of concordance. The
identity of the group is the set of all slice knots, and the inverse of
a knot @xmath is @xmath .

#### 2.1.1 How to tell if a knot is slice

If a knot is smoothly slice, then its slice disc may be put into general
position so that concentric @xmath -spheres move through and intersect
it to produce knots and links, together with a finite number of
singularities. These singularities correspond to

1.  a simple maximum or minimum

2.  a saddle point

To implement a move through a saddle point on the diagram of a knot, one
must perform a surgery: remove @xmath and glue in @xmath . Find two arcs
of the knot with opposite orientation, remove them and re-glue as shown
in the following figure:

###### Example 2.1.9.

Stevedore’s knot, otherwise known as @xmath , is the simplest slice knot
(other than the unknot). The following ‘movie’ shows how @xmath -spheres
move through the slice disc:

[]

The slice disc is shown schematically below:

[]

###### Example 2.1.10.

Another example of a slice knot is the 8-crossing knot @xmath . Here is
the corresponding slice movie:

[]

The important thing to notice in these examples is that after the saddle
move has been made, the resulting knots are unknotted and unlinked. If
the knots after the saddle move were linked (which is what always
happens when you try making a slice movie with a trefoil, for example)
then we would not be able to cap them off with discs to finish making
the slice disc.

It is, in general, quite difficult to find a slice movie for a knot,
even when one knows that the knot is slice. The problem is not one which
can be algorithmically implemented, since there are infinitely many
places to try doing a surgery, including adding in more crossings to the
knot and even tying in other slice knots. (For an example of this latter
phenomenon see Example 10.1 in [ HKL10 ] , where the authors prove that
@xmath is slice by first tying in the connected sum of the trefoil with
its reverse mirror image.)

###### Remark 2.1.11.

A ribbon knot is a knot which bounds a smooth disc @xmath in @xmath such
that the singularities of the ribbon disc are either minima or saddle
points. Clearly every ribbon knot is (smoothly) slice, but it is an open
conjecture whether all smoothly slice knots are ribbon. If it were so,
this would make the process of looking for slice discs easier because we
would not have to worry about introducing maxima into the slice movie.

To prove that a knot is not slice is often much easier. In the next
section we will look at obstructions that are derived from Seifert
matrices.

### 2.2 Algebraic concordance

Although only the unknot can bound a disc in @xmath , all knots can
bound some higher-genus surfaces in @xmath dimensions. One approach to
deciding whether a knot is slice is to take these surfaces and see if we
can do surgery on them to reduce them to discs embedded in the @xmath
dimension.

#### 2.2.1 Seifert surfaces and Seifert matrices

###### Definition 2.2.1.

A Seifert surface of an oriented knot @xmath is a compact connected
oriented surface whose boundary is @xmath .

###### Theorem 2.2.2.

Every oriented link has a Seifert surface.

###### Proof.

(Seifert, 1934) (The following method is known as Seifert’s algorithm .)
Fix an oriented projection of the link. At each crossing of the
projection there are two incoming strands and two outgoing strands.
Eliminate the crossings by swapping which incoming strand is connected
to which outgoing strand (see diagram below). The result is a set of
non-intersecting oriented topological circles called Seifert circles ,
which, if they are nested, we imagine being at different heights
perpendicular to the plane with the z-coordinate changing linearly with
the nesting. Fill in these circles, giving discs, and connect the discs
together by attaching twisted bands where the crossings used to be. The
direction of the twist corresponds to the direction of the crossing in
the link.

[]

This procedure forms a surface which has the link as its boundary, and
it is not hard to see that it is orientable. If we colour the Seifert
circles according to their orientation, e.g. the upward face blue for
clockwise and the upward face red for anticlockwise, then the twists
will consistently continue the colouring to the whole surface. According
to the convention in Rolfsen [ Rol03 ] we consider the red face as the
‘positive’ side. ∎

###### Remark 2.2.3.

An excellent program called Seifertview [ vWC06 ] constructs a @xmath
-dimensional visualisation of a Seifert surface for any given knot. The
surfaces are constructed using exactly the algorithm described above.
The Seifert surfaces shown in Figure 1.1 are courtesy of Seifertview.

Given a Seifert surface for a knot, we want to analyse the ‘holes’ in
this surface. This means looking at generators of the first homology
group of the surface and seeing how they interact with each other. This
interaction will be captured by the linking form.

###### Definition 2.2.4.

Suppose that @xmath is a regular oriented projection of a two-component
link with components @xmath and @xmath . Assign each crossing a sign:

[]

The linking number @xmath of @xmath and @xmath is half the sum of the
signs of the crossings at which one strand is from @xmath and the other
is from @xmath .

###### Definition 2.2.5.

Let @xmath be a Seifert surface for an oriented knot @xmath . We define
the linking pairing (also known as the linking form or Seifert form )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by @xmath where @xmath denotes the translation of @xmath in the positive
normal direction into @xmath . A Seifert matrix for @xmath is a matrix
representing @xmath in some basis of @xmath .

Since the Seifert matrix depends on the choice of Seifert surface and on
the choice of a homology basis, it is not an invariant for the knot.
However, we can say how two different Seifert matrices for the same knot
must be related. Two Seifert surfaces for a knot are related by a
sequence of ambient isotopies and by handle additions/removals (see [
Lic97 , Theorem 8.2] for a proof). If @xmath is obtained from @xmath by
a handle addition, and if the respective Seifert matrices are @xmath and
@xmath then we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some vectors @xmath or @xmath . @xmath is called an elementary
enlargement of @xmath and @xmath is called an elementary reduction of
@xmath .

###### Definition 2.2.6.

Two matrices @xmath and @xmath are called S-equivalent if they are
related by a finite sequence of elementary enlargements, reductions and
by unimodular congruences (i.e. relations of the form @xmath with @xmath
). Two knots are called S-equivalent if they have S-equivalent Seifert
matrices.

###### Lemma 2.2.7.

[ Lic97 , Theorem 8.4] Two Seifert matrices for a knot are S-equivalent.

Two inequivalent knots may be S-equivalent, and thus all of the
invariants derived from their Seifert matrices will be identical. This
is the first clue that algebraic invariants will not be sufficient to
tell us the whole story of which knots are slice. Some of the invariants
which will be important are contained in the following definition.

###### Definition 2.2.8.

The Alexander polynomial of a knot @xmath with Seifert matrix @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(defined up to multiples of @xmath ). The signature @xmath is the number
of positive eigenvalues minus the number of negative eigenvalues in
@xmath . The @xmath -signature @xmath for a unit complex number @xmath
is the signature of the hermitian matrix

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 2.2.2 Seifert matrices for slice knots

To be able to use these invariants as slicing obstructions, we need to
know what the Seifert matrix of a slice knot looks like. This was
determined in @xmath by Levine [ Lev69b , Lemma 2] .

###### Theorem 2.2.9.

If @xmath is slice, then for any Seifert surface @xmath of @xmath there
exists a half-rank direct summand @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath for
@xmath a Seifert form for @xmath .

The proof of this theorem is long, but it reveals a lot about the
topology of the slice disc so we have included it in full.

###### Proof.

Step 1: For a slice knot @xmath with Seifert surface @xmath and slice
disc @xmath there exists an oriented submanifold @xmath with boundary
@xmath .

Proof of Step 1. [This section of the proof is taken from [ Lic97 ,
Lemma 8.14] .] Let @xmath be the exterior of @xmath . We want to define
a map @xmath so that @xmath is an isomorphism and @xmath . On a product
neighbourhood of @xmath in @xmath , define @xmath to be the projection
@xmath followed by the map @xmath . Let @xmath map the remainder of
@xmath to @xmath .

Let @xmath , a neighbourhood of @xmath . We extend @xmath to the rest of
@xmath so that the inverse image of @xmath is @xmath for some point
@xmath (note: @xmath is a longitude of @xmath ). We now need to extend
the map over all of @xmath .

Consider the simplices of some triangulation of @xmath . Let @xmath be a
tree in the @xmath -skeleton containing all the vertices of this
triangulation, that contains a similar maximal tree of @xmath . Extend
@xmath over all of @xmath in an arbitrary way. Then on a @xmath -simplex
@xmath not in @xmath , define @xmath so that if @xmath is a @xmath
-cycle consisting of @xmath summed with a @xmath -chain in @xmath
(joining up the ends of @xmath ), then @xmath is the image of @xmath
under the isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Trivially, the boundary of a @xmath -simplex @xmath of @xmath represents
zero in @xmath , so @xmath . Hence @xmath is null-homotopic on @xmath
and so extends over @xmath . Finally, @xmath extends over the @xmath &
@xmath -simplices, as any map from the boundary of an @xmath -simplex to
@xmath is null-homotopic when @xmath .

Now regard @xmath as a simplicial map to some triangulation of @xmath in
which @xmath is not a vertex. Then @xmath is a @xmath -manifold @xmath ,
and @xmath was constructed so that @xmath .

Step 2: @xmath is a Lagrangian subspace of dimension @xmath (where
@xmath has genus @xmath ).

###### Definition 2.2.10.

A Lagrangian subspace or metaboliser of @xmath with respect to the
linking form @xmath is a vector subspace @xmath which satisfies @xmath ,
where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This implies that @xmath has half the rank of @xmath .

Proof of Step 2. [Taken from the unpublished lecture notes of a course
given by Peter Teichner [ Tei01 ] .] Look at the homology exact sequence
of @xmath (over @xmath ):

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Lefschetz duality says @xmath (since @xmath and @xmath by the Universal
Coefficient Theorem, as we are working over a field). Poincaré duality
says @xmath , which again implies @xmath .

So let

   bob   

    @xmath ,

   bob   

    @xmath ,

   bob   

    @xmath ,

   bob   

    @xmath ,

   bob   

    @xmath .

Then the exactness of the sequence implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We also have the exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so @xmath .

Therefore @xmath , so @xmath and thus @xmath .

Now note that @xmath (recall @xmath ). Suppose we have @xmath , @xmath .
There exist surfaces @xmath with @xmath , @xmath . When @xmath is moved
to @xmath , the surface @xmath can also be moved off @xmath to @xmath
(so @xmath ), and then the intersection of @xmath and @xmath is empty.
Thus @xmath .

Moving from @xmath to @xmath coefficients is not a problem, although the
@xmath -kernel of @xmath might not be a direct summand. We use instead
@xmath . The rank of @xmath is the same as that of the kernel and it is
a direct summand because @xmath is torsion-free. Note also that @xmath
implies @xmath by linearity, so @xmath , as required. ∎

###### Definition 2.2.11.

A square matrix congruent to one of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for square matrices @xmath , @xmath and @xmath of the same size is
called metabolic or Witt trivial .

Thus our above proof has shown that any Seifert matrix for a slice knot
must be unimodular congruent to a metabolic matrix. What do the
signatures and Alexander polynomials of a metabolic form look like?

###### Corollary 2.2.12.

For a slice knot @xmath we have

  (i)  

    the signature @xmath is zero for every unit complex number @xmath
    except those which are roots of the Alexander polynomial @xmath .
    (Notice that the regular signature is @xmath so the same corollary
    holds for it too.)

  (ii)  

    the Alexander polynomial @xmath is of the form @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a Seifert matrix for @xmath . By Theorem 2.2.9 we may
assume

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for square matrices @xmath , @xmath and @xmath of equal size ( @xmath
where @xmath is the genus of the associated Seifert surface) with
entries in @xmath .

  (i)  

    Let @xmath be a unit complex number such that @xmath and let @xmath
    . Notice that @xmath and that @xmath up to a power of @xmath . Now

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    We can rewrite @xmath as @xmath so @xmath . Since @xmath we know
    that @xmath is non-singular. This implies that @xmath is
    non-singular and therefore invertible over @xmath . Define

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Then @xmath , so @xmath .

  (ii)  

    We have

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    up to units in @xmath .

∎

###### Example 2.2.13.

-   The trefoil knot @xmath has Seifert matrix @xmath , so @xmath .
    Eigenvalues are both negative, so @xmath . Thus the trefoil is our
    first example of a knot which is not slice.

-   The Figure-8 knot @xmath has Seifert matrix @xmath so @xmath .
    Eigenvalues are @xmath so @xmath . However, the Alexander polynomial
    of @xmath is @xmath , which does not factorise as @xmath . This is
    clear because @xmath which is not a square. Thus @xmath is also not
    a slice knot.

Why is the signature of the Figure-8 knot zero even though the knot
isn’t slice? If we examine the knot a little more closely, we find that
it is negative amphicheiral : it is its own mirror image reverse. This
means that in the concordance group @xmath and @xmath is an element of
order 2. The signature is an integer-valued additive invariant, so if
@xmath then @xmath . Similarly, the non-vanishing of the trefoil
signature proves that the trefoil is an element of infinite order in
@xmath .

#### 2.2.3 The algebraic concordance group

In the same way that we can make the set of knots into a group by
quotienting out the slice knots, we can make the set of Seifert forms
into a group by quotienting out the metabolic forms. First we need a
definition of the “set of Seifert forms” which is independent of knots.

We have the following property that characterises Seifert matrices.

###### Lemma 2.2.14.

If @xmath is a Seifert matrix for a knot @xmath then @xmath is
unimodular; that is, @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath is a Seifert matrix obtained from a genus @xmath
Seifert surface @xmath and a set of curves @xmath . Without loss of
generality, we may assume that the curves are arranged as in Figure 2.2
, i.e. as a disc with bands attached, although the bands themselves may
be twisted and knotted around each other. The @xmath entry of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have that @xmath bounds an annulus normal to @xmath , which meets
@xmath in @xmath . The linking number of @xmath with @xmath is then the
algebraic intersection of this annulus with @xmath , i.e. the algebraic
intersection of @xmath with @xmath . We thus have that @xmath consists
of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

on the diagonal and zeros elsewhere. It follows that this matrix is
unimodular. ∎

The converse is a result of Seifert [ Sei35 ] ; a proof may also be
found in [ BZ02 , 8.7] .

###### Lemma 2.2.15.

Every square matrix @xmath of even order satisfying @xmath is a Seifert
matrix of a knot.

###### Remark 2.2.16.

The proof given for Lemma 2.2.14 actually proves that @xmath , and
indeed, in Lemma 2.2.15 the @xmath case does not appear. This is because
@xmath is skew-symmetric and every even order invertible integral
skew-symmetric matrix is congruent to a block sum of the matrix @xmath .
The reason we include the @xmath case is that it streamlines theorems
and arguments in higher dimensions, where the @xmath case does exist.

Given two square matrices @xmath and @xmath we can form their block sum
@xmath .

###### Definition 2.2.17.

Two square matrices @xmath and @xmath are called cobordant (or Witt
equivalent ) if @xmath is Witt trivial (metabolic).

If we restrict our attention to the set of matrices which are Seifert
matrices, then Levine [ Lev69b , Lemma 1] shows that this is an
equivalence relation.

###### Definition 2.2.18.

The algebraic concordance group @xmath is defined to be the set of
square integral matrices @xmath satisfying @xmath under the operation of
block sum and modulo the relation of cobordism (Witt equivalence).

###### Theorem 2.2.19.

The map @xmath which maps a knot to one of its Seifert matrices is an
epimorphism of groups.

###### Proof.

If two knots @xmath and @xmath have Seifert matrices @xmath and @xmath
respectively, then a Seifert matrix for @xmath is @xmath , while a
Seifert matrix for @xmath is @xmath . These facts, together with Theorem
2.2.9 show that the map is a homomorphism, while Lemma 2.2.15 shows that
it is surjective. ∎

###### Definition 2.2.20.

A knot whose image in @xmath under the map @xmath is zero is called
algebraically slice .

The big question of knot concordance in the 1970s was: is @xmath an
isomorphism? That is, are ‘slice’ and ‘algebraically slice’ equivalent
notions? We will find the answer to this in Section 2.4 ; for now, let
us look more closely at the structure of @xmath .

###### Theorem 2.2.21 ([Lev69a]).

@xmath

Levine proved this theorem by finding a complete set of invariants for
@xmath coming from signatures and Witt groups. We will analyse these in
detail in Chapter 3 .

### 2.3 Higher dimensions

There is an analogous notion of knot concordance in higher dimensions.
The surprising result, which we will explore in this section, is that
the structures of the high-dimensional concordance groups are very well
understood, in stark contrast to the concordance group of @xmath
-dimensional knots.

###### Definition 2.3.1.

An @xmath -knot is a locally flat (or smooth) embedding of @xmath into
@xmath , defined up to ambient isotopy. An @xmath -knot @xmath is called
slice if it bounds a locally flat (smooth) disc @xmath . Two @xmath
-knots @xmath and @xmath are concordant if @xmath is slice, where @xmath
is the image of @xmath with reversed orientation under a reflection of
@xmath .

###### Definition 2.3.2.

The @xmath -dimensional concordance group @xmath is the set of
concordance classes of @xmath -knots.

As in the @xmath -dimensional case, we will need Seifert surfaces as a
starting point for proving that knots have slice discs. Luckily we have
the following theorem:

###### Theorem 2.3.3.

Every @xmath -knot bounds some @xmath -dimensional surface in @xmath .

###### Proof.

(Sketch proof from [ Rol03 , 5B1] ) Suppose @xmath (for the @xmath case
see Section 2.2 ). Let @xmath be an @xmath -knot and @xmath be a tubular
neighbourhood of @xmath . Define a map @xmath , corresponding to the map
@xmath given by @xmath . We would like to extend @xmath to a map of the
knot exterior @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . Obstruction theory says
that such an extension is possible if and only if certain elements of
the cohomology groups @xmath , with coefficients in @xmath , vanish. If
@xmath then the coefficient group is trivial, and if @xmath then we have
integer coefficients and @xmath by Lefschetz and Alexander dualities. So
all the obstructions vanish and there is a map @xmath extending @xmath .
Choose a regular point @xmath (we may assume that we are either in the
PL or smooth category); then @xmath is the required orientable surface
of codimension @xmath . ∎

The first thing that was proven about the higher dimensional concordance
groups was that the even dimensional groups were zero.

###### Theorem 2.3.4 ([Ker65]).

@xmath for @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be an @xmath -knot and let @xmath be a Seifert surface for
@xmath . Perform ambient surgeries on @xmath below the middle dimension
to turn @xmath into a slice disc @xmath . ∎

For odd dimensions, the Seifert surfaces are even-dimensional so we have
to worry about what happens in the middle dimension. In the middle
dimension is the linking form and it turns out that if this linking form
has a Lagrangian then the knot is slice. So the algebraic concordance
group tells us about the geometry of slice knots.

The reason this works in dimensions above @xmath is the existence of the
Whitney trick . When the ambient dimension is above @xmath , the Whitney
trick allows intersection points of opposite sign to be cancelled with
each other. If two @xmath -knots have linking number zero then this
means we can arrange for them to be actually disjoint.

###### Theorem 2.3.5 (Whitney trick).

Let @xmath be an oriented manifold of dimension @xmath , and let @xmath
and @xmath be oriented submanifolds of codimension at least two. Suppose
that either

-   @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , or

-   @xmath , @xmath , @xmath

Then pairs of intersections of @xmath and @xmath of opposite sign may be
removed by isotopies of @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

(Sketch proof from [ Sco05 ] ) By a general position argument, we may
assume that intersections of @xmath and @xmath are transverse. Since
@xmath and @xmath have complementary dimensions, they intersect in a
collection of isolated points. Each of these points has a sign coming
from the orientations of @xmath and @xmath . Pick a pair of points
@xmath and @xmath of opposite sign. Draw a path linking @xmath and
@xmath that lies inside @xmath , and another path linking @xmath and
@xmath that lies inside @xmath . Together, these two curves form a
circle. By the simple-connectedness of @xmath , this circle is
homotopically trivial and therefore bounds an immersed disc in @xmath .
The weak Whitney embedding theorem tells us that immersions of discs in
manifolds of dimension at least 5 can be approximated by embeddings.
Thus we have an embedded disc (called the Whitney disc ) with boundary
in @xmath (Figure 2.3 , left). Use this disc to construct an isotopy
which pushes @xmath past @xmath until the intersections disappear
(Figure 2.3 , right); this is possible without introducing new
intersection points because of the opposite signs of @xmath and @xmath .

∎

It is Whitney’s embedding theorem which fails in dimension 4; we cannot
guarantee that the Whitney disc is an embedding rather than an
immersion.

The group structure of the odd-dimensional concordance groups is @xmath
, just as for the one-dimensional algebraic concordance group. However,
the isomorphism is not to @xmath , as defined in Section 2.2.3 , but to
a slight refinement of it.

###### Definition 2.3.6.

@xmath is defined to be the set of matrices @xmath for which @xmath is
unimodular, under the operation of block sum and modulo the equivalence
relation of cobordism of matrices. The group @xmath is the subgroup of
@xmath of index 2, defined by matrices with property @xmath and
signature @xmath a multiple of @xmath .

###### Theorem 2.3.7 ([Lev69b]).

-   @xmath for @xmath

-   @xmath for @xmath

-   @xmath .

### 2.4 Casson-Gordon invariants

In the 1970s Casson and Gordon devised a new invariant for the knot
concordance group. It is derived from the Atiyah-Singer index theorem
and looks at the difference of two intersection forms, one of which has
coefficients twisted by a representation of the knot group. By
calculating their new invariant for a family of knots known as the ‘
@xmath -twisted doubles of the unknot’ (see Definition 9.4.1 ) they
proved the following theorem (which had been suspected to be true for
some time).

###### Theorem 2.4.1.

The kernel of the homomorphism @xmath is non-trivial.

In other words, Casson and Gordon were able to use their invariant to
prove that some algebraically slice knots were not geometrically slice.

Here is how their invariant was constructed. We give the construction
first for a general @xmath -manifold and then describe the particular
manifold that will be used for obstructing the sliceness of knots. In
what follows, @xmath is the Witt group of @xmath consisting of
(equivalence classes of) pairs @xmath where @xmath is a
finite-dimensional vector space over @xmath and @xmath is a hermitian
inner product (i.e. complex-valued bilinear form) satisfying @xmath and
@xmath . Here @xmath is the involution that sends @xmath to @xmath with
@xmath being complex conjugation. (For more detail on Witt groups, see
Section 3.1 .)

Let @xmath be a @xmath -manifold together with a homomorphism @xmath ,
where @xmath is an odd prime power. The @xmath -dimensional bordism
group @xmath is finite; in fact, @xmath -torsion (we will see more
details in the next section). Thus @xmath for some @xmath -manifold
@xmath and map @xmath . The manifold @xmath has a non-singular hermitian
@xmath -intersection form @xmath , where the local coefficients are
twisted using the map @xmath . The @xmath -action is multiplication by
@xmath and the @xmath -action is multiplication by @xmath .

The manifold @xmath also has an ordinary (untwisted) intersection form
@xmath . (If this is singular, take the quotient of this form by its
kernel.) The Casson-Gordon invariant is defined to be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and is independent of @xmath . Since @xmath is odd, @xmath actually
lives in @xmath , where @xmath is @xmath localised at @xmath , i.e. the
set of rational numbers with odd denominator.

Let @xmath be the complement @xmath of a knot @xmath . Let @xmath be the
@xmath -manifold constructed by @xmath -surgery on @xmath and @xmath be
the @xmath -fold cyclic cover of @xmath , where @xmath is a power of a
prime @xmath . There is a natural surjection @xmath via the covering
projection of @xmath to @xmath and the map of @xmath to @xmath
determined by the orientation of @xmath . Given a surjective
homomorphism @xmath (where @xmath is the @xmath -fold branched cover of
@xmath over @xmath ) we can define a representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the first map is the Hurewicz map.

The Casson-Gordon invariant which is then a slicing obstruction for
@xmath is @xmath . This may also be denoted @xmath .

#### 2.4.1 Casson-Gordon signatures

For each class @xmath and for each unit complex number @xmath , a
signature @xmath is defined by evaluating a representative of that class
at @xmath and computing the signature of the resulting Hermitian matrix.
If the representative is singular at @xmath then the signature is the
average of the one-sided limits, i.e. @xmath and @xmath .

Each @xmath is a homomorphism that can be extended to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in the obvious way.

###### Definition 2.4.2.

The Casson-Gordon signature of a knot @xmath together with a map
@xmath (where @xmath and @xmath are odd prime powers) is defined to be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We shall abbreviate this to @xmath .

(What follows is taken from [ LN99 ] , Section 4.) The Casson-Gordon
signature can be viewed as a map from the bordism group @xmath to @xmath
. If two elements @xmath and @xmath represent the same element in @xmath
then @xmath and @xmath differ by an element of @xmath . Thus the
difference @xmath is an integer, and we can see @xmath as a homomorphism
from @xmath . Indeed, by the definition of the Casson-Gordon invariant,
@xmath takes values in @xmath . Casson and Gordon [ CG86 ] show that
@xmath is actually an isomorphism.

We have further isomorphisms:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the first is given by the projection and inclusion maps, whilst
the second is as follows. For a pair @xmath with a character @xmath , we
can always find some @xmath so that @xmath for all @xmath . The image of
@xmath in @xmath is then @xmath .

Putting these isomorphisms together, we obtain a straightforward
generalisation of Theorem 2.5 of [ LN01 ] :

###### Theorem 2.4.3.

If @xmath is a character obtained by linking with the element @xmath ,
then @xmath mod @xmath .

So although it is difficult to calculate Casson-Gordon signatures
precisely, we can at least use this theorem to decide if the signature
cannot be zero, and thus to decide if a knot cannot be slice.

#### 2.4.2 Casson-Gordon discriminants

We would like to turn the determinant of a class of @xmath into an
invariant of that class, but to do so we will need to work modulo
whatever the determinant is of the zero class. What is the determinant
of a metabolic (Witt trivial) form?

An element representing zero in @xmath has the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and if @xmath has dimension @xmath then the determinant of this is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 2.4.4.

A polynomial of the form @xmath will be called a norm .

Let @xmath denote the multiplicative subgroup generated by norms.

###### Definition 2.4.5.

The discriminant of a class @xmath is the determinant of a
representative @xmath of @xmath , considered modulo norms:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We would like to extend this to a map from @xmath . Notice that, since
matrices representing classes in @xmath are Hermitian, every
discriminant has the property that @xmath . This means that @xmath is
@xmath if @xmath is odd and is @xmath if @xmath is even. This allows us
to extend our definition of the discriminant to a function from @xmath
as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Casson-Gordon discriminant of a knot, @xmath will be the main tool
of this thesis. This is because it is equivalent to the twisted
Alexander polynomial , which we will define in Chapter 5 and which
requires no @xmath -manifold constructions. This makes it relatively
easy to compute compared with the Casson-Gordon signature and with the
Casson-Gordon invariant itself.

## Chapter 3 Finding the algebraic concordance class of a knot

In this chapter we delve more deeply into the algebraic concordance
group @xmath of Levine [ Lev69a , Lev69b ] and find out what invariants
are needed to find the image of a knot in @xmath . The structure of this
chapter owes much to the excellent survey article on algebraic
concordance by Charles Livingston [ Liv08 ] .

### 3.1 Symmetric bilinear forms and Witt groups

We start with defining everything in full generality, so let @xmath be a
commutative ring with identity. The following definitions may be found
in [ MH73 ] and [ Sch85 ] .

###### Definition 3.1.1.

A symmetric bilinear form on an @xmath -module @xmath is a function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that @xmath and @xmath are linear as functions of fixed @xmath and
@xmath respectively, and so that @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Remark 3.1.2.

It is worth mentioning the cousin of the symmetric bilinear form: the
quadratic form. A quadratic form on @xmath is a function @xmath such
that @xmath for all @xmath and such that @xmath is a symmetric bilinear
form. Notice that, given any symmetric bilinear form @xmath , we can
define the quadratic form @xmath . Conversely, given a quadratic form
@xmath we can define a symmetric bilinear form @xmath so long as @xmath
is not a zero-divisor in @xmath . Thus the theory of quadratic forms is
equivalent to the theory of symmetric bilinear forms over rings in which
@xmath is a unit.

If @xmath is a finitely generated free @xmath -module with basis @xmath
, then any bilinear form @xmath on @xmath can be written as a matrix
@xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The integer @xmath is called the dimension of @xmath , and @xmath is
called nonsingular if @xmath .

###### Definition 3.1.3.

Let @xmath be a finitely generated free module over @xmath and @xmath a
non-singular symmetric bilinear form on @xmath . We say that @xmath is
Witt trivial if @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular, this means that @xmath has dimension @xmath for some
@xmath , and @xmath has dimension @xmath . ¹ ¹ 1 This follows from the
exact sequence

@xmath

which tells us that @xmath . @xmath is called a metaboliser for @xmath .
The forms @xmath and @xmath are called Witt equivalent if @xmath is Witt
trivial, where @xmath is some Witt trivial form.

###### Definition 3.1.4.

The Witt group @xmath consists of pairs @xmath under the operation of
direct sum and under the equivalence relation of Witt equivalence
defined above. We may also make @xmath into a commutative ring by
defining multiplication as tensor product.

###### Theorem 3.1.5.

[ Sch85 , 6.4] If @xmath is a ring in which @xmath is a unit then any
symmetric bilinear form @xmath can be diagonalised over @xmath . In
other words, there is a basis @xmath of @xmath so that @xmath for @xmath
. We write @xmath in the matrix form @xmath where the @xmath are the
diagonal entries.

###### Remark 3.1.6.

Notice that if @xmath is replaced with @xmath , @xmath , then the new
diagonal form is @xmath .

### 3.2 The algebraic concordance group

The algebraic knot concordance group @xmath , as described in Chapter 2
, was developed by Levine [ Lev69b ] to classify knots within the
higher-dimensional geometric concordance groups @xmath and to
investigate the structure of @xmath . We recap some of the definitions
using our new terminology.

###### Definition 3.2.1.

The algebraic concordance group @xmath (or @xmath ) consists of the set
of integral square matrices @xmath satisfying @xmath up to Witt
equivalence.

###### Definition 3.2.2.

The Alexander polynomial of @xmath is @xmath , defined up to multiples
of @xmath .

Life becomes easier if we work with rational matrices rather than
integral ones, so let us consider the group @xmath : square matrices
@xmath with entries in @xmath satisfying @xmath is non-singular, with
the same equivalence relation as in @xmath . The inclusion @xmath is
injective [ Lev69a , Section 3] and so we can try to find invariants in
@xmath rather than in @xmath .

Henceforth @xmath will be a finite dimensional vector space over @xmath
.

###### Definition 3.2.3.

An isometric structure is a triple @xmath where @xmath is a nonsingular
symmetric bilinear form on @xmath and @xmath is an isometry of @xmath .
This means that @xmath for every @xmath .

###### Definition 3.2.4.

An isometric structure @xmath is null-cobordant if @xmath has a
metaboliser @xmath which is invariant under @xmath . Two isometric
structures @xmath , @xmath are cobordant if @xmath is null-cobordant.

We define @xmath to be the group of cobordism classes of isometric
structures @xmath satisfying @xmath , where @xmath is the characteristic
polynomial of @xmath .

###### Theorem 3.2.5.

[ Lev69a ] There is an isomorphism @xmath given by @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath with @xmath non-singular. (Levine [ Lev69a , Lemma 8] proves
that every matrix in @xmath is equivalent to a non-singular one.) Define
@xmath and @xmath . It is easy to check that @xmath and that the
congruence class of @xmath determines the congruence class of @xmath and
the similarity class of @xmath . Thus @xmath is an isometric structure,
which is null cobordant whenever @xmath is Witt trivial. We need to
check that @xmath , but we know that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath , and since @xmath we know that @xmath is non-singular, so
@xmath .

We now need an inverse function from @xmath to @xmath . Suppose we have
computed the map above @xmath . Then @xmath so we can recover @xmath
from @xmath . We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath we have that @xmath is non-singular. ∎

We can also define cobordism classes of isometric structures over
different fields. For a field @xmath we will use the notation @xmath .
The idea now is to break down the problem of finding the image of a
class in @xmath into the problem of finding the image of a class in
@xmath where @xmath is ‘simpler’. And even these @xmath groups can be
broken down further by restricting to isometric structures with a
particular characteristic polynomial. This is what motivates the next
definition.

###### Definition 3.2.6.

For a polynomial @xmath , let @xmath denote the Witt group of isometric
structures @xmath where @xmath is a finite-dimensional vector space over
@xmath , @xmath is a power of @xmath , and @xmath .

We will need the next lemma in order to see how to factorise
characteristic polynomials.

###### Lemma 3.2.7.

For any isometric structure @xmath , the characteristic polynomial
@xmath is symmetric, i.e. it satisfies @xmath where @xmath is the degree
of the polynomial and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a matrix representative of @xmath . By definition, @xmath
. We have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

∎

In fact, it is easy to see that if @xmath then @xmath must be equal to
@xmath and if furthermore @xmath then @xmath must be even.

Lemma 3.2.7 tells us that if @xmath factorises then it must do so as
@xmath , where the @xmath are distinct irreducible symmetric polynomials
and the @xmath are non-symmetric irreducible factors that appear in
pairs @xmath and @xmath . The next lemma, proved by Milnor [ Mil69 ] and
Levine [ Lev69a ] , tells us that we need only worry about the symmetric
factors.

###### Theorem 3.2.8.

@xmath where the sum is over all irreducible symmetric polynomials.

###### Sketch proof.

Suppose @xmath is an isometric structure over @xmath . Consider the
vector space on which @xmath and @xmath are defined as @xmath -modules,
defining the action of @xmath by @xmath . For each irreducible factor
@xmath of @xmath define @xmath to be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(More specifically, we need @xmath to be at least the multiplicity of
@xmath as a factor of @xmath .) Then our vector space @xmath is the
direct sum of the @xmath .

We want to show that if @xmath and @xmath are irreducible factors of
@xmath with @xmath and @xmath relatively coprime, then @xmath and @xmath
are orthogonal. We start with the identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . This shows that @xmath is orthogonal to @xmath .

If @xmath and @xmath are coprime then the map @xmath defined by @xmath
maps the subspace @xmath isomorphically onto itself. This completes the
proof that @xmath and @xmath are orthogonal.

We have already seen that @xmath factorises as @xmath , where the @xmath
are distinct irreducible symmetric polynomials and the @xmath are
non-symmetric irreducible factors that appear in pairs @xmath and @xmath
. We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the restriction of @xmath to each of these summands gives an
isometric structure. What we have shown in the earlier part of the proof
is that the factors @xmath are null-cobordant. It follows that @xmath is
null-cobordant if and only if its restriction to each @xmath is
null-cobordant. ∎

We said earlier that we would like to break down the study of a class in
@xmath into the study of classes in @xmath where @xmath is simpler. The
following result of Levine [ Lev69a , 17] shows us which fields to
consider.

###### Theorem 3.2.9.

An isometric structure over a global field @xmath is null-cobordant if
and only if the extension over every completion of @xmath is
null-cobordant.

What are the completions of the global field @xmath ? It turns out that
these are the real numbers @xmath and the @xmath -adic rationals @xmath
. We will learn more about these in the next section, but first we shall
bring together the theorems in this section, together with another
result of Levine [ Lev69a , 16] , for a definitive guide as to when an
isometric structure in @xmath is trivial.

###### Theorem 3.2.10.

-   A class @xmath is trivial if and only if it is trivial in @xmath for
    every @xmath an irreducible symmetric factor of @xmath and for
    @xmath and @xmath for every prime @xmath .

-   A class @xmath , where @xmath or @xmath and @xmath is irreducible
    symmetric, is trivial if and only if @xmath is @xmath with @xmath
    even and @xmath is trivial in the Witt group of @xmath , @xmath .

The next section will focus on understanding these Witt groups.

### 3.3 The Witt groups @xmath and @xmath

We begin this section with a short discussion of the @xmath -adic
numbers. Given a prime @xmath , any integer @xmath may be written as
@xmath for some @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath denotes the finite
field of @xmath elements. The @xmath -adic integers, denoted @xmath ,
are defined to be numbers of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the @xmath -adic rationals, denoted @xmath , are the field of
fractions of this ring. A @xmath -adic rational may be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath .

###### Example 3.3.1.

Let us look at some elements of @xmath . We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

because multiplying both sides by @xmath gives @xmath on each side. Thus
@xmath is a @xmath -adic integer.

The number @xmath is written in @xmath as @xmath since this is the
unique number which, when added to @xmath , makes zero. This is also a
@xmath -adic integer.

Notice that any element of @xmath with @xmath cannot have a
multiplicative inverse in @xmath . The group of units of @xmath ,
denoted @xmath , are those elements with @xmath . Every element of
@xmath can be written as @xmath with @xmath and @xmath .

###### Remark 3.3.2.

In the ring of integers @xmath there are many maximal ideals - one for
each prime number @xmath . In the @xmath -adic integers @xmath there is
precisely one non-zero maximal ideal, meaning that @xmath is a discrete
valuation ring (and therefore a local ring ). By putting together the
information about all the local rings we hope to reconstruct the
behaviour of the global ring. This is the rationale behind studying
@xmath by looking at @xmath (for all primes @xmath ) and @xmath (which
we can think of as @xmath ).

Given any element in @xmath , we get elements in @xmath and @xmath by
extension of scalars, i.e. by tensoring over @xmath with @xmath and
@xmath respectively. For this mapping to be informative, we need to know
the structure of @xmath and @xmath . Let us start with the easy one.

###### Lemma 3.3.3.

@xmath .

###### Proof.

Every real number is either a square or the negative of a square; thus
every quadratic form can be diagonalised as @xmath . In @xmath we have
@xmath , so every class in @xmath is determined by the sum of the signs
of its diagonalisation. This value is called the signature, denoted by
@xmath , and is an isomorphism between @xmath and @xmath . ∎

To start our investigation of @xmath , we need to understand what the
squares in @xmath look like.

###### Lemma 3.3.4.

If @xmath is odd, the quotient @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath . The four
distinct elements are @xmath where @xmath is not a square modulo @xmath
.

###### Proof.

We first prove that a unit @xmath in @xmath is a square if and only if
@xmath is a square in @xmath . This is due to Hensel’s Lemma (see, for
example, [ Eis95 , Theorem 3.7] ) which states that if @xmath is a
solution to the congruence @xmath mod @xmath for @xmath , and if @xmath
mod @xmath , then there exists a number @xmath which is a solution to
@xmath mod @xmath and @xmath mod @xmath . If @xmath in @xmath we can let
@xmath , so @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . Hensel’s Lemma lets us
construct the coefficients @xmath in the @xmath -adic integer which is
the square root of @xmath .

Up to a factor of an even power of @xmath , every element of @xmath can
be written as @xmath or @xmath where @xmath is a unit in @xmath . From
the first half of this proof, @xmath is a square if and only if @xmath
is a square in @xmath , and @xmath . Since @xmath is not a square, the
result follows. ∎

The result for @xmath is more complicated and a proof may be found in [
Sch85 ] .

###### Lemma 3.3.5.

The quotient @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath . The eight distinct
elements are the set @xmath .

Now that we understand the squares of @xmath , we have a way to map
@xmath into yet simpler Witt groups – at least, in the case when @xmath
is odd.

###### Theorem 3.3.6.

For @xmath odd, @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Theorem 3.1.5 , Remark 3.1.6 and Lemma 3.3.4 , any form in @xmath can
be diagonalised as @xmath where the @xmath and @xmath are units in
@xmath . For a unit @xmath write @xmath . Then the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the desired isomorphism. For future reference, we will denote this
isomorphism by @xmath . ∎

###### Theorem 3.3.7.

@xmath .

###### Proof.

The generators are @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . For a proof, see [ Sch85
, Chapter 5, Theorem 6.6] . ∎

To fully understand @xmath when @xmath is odd, it thus suffices to
understand @xmath . The following theorem deals with this question,
including the case of @xmath for completeness.

###### Theorem 3.3.8.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

For @xmath every form can be represented by a sum of the forms @xmath
and @xmath . The first of these has order @xmath in @xmath and the
second is Witt trivial.

For @xmath odd, the group of units @xmath is cyclic of even order @xmath
, so @xmath . Modulo squares then, every number is equivalent to @xmath
or to @xmath where @xmath is not a square. Thus every form in @xmath is
equivalent to @xmath . If @xmath mod @xmath then @xmath is a square, so
any form @xmath , which is Witt trivial. Hence any non-trivial form is
equivalent to @xmath , @xmath or @xmath and each of these is of order
@xmath .

If @xmath mod @xmath , then @xmath is not a square so we can let @xmath
. Since @xmath is trivial, every form is equivalent to a multiple of
@xmath or a multiple of @xmath . The form @xmath is nontrivial but
@xmath is trivial, with metaboliser @xmath where @xmath satisfy @xmath .
The pair @xmath exist by the Pigeonhole Principle: there are @xmath
values for @xmath in @xmath and also @xmath values for @xmath . There
are only @xmath values in @xmath so the equation @xmath must have a
solution. ∎

We now understand all that we need to know about the Witt groups of the
completions of @xmath . There is one remaining remark, which concerns
the isomorphism in the proof of Theorem 3.3.6 . We denoted this
isomorphism by @xmath , and it turns out that we may safely ignore
@xmath and just use the map @xmath . The rest of this section gives a
proof of this fact and further illuminates how we can understand the
group @xmath by looking at all the local Witt groups @xmath and @xmath .

Recall that the homomorphism @xmath (which factors through @xmath ) maps
an element @xmath (where @xmath with @xmath and @xmath coprime to @xmath
) to @xmath if @xmath is odd and @xmath if @xmath is even. A quick
example illustrates this.

###### Example 3.3.9.

Let @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Notice that for any @xmath , @xmath for almost all @xmath . We may thus
take the direct sum of all these homomorphisms to get one giant
homomorphism @xmath .

###### Theorem 3.3.10.

The sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is split exact, where @xmath and @xmath maps @xmath to @xmath .

###### Sketch proof.

For each @xmath , let @xmath be the subring of @xmath generated by
@xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath . Note that @xmath and @xmath unless @xmath is prime. Each of
the homomorphisms @xmath induce an isomorphism @xmath . Using these
isomorphisms and an argument by induction, one can show that the
homomorphisms

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are surjective with kernel equal to @xmath . Passing to the direct limit
as @xmath we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is exact. Using the signature homomorphism @xmath (defined in Lemma
3.3.3 ) it follows that the sequence is actually split exact. ∎

### 3.4 Invariants of algebraic knot concordance

In the final section of this chapter we will investigate the set of
algebraic concordance invariants given by Levine in [ Lev69a ] . In
Section 3.2 we saw that, in order to find the algebraic concordance
order of a knot with image @xmath , we would have to look at the image
of @xmath in @xmath for every prime @xmath . Since we wish to classify
our knots in a finite amount of time, we need to find a way to reduce
the list of primes that we have to check.

###### Definition 3.4.1.

Let @xmath be an isometric structure, @xmath be an irreducible symmetric
factor of @xmath and @xmath be a prime.

-   @xmath is the exponent, modulo @xmath , of @xmath in @xmath .

-   @xmath is the signature of @xmath restricted to the @xmath -primary
    component.

-   @xmath is @xmath where @xmath is the image of @xmath in @xmath
    restricted to the @xmath -primary component, where @xmath is defined
    by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and where @xmath is the Hilbert symbol for @xmath , @xmath is the
    Hasse invariant and @xmath has rank @xmath .

This last definition of @xmath needs some more explanation. We will give
the definitions of Hilbert symbol and Hasse invariant, followed by a
formula for the Hilbert symbol in the case of the field being @xmath .

###### Definition 3.4.2.

The Hilbert symbol of a local field @xmath is the function @xmath
defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 3.4.3.

The Hasse invariant , or Hasse symbol , of a quadratic form @xmath
diagonalised as @xmath over a local field @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Hilbert symbol.

###### Proposition 3.4.4.

( [ Ser73 , Chapter 3, 1.2] ) If @xmath and if we write @xmath , @xmath
for units @xmath , then we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is the Legendre symbol (see [ Ser73 ]
for more details about this).

###### Theorem 3.4.5.

( [ Lev69a , 21] ) The functions @xmath are a complete set of cobordism
invariants for an isometric structure @xmath in @xmath , when taken over
every possible @xmath and every prime @xmath .

Of these three invariants, @xmath is the only one which takes values in
a non-finite group, so is the only one which can detect elements of
infinite order. The invariant @xmath is of order @xmath and @xmath is of
order @xmath (as we shall see), so this proves that @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath are the only finite orders that a knot may have in the algebraic
concordance group.

We will now look at practical ways to detect knots of order @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . Knots of order @xmath , i.e. algebraically slice
knots, are those for which all invariants @xmath vanish, where @xmath
runs over all the irreducible symmetric factors of the Alexander
polynomial @xmath and @xmath runs over every prime.

#### 3.4.1 Detecting infinite order elements in @xmath

If a knot has infinite order in @xmath then it must have signature
@xmath for some symmetric irreducible factor @xmath of @xmath . Over the
real numbers, such irreducible symmetric polynomials are of the form
@xmath , up to a unit. The roots are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and because the polynomial is irreducible we must have @xmath . Writing
@xmath gives the roots as @xmath , which we can write as @xmath for
@xmath .

We need to know a formula for computing @xmath at these irreducible
polynomials.

###### Definition 3.4.6.

For a knot @xmath with Seifert matrix @xmath , and for a unit modulus
complex number @xmath , the @xmath -signature @xmath is the signature of
the Hermitian matrix

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The @xmath -signature of @xmath , as a map @xmath , is continuous with
jumps only at the unit roots of the Alexander polynomial of @xmath .
More details about the @xmath -signature and these jumps are provided in
Section 9.2 ; for now we need only the following theorem.

###### Theorem 3.4.7.

( [ Mat77 ] ) If a knot @xmath with Seifert matrix @xmath has @xmath as
a factor of its Alexander polynomial @xmath , then @xmath equals, up to
sign, the jump in the @xmath -signature function at @xmath where @xmath
.

If the @xmath -signature of a knot has no jumps, i.e. is zero at every
@xmath , then the knot must be of finite order in the knot concordance
group.

#### 3.4.2 Detecting order 4 elements in @xmath

From our previous analysis of Witt groups we know there is a chance that
a knot may have algebraic order @xmath , since @xmath for @xmath mod
@xmath and there is a factor @xmath . The following theorem was
essentially worked out by Levine [ Lev69a , 22] and gives exact criteria
for a knot to have algebraic order @xmath . Interestingly, there are no
elements in @xmath with image of order @xmath in @xmath . The proof
given here uses elements from Levine’s paper as well as Livingston’s
paper [ Liv08 , 3.1] .

###### Theorem 3.4.8.

A class @xmath which is the image of an element of @xmath is of order
@xmath if and only if

-   @xmath for every @xmath ,

-   There exists an irreducible symmetric factor @xmath of @xmath with
    @xmath and with @xmath for a prime @xmath mod 4, @xmath odd and
    @xmath relatively prime to @xmath .

###### Proof.

The signature function @xmath is additive with values in @xmath , so if
it is not zero then @xmath must have infinite order.

Levine [ Lev69a , 19] proves that, for @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular, if @xmath then this equals @xmath and @xmath has order at
most @xmath . So suppose there is some factor @xmath of @xmath with odd
exponent in @xmath .

For @xmath to have order @xmath , we need that @xmath for some prime
@xmath . We need to consider two cases: @xmath odd and @xmath .

@xmath is odd: From Proposition 3.4.4 we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath for a unit @xmath . Immediately we see that if @xmath mod 4
then @xmath and @xmath would be of order @xmath . So assume @xmath mod
4. For @xmath to be of order @xmath we also need the exponent @xmath to
be odd. In our case

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so this means we need @xmath to divide @xmath with odd exponent.

@xmath : We want to show that @xmath for any class @xmath . This would
mean that the prime @xmath cannot detect elements of order @xmath . We
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath for @xmath coprime to @xmath . As before, we have @xmath
with degree @xmath . We will show that this is always congruent to
@xmath modulo @xmath , meaning that @xmath and @xmath is always equal to
@xmath .

Write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is the image of an element of @xmath , we have that @xmath
is odd. Thus @xmath is odd. We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are the sums of the coefficients with even or
odd subscripts, respectively. We also have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is even then @xmath . If @xmath is odd then @xmath . In both
cases we have @xmath , and since @xmath is odd this is @xmath modulo
@xmath . ∎

We rewrite the result of Theorem 3.4.8 in a way that will be useful to
us in Chapter 4.

###### Corollary 3.4.9.

If a knot @xmath is of order 4 in the algebraic concordance group @xmath
then for some prime @xmath mod @xmath and some symmetric irreducible
factor @xmath of @xmath , @xmath divides @xmath and @xmath has odd
exponent in @xmath .

#### 3.4.3 Detecting order 2 elements in @xmath

##### Order @xmath via the exponent map

If a knot has all its signatures @xmath equal to zero and is known not
to be of order @xmath by Corollary 3.4.9 but has @xmath for some
irreducible symmetric @xmath , then such a knot must be an element of
algebraic order @xmath .

##### Order @xmath in @xmath for @xmath and @xmath mod 4

We now suppose that we have a knot whose signatures @xmath are all zero,
which is known not to be of order @xmath and which has @xmath for all
@xmath . We wish to compute the image of this knot in @xmath for primes
@xmath modulo @xmath , and seek some way to eliminate the majority of
such primes from consideration. The hope is that, as with Corollary
3.4.9 , we only need to consider those primes which divide @xmath .
Unfortunately the situation is somewhat more complicated.

The following is Theorem 4.1 from [ Liv08 ] , where the notation @xmath
is equivalent to @xmath and is the Alexander polynomial associated to
the matrix @xmath .

###### Theorem 3.4.10.

Let @xmath be a non-singular Seifert matrix and suppose that each
irreducible symmetric factor of @xmath has even exponent. Then for any
prime @xmath that does not divide @xmath we have that @xmath represents
zero in @xmath , where @xmath denotes the product of all the distinct
irreducible factors of @xmath .

The discriminant of the Alexander polynomial is closely related to the
determinant of the knot. The determinant of a knot @xmath , denoted
@xmath , is defined to be @xmath . Notice that the primes dividing
@xmath are exactly those dividing @xmath , so we will assume for now
that the Alexander polynomial has no repeated irreducible factors.

Write the Alexander polynomial as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then the discriminant of @xmath is the product of the squares of the
differences of the roots

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the roots @xmath lie in some algebraic closure of @xmath . The
Alexander polynomial is symmetric so the roots come in inverse pairs:
write @xmath for @xmath . Since @xmath is not a root, @xmath and we can
re-write the discriminant as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us re-write the first product as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now let us find a formula for the determinant. We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by definition of the @xmath . The determinant is therefore

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The result of these manipulations is the formula in the next Lemma.

###### Lemma 3.4.11.

If the Alexander polynomial @xmath of a knot @xmath has no repeated
irreducible factors, then the discriminant of @xmath is related to the
determinant of @xmath by the following formula.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark 3.4.12.

The discriminant of a polynomial @xmath may be expressed as an integer
polynomial in the coefficients of @xmath (see, for example, Proposition
7.5 in [ Gri07 ] ). Since the Alexander polynomial has integer
coefficients, the discriminant will therefore be an integer. The
determinant of @xmath is also an integer. It therefore does not matter
which algebraic closure we use to find the roots @xmath , in terms of
deciding which primes divide the discriminant but not the determinant.

###### Remark 3.4.13.

In fact, it is fairly rare for a prime other than @xmath to divide the
discriminant but not the determinant of @xmath . Of the @xmath knots
forming a basis for the kernel of the signature function (see Section
4.1 ) there are @xmath knots with this property. This goes down to only
one knot out of the @xmath knots in @xmath (see Section 4.4 ), which is
the set of knots that are trivial in @xmath for all primes @xmath
dividing the determinant.

##### Order @xmath in @xmath for @xmath mod 4

It may happen that a knot is detected to be of order @xmath in @xmath
for @xmath mod @xmath . These Witt groups are isomorphic to @xmath , so
it is possible that an element representing @xmath arises as twice an
element of order @xmath . If this is the case, then all other @xmath
-valued invariants will vanish. (Such examples will occur at the end of
Section 4.2 .) The following theorem will help us to eliminate such a
possibility.

###### Theorem 3.4.14.

Suppose the symmetric factors of the Alexander polynomial @xmath of a
knot @xmath factor (over @xmath ) as @xmath with all @xmath distinct
unit complex numbers. Then the jump @xmath in the @xmath -signature
function of @xmath is @xmath or @xmath modulo @xmath depending on
whether @xmath for some @xmath or not.

###### Proof.

(Taken from Appendix A of [ HKLar ] .) Let @xmath be a Seifert matrix
for the knot @xmath . Write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so the determinant of @xmath is @xmath . For a unit complex number
@xmath , the @xmath -signature @xmath is simply the signature of @xmath
, taking the average of the one-sided limits when @xmath is singular.
Since @xmath is continuous except at these singularities, it is a
constant function with jumps. Define the jump function @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(Despite the factor of @xmath , the jump function is actually
integer-valued, as will be seen shortly.)

Since we are considering @xmath as an element of @xmath , we consider
its determinant as an element of @xmath , where (as in Chapter 2 )
@xmath is the subgroup of @xmath generated by norms. Thus we may write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the @xmath are distinct unit complex numbers. This is because
@xmath so if @xmath is a factor then @xmath is also a factor, and if
@xmath is not a unit complex number then these two factors form a norm
and can be removed from the product. If @xmath is a unit complex number
then any factors of @xmath can also be removed. Furthermore, the
symmetry of @xmath allows us to conclude that @xmath and @xmath .

Now, we may diagonalise any class in @xmath , and the diagonal entries
are also of the form @xmath for some distinct set of @xmath and for
@xmath . Some clever manipulation gives us the following lemma.

###### Lemma 3.4.15.

If @xmath , if @xmath and if @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Write

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

So

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

If @xmath is a @xmath -dimensional form with representative @xmath as
given in Lemma 3.4.15 then it is clear that

-   @xmath or @xmath depending on whether @xmath or not.

-   @xmath or @xmath depending on whether @xmath or not.

where the second point is seen from the @xmath form of @xmath , since
this changes sign as @xmath goes from @xmath to @xmath .

Since the signature and jump functions are additive, this gives us the
result that the jump @xmath is @xmath mod @xmath if @xmath is a factor
of @xmath (and therefore of the symmetric part of @xmath ) and @xmath
mod @xmath otherwise. This completes the proof. ∎

In particular, this means that if an Alexander polynomial of a knot has
any distinct complex roots of unit modulus, then the signature function
will jump at those roots, meaning that the knot must be of infinite
order.

## Chapter 4 Algebraic concordance classification of @xmath-crossing
knots

In this chapter we use the theorems from Chapter 3 to identify the
subgroup of the algebraic concordance group @xmath generated by the
prime knots of @xmath or fewer crossings. From this ‘classification’ we
can easily decide what order a linear combination of @xmath -crossing
knots has in @xmath and, in particular, which linear combinations are
algebraically slice.

To begin, let us recap the definitions made in Section 1.5.2 .

Let @xmath , where @xmath since the list includes the distinct reverses
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

###### Notation.

Let @xmath denote the subgroup of @xmath generated by @xmath . Denote by
@xmath the free abelian group generated by @xmath .

There are natural maps @xmath , and in this chapter we wish to analyse
the kernel and image of @xmath . (A summary of the result may be found
in Section 4.5 .) We will be using the invariants described in
Definition 3.4.1 :

-   @xmath : the exponent, modulo @xmath , of @xmath in @xmath ,

-   @xmath : the signature of @xmath restricted to the @xmath -primary
    component,

-   @xmath : @xmath where @xmath is the image of @xmath in @xmath
    restricted to the @xmath -primary component,

where @xmath runs over the irreducible symmetric factors of the
Alexander polynomial @xmath and @xmath is a prime. For a Seifert matrix
@xmath , recall that @xmath and @xmath . However, instead of using
@xmath directly we will simply look at the image of knots in the Witt
groups @xmath restricted to each @xmath -primary component.

If a knot has no irreducible symmetric factors, it must be algebraically
slice. Similarly, if the image of the knot under all of these maps is
zero, then it must be algebraically slice. That is, if the @xmath
-signature @xmath is zero for every unit complex number @xmath which is
not a root of the Alexander polynomial @xmath ; if the exponent of every
irreducible symmetric factor of @xmath is even; and if the image of
@xmath in @xmath is zero for every prime @xmath , then @xmath .

### 4.1 Analysing the signature function

We begin by finding a basis for the knots of infinite order in @xmath by
analysing the signature function of each knot. Given a Seifert matrix
@xmath for a knot @xmath , the signature function @xmath is defined for
each unit complex number @xmath as follows

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and is continuous except at unit roots of the Alexander polynomial
@xmath . If @xmath is a unit root of @xmath , we define @xmath to be the
average of the limit on either side.

By the analysis of Section 3.4.1 we know that if this function is
non-zero for any value of @xmath , then the knot @xmath is of infinite
order in @xmath . Conversely, by Theorem 3.4.5 if @xmath for every
@xmath then @xmath is of finite order in @xmath .

Since the signature function of a knot @xmath is continuous except at
the unit roots of @xmath , and is integer-valued, this means that @xmath
is constant between unit roots of @xmath . This simplifies our
computations because it means that, to determine the full signature
function of any knot, we need only take a sample of the signature values
in between each pair of the unit roots of @xmath . Furthermore, we need
only do this for the unit roots with positive imaginary part, because
the signature function is symmetric: @xmath .

The set of unit roots, with positive imaginary part, of Alexander
polynomials of knots in @xmath consists of 70 values, which we shall
call @xmath ordered by argument. We shall choose the midpoint of each
consecutive pair of values:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Evaluating the signature function of each knot at each of the @xmath
gives us a complete picture of the signature function of each knot. We
put the values into an @xmath matrix and then perform column operations
to get it in reduced echelon form. (See Appendix A for this reduced-form
matrix.) From this we can read off a basis for the kernel of the
signature function as well as a basis for the knots which are of
infinite order.

The following is a linearly independent set of @xmath knots which form a
basis in @xmath for the knots of infinite algebraic concordance order:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The following @xmath knots are a basis for the kernel of the signature
function:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

These knots must all have finite order in @xmath , and we will now
analyse them further to determine what order they have in @xmath .

### 4.2 Elements of algebraic order 4

In this section we begin our first analysis of the Witt groups @xmath .
Recall Corollary 3.4.9 , which states that

###### Corollary 3.4.9.

If a knot @xmath is of order 4 in the algebraic concordance group @xmath
then for some prime @xmath mod 4 and some symmetric irreducible factor
@xmath of @xmath , @xmath divides @xmath and @xmath has odd exponent in
@xmath .

We can see immediately that if @xmath factors into primes that are all
congruent to @xmath mod @xmath then @xmath cannot be of order @xmath .
In this section we will thus consider the knots in @xmath whose
determinant contains a prime divisor that is congruent to @xmath modulo
@xmath . For each of these knots and for each prime congruent to @xmath
mod @xmath that divides @xmath for @xmath a factor of @xmath (including
the factors of even exponent), we will calculate the image of @xmath in
@xmath restricted to the @xmath -primary component, via the map @xmath
(see Theorem 3.3.6 and Example 3.3.9 ). This image is found by
diagonalising @xmath to consist of square-free integers, removing the
entries that are coprime to @xmath and dividing the rest by @xmath .

The knots that we have to deal with are:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The last knot will clearly be zero in any Witt group @xmath .

The results of the Witt group calculations can be found in Appendix C .
From performing column operations on this matrix we can deduce the
following:

-   That @xmath are independent generators of @xmath summands in @xmath
    .

-   That @xmath are independent generators of @xmath summands in @xmath
    .

-   That @xmath cannot be detected in the Witt groups @xmath for @xmath
    mod @xmath .

###### Remark 4.2.1.

Notice that since @xmath and @xmath are detected at different primes
(i.e. @xmath is non-trivial in @xmath while @xmath is not) it is clear
that no linear combination @xmath , @xmath , is algebraically slice.
Similarly, we know that the elements of @xmath are linearly independent
since they are detected using different polynomials (even though some
are detected using the same prime).

It is worth further analysing the knots which have been detected as
elements of order 2. Since they have been detected using a @xmath
-valued function, a natural question is whether these elements of order
2 could be twice elements of algebraic order @xmath . Suppose that
@xmath for some knot @xmath of order @xmath . Then the order of @xmath
could not be detected by any @xmath invariants (for example, by the Witt
groups @xmath with @xmath mod @xmath ). Let us calculate the other Witt
groups for the knots with a “ @xmath mod @xmath ” prime in their
determinant and see what they tell us.

  Polynomial   @xmath   @xmath
  ------------ -------- --------
  Prime        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath       @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath       @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath       @xmath   @xmath

Since these knots are all nontrivial in @xmath , they cannot be twice
another knot.

The knots @xmath and @xmath do not have any factors congruent to @xmath
mod @xmath in their determinants and so we must try different tactics.
If @xmath and @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Both polynomials contain four distinct roots on the unit circle in
@xmath . This means that the signatures of @xmath and @xmath are non
zero (by Theorem 3.4.14 ), and so the knots cannot be of algebraic order
@xmath .

### 4.3 The exponent map

For the next section of the algebraic classification, we consider the
map @xmath which looks at the exponent of each of the symmetric
irreducible factors @xmath of @xmath and evaluates them mod @xmath . The
knots now of concern are those in @xmath along with those in @xmath
whose determinants did not contain a @xmath mod @xmath prime factor.

At this point (although we could have done this at the beginning) we may
isolate those knots whose Alexander polynomial does not contain any
symmetric irreducible factors. These are:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and they are all algebraically slice.

The following knots have a unique (i.e. not found in any other knot)
irreducible factor with odd exponent in their Alexander polynomial:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The following knots’ Alexander polynomials contain the factor @xmath
with odd exponent:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whilst those in the next list contain the factor @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We take the first knot in each list (i.e. the one with smallest crossing
number) as a generator, and differences of the others to be in the
kernel of the exponent map. Thus a basis of the kernel of the exponent
map is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

### 4.4 More Witt group analysis

By Theorem 3.4.10 , any elements of order @xmath in @xmath are detected
only at primes that divide the determinant of the Seifert form (i.e. the
leading coefficient of the Alexander polynomial), the discriminant of
the (reduced) Alexander polynomial and in @xmath . We need to examine
the knots in @xmath in each of the relevant Witt groups.

The knots @xmath are clearly zero in any Witt group and are thus
algebraically slice.

The only knot in @xmath which has an odd prime (namely, 3) as the
leading coefficient of its Alexander polynomial is @xmath . However,
this knot is trivial in @xmath . The only knot in @xmath whose
discriminant contains an odd prime (namely, @xmath ) that is not a
factor of the determinant is @xmath , and this knot is also trivial in
@xmath .

###### Conjecture 4.4.1.

Every knot is trivial in @xmath for any odd prime @xmath which does not
divide the determinant of the knot.

A full analysis of the remaining knots and primes is to be found in
Appendix D . From the table we see that

-   @xmath are independent generators of a @xmath summand.

-   @xmath cannot be detected in the Witt groups @xmath for @xmath mod
    @xmath .

To prove that the knots in @xmath are algebraically slice, we must also
check their image in the Witt group @xmath . These all turn out to be
trivial.

The knots @xmath do not have any @xmath mod @xmath primes in their
determinants, but we must check their image in @xmath . These are all
trivial.

###### Conjecture 4.4.2.

If a knot has trivial image in each @xmath for @xmath an odd prime, then
it also has trivial image in @xmath .

### 4.5 Summary

Putting the last four sections of analysis together, we have the
following theorem.

###### Theorem 4.5.1.

A basis for the knots in @xmath of infinite algebraic concordance order
is

-   @xmath

while a basis for the kernel @xmath of the map @xmath , @xmath ,
consists of the union of the independent sets @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
where

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

###### Remark 4.5.2.

We may change basis in @xmath to make things look nicer:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

###### Remark 4.5.3.

The image of @xmath in the algebraic concordance group @xmath is @xmath
.

## Chapter 5 Topological techniques

Our ultimate aim in Chapter 6 will be to calculate the image of the
algebraically slice @xmath -crossing knots @xmath in the concordance
group @xmath . There are few methods which are powerful enough to
determine whether or not an algebraically slice knot is topologically
slice. One of these methods is due to Casson and Gordon [ CG86 ] (and
was described in Section 2.4 ), but calculations of their invariant are
possible for only a small number of knots. However, a determinant of the
Casson-Gordon invariant turns out to be the twisted Alexander polynomial
[ KL99a ] which has been developed by a number of people and which is
relatively easy to compute. We will concentrate on developing the use of
the twisted Alexander polynomial to finish our classification of
9-crossing knots in @xmath .

To understand twisted Alexander polynomials, the following basic
definition will be key.

###### Definition 5.0.1.

Any finitely generated module @xmath over a principal ideal domain
@xmath is the direct sum of cyclic modules

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a free @xmath -module and the @xmath are defined modulo
units in @xmath with @xmath dividing @xmath for all @xmath . (See, for
example, [ Gri07 , Theorem 6.3] .) The order (of the torsion) of @xmath
is defined to be the product of all the ideals @xmath .

###### Notation.

In this section @xmath will be an oriented knot, @xmath will denote the
@xmath -fold cover of @xmath branched over @xmath and @xmath will denote
the @xmath -fold cyclic cover of the knot complement @xmath . We write
@xmath for a complex number which is a @xmath root of unity and an
overline, e.g. @xmath , to mean complex conjugation.

### 5.1 Twisted Alexander polynomials

The original Alexander polynomial [ Ale28 ] of a knot @xmath can be
viewed as a description of the homology of the infinite cyclic cover
@xmath of the knot complement @xmath . More precisely, @xmath is the
order of the @xmath -module @xmath (this is well-defined for knots, as
the order ideal is principal). This concept can be generalised by
looking at representations of the knot group @xmath and using them to
twist the coefficients of @xmath . A detailed description of what
follows may be found in [ KL99a ] .

We will first work in greater generality than we need, so let @xmath be
a finite CW-complex with fundamental group @xmath . Let @xmath be an
epimorphism and @xmath be a homomorphism, where @xmath is a
finite-dimensional vector space over a field @xmath . The map @xmath
determines a right @xmath -action on @xmath , so we may construct the
@xmath -bimodule

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with right @xmath -action given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is the universal cover of @xmath then @xmath acts on the left
of the cellular chain complex @xmath by deck transformations. We define
the twisted chain complex

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 5.1.1.

The twisted Alexander polynomial associated to @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , denoted @xmath , is the order of @xmath as a left @xmath
-module. This is well-defined up to multiplication by units in @xmath .

### 5.2 Twisted polynomials as slicing obstructions

To use twisted Alexander polynomials in a knot-slicing context, we will
let @xmath be @xmath , the @xmath -fold cyclic cover of the knot
complement @xmath for a prime @xmath , whilst @xmath for a prime @xmath
. This means that @xmath is @xmath .

A surjection @xmath is obtained through composing the map on fundamental
groups @xmath , induced by the covering map, with the Hurewicz
homomorphism @xmath (which is uniquely defined since our knot is
oriented). Let @xmath be @xmath . We construct the representation @xmath
in the following way, which is consistent with the representation used
in the construction of Casson-Gordon invariants (see Section 2.4 ).

Choose a character (group homomorphism) @xmath where @xmath is a prime
power @xmath . Precompose this map with the map on homology arising from
the inclusion @xmath and then with the Hurewicz homomorphism to get a
map @xmath . We then have that @xmath maps into @xmath by @xmath , and
hence into @xmath . All these operations give us the following
composition of maps:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We shall denote the specific twisted Alexander polynomial obtained in
this way by @xmath , or simply @xmath where there is no confusion.

###### Remark 5.2.1.

Milnor in [ Mil62 ] interpreted the Alexander polynomial of a knot as
the Reidemeister torsion of an associated chain complex. This allowed
him to recover the result that the Alexander polynomial of a knot is
symmetric, i.e. @xmath (up to a power of @xmath ). In [ Kit96 ] , Kitano
was able to show that twisted Alexander polynomials could also be
interpreted as Reidemeister torsion. Kirk and Livingston [ KL99a ]
developed these ideas in the context above to show that, up to a factor
of @xmath with @xmath , the twisted Alexander polynomial @xmath was the
Reidemeister torsion of the complex

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath as before. This interpretation allowed Kirk and Livingston
to conclude [ KL99a , Corollary 5.2] that twisted Alexander polynomials
are symmetric in the sense that @xmath .

The twisted Alexander polynomial defined above turns out to be
equivalent to the Casson-Gordon determinant. Recall from Chapter 2
(Definition 2.4.4 ) the following notation.

###### Notation.

A norm in @xmath is a polynomial of the form @xmath , where @xmath means
complex conjugation of the coefficients of @xmath .

###### Theorem 5.2.2.

[ KL99a , Theorem 6.5] Suppose that @xmath and @xmath are odd primes
with @xmath and let @xmath be a character @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath or @xmath if @xmath is trivial or non-trivial respectively.

The work of Casson and Gordon in [ CG86 , Lemma 4 & corollary] implies
that if @xmath is a slice knot and if the character @xmath extends to
the @xmath -fold branched cover of the slice disc, then the
Casson-Gordon invariant @xmath vanishes. A particular set of characters
which extend over the branched cover of the slice disc are those which
vanish on a metaboliser of the linking form on @xmath (see [ Gil83 ] and
[ CG86 , Theorem 2] ). This linking form is analogous to Definition
2.2.5 except that it is defined on the homology of the cyclic branched
cover rather than on the homology of a Seifert surface for the knot.

###### Definition 5.2.3.

The linking form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a non-singular form defined as follows. Let @xmath and @xmath be
@xmath -cycles in @xmath . Suppose that @xmath bounds a 2-chain @xmath
for some @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the intersection number of @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath
, then @xmath takes values in @xmath .

There are various presentation matrices of @xmath which we may use to
calculate the linking form.

###### Proposition 5.2.4.

[ Rol03 , 8D.5] Let @xmath be a Seifert matrix for @xmath . If @xmath is
invertible, @xmath is a presentation matrix for @xmath as an abelian
group.

###### Proposition 5.2.5.

[ Gil93 ] In the case that the Seifert matrix @xmath may not be
invertible, let @xmath . Then @xmath is a presentation matrix for @xmath
as an abelian group.

###### Proposition 5.2.6.

[ Lic97 , Theorem 9.1] In the case of the two-fold branched cover,
@xmath is a presentation matrix for @xmath as an abelian group.

###### Definition 5.2.7.

An (invariant) metaboliser for @xmath is a subgroup @xmath (invariant
under the action of the covering transformation) for which @xmath ,
where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows that @xmath .

We now state the main theorem that will be used in the rest of this
thesis. This theorem is a generalisation of the fact, proved by Fox and
Milnor [ FM66 ] (and also in Corollary 2.2.12 ), that Alexander
polynomials for slice knots factor as @xmath .

###### Theorem 5.2.8.

[ KL99a , Theorem 6.2] If @xmath is slice and @xmath are distinct primes
with @xmath , then there is an (invariant) metaboliser of the linking
form @xmath with the following property. For all characters @xmath with
@xmath , @xmath factors as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath or @xmath if @xmath is trivial or
non-trivial, respectively.

It will often be easier to work with maps to @xmath rather than to
@xmath . The following corollary shows us how to do this.

###### Corollary 5.2.9.

[ HKL10 , Corollary 8.3] If @xmath is slice and @xmath are distinct
primes with @xmath , then there is a subspace of the linking form @xmath
with the following property. For all characters @xmath with @xmath ,
@xmath factors as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath or @xmath if @xmath is trivial or
non-trivial, respectively. The subspace @xmath is a reduction modulo
@xmath of a metaboliser for @xmath .

To prove that a knot is not slice, it therefore suffices to show that
every metaboliser @xmath of @xmath (for some prime @xmath ) has a
non-trivial map @xmath (for some prime @xmath ) such that @xmath and
such that @xmath is not a norm.

In order to use twisted polynomials to detect torsion in @xmath , we
need to know how they behave under connected sums of knots. The
following result was proved by Gilmer [ Gil83 ] in the context of
Casson-Gordon invariants, and by Kirk and Livingston [ KL99b ] for
twisted Alexander polynomials.

###### Proposition 5.2.10.

Suppose @xmath and that @xmath restricts to @xmath on the factors (i.e.
@xmath ). Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with the second case occurring if and only if @xmath and @xmath are
non-trivial.

### 5.3 Detecting infinite order

Twisted Alexander polynomials are a powerful tool in proving
non-sliceness of algebraically slice knots (see, e.g. [ KL99b ] , [
HKL10 ] ). They were used in [ KL01 ] to prove that a specific
collection of knots had infinite order and were linearly independent in
@xmath . In this section we develop techniques and theorems which will
enable us to decide whether any collection of arbitrary knots is
linearly independent in @xmath . For the rest of the chapter we abuse
notation and write @xmath when we mean @xmath .

#### 5.3.1 From metabolisers to polynomials

Our strategy for showing that a knot has infinite order in @xmath is to
analyse metabolisers of @xmath for an arbitrary @xmath and to show that
for each metaboliser there is a character @xmath vanishing on it for
which @xmath is not a norm. For most of what follows, @xmath will be
equal to @xmath and @xmath will be an odd prime.

What does a metaboliser for @xmath look like? Suppose first that @xmath
. Then @xmath . In order for a metaboliser to exist, we need @xmath to
be even, say @xmath . Let @xmath be a metaboliser. It is spanned by
@xmath vectors @xmath where @xmath (mod @xmath ) for every @xmath and
@xmath . (Here we are using the standard inner product on @xmath .) This
is because, if we write @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and since @xmath we have @xmath .

###### Example 5.3.1.

For example, let @xmath and @xmath . Then the following set of vectors
could be a spanning set for a metaboliser:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next, what characters vanish on @xmath ? Let @xmath be the map @xmath .
Then if @xmath we can write @xmath and we have that the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

will vanish on all of @xmath . By Proposition 5.2.10 we have that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and this should be a norm if @xmath is slice. The following observation
will help us to simplify this polynomial.

A twisted Alexander polynomial @xmath has the symmetry @xmath (see 5.2.1
). In particular, this means that @xmath is a norm. Thus if a vector
@xmath contains a repeated entry, say @xmath , then we can simplify
equation ( 5.2 ) by removing @xmath and @xmath from the right-hand side.
So it is only if an entry in a metabolising vector occurs an odd number
of times that it contributes to the twisted Alexander polynomial.

There is a further simplification we can make when doing calculations,
which is that the polynomials related to the various @xmath , @xmath ,
are all related by a particular symmetry.

###### Lemma 5.3.2.

Suppose that @xmath and @xmath are two characters such that @xmath for
some @xmath . Then @xmath , where @xmath is the map that takes @xmath to
@xmath . We say that @xmath and @xmath are Galois conjugates of each
other. Notice that if @xmath factorises as a norm then so does @xmath .

So in order to stop Equation ( 5.2 ) from factorising as a norm we need
to find a vector @xmath which contains at least one entry an odd number
of times. We then need to show that none of other polynomials on the
right-hand side of ( 5.2 ) are the same as the polynomial corresponding
to that ‘odd’ entry. One way to show this would be to show that none of
the Galois conjugates of @xmath are equal to each other, but this is
slightly overkill and we will see that we can get away with a lesser
condition. All these ideas will be made more precise in the next
section.

Finally, we also need to be able to deal with the trivial twisted
polynomial, @xmath . This polynomial is related to the standard
Alexander polynomial, but does not always behave in the same way.

###### Lemma 5.3.3.

If @xmath is algebraically slice then the trivial twisted Alexander
polynomial @xmath is a norm. However the converse is not true: it may
happen that @xmath is a norm whilst the standard Alexander polynomial
@xmath does not factorise as @xmath .

###### Proof.

The trivial twisted polynomial is related to the standard Alexander
polynomial by the following formula:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is algebraically slice then @xmath for some @xmath in @xmath .
It follows trivially that @xmath is a norm.

Conversely, let @xmath and @xmath (which is irreducible). Then @xmath ,
which is a norm. ∎

#### 5.3.2 Odd vectors and the main theorem

We will use the following lemma from [ KL01 ] to find metabolising
vectors whose entries occur an odd number of times.

###### Lemma 5.3.4.

Let @xmath be a non-singular @xmath matrix over @xmath for a prime
@xmath . Suppose that every vector in the subspace of @xmath spanned by
the rows of the @xmath matrix @xmath has an even number of non-zero
entries. Then @xmath is obtained from a diagonal matrix by permuting the
columns.

We adapt this result to our own situation.

###### Lemma 5.3.5.

Let @xmath be a knot, where @xmath for each @xmath , with the order of
the @xmath coprime to @xmath . Let @xmath be vectors in @xmath which are
a basis for a metaboliser @xmath on which the linking form vanishes. If
the linking forms of @xmath are the same (i.e. @xmath for all @xmath )
then

-   If @xmath (mod @xmath ) then either there is a linear combination of
    the @xmath which contains an odd number of zero entries or there is
    a linear combination of the @xmath of the form @xmath for an @xmath
    such that @xmath (mod q).

-   If @xmath (mod @xmath ) then @xmath is even and there must be a
    linear combination of the @xmath which contains an odd number of
    zero entries.

###### Proof.

Given any basis @xmath for a metaboliser we can perform row and column
operations to put the basis into the @xmath matrix form @xmath required
by Lemma 5.3.4 . We need to show that @xmath is non-singular.

Different columns of @xmath correspond to elements in the homology of
the branched cover of different knots, and these different knots may
have different linking forms. Let @xmath be the diagonal matrix with
diagonal entries @xmath (noting that these may be in a different order
because of the aforementioned column operations). Since the rows are
part of a metaboliser, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Rearranging and taking the determinant of both sides gives us

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath and @xmath are nonzero, @xmath is nonsingular too, as
required.

We can conclude from Lemma 5.3.4 that either there is a vector in the
span of the @xmath with an odd number of non-zero entries, or that
@xmath is obtained from a diagonal matrix by permuting the columns.
However, if the linking forms of the @xmath are identical we may deduce
more. We have @xmath so @xmath (mod @xmath ) and @xmath (mod @xmath ).
If @xmath is obtained from a diagonal matrix by permuting the columns
then the diagonal entries must be @xmath , where @xmath (mod @xmath ).
Such an element does not exist if @xmath (mod @xmath ) since @xmath is
not a square. For the same reason, if @xmath (mod @xmath ) then @xmath
must be even. ∎

By a theorem of Livingston and Naik [ LN99 , Theorem 1.2] we know that
if @xmath for any prime @xmath (mod @xmath ) and @xmath odd, then @xmath
is of infinite order in @xmath . In this next theorem we give conditions
for a knot to be of infinite order when @xmath (mod @xmath ) and @xmath
. We will then generalise this to deal with connected sums of knots, and
in the next section look at what happens when @xmath for any value of
@xmath .

###### Notation.

We use the symbol @xmath to denote ‘modulo norms’.

###### Theorem 5.3.6.

Suppose that we have a knot @xmath where @xmath for some prime @xmath
mod @xmath , where the order of @xmath is coprime to @xmath . Let @xmath
be the trivial map and @xmath be @xmath . Construct @xmath as in Section
5.2 . Then @xmath is of infinite order if it satisfies the following
conditions:

1.  @xmath does not factorise over @xmath as @xmath .

2.  There is a non-trivial irreducible factor @xmath of @xmath for which
    @xmath is not a factor of @xmath for any @xmath .

3.  @xmath , where @xmath (mod @xmath ).

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath satisfies conditions (1-3), and suppose that @xmath
is slice (for some @xmath , and try to obtain a contradiction. Since
@xmath is slice, there is a metaboliser @xmath of rank @xmath .

For each element @xmath of @xmath we have a character

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which vanishes on @xmath , and a twisted Alexander polynomial

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

By the sliceness of @xmath , @xmath must factorise as a norm for every
such @xmath , up to a factor of an element of @xmath and a possible
factor of @xmath (Theorem 5.2.8 ). Before embarking on the rest of the
argument, we notice the trivial but important point that @xmath is a
unique factorisation domain.

Recall that any twisted Alexander polynomial @xmath has the property
that @xmath . Thus if @xmath occurs with an even exponent on the RHS of
( 5.3 ) then we can ignore it because it factorises as a norm. By
assumption 1 and 3 (notice that assumption 3 implies that @xmath ,
@xmath , is not a norm) , the converse is also true: if a polynomial
occurs with an odd exponent on the RHS of ( 5.3 ) then it cannot
factorise (by itself, at least) as a norm. We now use the result of
Lemma 5.3.5 , and find ourselves with two cases to consider.

In the first case there is a vector @xmath which contains an odd number
of zero entries. So @xmath occurs with an odd exponent on the RHS of (
5.3 ) (i.e. non-trivially). By assumption 2, we know that @xmath
contains at least one non-trivial irreducible factor which cannot
combine with any other twisted Alexander polynomial to factorise as a
norm. Thus @xmath cannot factorise as a norm, which is a contradiction.

In the second case there is a vector @xmath which looks like @xmath for
an @xmath such that @xmath (mod q). In this case we can simplify the
right-hand side of ( 5.3 ) to get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From assumption 3 we know that @xmath , so this polynomial cannot
factorise as a norm, completing the contradiction. ∎

###### Remark 5.3.7.

For any @xmath , the twisted polynomials @xmath and @xmath are equal
because of the action of the 2-fold deck transformation on @xmath .

This theorem is quite powerful; we will see in Chapter 8 that it applies
to 84% of the knots of unknown concordance order with up to 12
crossings. However, one obvious situation when it cannot be applied is
when the knot is algebraically slice, since the first condition is
automatically not satisfied (see Lemma 5.3.3 ). Thankfully, there is an
alternative method of checking if a knot has infinite order in @xmath
which does not rely on assuming that @xmath is not a norm.

###### Theorem 5.3.8.

Suppose that we have a knot @xmath where @xmath for some prime @xmath
mod @xmath , where the order of @xmath is coprime to @xmath . Let @xmath
be the trivial map and @xmath be @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is a norm.
Then @xmath is of infinite order if it satisfies the following
condition:

-   @xmath is coprime, up to norms in @xmath , to @xmath for all @xmath
    , @xmath .

###### Proof.

The proof is identical to that of Theorem 5.3.6 except for the case
where the metaboliser contains a vector with an odd number of zeros. We
now know that @xmath is a norm, so we need a different argument. A
vector with an odd number of zeros also contains an odd number of
non-zero entries. This means that at least one entry, say @xmath ,
occurs an odd number of times and so its corresponding twisted Alexander
polynomial @xmath occurs with odd exponent in the polynomial for that
vector. By the condition of our theorem we know that @xmath is coprime
to all other twisted polynomials, so there is no other factor in the
product of polynomials which can combine with @xmath to form a norm. We
also know that @xmath is not a norm, because if it were then all of its
Galois conjugates would be norms as well, and the condition would not be
satisfied. Thus the twisted Alexander polynomial corresponding to this
‘odd vector’ is not a norm.

As in the previous proof, we also require that @xmath is not a norm, for
@xmath (mod @xmath ). This fact is taken care of by our condition too. ∎

We may generalise Theorem 5.3.6 to concern sums of knots, though a
little care must be taken to ensure that each individual knot satisfies
the set-up of the theorem. Notice that, whilst each individual knot in
the sum must not be algebraically slice, there is no restriction on the
algebraic sliceness of the sum.

###### Remark 5.3.9.

The following theorem has an alternative version, corresponding to
Theorem 5.3.8 , where we don’t need to assume that the component knots
of the sum are not algebraically slice. However, the following theorem
suffices to prove our 9-crossing classification, so we do not write out
this alternative theorem and instead leave it as an exercise for the
reader.

###### Theorem 5.3.10.

Let @xmath with @xmath having @xmath with the order of the @xmath
coprime to @xmath , and the remainder of the @xmath having @xmath with
the order of the @xmath coprime to @xmath . Then @xmath has infinite
order in @xmath if the twisted Alexander polynomials (as defined in
Theorem 5.3.6 ) satisfy:

1.  @xmath does not factorise over @xmath as a norm for any @xmath .

2.  There is a non-trivial irreducible factor @xmath of @xmath for which
    @xmath is not a factor of @xmath for all @xmath and all @xmath .

3.  @xmath where @xmath with @xmath and @xmath , for all @xmath where
    @xmath is defined. This means that if @xmath mod @xmath then @xmath
    and @xmath must be the same modulo squares and if @xmath mod 4 then
    @xmath and @xmath must be different modulo squares.

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath is slice and that a basis of a metaboliser in @xmath
is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath                     
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since we are considering an even multiple of @xmath , the number of
zeros at the end of each vector is even and can be ignored. Taking the
@xmath matrix @xmath whose rows are the entries of the @xmath from the
@xmath non-trivial knots, we perform row and column operations on @xmath
to turn it into @xmath . The proof of Lemma 5.3.5 adapts to this
situation so we know that @xmath is non-singular and we can therefore
invoke the conclusions of Lemma 5.3.5 . There are two cases. (For what
follows, remember that each column of @xmath corresponds to one of the
@xmath .)

Firstly, we may be able to find a linear combination of the rows of
@xmath which contains an odd number of zeros. An odd number of zeros
must therefore come from a particular knot @xmath . This means that
@xmath occurs with odd exponent in the twisted Alexander polynomial
@xmath corresponding to that vector. From condition (1) we know that
@xmath is not a norm, and from condition (2) we know that it cannot
factorise as a norm as a result of being combined with non-trivial
twisted polynomials from any of the other knots. The only way that it
could become a norm is to be combined with one of the other trivial
twisted polynomials, say @xmath . Since @xmath is not a norm it must
also occur with odd exponent. But this pairing up of non-trivial twisted
polynomials cannot continue indefinitely, since we know there are an odd
number of zeros in our vector. There must therefore be a factor of
@xmath which is not a norm and which occurs with odd exponent, meaning
that @xmath is itself not a norm.

If there is no combination of the rows of @xmath which contains an odd
number of zeros, Lemma 5.3.4 says that @xmath is obtained by permuting
the columns of a diagonal matrix. Let the diagonal matrix have entries
@xmath . Every row in @xmath then looks like

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In any particular row, suppose the knot corresponding to the column
containing the @xmath has the linking form @xmath and the knot
corresponding to the column with the @xmath has the linking form @xmath
. Then we would have @xmath (mod @xmath ), which means @xmath (mod
@xmath ). If @xmath (mod @xmath ) then we need @xmath and @xmath to be
either both squares or both non-squares for there to be a solution. If
@xmath (mod @xmath ) then we need @xmath and @xmath to be different
modulo squares. Assuming that there is a solution @xmath , this row then
gives us the twisted polynomial

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which by condition (3) is designed not to be a norm. ∎

### 5.4 Prime powers

Suppose @xmath for a knot @xmath , a prime @xmath and a natural number
@xmath . We want a criterion for deciding if @xmath is of infinite
order. Livingston and Naik have the following theorem in the case when
@xmath (mod @xmath ) and when @xmath is odd.

###### Theorem 5.4.1 (1.2, [Ln99]).

If @xmath with @xmath a prime congruent to @xmath modulo @xmath , @xmath
odd and @xmath not dividing the order of @xmath , then @xmath is of
infinite order in @xmath .

But what happens when @xmath (mod @xmath ) or if @xmath is even? The
proof of Theorem 5.4.1 made use of Casson-Gordon signatures, which are
not powerful enough to provide an obstruction in these cases. However,
we shall see that twisted Alexander polynomials do provide computable
obstructions, much as in the @xmath case.

###### Theorem 5.4.2.

Suppose that we have a knot @xmath where @xmath for some prime @xmath ,
where the order of @xmath is coprime to @xmath . Let @xmath be the
trivial map and @xmath be @xmath (mod @xmath ). Construct @xmath as in
Section 5.2 . Then @xmath is of infinite order if it satisfies the
following conditions:

1.  If @xmath , @xmath is not a norm.

2.  @xmath is not a norm.

3.  @xmath is coprime, up to norms in @xmath , to @xmath for all @xmath
    .

4.  If @xmath (mod @xmath ) then @xmath , where @xmath (mod @xmath ).

###### Remark 5.4.3.

Conditions (2)-(4) may be replaced by the condition that @xmath should
be coprime (modulo norms) to @xmath for any @xmath , @xmath . The proof
below is easily adjusted to this other case using the same proof as for
Theorem 5.3.8 .

###### Proof.

We will discuss the proof of the case when @xmath ; the case of @xmath
is identical except that everywhere we would need to consider the @xmath
-primary component of the homology.

Suppose that @xmath is slice. Then @xmath , so any metaboliser has order
@xmath . Let @xmath denote the matrix whose rows are the spanning set of
a metaboliser. Following the proof of [ LN99 , 1.2] , we let @xmath
denote the number of rows in @xmath divisible by @xmath . Since the
metaboliser @xmath has the property that @xmath , we have that @xmath
for @xmath .

###### Example 5.4.4.

Let @xmath and @xmath , so @xmath . A metaboliser needs to have order
@xmath . Here is one possibility:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

As per Corollary 5.2.9 we need to find a map @xmath which vanishes on
the image modulo @xmath of a metaboliser, and for which the
corresponding twisted Alexander polynomial does not factorise as a norm.
The image modulo @xmath of @xmath is clearly just the first @xmath rows.

Case 1: @xmath

If all the rows are divisible by @xmath , then any character from @xmath
to @xmath will vanish on @xmath . In particular we can take @xmath ,
giving us the condition that @xmath is a norm if @xmath is slice. This
is obstructed by condition (1) of the theorem.

Case 2: @xmath

In this case, all other @xmath are zero and every row has order @xmath .
The image of @xmath under the map which reduces every entry modulo
@xmath has rank @xmath and the form @xmath for a square matrix @xmath .
Since the dot product of any two rows in @xmath is zero modulo @xmath ,
the dot product of any two rows of @xmath is zero modulo @xmath . By
Lemma 5.3.5 we then know that @xmath is non-singular and that either (a)
there is a vector in the span of the rows of @xmath with an odd number
of zero entries, or (b) @xmath is obtained from a diagonal matrix by
permuting the columns. In case (a) the corresponding twisted polynomial
is obstructed from being a norm by conditions (2) and (3) of the
theorem. In case (b) the rows in @xmath have the form @xmath and @xmath
modulo @xmath since the row has dot product zero with itself. The
corresponding twisted Alexander polynomial is obstructed from being a
norm by condition (4).

Case 3: @xmath

The span of the rows must create a subspace of order @xmath . The @xmath
rows which are a multiple of @xmath each have order @xmath , telling us
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath if @xmath is odd and @xmath if @xmath is even. Using the fact
that @xmath for @xmath we get @xmath (where the summand @xmath does not
exist in the odd case). The number of rows is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These calculations tell us that the number of rows is @xmath .

Create a new matrix @xmath by dividing the @xmath rows of @xmath by
@xmath for each @xmath . Then perform row operations until @xmath has
the form @xmath where there is a @xmath identity matrix on the left of
the vertical line, and @xmath is a @xmath matrix. Since @xmath , we have
@xmath and @xmath has more rows than columns.

Notice that each row of @xmath has dot product zero modulo @xmath with
the original @xmath rows of @xmath , since the rows of @xmath have dot
product zero modulo @xmath with the first @xmath rows. Therefore the
rows of @xmath , denoted @xmath , can be thought of as maps @xmath to
@xmath vanishing on the image modulo @xmath of the metaboliser. We need
to find a linear combination of them to give us a non-trivial twisted
Alexander polynomial; we will do this by finding a row with an odd
number of non-zero (and thus zero) entries in the span of the @xmath .
Conditions (2) and (3) of the theorem then obstruct the twisted
Alexander polynomial from being slice.

If there are an even number of non-zero entries in any row of @xmath ,
then the row in @xmath has an odd number of non-zero entries and we are
done. So suppose that every row of @xmath has an odd number of non-zero
entries. Since @xmath has more rows than columns, there is a linear
combination of the rows which is zero. Say @xmath (mod @xmath ). If an
odd number of the @xmath are non-zero, then @xmath is an odd vector.

So assume that an even number of the @xmath are non-zero. Choose @xmath
, and then a non-zero @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a vector with an odd number of non-zero entries. (This is because
there is an even number of non-zero values among the first @xmath
entries, and an odd number of non-zero entries coming from the last
@xmath entries because we assumed that the rows of @xmath all had an odd
number of non-zero entries.)

∎

### 5.5 Higher order covers

In this section we analyse metabolisers of higher order branched covers
of knots in order to find further criteria which indicate when a knot
has infinite order in @xmath . This is a very different situation to
that of the double branched cover which we have studied up until now,
because the homology of @xmath for a prime @xmath is always a direct
double. That is, @xmath for some @xmath . (For a proof, see [ Rol03 ,
Theorem 8, Section 8D] .) This means that we need different kinds of
characters (i.e. not just the linking form) and a more involved analysis
of the metabolisers. The arguments here owe their existence to the work
of Kirk and Livingston in [ KL01 ] ; particularly their work in Chapter
5.

Let @xmath be a knot with @xmath where @xmath and @xmath are the
eigenspaces of the deck transformation @xmath . Let @xmath be an @xmath
-eigenvector (i.e. @xmath ) and @xmath be a @xmath -eigenvector. Now
define @xmath by @xmath and @xmath . Similarly, @xmath is defined by
@xmath and @xmath .

###### Theorem 5.5.1.

The knot @xmath is of infinite order in @xmath if the following
conditions on the twisted Alexander polynomial of @xmath are satisfied:

1.  @xmath is coprime, up to norms, to both @xmath and @xmath , and
    @xmath is not a norm.

2.  @xmath for any @xmath .

###### Proof.

We want to show that @xmath is not slice for any @xmath , and without
loss of generality we let @xmath . For every metaboliser we need to find
a character for which the corresponding twisted Alexander polynomial
does not factorise. Any invariant metaboliser will be spanned by
eigenvectors. Let @xmath be a @xmath matrix which represents the
contribution from the @xmath -eigenspaces, and @xmath be a @xmath matrix
representing the contribution from the @xmath -eigenspaces.

Case 1: @xmath

In this case we will prove that in every metaboliser there will be a
vector which has an odd number of zero entries. By Condition (1) the
corresponding twisted Alexander polynomial cannot factorise.

We can write @xmath where @xmath is a @xmath matrix. If there are an
even number of non-zero entries in any row of @xmath , then the row in
@xmath has an odd number of non-zero entries and we are done. So suppose
that every row of @xmath has an odd number of non-zero entries. Now,
@xmath has more rows than columns, so there is a linear combination of
the rows which is zero. Say @xmath (mod @xmath ). If an odd number of
the @xmath are non-zero, then @xmath is an odd vector.

So assume that an even number of the @xmath are non-zero. Choose @xmath
, and then a non-zero @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a vector with an odd number of non-zero entries. (This is because
there is an even number of non-zero values among the first @xmath
entries, and an odd number of non-zero entries coming from the last
@xmath entries because we assumed that the rows of @xmath all had an odd
number of non-zero entries.)

Case 2: @xmath

In this case both @xmath and @xmath are @xmath matrices. Write @xmath
where @xmath is a change of basis matrix (i.e. row operations) and
@xmath is a permutation matrix (i.e. column interchanges). Without loss
of generality, we may assume that @xmath is the identity matrix. We may
also assume that @xmath is non-singular, since if it weren’t, we would
be able to use the argument detailed in the first case to obtain an odd
vector.

Now, whatever permutations we do to the matrix @xmath , we must also do
to the matrix @xmath . Write @xmath .

Notice that @xmath so @xmath , and similarly for @xmath . The linking
form relating @xmath to @xmath is therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and because @xmath and @xmath represent elements of a metaboliser we
have @xmath (mod @xmath ). This means that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Rearranging gives us that @xmath . So @xmath . We may assume that @xmath
is non-singular, since if it weren’t, we would again be in the previous
case and able to find an odd vector in @xmath . The matrix @xmath
represents a change of basis, so once again we may assume that it is the
identity.

To summarise, we are in the situation where @xmath and @xmath . This
means we can apply Lemma 5.3.4 to conclude that @xmath is obtained from
a diagonal matrix @xmath by permuting the columns. So write @xmath where
@xmath is a permutation matrix, and @xmath . Then

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

Since the permutation matrix @xmath is common to both @xmath and @xmath
, we may assume @xmath . So @xmath and @xmath .

Consider the top rows of @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We subtract these vectors, and notice that the character @xmath vanishes
on @xmath , whilst @xmath vanishes on @xmath . The twisted Alexander
polynomial corresponding to @xmath is thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By condition (2) of the theorem, this is assumed not to be a norm,
completing the proof. ∎

To complete our classification of @xmath -crossing knots, we will need
an extension of this theorem to decide when a connected sum of knots is
not slice. A special case of this, which we shall look at first, is
deciding when a knot minus its reverse is not slice. There do not
currently exist any general methods in the literature for proving that a
knot is not concordant to its reverse, let alone that the difference is
of infinite order in @xmath . Specific examples have been dealt with by
Kirk, Livingston and Naik [ Liv83 ] , [ Nai96 ] , [ KL99b ] using
Casson-Gordon invariants and twisted Alexander polynomials, and this
theorem can be seen as a generalisation of their methods.

The proof is almost identical to that of Theorem 5.5.1 except than an
extra condition is needed at the end.

###### Theorem 5.5.2.

The knot @xmath is of infinite order in @xmath if the following
conditions on the twisted Alexander polynomial of @xmath are satisfied:

1.  @xmath is coprime, up to norms, to both @xmath and @xmath , and none
    of these polynomials are themselves norms.

2.  @xmath for any @xmath

3.  @xmath for any @xmath .

###### Proof.

We want to show that @xmath is not slice for any @xmath . This means
that for every metaboliser, we need to find a character for which the
corresponding twisted Alexander polynomial does not factorise. Any
invariant metaboliser will be spanned by eigenvectors. Let @xmath be a
@xmath matrix which represents the contribution from the @xmath
-eigenspaces, and @xmath be a @xmath matrix representing the
contribution from the @xmath -eigenspaces.

The first part of the proof of this theorem is identical in every way to
that of Theorem 5.5.1 , up until the following line, where it begins to
differ.

We have @xmath and @xmath where @xmath is a diagonal matrix.

Consider the top rows of @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have two cases to consider.

In the first case, the columns corresponding to the non-zero entries are
from different knots; i.e. one is from @xmath and the other is from
@xmath . In this case, the twisted polynomial corresponding to @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By condition (2) of the theorem, this is assumed not to be a norm.

In the second case, the two non-zero columns represent different copies
of the same knot. In this case we subtract the two vectors, and the
twisted Alexander polynomial corresponding to @xmath is (as explained in
the previous proof)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By condition (3) of the theorem, this is also assumed not to be a norm,
completing the proof. ∎

Let @xmath now be a connected sum of knots, each of which has the same
condition on the @xmath -fold branched cover for some prime @xmath ;
that is, let @xmath with @xmath for some prime @xmath , some prime
@xmath and for every @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are eigenspaces of
the deck transformation. For each knot we have the maps @xmath and
@xmath as described earlier.

###### Theorem 5.5.3.

The knot @xmath is of infinite order in @xmath if the following
conditions on the twisted Alexander polynomial of the @xmath are
satisfied:

1.  @xmath is not a norm in @xmath for any @xmath .

2.  @xmath is coprime, up to norms, to @xmath and @xmath for every
    @xmath and @xmath .

3.  @xmath (or @xmath ) for any @xmath and any @xmath .

4.  @xmath for any @xmath and any @xmath .

###### Proof.

We want to show that @xmath cannot be slice for any @xmath . This means
that for every metaboliser, we need to find a character for which the
corresponding twisted Alexander polynomial does not factorise as a norm.
Any invariant metaboliser will be spanned by eigenvectors. Let @xmath be
a @xmath matrix which represents the contribution from the @xmath
-eigenspaces, and @xmath be a @xmath matrix representing the
contribution from the @xmath -eigenspaces.

Case 1: @xmath

In this case we can follow the same proof as in Theorem 5.5.1 to show
that in every metaboliser there will be a vector which has an odd number
of zero entries. By Conditions (1) and (2) the corresponding twisted
Alexander polynomial corresponding to this vector cannot be a norm.

Case 2: @xmath

We again follow the proof of Theorem 5.5.1 until the following line:

We have @xmath and @xmath where @xmath is a diagonal matrix. Consider
the top rows of @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have two cases to consider.

In the first case, the columns corresponding to the non-zero entries are
from different knots; say one is from @xmath and the other is from
@xmath . By condition (3) the twisted Alexander polynomial corresponding
to either @xmath or @xmath is assumed not to be a norm.

In the second case, the two non-zero columns represent different copies
of the same knot @xmath . In this case we subtract the two vectors and
the corresponding twisted Alexander polynomial is (as explained in the
proof of Theorem 5.5.1 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By condition (4) of the theorem, this is assumed not to be a norm,
completing the proof. ∎

###### Remark 5.5.4.

Using Corollary 5.2.9 we can extend Theorem 5.5.3 to include knots
@xmath in the connected sum for which @xmath (or simply @xmath ) with
the order of the @xmath coprime to @xmath .

## Chapter 6 Geometric concordance classification of @xmath-crossing
knots

In Chapter 4 we took the free abelian group @xmath generated by the
@xmath -crossing prime knots @xmath (including the distinct reverses
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath ) and in Theorem 4.5.1 found a basis for the
kernel @xmath of the map @xmath , where @xmath is the subgroup of @xmath
generated by @xmath .

We would now like to complete our investigation into the structure of
@xmath by identifying a basis for the kernel of the map @xmath .

Let us first pick out those knots which have been shown to be slice or
order @xmath by other people (see Knotinfo [ CL10 ] ). The notation
@xmath will stand for the set of elements of geometric (T @xmath
Topological) order @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It remains to look at the image under @xmath of the following set of
knots:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

###### Conjecture 6.0.1.

The image of @xmath in @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath generated by the
image under @xmath of the set @xmath .

The @xmath summand is generated by @xmath , since @xmath is itself of
order @xmath . For now we will remove @xmath from @xmath , since if we
can prove that no linear combination of the other knots in @xmath is
slice then @xmath is independent of those knots. To prove the rest of
the conjecture we need to show that all the remaining knots are of
infinite order in @xmath and that they are independent of one another.

### 6.1 Knots of infinite order

The knots in @xmath are all algebraically slice, so we will need
Casson-Gordon invariants to prove that they are not geometrically slice.
In particular, we will use twisted Alexander polynomials and the
theorems developed in Chapter 5 .

The knots @xmath and @xmath are known to be of infinite order from
KnotInfo [ CL10 ] . The other singleton knots @xmath and @xmath are
shown to be of infinite order via Theorem 5.3.6 .

Theorem 5.3.10 applies to the following knots to show that they are of
infinite order:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The twisted Alexander polynomial calculations, performed using Maple
@xmath , can be found in Appendix E . We work through a couple of
examples to illustrate how the theorem works.

###### Example 6.1.1.

Using Theorem 5.3.10 we show that @xmath is of infinite order in @xmath
. We have @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , so we choose to use the prime
@xmath . This means we do not have to compute any polynomials related to
@xmath .

Condition (1) of Theorem 5.3.10 asks us to check whether any of the
trivial twisted polynomials are norms. We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath an @xmath root of unity. Is this a norm? Write the first
factor as @xmath . Then the inverse conjugate of this is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we are reduced to deciding whether @xmath where @xmath is the
constant term in the second factor. Calculating using a program such as
Maple, we find that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus we have shown that the trivial twisted polynomials are not norms.

Condition (2) asks us to check whether any factors of @xmath for either
@xmath or @xmath are contained in any of the non-trivial polynomials.
This is clearly not the case, since @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is irreducible over @xmath .

Finally, condition (3) asks us to look at the linking forms of @xmath
and @xmath . These are @xmath (which is not a square) and @xmath (also
not a square). Since the linking forms are the same modulo squares, and
since @xmath modulo @xmath , there is no further work to be done.

###### Example 6.1.2.

As a further example to illustrate when condition (3) of Theorem 5.3.10
is necessary, consider the knot @xmath . For this knot we use the prime
@xmath , which is @xmath modulo @xmath , and we find that @xmath and
@xmath have different linking forms modulo squares. This means we have
to check whether certain Galois conjugates of @xmath and @xmath are the
same. The polynomials we are dealing with are of the form @xmath for
@xmath and @xmath for @xmath , where

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Since Galois conjugation does not change the frequency of the
coefficients in @xmath or @xmath , it is easy to see that no Galois
conjugate of @xmath can ever equal @xmath .

The knot @xmath is problematic because the twisted polynomial @xmath for
@xmath is trivial, ¹ ¹ 1 The twisted Alexander polynomial of any genus
@xmath knot is an element of @xmath , which is considered trivial. This
is because the degree of the twisted Alexander polynomial is a lower
bound for the Thurston norm [ FK08 ] , which is @xmath for a genus
@xmath knot. and so condition (3) of Theorem 5.3.10 fails to hold. The
homology of the two-fold branched cover of this knot is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the prime @xmath , we must follow the proof of Theorem 5.3.10 more
carefully and identify whether the conclusions still hold.

###### Proposition 6.1.3.

The knot @xmath is of infinite order in @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose @xmath is slice and that a basis of a metaboliser in @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath                     
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath .

Consider the truncated @xmath matrix @xmath whose rows are the @xmath
but without the final @xmath zeros. If a linear combination of these
rows is found which contains an odd number of zeros then the polynomial
@xmath will occur with odd degree as part of the corresponding twisted
Alexander polynomial of that vector, since this polynomial is a factor
of both @xmath and @xmath (but not @xmath ). The twisted polynomial can
therefore not factorise and @xmath is not slice. If such a linear
combination cannot be found, then by Lemmas 5.3.4 and 5.3.5 we can
perform row and column operations on @xmath to transform it into @xmath
, where @xmath is obtained from a diagonal matrix whose entries are
@xmath (since the linking forms of @xmath and @xmath are the same) by
permuting the columns. Each row of this new matrix (which we will call
@xmath ) gives us a twisted Alexander polynomial of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath or if @xmath then this polynomial is not a norm; the
difficulty comes if @xmath because then this polynomial is equal to
@xmath . However, it is impossible that @xmath for every row of @xmath
because that would imply that every column corresponded to the knot
@xmath , when we know that only half the columns do. We can thus deduce
that there is a row which corresponds to a twisted polynomial that is
not a norm, finishing the proof that @xmath cannot be slice. ∎

###### Remark 6.1.4.

This proof can be adapted to work for any knot @xmath which satisfies
all the conditions of Theorem 5.3.10 except that one constituent knot
has a @xmath which is a norm. In fact, a more careful analysis should
reveal how many of the constituent knots need not satisfy condition (3)
before the theorem fails.

Finally, the knots @xmath and @xmath cannot be shown to be of infinite
order by the @xmath -fold branched cover, so we must look to higher
covers and use Theorem 5.5.2 . This applies to our two knots when @xmath
(i.e. looking at @xmath ). For @xmath we work at the prime @xmath and
for @xmath we use the prime @xmath . What are @xmath and @xmath in these
cases, and why are there only two relevant eigenvalues when in principle
there could be four? The following theorem, proved by Fox [ Fox70 ,
Theorem 1] and also restated by Hartley [ Har83 , 1.7] , answers these
questions.

###### Theorem 6.1.5.

Let @xmath be a knot and suppose that @xmath divides @xmath and that
@xmath is an element of order @xmath in @xmath . Suppose also that
@xmath with the @xmath being different eigenspaces of the deck
transformation. Then @xmath is one of the eigenspaces in this sum if and
only if @xmath divides @xmath .

In particular, if @xmath is an eigenspace of the deck transformation
then so is @xmath since @xmath (up to a factor of @xmath ). Thus @xmath
in @xmath .

For @xmath there are four @xmath roots of unity in @xmath : @xmath .
However, only @xmath and @xmath are roots of the Alexander polynomial
modulo @xmath . (And indeed they are inverses of each other modulo
@xmath .) For @xmath there are also four @xmath roots of unity in @xmath
: @xmath . Only @xmath and @xmath are roots of the Alexander polynomial
modulo @xmath .

The prime @xmath is a rather large one: for condition (3) of Theorem
5.5.2 there are potentially @xmath twisted polynomials that need to be
checked. Thankfully, many of them turn out to be the same via the action
of the deck transformation @xmath .

###### Lemma 6.1.6.

Let @xmath denote the twisted Alexander polynomial @xmath , where @xmath
and @xmath are explained at the beginning of Section 5.5 . Then the
polynomial @xmath is equal to @xmath for each @xmath .

###### Proof.

For any map @xmath , the twisted Alexander polynomial @xmath is
equivalent to @xmath , where @xmath is the deck transformation of @xmath
.

An element in @xmath may be written as @xmath for some @xmath , where
@xmath and @xmath are @xmath - and @xmath - eigenvectors respectively.
This means that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

because @xmath and @xmath by the definition of @xmath and @xmath being
eigenvectors. Applying the deck transformation repeatedly gives the
result. ∎

Continuing with the same notation as in Lemma 6.1.6 , we may consider
the polynomials @xmath as living in the projective space of @xmath .
This is because @xmath is the same polynomial as @xmath up to Galois
conjugation, for any @xmath . This means there are @xmath different
polynomials in our space, a priori : @xmath . However, we also have an
action on this group, namely, multiplication of the first entry by
@xmath and multiplication of the second entry by @xmath . (Notice that
since @xmath we have @xmath , and the action of the group is equivalent
to multiplying the second entry by @xmath .) Orbits of this action,
which are of order @xmath since @xmath (mod @xmath ), give us the same
polynomial. This means there are only @xmath potential different
polynomials to be checked for condition (3) of Theorem 5.5.2 . In fact,
we can cut this down by a further factor of two, since we are only
interested in checking whether @xmath , so we only have to check the
polynomials where the second factor is a (negative) square. (The action
of the group preserves squares in the second factor.)

In the case of @xmath we have @xmath and @xmath , so for condition (3)
there is only one polynomial to be checked against @xmath (up to Galois
conjugates), namely @xmath . We must also check that @xmath up to Galois
conjugates. These conditions are satisfied, and we give the relevant
polynomials in Appendix E . For @xmath we have @xmath and @xmath , so
there are @xmath polynomials to check for condition (3). Since @xmath
(mod 4), one of these polynomials is actually @xmath (when @xmath ), so
we must remember to check that @xmath . (They aren’t equal!) It would be
impractical to write out all of these polynomials (each coefficient of a
power of @xmath has @xmath terms!) so instead we look at the coefficient
of @xmath only. This coefficient is a polynomial in @xmath , where
@xmath is a @xmath root of unity. In Appendix E we give the frequency of
the coefficients of the @xmath ; for example, in the polynomial @xmath
we see that @xmath occurs as a coefficient of the @xmath @xmath times.
Since Galois conjugation does not change these frequencies, it is
possible to see that all the required polynomials are different from
@xmath .

### 6.2 Linear independence

Consider the knot

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

###### Conjecture 6.2.1.

@xmath is slice if and only if @xmath for all @xmath .

The method of proof will involve identifying primes in @xmath which only
occur in the homology of the branched covers of very few of the
constituent knots. The problem will then be reduced to a series of
independence proofs involving only two or three knots at a time.

###### Notation.

Let @xmath denote the knot whose coefficient is @xmath in the sum of
knots making up @xmath .

We start by identifying primes which only occur in @xmath for a single
@xmath . Since we know that all the @xmath are of infinite order, the
coefficients of these ‘singleton’ knots must be zero.

  Prime        Coefficient which is zero
  ------------ ---------------------------
  @xmath       @xmath
  @xmath       @xmath
  @xmath       @xmath
  @xmath       @xmath
  @xmath       @xmath
  @xmath       @xmath
  ( @xmath )   ( @xmath )

The last coefficient is in brackets because it is for the knot @xmath ,
which cannot be shown to be of infinite order using the @xmath -fold
cover. We shall ignore this knot for now, but keep it in mind to deal
with later.

Here follows a table of the other coefficients with the primes we will
use to attack them.

  Prime        Coefficients
  ------------ --------------------------
  @xmath       @xmath , @xmath
  @xmath       @xmath , @xmath
  ( @xmath )   ( @xmath , @xmath )
  @xmath       @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
  @xmath       @xmath , @xmath , @xmath

Again, the prime which is bracketed refers to the knot @xmath which we
know cannot be dealt with using the @xmath -fold cover, so we will put
it to one side for the moment. For @xmath there is a problem with @xmath
being trivial, but a combination of Theorem 5.3.10 and the techniques of
Proposition 6.1.3 serve to deal with it and prove that @xmath . For
@xmath , Theorem 5.3.10 suffices to prove that the corresponding
coefficients are all zero.

The remaining coefficients are @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,
each of them appearing non-trivially at the primes @xmath and @xmath .
When @xmath there is a problem with @xmath because @xmath . When @xmath
there is also a problem because in @xmath there are summands of @xmath
and @xmath . Since we cannot make further progress with the @xmath -fold
branched cover, we shall instead study the higher covers and attempt to
make use of Theorem 5.5.3 .

Let

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and let us look at @xmath for various @xmath . Recall that in order to
apply Theorem 5.5.3 we need to find primes @xmath dividing the order of
@xmath such that @xmath divides @xmath .

When @xmath , the primes @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath divide the
order of @xmath , but none of these have the property that @xmath
divides @xmath .

When @xmath we have more luck, since the primes dividing @xmath are
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . But @xmath and this situation is not
covered by Theorem 5.5.3 , while at the prime @xmath the twisted
Alexander polynomials of @xmath do not satisfy the theorem’s
requirements. In particular, the twisted polynomials for @xmath and
@xmath are trivial and @xmath . However, the prime @xmath is a success.
The twisted polynomials for @xmath satisfy the conditions of Theorem
5.5.3 and so we may conclude that if @xmath is slice then @xmath .

Moving on to @xmath , the primes dividing @xmath are @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . Unfortunately @xmath does not divide @xmath , and again we have
the problem that @xmath so the prime @xmath is out of the question. The
prime @xmath is a good one because @xmath divides @xmath , but the
difficulty here is in the sheer amount of computation involved in
checking the conditions of Theorem 5.5.3 . Using the analysis from
Section 6.1 we see that there are @xmath polynomials to be checked for
condition @xmath of the theorem.

In fact, @xmath appears to always have a four-fold summand in the
homology of its branched covers, whilst the homology of the covers of
@xmath never splits into the requisite eigenspaces. It seems that we are
once again stuck, so we shall go back to studying @xmath and see if we
can find a way to use twisted Alexander polynomials when there are
different powers of a prime involved.

### 6.3 Combining prime powers

How can we combine the theorems in Chapter 5 to determine the sliceness
of a composite knot where different powers of a prime occur in the
homologies of @xmath of different component knots? For example, how can
we tell if the knot @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath , is slice? Let us
take this very simple example and investigate what a metaboliser of
@xmath would look like.

Suppose that @xmath is slice. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so a matrix @xmath representing a metaboliser will have @xmath columns.
The first @xmath columns will have entries in @xmath and the last @xmath
columns will have entries in @xmath . Some number of the rows, say
@xmath , will be of order @xmath , with the rest, @xmath , of order
@xmath . The order of the homology is @xmath , so the order of the
metaboliser is @xmath . We must therefore have the relation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So far, we have a picture of @xmath which looks like this:

(There are @xmath rows above the first horizontal line and @xmath rows
beneath it; the entries to the left of the vertical double line are in
@xmath whilst those to the right are in @xmath .)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By the definition of a metaboliser, the linking pairing between any pair
of rows must be zero in @xmath . Let @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us assume (currently without loss of generality) that @xmath and
@xmath . For @xmath to be an integer we must have that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

It follows that @xmath must be zero modulo @xmath . A corresponding
condition holds for the dot product of any two rows of @xmath .

In the @xmath rows of order @xmath , the dot product of the @xmath -part
of the rows is zero modulo @xmath . For these rows, it follows that
@xmath must be zero modulo @xmath (and similarly for the dot product
between any two of the order @xmath rows).

What about the dot product between an order @xmath row and an order
@xmath row? Let us split the @xmath rows of order @xmath into the @xmath
rows that have a non-trivial @xmath part and the @xmath rows that have a
trivial @xmath part. The bottom @xmath rows clearly need to have dot
product zero (modulo @xmath ) with the top @xmath rows. In the middle
@xmath rows, the @xmath -entries are all multiples of @xmath . If we
divide these entries by @xmath , Equation 6.1 tells us that the
resulting dot product between a @xmath row and a modified @xmath row is
zero modulo @xmath .

Here is a picture of our metaboliser @xmath where the middle @xmath rows
have had their @xmath entries divided by @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To summarise the relations between rows, we have

1.  The top left block of @xmath rows have dot product zero modulo
    @xmath amongst themselves.

2.  The bottom right block of @xmath rows have dot product zero modulo
    @xmath between themselves and any other row in the matrix. I.e.
    @xmath and @xmath modulo @xmath .

3.  The middle block of @xmath rows have dot product zero modulo @xmath
    with any other row in the matrix (but not necessarily themselves).

where “left” and “right” refer to @xmath and @xmath entries
respectively.

###### Example 6.3.1.

An example matrix which satisfies all these conditions is (before
division by 3)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Now let us try to find some ‘odd’ vectors in @xmath so that we get a
slice obstruction from the twisted Alexander polynomials. In what
follows, all entries of @xmath have been mapped into @xmath .

If @xmath then the vector @xmath has zero dot product with any row of
@xmath , giving us the twisted Alexander polynomial condition @xmath .

If @xmath , then condition (1) means that we can use Lemma 5.3.5 to find
a linear combination of rows which contains an odd number of zeros (on
the ‘left’ of @xmath ). If @xmath then this again obstructs @xmath from
being slice.

If @xmath then condition (3) means that we can use Lemma 5.3.5 to find a
linear combination of rows which contains an odd number of zeros (on the
‘right’ of @xmath ). If @xmath then this obstructs @xmath from being
slice.

Finally, we are in the situation where @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath
, we have @xmath . If we can find an odd row in the middle @xmath rows,
then we are done since these rows have zero dot product with any other
row. The problem is that we do not have a dot product condition between
any of the @xmath rows, so we cannot use any variant of Lemma 5.3.5 .

At this point we are stuck and cannot complete the proof of the
conjecture. In future work, perhaps Casson-Gordon signatures could be
combined with twisted Alexander polynomials to eliminate the final case
from consideration.

### 6.4 Summary

The analysis of this chapter leaves us still with the conjecture that we
had at the start; namely:

###### Conjecture 6.4.1.

A basis for the kernel of the map @xmath is the union of the independent
sets @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , where

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

In order to prove this conjecture, it remains to show that the knots
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are linearly independent in
@xmath .

###### Remark 6.4.2.

If this conjecture holds, then the image of @xmath in @xmath is
isomorphic to @xmath .

## Chapter 7 Examples

In Chapters 4 and 6 we analysed the concordance relations of the knots
in @xmath , that is, the prime knots with up to 9 crossings. Given that
Conjecture 6.4.1 is correct, we know where all the algebraic and
geometrical torsion in @xmath comes from and we know which knots are
independent of each other in @xmath . But what can we do with all this
information?

There are two questions that our classification is designed to answer:

1.  Given a knot @xmath which is a linear combination of knots in @xmath
    , what are its algebraic and topological concordance orders?

2.  Suppose that there is a mystery knot @xmath which we are told is a
    linear combination of knots in @xmath . How do we determine what
    this linear combination is (up to concordance)?

In the first case, the final classification itself is sufficient to
answer this question for any knot @xmath . For the second question, we
will need not only the classification but all the calculations of
invariants which were done along the way. To illustrate the methods that
one would need to answer these questions, we shall work with a specific
test knot

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 7.1 Question 1: Finding the concordance order of @xmath

To find the concordance order of @xmath , we first re-write the knot in
terms of our basis.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These knots are independent (in the sense described in previous
chapters) and so the concordance order of @xmath is the maximum of the
concordance orders of these knots. (Strictly speaking it is the least
common multiple, but since the only possible orders are @xmath or @xmath
this corresponds to the maximum.) Since @xmath has infinite order, both
in @xmath and @xmath , then so does @xmath .

As a further example, let us take @xmath . We know that @xmath has both
algebraic and topological order 2 (so @xmath ) whilst @xmath is
algebraically of order @xmath and topologically of infinite order. Thus
@xmath is algebraically of order @xmath and topologically of infinite
order.

We have made a website which implements this method, which can be found
at

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

It will output the algebraic and geometric concordance orders of any
linear combination of prime 9-crossing knots, as well as giving a
breakdown of the knot in terms of the basis knots from Chapter 6 .

### 7.2 Question 2: Finding a decomposition of @xmath in terms of
elements of @xmath

Henceforth we will assume that we do not know what @xmath is (for
example, we have only some unrecognisable knot diagram). All that we can
do is ask for the values of certain invariants. We will first try to
identify the knots in the decomposition which are non-trivial in @xmath
, and then to find component knots which are non-trivial in @xmath .
Notice that, in the eyes of the concordance group @xmath , our knot
@xmath is equivalent to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

because @xmath is amphicheiral and @xmath is slice. We will use this
version of the knot for all invariants which follow.

#### 7.2.1 Signatures

To identify the components of @xmath which have infinite order we will
use the @xmath -signatures as detailed in Section 4.1 . The @xmath
-signatures of every knot were originally evaluated at @xmath different
values, but only @xmath of these values are needed to identify the
infinite order knots.

If we evaluate the @xmath -signature of @xmath at each of the relevant
@xmath values of @xmath , we find that it is non-zero at @xmath , which
correspond to the knots @xmath and @xmath respectively. (See Appendix A
.) A closer analysis of the signature tells us the coefficients of these
knots: for example, @xmath has signature @xmath at @xmath , but when we
evaluate @xmath at @xmath we get @xmath , so the coefficient of @xmath
must be @xmath . After this analysis we know that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a knot of finite order in @xmath .

#### 7.2.2 The Alexander Polynomial

The Alexander polynomial of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will denote the (unique) factors of this polynomial by the letters
@xmath , starting with @xmath .

There are two polynomials here which are not accounted for by the knot
@xmath : namely @xmath and @xmath . Out of the knots in @xmath and
@xmath , there is exactly one knot corresponding to each polynomial. The
knot with Alexander polynomial @xmath is @xmath and the knot with
Alexander polynomial @xmath is @xmath . We now know that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath , where @xmath is a finite-order knot whose Alexander
polynomial factorises as @xmath .

#### 7.2.3 Witt groups for primes @xmath mod 4

We will examine the image of @xmath in @xmath for primes congruent to 3
mod 4 which divide @xmath . These primes correspond to the polynomials
@xmath and @xmath . The results are given in the following table.

  Polynomial        @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  ----------------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
  Prime @xmath      3        11       31       3        23
  Image in @xmath   1        1        1        3        1

We now apply a similar analysis to the knot @xmath .

  Polynomial        @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  ----------------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
  Prime @xmath      3        11       31       3        23
  Image in @xmath   3        1        1        @xmath   @xmath

It is easy to see that polynomial @xmath is not giving us the right
invariant. The knot @xmath must therefore contain a component which has
the image @xmath and zero in the Witt groups corresponding to the other
primes. The knots in @xmath and @xmath which satisfy this condition and
whose Alexander polynomial contains a factor @xmath are @xmath and
@xmath . However, @xmath and @xmath both contain factors with odd
exponent in their Alexander polynomials which do not divide @xmath , so
this rules them out.

Comparing images in @xmath for the polynomial @xmath gives us the
information that we should take @xmath and not @xmath . Our updated
knowledge of @xmath is thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath .

#### 7.2.4 Witt groups for primes @xmath mod 4

We will examine the image of @xmath in @xmath for primes congruent to 1
mod 4 which divide @xmath . These primes correspond to the polynomials
@xmath and @xmath . The results are given in the following table.

  ----------------- -------- --------
  Polynomial        @xmath   @xmath
  Prime @xmath      29       13
  Image in @xmath   (0,1)    (0,1)
  ----------------- -------- --------

The image of @xmath is

  ----------------- -------- --------
  Polynomial        @xmath   @xmath
  Prime @xmath      29       13
  Image in @xmath   (0,1)    (0,1)
  ----------------- -------- --------

Thus our current knowledge of @xmath is the best that we can do from
looking at the algebraic concordance group. It means that @xmath must be
algebraically slice.

#### 7.2.5 Twisted Alexander polynomials

The final tool at our disposal for finding out what knot @xmath is, up
to concordance, is the twisted Alexander polynomial. Let us take a quick
recap of what we know about our knot so far.

Our original knot @xmath has

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Our current estimate of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whose homology is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Any algebraically slice knots forming @xmath must be detectable at the
primes @xmath and @xmath .

There is only one algebraically slice knot which is nontrivial at the
prime @xmath : this is @xmath . Since there is only one summand of
@xmath in @xmath , this means that the coefficient of @xmath in @xmath
is @xmath , so @xmath .

For the prime @xmath there is only a single summand in @xmath , so there
can only be a single knot to cause it. We may calculate a non-trivial
twisted Alexander polynomial corresponding to this knot and this prime.
If we do this, we will find that it gives a different,
non-Galois-conjugate, polynomial to @xmath . The component @xmath in
@xmath is therefore incorrect. The only algebraically slice knot which
is non-trivial at the prime @xmath is @xmath . If we let @xmath , then
we find that we indeed get the correct twisted Alexander polynomial.

Continuing this method, there is only one @xmath summand in @xmath so it
must be generated by only one knot. The possible @xmath algebraically
slice knots are @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . There is no combination of
these which would produce a single @xmath summand, from which we
conclude that @xmath .

There are three @xmath summands, only one of which is accounted for by
@xmath . The algebraically slice knots which may account for this are
@xmath and @xmath . The knot @xmath is of infinite order and this is
detected by the twisted Alexander polynomial, whilst @xmath is
amphicheiral and has twisted Alexander polynomials which are Galois
conjugates of each other. In principle it should be possible to compute
the twisted Alexander polynomials for @xmath and decide which case we
are in, though in practice our current Maple program gets stuck because
the homology has the wrong form. That is, the homology of @xmath will
always be a direct double for any knot @xmath , precluding the use of
the @xmath -fold cover, whilst higher covers will have a quadruple
summand.

At the prime @xmath there are two possible algebraically slice knots
which could be part of @xmath . These are @xmath and @xmath . However,
the second of these two knots has non-trivial twisted Alexander
polynomials at the prime @xmath , and this prime does not divide the
homology of @xmath . Both @xmath and @xmath are possibilities since they
preserve the @xmath summand. It should be possible to detect the
presence (or, in this case, absence) of an @xmath component using
twisted Alexander polynomials, since the @xmath twisted polynomials are
(Galois-) distinct from the @xmath twisted polynomials. Unfortunately,
as we have already lamented, the program which currently exists cannot
compute twisted polynomials for composite knots where two or more
constituent knots have the same primes dividing the homology of their
branched covers.

Up to this point, we have determined that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The only part of the homology of @xmath not accounted for is a factor
@xmath . The algebraically slice knots whose @xmath has order a power of
@xmath are @xmath and @xmath . These knots all happen to be slice, so up
to concordance is it impossible to distinguish them. However, we can say
a little more than that. The knots @xmath and @xmath would introduce a
@xmath summand to the homology, whilst @xmath and @xmath would both
introduce a @xmath summand. Since the factor we are looking for is
@xmath , it must therefore come from the knot @xmath .

Thus we have recovered the fact that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 7.2.6 Limitations

Aside from the problem of computing twisted Alexander polynomials for
composite knots, there are also limitations of this algorithm if we stop
restricting ourselves to just the @xmath -crossings knots. For example,
if a generic knot were given which claimed to be concordant to a linear
combination of @xmath -crossing prime knots, there is no guarantee that
we could find this linear combination. For example, suppose that a knot
in the sum were concordant to @xmath , but the homology of its 2-fold
branched cover were @xmath . The twisted Alexander polynomial theorems
in Chapter 5 cannot deal with this sort of homology, so we would be
stuck.

## Chapter 8 Unknown concordance orders

The website KnotInfo ( http://www.indiana.edu/~knotinfo/ ) tabulates all
known knot invariants for prime knots of up to 12 crossings. The
algebraic concordance order is known for every such knot, but there are
many unknown values for the smooth and topological concordance orders.
The smallest knot with unknown (topological) concordance order is @xmath
, whilst @xmath is the only knot which has neither been proven to be
slice or not slice. The most recent list of unknown values, as of the
writing of this thesis, may be found in [ CL09 ] .

In this chapter we apply the theorems from Chapter 5 to each of the
@xmath knots of unknown concordance order. If the conditions of the
theorems hold then these knots are of infinite order (smoothly and
topologically). If the conditions do not hold, we have investigated
whether the knots have finite order and for some knots have found that
this is indeed the case. There remain only two knots for which the
concordance order is unknown. The main difficulty in this exercise is
showing when a knot is of finite order, since the only method of doing
this is to find a slice movie for the knot (see Section 2.1.1 ). When
the knots involved have @xmath or more crossings, showing that they are
of order @xmath means manipulating a knot diagram which has over @xmath
crossings. The only shortcut available is when a knot happens to be
concordant to a smaller knot of order @xmath (such as the Figure Eight
knot @xmath ), but even proving this concordance is not always easy.

### 8.1 Finding the concordance orders of prime knots up to 12 crossings

There are @xmath knots listed as having unknown topological concordance
order in Knotinfo. ( @xmath of these also have unknown smooth
concordance order.) Of these, we can immediately find the concordance
orders of nine of them because of previously existing theorems. The knot
@xmath is slice because it has Alexander polynomial @xmath [ FQ90 ,
11.7B] . The knots @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath each have a determinant which factors into primes that
are congruent to @xmath modulo @xmath (with odd powers), so by Theorem
5.4.1 they are of infinite order. The knot @xmath is known to be fully
amphicheiral, so is therefore of order 2.

To do our first real batch of analysis we will use Theorem 5.3.6 , which
we will restate here.

###### Theorem 5.3.6.

Suppose that we have a knot @xmath where @xmath for some prime @xmath
mod @xmath , where the order of @xmath is coprime to @xmath . Let @xmath
be the trivial map and @xmath be @xmath . Construct @xmath as in Section
5.2 . Then @xmath is of infinite order if it satisfies the following
conditions:

1.  @xmath is not a norm.

2.  There is a non-trivial irreducible factor @xmath of @xmath for which
    @xmath is not a factor of @xmath for any @xmath .

3.  @xmath , where @xmath (mod @xmath ).

This theorem applies to all the remaining @xmath knots of unknown
concordance order with the exception of the following:

-    Condition (1) not satisfied: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath .

-    Condition (3) not satisfied: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

-    Conditions (1), (2) and (3) not satisfied: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
    , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

-   @xmath is not of the form @xmath : @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
    , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath .

This is a total of @xmath knots, meaning that the theorem has an 84%
success rate.

We will first address those knots for which condition (1) was not
satisfied; namely those knots for which @xmath was a norm. This is
exactly the case that Theorem 5.3.8 was designed for.

###### Theorem 5.3.8.

Suppose that we have a knot @xmath where @xmath for some prime @xmath
mod @xmath , where the order of @xmath is coprime to @xmath . Let @xmath
be the trivial map and @xmath be @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is a norm.
Then @xmath is of infinite order if it satisfies the following
condition:

-   @xmath is coprime, up to norms in @xmath , to @xmath for all @xmath
    , @xmath .

The knots @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath do satisfy the
conditions of this theorem and are therefore all of infinite order. This
brings us down to @xmath knots of unknown concordance order.

To attack the knots which have the ‘wrong’ kind of homology, we need
Theorem 5.4.2 .

###### Theorem 5.4.2.

Suppose that we have a knot @xmath where @xmath for some prime @xmath ,
where the order of @xmath is coprime to @xmath . Let @xmath be the
trivial map and @xmath be @xmath (mod @xmath ). Construct @xmath as in
Section 5.2 . Then @xmath is of infinite order if it satisfies the
following conditions:

1.  If @xmath , @xmath is not a norm.

2.  @xmath is not a norm.

3.  @xmath is coprime, up to norms, to @xmath for all @xmath .

4.  If @xmath (mod @xmath ) then @xmath , where @xmath (mod @xmath ).

Alternatively, if @xmath is a norm, conditions (2)-(4) may be replaced
by

1.  @xmath is coprime, up to norms, to @xmath for any @xmath , @xmath .

This theorem applies to the following @xmath knots to show that they are
of infinite order: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

Of the remaining @xmath knots, the following problems with the theorem
arise:

-    Condition (1) not satisfied, so @xmath : @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

-    Condition (4) not satisfied, so @xmath : @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

-    Both @xmath and @xmath are norms: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
    @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

-   @xmath is not of the form @xmath : @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
    , @xmath , @xmath .

The first bullet point is interesting because here we have examples
where neither @xmath nor @xmath are norms, but their product is a norm.
At this point it seemed worth investigating these knots to see if any of
them were of finite order in @xmath . It turned out that @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath were all of order @xmath , meaning that condition (1) of
Theorem 5.4.2 is a necessary one. Upon further investigation, we also
found that @xmath and @xmath are elements of order @xmath ; likewise the
knots @xmath , @xmath and @xmath have been proved to be of order @xmath
by Kate Kearney (in unpublished work). None of these knots are either
positive or negative amphicheiral, but they are concordant to the
Figure-8 knot @xmath .

We now have @xmath knots of unknown concordance order. Clearly no
further progress (using the existing theorems) can be made using the
@xmath -fold branched cover of the knots, so it is time to move on to
information contained within the higher branched covers.

The setup for Theorem 5.5.1 is as follows. Take a knot @xmath with
@xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are the eigenspaces of the deck
transformation. Let @xmath be an @xmath -eigenvector (i.e. @xmath ) and
@xmath be a @xmath -eigenvector. Define @xmath by @xmath and @xmath .
Similarly, @xmath is defined by @xmath and @xmath .

###### Theorem 5.5.1.

The knot @xmath is of infinite order in @xmath if the following
conditions on the twisted Alexander polynomial of @xmath are satisfied:

1.  @xmath is coprime, up to norms, to both @xmath and @xmath , and
    @xmath is not a norm.

2.  @xmath for any @xmath .

Let us investigate whether we can apply this theorem to any of our
remaining @xmath knots.

First we will look at the information contained in the @xmath -fold
branched cover. The conditions in the theorem turn out to apply to only
two of the remaining knots: @xmath and @xmath . However, there are
another three knots whose only problem is that @xmath is a norm: @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath . In the same way that Theorems 5.3.6 and 5.4.2 had
an alternative version in the case of @xmath being a norm, so does
Theorem 5.5.1 . The proof still holds if we replace assumption (1) with

1.  @xmath and @xmath are not norms and are coprime over @xmath (up to
    norms) to @xmath .

This assumption ensures that if there is an ‘odd’ vector in @xmath or
@xmath (see the proof of Theorem 5.5.1 for details) then the
corresponding twisted Alexander polynomial is not a norm. The three
knots @xmath , @xmath and @xmath do satisfy this condition, so we know
they are of infinite order.

Of the remaining @xmath knots there are examples of both condition (1)
(and ( @xmath )) failing ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
) and condition (2) failing ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ) as
well as knots whose homology does not split into two eigenspaces (
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ).

Moving on to yet higher order covers, the infinite order of @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath is detected by the @xmath -fold cover, whilst @xmath
is proved to be of infinite order via the @xmath -fold cover.
Unfortunately the knot @xmath has incredibly large primes in the
homology of its covers: @xmath for the @xmath -fold cover, @xmath for
the @xmath -fold cover and @xmath for the @xmath -fold cover. It is not
possible to compute the corresponding twisted Alexander polynomials
using the computing resources that we have had access to during this
thesis. It is therefore difficult to conjecture whether @xmath will turn
out to be of infinite order or finite order.

The knots @xmath , @xmath and @xmath all turn out to be of order @xmath
, concordant to the amphicheiral knot @xmath . The knots @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath are also of order @xmath , concordant to the
amphicheiral knot @xmath .

The remaining knot @xmath seems likely to be of finite order, since it
fails to satisfy the conditions of each of the relevant theorems in some
way. It is still unknown whether or not @xmath is slice.

### 8.2 Summary

Of the @xmath prime knots of unknown concordance order (i.e. ignoring
the knots listed at the beginning of the chapter which can be dealt with
using existing theorems), they can all be proven to be of infinite order
in @xmath by using twisted Alexander polynomials computed from the
@xmath -fold branched cover, with the exception of the following:

-   @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are shown to be of
    infinite order via their @xmath -fold covers.

-   @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are shown to be of infinite order via
    their @xmath -fold covers.

-   @xmath is shown to be of infinite order via its @xmath -fold cover.

-   @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are all of order @xmath
    , concordant to the Figure Eight knot @xmath .

-   @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are all of order @xmath , concordant to
    the knot @xmath .

-   @xmath remains of unknown order, but is suspected to be finite order
    and possibly slice.

-   @xmath remains of unknown order, and there are no suspicions as to
    whether it is of finite or infinite order in @xmath .

In summary, the theorems given in Chapter 5 have a 99% success rate in
detecting knots of infinite order.

Slice movies of the finite order knots can be found in Appendix F .

## Chapter 9 Torus signatures

### 9.1 Introduction

In this chapter we find a formula for the @xmath signature of a @xmath
torus knot, which is the integral of the @xmath -signatures over the
unit circle. We then apply this to a theorem of Cochran, Orr and
Teichner to prove that the @xmath -twisted doubles of the unknot, @xmath
, are not slice. This is a new proof of the result first proved by
Casson and Gordon.

###### Note.

It has been drawn to our attention that the main theorem of this
chapter, Theorem 9.3.3 , was first proved in @xmath by Robion Kirby and
Paul Melvin [ KM94 ] using essentially the same method presented here.
The theorem has also recently been reproved using different techniques
by Maciej Borodzik [ Bor09 ] .

Before we recall the definition of @xmath -signatures, let us first
motivate the subject with an elementary but difficult problem in number
theory. Suppose we have two coprime integers, @xmath and @xmath ,
together with another (positive) integer @xmath which is neither a
multiple of @xmath nor of @xmath . Write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we ask the question:

“Is @xmath positive or negative?”

Clearly, given any particular @xmath and @xmath , the answer is easy to
work out, so the question is whether there is an (explicit) formula
which could anticipate the answer. Let us define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and let us study the sum

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as @xmath varies between @xmath and @xmath . It would not be an
unreasonable first guess to suggest that @xmath is @xmath for the first
@xmath values of @xmath , and @xmath for the other half of the values.
Indeed, this is true when @xmath (see the nice ‘V’ shape in Figure
9.1(a) ). But if we investigate other values of @xmath and @xmath then
strange ‘wiggles’ in the graph of @xmath start appearing (see Figures
9.1(b) , 9.1(c) and 9.1(d) ). The pattern of wiggles seems different for
every @xmath and @xmath : could there be an underlying principle to
explain them?

It turns out that the clue to finding the pattern is to realise that the
function @xmath is the jump function of the @xmath -signature of a
@xmath torus knot. What does this mean? A torus knot @xmath is a knot
which lives on the boundary of a torus, wrapping @xmath times around the
meridian and @xmath times around the longitude. (If @xmath and @xmath
are not coprime then @xmath is a link rather than a knot.) Given a
non-singular Seifert matrix @xmath for @xmath and a unit complex number
@xmath , the @xmath -signature @xmath is the sum of the signs of the
eigenvalues of the hermitian matrix

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is independent of the choice of Seifert matrix. The @xmath
-signature is an integer-valued function that is continuous (and
therefore constant) everywhere except at the unit roots of the Alexander
polynomial @xmath . At these points, the signature ‘jumps’, with the
value of the jump at @xmath being given by @xmath .

The @xmath -signature has proved to be useful in a variety of areas of
mathematics; see Stoimenow’s paper [ Sto05 ] to get a comprehensive
list, including applications to unknotting numbers of knots, Vassiliev
invariants and algebraic functions on projective spaces. The jump
function in particular appears to be related to the Jones polynomial [
Gar03 ] . But the most important use for signatures is in the study of
knot concordance.

Cochran, Orr and Teichner [ COT03 ] have recently been probing the
secrets of the concordance group @xmath using the difficult techniques
of @xmath signatures. Amazingly, it turns out that a special case of
these @xmath signatures is the integral of the @xmath -signatures over
the unit circle.

Even more amazingly, we find that despite the @xmath -signatures being
fairly unpredictable for a torus knot, the integral of the @xmath
-signatures has the following beautiful formula.

###### Theorem 9.3.3.

Let @xmath and @xmath be coprime positive integers. Then the integral of
the @xmath -signatures of the @xmath torus knot is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In this chapter we prove Theorem 9.3.3 , the reason for which is that
the result can be combined with a theorem in [ COT03 ] to recover the
old Casson-Gordon theorem that the twist knots are not slice. The hope
is that the techniques here may prove useful in investigating signatures
of other families of knots and in proving more general theorems about
the structure of the concordance group.

### 9.2 Signatures and jump functions

Let @xmath be a knot, @xmath be a Seifert matrix for @xmath of size
@xmath and @xmath be a unit complex number. We would like to define the
@xmath -signature to be the signature of @xmath . However, notice that
@xmath and @xmath where @xmath is the Alexander polynomial of @xmath .
This means that @xmath becomes degenerate at the unit roots of the
Alexander polynomial and we will need an alternative definition of the
signature at these points.

###### Definition 9.2.1.

For a unit complex number @xmath which is not a root of the Alexander
polynomial @xmath , the @xmath -signature @xmath is the signature (i.e.
the sum of the signs of the eigenvalues) of the hermitian matrix

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is a unit root of @xmath , we define @xmath to be the average
of the limit on either side.

This concept was formulated independently by Levine [ Lev69b ] and
Tristram [ Tri69 ] ; hence the @xmath -signature is sometimes called the
Levine-Tristram signature . It is a generalisation of the usual
definition of a knot signature, i.e. the signature of @xmath , which was
developed by Trotter and Murasugi [ Tro62 , Mur65 ] .

For any knot @xmath , the function @xmath is continuous as a function of
@xmath except at roots of the Alexander polynomial. Since @xmath is
integer-valued, this means that it is a step function with jumps at the
roots of @xmath .

###### Definition 9.2.2.

The jump function @xmath of a knot @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath for @xmath .

###### Lemma 9.2.3.

The jump function @xmath and the @xmath -signature @xmath have the
following properties.

1.  @xmath if @xmath is not a unit root of the Alexander polynomial of
    @xmath .

2.  In particular, @xmath and @xmath .

3.  @xmath so @xmath .

4.  @xmath if @xmath is not a root of the Alexander polynomial of @xmath
    . (Notice that this is a finite sum because only finitely many of
    the jumps are non-zero.)

We saw in Section 2.2.2 (specifically, Corollary 2.2.12 ) that the
@xmath -signatures (excepting the jump points) vanish for slice knots,
meaning they are concordance invariants. In fact, it turns out that the
integral of the @xmath -signatures, for @xmath , is a special case of a
more powerful invariant.

###### Definition 9.2.4.

An @xmath -signature (or @xmath -invariant) of a knot @xmath is a number
@xmath associated to a representation @xmath , where @xmath is the
zero-framed surgery on @xmath along @xmath and @xmath is a group.

The precise definition is complicated and may be found in [ COT03 ,
Section 5] . @xmath signatures are, in general, very difficult to
compute. However, if we pick a nice group for @xmath then magic happens
and we get an explicit formula:

###### Lemma 9.2.5.

[ COT03 , Lemma 5.4] When @xmath and @xmath is the canonical
abelianisation epimorphism, we have that @xmath , normalised so that the
circle has total length @xmath .

Henceforth we shall refer to the integral of the @xmath -signatures as
the @xmath signature of the knot. We end the section with a formula
relating the @xmath signature of a knot to its jump function.

###### Lemma 9.2.6.

Suppose that the unit roots of the Alexander polynomial of a knot @xmath
are @xmath for @xmath and @xmath . Then the @xmath signature of @xmath
is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be any unit complex number between @xmath and @xmath for
@xmath . Then we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we multiply by @xmath because that is the proportion of the unit
circle which has signature @xmath . We now use (1) and (4) of Lemma
9.2.3 to rewrite @xmath in terms of the jump function:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

###### Example 9.2.7.

To illustrate the notation in Lemma 9.2.6 we shall calculate the @xmath
signature of the knot @xmath , otherwise known as the cinquefoil knot or
the @xmath torus knot. The Alexander polynomial of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whose roots are the @xmath roots of unity that are neither @xmath roots
of unity nor @xmath . This means that the roots are @xmath where @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

Let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Computing the @xmath -signature at
these points gives us @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We can thus draw the
signature for every value on the unit circle:

We can now compute the @xmath signature to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

### 9.3 Torus knot signatures

For coprime integers @xmath and @xmath , the @xmath torus knot @xmath is
the knot lying on the surface of a torus which winds @xmath times around
the meridian and @xmath times around the longitude. If @xmath and @xmath
are not coprime, then @xmath is a link of more than one component. The
Alexander polynomial of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(A proof can be found in, for example, Lickorish [ Lic97 , pg 119] .)
The roots of this polynomial are the @xmath roots of unity that are
neither @xmath nor @xmath roots of unity. This gives us @xmath places at
which the signature function could jump, namely @xmath for @xmath with
@xmath such that @xmath is not divisible by @xmath or @xmath .

The jump functions of torus knots have been investigated by Litherland [
Lit79 ] . His result is that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Notice that if @xmath is not a multiple of @xmath or @xmath then @xmath
and @xmath cannot both be non-empty. To see this, suppose that @xmath
and @xmath . Then @xmath , and since @xmath and @xmath are coprime we
must have @xmath (mod @xmath ) and @xmath (mod @xmath ). But this forces
@xmath and @xmath , which is a contradiction. A similar argument shows
that neither @xmath nor @xmath can contain more than one element.
However, at least one of the two sets is non-empty. For, we can write
@xmath with @xmath , and if @xmath then @xmath whilst if @xmath we have
@xmath .

If @xmath is a multiple of @xmath or @xmath then @xmath . Putting these
results together gives us the following.

###### Proposition 9.3.1.

The jump function of the @xmath torus knot is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We need one more lemma before we are ready to find a formula for the
@xmath signature.

###### Lemma 9.3.2.

If @xmath and @xmath are coprime and @xmath with @xmath not a multiple
of @xmath or @xmath , then exactly one of @xmath and @xmath can be
written as @xmath for @xmath .

###### Proof.

See, for example, [ BR07 , Lemma 1.6] . ∎

###### Theorem 9.3.3.

Let @xmath and @xmath be coprime positive integers. Then the @xmath
signature of the @xmath torus knot is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Denote the jump function of the @xmath torus knot by @xmath . The
signature function at @xmath can be defined as the sum of the jump
functions up to that point (Lemma 9.2.3 ). If @xmath with @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can now use Lemma 9.2.6 to find a formula for the @xmath signature in
terms of the jump function.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.1)
              @xmath   @xmath      (9.2)
              @xmath   @xmath      (9.3)
              @xmath   @xmath      (9.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Let @xmath be the set defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Given an integer @xmath which is not a multiple of @xmath or @xmath , we
can write @xmath with @xmath . By Lemma 9.3.2 , either @xmath or @xmath
. Proposition 9.3.1 tells us that in the first case we have @xmath ,
whilst in the second case we have @xmath . If @xmath is a multiple of
@xmath or @xmath then the jump function will be zero and so it will not
contribute to the sum.

We may rewrite equation ( 9.4 ) as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There are @xmath points in @xmath , and in the paper by Mordell [ Mor51
] we find the following formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Putting these together gives us

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

∎

###### Remark 9.3.4.

That there is such a neat formula for the @xmath signature of a torus
knot is all the more surprising considering the absence of an explicit
formula for the usual signature @xmath of a torus knot. We have the
following formula due to Hirzebruch [ Hir95 ] for @xmath and @xmath odd
and coprime:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Further work was done by Brieskorn [ Bri66 ] and
Gordon/Litherland/Murasugi [ GLM81 ] , without success, and in @xmath
Borodzik and Oleszkiewicz published a proof [ BO10 ] that in fact there
can never be a rational function @xmath such that @xmath for all odd
coprime integers @xmath and @xmath .

### 9.4 Twist knots

As an important corollary, we show that the twist knots @xmath are not
slice. This was proved in the 1970s by Casson and Gordon [ CG86 ] but
the following proof, which uses a result of Cochran, Orr and Teichner,
is much shorter and simpler ¹ ¹ 1 It is also an interesting historical
point that Milnor used an early version of the @xmath -signatures to
show that an infinite number of the @xmath are independent in the
concordance group @xmath [ Mil68 ] . .

###### Definition 9.4.1.

The twist knots @xmath are the following family of knots:

[]

For example, @xmath is the trefoil, @xmath is the figure-eight knot and
@xmath is Stevedore’s knot @xmath . The knot @xmath is sometimes called
the @xmath -twisted double of the unknot .

A Seifert matrix for @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which gives the Alexander polynomial as @xmath . There is a class of
twist knots (those for which @xmath for some @xmath ) which are
algebraically slice. This means that there is a simple closed curve
@xmath on the Seifert surface @xmath such that @xmath is nontrivial in
@xmath and such that @xmath , which is the curve pushed off the Seifert
surface, has zero linking with @xmath . The consequence of this is that
all signatures and other known slice invariants vanish. The question is
then: are these knots really slice?

The following theorem shows us that one way of finding the answer is to
consider the slice properties of the curve @xmath rather than those of
the original knot. For those readers unfamiliar with the work of
Cochran, Orr and Teichner, read “ @xmath -solvable" as “having vanishing
Casson-Gordon invariant".

###### Theorem 9.4.2 ([Cot03]).

Suppose @xmath is a @xmath -solvable knot with a genus @xmath Seifert
surface @xmath . Suppose that the classical Alexander polynomial of
@xmath is non-trivial. Then there exists a homologically essential
simple closed curve @xmath on @xmath , with self-linking zero, such that
the integral over the circle of the @xmath -signature function of @xmath
(viewed as a knot) vanishes.

Thus if the @xmath -signature is non-zero for any closed curve on @xmath
with self-linking zero, then the knot cannot be @xmath -solvable and
therefore cannot be slice.

###### Corollary 9.4.3.

The twist knots @xmath are not slice unless @xmath or @xmath .

###### Proof.

The Alexander polynomial of @xmath is @xmath . If @xmath then @xmath has
distinct roots on the unit circle and an easy computation shows that the
signature is non-zero. If @xmath then @xmath is reducible if and only if
@xmath is a square. Since the Alexander polynomial of a slice knot has
the form @xmath [ FM66 ] , it follows that @xmath cannot be slice if
@xmath is not a square.

Suppose @xmath = @xmath with @xmath . Then @xmath . Using the obvious
genus @xmath Seifert surface @xmath for @xmath it can be seen that the
only simple closed curve on @xmath with self-linking zero is the @xmath
torus knot (see, for example, Kauffman [ Kau87 , Chapter VIII] ). Since
the @xmath signature for any torus knot @xmath is non-zero (except for
@xmath ) by Theorem 9.3.3 , this means that @xmath cannot be
(1.5)-solvable and therefore not slice unless @xmath or @xmath . ∎

We now apply Theorem 9.3.3 to the @xmath -twisted doubles of knots, an
example of which can be seen in Figure 9.2 .

###### Corollary 9.4.4.

Let @xmath be a knot and @xmath the @xmath -twisted double ( @xmath ) of
@xmath .

-   @xmath cannot be slice unless @xmath for some @xmath and @xmath . In
    particular, @xmath can only be slice if @xmath .

-   For any given @xmath with @xmath , there is at most one @xmath which
    can be slice.

###### Proof.

The Alexander polynomial of @xmath is once again @xmath and the same
argument as in the proof of Corollary 9.4.3 shows that @xmath is
algebraically slice if and only if @xmath for some integer @xmath .
(Notice that if @xmath then the Alexander polynomial is trivial and
@xmath is slice by Freedman’s work [ FQ90 ] .) The zero-framed curve on
the obvious Seifert surface is the connected sum of @xmath and the
@xmath torus knot, @xmath . If we denote the @xmath signature by @xmath
, we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

By Theorem 9.3.3 , @xmath can only be slice if @xmath . In particular,
if @xmath or @xmath then @xmath is the unknot and so @xmath must be zero
for @xmath to be slice. This proves (a). For (b), suppose that @xmath .
Rearranging, we get @xmath . Suppose that @xmath and @xmath are roots.
Then @xmath , so @xmath , giving only one value for @xmath . ∎

Se-Goo Kim [ Kim05 ] proves that for any knot @xmath , all but finitely
many algebraically slice twisted doubles of @xmath are linearly
independent in the concordance group @xmath . Using our theorem we can
conjecture that there is a much stronger result about the independence
of the twisted doubles of @xmath .

###### Conjecture 9.4.5.

For a fixed knot @xmath , the @xmath are linearly independent in @xmath
for all but one (or two, if @xmath ) values of @xmath .

The proof of this conjecture will require Theorem 9.4.2 to be extended
to connected sums of genus @xmath Seifert surfaces. The difficulty with
this is analysing all the possible metabolising curves (i.e. half-bases
of homology curves with self-linking zero) on a higher genus surface.
The number of such curves would grow exponentially as the genus
increased, and it is not possible to deduce enough information about the
metabolisers of a connected sum from looking at metabolisers of the
component knots.

## Chapter 10 Further work

In this thesis we have developed new techniques for studying knot
concordance and have determined many previously unknown concordance
orders of knots. Our explorations have shed more light on the big
questions of concordance and have also revealed new questions hitherto
unasked. In this chapter we discuss the questions that remain open and
give our thoughts on how to go about attacking them.

### 10.1 The algebraic concordance group

In Chapter 4 we make various conjectures about the classification of
knots in the algebraic concordance group. To determine the order of a
knot in @xmath , the current literature says that we need to look at the
image of the knot in @xmath for primes @xmath dividing the discriminant
and the leading coefficient of the Alexander polynomial. Together,
Conjectures 4.4.1 and 4.4.2 say that all the information required to
determine the algebraic order of a knot is contained in the groups
@xmath for primes @xmath dividing the determinant of the knot. More
analysis should be done on algebraic concordance orders of knots, for
example by building on the work of the @xmath -crossing analysis to
analyse prime knots of @xmath or @xmath crossings, to see further
whether these conjectures hold.

Another interesting exercise would be to find a prime knot of algebraic
order @xmath which turns out to be concordant to twice another prime
knot of algebraic order @xmath . Such examples have not yet been
exhibited.

### 10.2 Developing twisted Alexander polynomials

Although the theorems of Chapter 5 go a long way in developing twisted
Alexander polynomials as slicing obstructions, there are still cases to
be looked at in order to complete the theory. These are

-   where @xmath for a prime knot @xmath , or more generally…

-   … where @xmath for a prime knot @xmath and some @xmath ;

-   where @xmath for at least two distinct @xmath and @xmath ;

-   where @xmath for a prime knot @xmath and @xmath ;

-   most generally, where @xmath for any knot @xmath , any prime power
    @xmath and any integers @xmath .

This last condition also includes the case where @xmath does not split
into 1-dimensional eigenspaces. For example, those cases where @xmath
where @xmath does not divide @xmath .

Some work in the direction of these generalisations has been done by
Livingston and Naik [ LN09 ] , where they show that knots with @xmath
for any @xmath are not of order @xmath in @xmath . The amount of algebra
and number theory involved in even this simple case shows how difficult
such general theorems would be to prove.

In addition to these generalisations, it should be possible to get
tighter conditions for some of the existing theorems, particularly those
relating to knots which are connected sums. The proof of Proposition
6.1.3 shows that not all of the constituent knots of a connected sum
need to satisfy the conditions of Theorem 5.3.10 , so a next step would
be to work out exactly how many of the conditions are required to prove
the infinite order of a connected sum.

### 10.3 Signatures vs twisted polynomials

The proofs of the fact that knots with @xmath , @xmath odd, have
infinite order in @xmath use Casson-Gordon invariants, but in the form
of signatures. The obstructions given in this thesis to knots having
finite order use Casson-Gordon invariants, but in the form of twisted
Alexander polynomials. Both of these simplifications are necessary for a
computable obstruction theory, since the Casson-Gordon invariants
themselves are too complicated to compute except in a few simple cases.

Twisted Alexander polynomials seem like a weaker obstruction, since they
are of order @xmath (i.e. a twisted Alexander polynomial can only be an
obstruction if it occurs with odd exponent). It would be good to show
that in some cases they are equally effective. For example, in Theorem
5.4.2 , it would be good to show that for @xmath mod @xmath and @xmath
odd, that the conditions given always hold. We would then have a second
proof of the Livingston-Naik theorem, which could perhaps be generalised
to other situations where the signatures are not effective.

In the paper [ HKLar ] Hedden, Kirk and Livingston use a combination of
signatures and twisted Alexander polynomials to show that a set of knots
is linearly independent. Perhaps these techniques could also be used to
prove Conjecture 6.0.1 , which does not appear to be tractable by using
twisted Alexander polynomials alone.

### 10.4 Structure of the concordance group @xmath

The conjecture of the knot theoretic community is that @xmath . The main
reasons behind this conjecture are that no knots of order @xmath have
been found, and that there are no knots of any finite order other than
@xmath and @xmath in the higher-dimensional knot concordance groups.

A first step on the road to proving this conjecture would be to prove
the conjecture made by Livingston [ LN01 , 1.4] that knots of algebraic
order @xmath have infinite order in @xmath . A knot is of algebraic
order @xmath if and only if it has primes congruent to @xmath mod @xmath
dividing its determinant with odd exponent [ Lev69a , 23(c)] .
Livingston and Naik have proved various theorems about the orders of
knots with homology of this form: knots with @xmath for @xmath odd are
always of infinite order in @xmath [ LN01 ] , and knots with @xmath for
any @xmath are not of order @xmath in @xmath [ LN09 ] . These results
need to be generalised to knots whose @xmath is a direct sum of @xmath
where @xmath (mod 4) and at least one @xmath is odd. The difficulty
seems to lie only in the linear algebra and number theory, rather than
in the knot theory.

A result of this form would be surprising because it would be an abelian
invariant which provides the obstruction. Why should the shape of the
homology of the @xmath -fold branched cover determine the order of the
knot in the concordance group? This is certainly not true in general:
for any knot which is algebraically slice, there is a slice knot which
has exactly the same abelian invariants [ Kea04 ] . It is therefore
impossible to use abelian invariants to obstruct an algebraically slice
knot from being slice.

Furthermore, it is surprising to think that no more sophisticated tools
than Casson-Gordon invariants will be needed to prove this conjecture.
Given the infinite filtration of the knot concordance group, why should
all algebraic order @xmath knots lie in the same part of it? A
corresponding result is certainly not true for order @xmath knots:
Cochran, Harvey and Leidy [ CHL11 ] have shown that there are
(infinitely many) order @xmath knots in every level @xmath of the
concordance filtration.

It is fascinating that it should be some simple number theory which
determines the concordance order of a knot. The condition that the
determinant of a knot has no primes congruent to 3 mod 4 with odd
exponents is equivalent to the condition that the determinant is the sum
of two squares. It is known that the determinant of an amphicheiral knot
is of this form [ Goe33 ] , but this is almost certainly a property of
the concordance group, not of the symmetry type of the knot. We
conjecture that a result of the form of Hartley and Kawauchi (that the
Conway polynomial @xmath of an amphicheiral knot splits as @xmath ) [
HK79 ] , or of the form of Conant’s conjecture (that for an amphicheiral
knot @xmath is a perfect square inside the ring of power series with
integer coefficients) [ Con06 ] , should be true for any knot concordant
to an amphicheiral knot.

### 10.5 Where do order 2 knots come from?

It is an open conjecture whether the @xmath summand in @xmath is
generated by amphicheiral knots. In other words, is there a knot of
concordance order 2 which is neither amphicheiral nor concordant to an
amphicheiral knot?

In Chapter 8 we found examples of knots of order 2 which are not
negative amphicheiral but which turn out to be concordant to
amphicheiral knots ( @xmath or @xmath ). Part of the reason why we have
only found knots of this kind is that it is much easier to prove that a
knot is concordant to a smaller one than to prove it is of order 2
directly. If a knot @xmath has @xmath crossings then @xmath has @xmath
crossings and it is virtually impossible to see where to make a slice
move. However, we have found two possible candidates for a finite order
knot which is not concordant to an amphicheiral knot: namely, @xmath and
@xmath . It seems worth investigating these particular knots to see
whether they are counterexamples to the conjecture; perhaps by
developing computer techniques (or manual techniques) for finding slice
movies. Some work has been done in this area by Ayumu Inoue [ Ino10 ] ,
who uses computer simulations to find slice movies for the twist-spun
trefoils.

### 10.6 Second-order slice obstructions

In Chapter 9 we use @xmath -signatures as a second-order obstruction to
provide another proof that the twist knots are not slice. This appears
to be a powerful, yet simple, technique which could be used for other
families of knots. As mentioned at the end of the chapter, the result
should also be able to prove the linear independence of families of
knots, provided the Cochran-Orr-Teichner theorem can be extended to
connected sums of genus @xmath knots. It is yet a more difficult problem
to extend the theorem to prime knots of higher genus, since it is then
much more difficult to analyse the metabolising curves on the surface.

## Appendix A Signature calculations

Here we give the results of the analysis of signatures done in Section
4.1 .

We find the set of unit roots, with positive imaginary part, of
Alexander polynomials of knots in @xmath , of which there are @xmath .
The midpoint of each consecutive pair of values is found; these are the
@xmath listed along the top of the table. Evaluating the signature
function of each knot at each of the @xmath gives us a complete picture
of the signature function of each knot. The matrix presented here is the
result of these calculations put into reduced echelon form. It allows us
to read off a basis for the kernel of the signature function as well as
a basis for the knots which are of infinite order.

Non-zero values are highlighted to make reading the table easier.

## Appendix B Factorised Alexander polynomials for knots in @xmath

Here we give a list of the Alexander polynomials for the knots in @xmath
; that is, those which are a basis for the kernel of the signature
function. The polynomials are factorised over @xmath and the determinant
of the knot, which is the Alexander polynomial evaluated at @xmath , is
given. These calculations are necessary for the analysis in Chapter 4 ;
in particular, it is the symmetric irreducible factors which are
important in the algebraic concordance classification.

  Knot @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  ------------- -------- --------
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath

## Appendix C Witt group calculations for @xmath mod 4

Here we analyse the image of the knots in @xmath in the Witt groups
@xmath for @xmath mod @xmath . More precisely, for each knot we compute
a Seifert matrix @xmath and the corresponding isometric structure @xmath
, then look at the image of this form in @xmath , restricted to the
@xmath -primary component for each @xmath an irreducible symmetric
factor of the Alexander polynomial @xmath . The method of finding this
image is detailed in Section 4.2 . The entries of the following table
are elements in @xmath .

[TABLE]

## Appendix D Witt group calculations for @xmath mod 4

Here we analyse the image of the knots in @xmath in the Witt groups
@xmath for @xmath mod @xmath . As in Appendix C , for each knot we
compute a Seifert matrix @xmath and the corresponding isometric
structure @xmath , then look at the image of this form in @xmath ,
restricted to the @xmath -primary component for each @xmath an
irreducible symmetric factor of the Alexander polynomial @xmath . The
entries of the following table are elements in @xmath .

+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Polynomial  | @xmath      | @xmath      | @xmath      | @xmath      |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Prime       | 5           | 13          | 5           | 17          |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| @xmath      | 0           | 0           | 0           | 0           |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| @xmath      | (1,1)       | (1,1)       | 0           | 0           |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| @xmath      | 0           | 0           | 0           | 0           |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| @xmath      | 0           | 0           | 0           | 0           |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| @xmath      | 0           | 0           | 0           | 0           |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| @xmath      | 0           | 0           | 0           | 0           |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| @xmath      | 0           | 0           | 0           | 0           |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| @xmath      | 0           | 0           | 0           | 0           |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| @xmath      | (1,1)       | 0           | 0           | (1,1)       |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

## Appendix E Twisted Alexander polynomial calculations

Here we list the knots analysed in Section 6.1 , giving the trivial (
@xmath ) and non-trivial ( @xmath ) twisted Alexander polynomials
factorised into irreducibles over @xmath for each knot. The prime @xmath
being used is given, and @xmath is abbreviated to @xmath in each case.
Polynomials are written modulo norms; thus, for example, in the first
calculation the trivial twisted polynomial corresponding to @xmath is
not a norm.

The program used for these computations (and for those in Chapter 8 )
was adapted from one written by Herald, Kirk and Livingston, described
fully in [ HKL10 ] and run in Maple 13. This algorithm is slightly
different from the one described in Section 5.2 in that it takes
advantage of a relationship between twisted polynomials associated to
representations of @xmath and twisted polynomials associated to
representations of @xmath in order to simplify calculations. Group
presentations of @xmath become complicated very quickly as @xmath
increases, so this algorithm makes computation much faster for the
polynomials associated to the higher branched covers.

In addition to the twisted Alexander polynomials, we also give the
relevant linking forms for each knot (since these are necessary for the
use of Theorem 5.3.10 ) and say whether each one is a square in @xmath .
The linking form for @xmath is found by calculating @xmath for a Seifert
matrix @xmath and taking one of the diagonal entries.

@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath (not square), @xmath (not square);

  -------- -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  -------- -------- -------- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath (not square), @xmath (not square);

  -------- -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  -------- -------- -------- --------

@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath (square), @xmath (square);

  -------- -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  -------- -------- -------- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath (not square), @xmath (not square);

  -------- -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  -------- -------- -------- --------

@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath (not square), @xmath (not square);

  -------- -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  -------- -------- -------- --------

@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath (not square), @xmath (not square);

  -------- -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  -------- -------- -------- --------

@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath (square), @xmath (square), @xmath
(square);

  -------- -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  -------- -------- -------- --------

@xmath (but consider @xmath ),
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath (not square), @xmath (not square);

  -------- -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  -------- -------- -------- --------

@xmath (but consider @xmath ), @xmath , @xmath ;

  -------- -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  -------- -------- -------- --------

@xmath (but consider @xmath ), @xmath , @xmath

  -------- -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  -------- -------- -------- --------

@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath (square), @xmath (square);

  -------- -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  -------- -------- -------- --------

@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath (not square), @xmath (square);

  -------- -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
                             @xmath
                             @xmath
                             @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
                             @xmath
                             @xmath
                             @xmath
  -------- -------- -------- --------

@xmath , @xmath , @xmath

  -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
                    @xmath
                    @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
                    @xmath
                    @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
                    @xmath
                    @xmath
                    @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
                    @xmath
                    @xmath
                    @xmath
  -------- -------- --------

@xmath , @xmath , @xmath

  -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  -------- -------- --------

  ------------ -------------------------------------------------------------- --- --- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- -----
               Frequency of coefficients of @xmath in coefficient of @xmath                                                             
  Polynomial   4                                                              3   2   1    -1   -2   -3   -4   -5   -6   -7   -8   -9   -10
  (1,0)        0                                                              0   0   10   15   55   5    10   0    0    0    0    0    0
  (0,1)        0                                                              0   0   0    0    0    5    0    0    50   5    35   5    0
  (1,1)        0                                                              0   1   3    9    18   20   25   9    3    0    1    0    0
  (1,4)        0                                                              0   1   2    15   10   22   26   9    3    1    0    0    0
  (1,5)        0                                                              0   0   0    0    2    0    5    4    9    7    13   16   15
  (1,6)        0                                                              0   1   2    18   20   24   19   9    4    0    0    0    0
  (1,9)        0                                                              0   0   0    0    0    1    5    4    8    6    15   22   14
  (1,13)       1                                                              1   5   15   24   16   11   3    0    0    0    0    0    0
  (1,19)       0                                                              0   0   0    2    6    11   25   27   19   6    2    1    1
  (1,22)       0                                                              0   2   6    23   21   21   8    4    0    0    0    0    0
  (1,24)       0                                                              0   0   0    1    2    6    14   22   22   15   15   2    1
  (1,25)       0                                                              0   0   0    0    2    0    2    1    0    6    1    3    11
  ------------ -------------------------------------------------------------- --- --- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- -----

## Appendix F Slice movies

Here we give details of the slice movies used in Chapter 8 to prove that
certain knots were of order @xmath . For each of the knot diagrams we
show where to make a saddle move (see Section 2.1.1 for details on this
procedure) in order to obtain two unlinked knots. In each case, one of
the unlinked knots is the unknot and the other is either @xmath or
@xmath . Since both @xmath and @xmath are of order @xmath in @xmath ,
this means that the original knot must also be of order @xmath .
