## Introduction

Entanglement measures the nonclassical correlations between the
components of a quantum system. The characterization of this intimately
quantum property of physical systems is one of most challenging issues
of quantum information and computation theory. The reason why the
profound comprehension of entanglement is considered so important is
twofold: on the one hand it is spurred by an obvious interest for the
foundations of quantum mechanics, on the other hand entanglement
represents one of the most important resources in quantum information
processing and quantum enabled technologies [ Nielsen and Chuang [2000]
, Benenti, Casati and Strini [2004] ] . Generation of highly entangled
quantum states is therefore one of the key elements for the realization
of the ideas of quantum information. In this scenario a dominant role is
played by the investigation of one dimensional spin chains, as possible
candidates for modeling quantum computers [ Lieb, Schultz and Mattis
[1961] , Pfeuty [1970] , Takahashi [1999] ] . However, experimental and
theoretical difficulties, such as decoherence and imperfections in the
quantum hardware, impose strong bounds on the realization of large scale
systems and at the same time have boosted a high interest in finite size
systems [ Shastry and Sutherland [1990] , Schwinger [1998] , Osterloh,
Amico and Eckrn [2000] , De Pasquale, Costantini, Facchi, Florio,
Pascazio and Yuasa [2008] , De Pasquale and Facchi [2009] ] . The
bipartite entanglement between systems of small dimension (such as a
pair of qubits) can be given a quantitative characterization in terms of
several physically equivalent measures, such as entropy and concurrence
[ Wootters [2001] ] , as will be briefly recalled in Chap. 1 . A direct
investigation of quantum correlations and other basic properties of
quantum systems, can be also reached through very simple tomographic
techniques [ Paris and Řeháček [2004] ] . Among them, scattering has
always been considered a very powerful way to investigate many physical
systems in a wide range of fields of physics, from elementary particles
to condensed matter physics. Some very simple examples of state
reconstruction through scattering of a probe qubit can be found in [
Kawabata [2001] , Hida, Nakazato, Yuasa, and Omar [2009] , De Pasquale,
Yuasa and H. Nakazato [2009] ] . The relationship between entanglement
and tomography is “bidirectional”: if on the one hand tomographic
techniques can be very useful in order to unveil quantum correlations
between subsystems, on the other hand it has been proved that quantum
effects enable an increase in precision in estimating the parameters of
a given target state. The latter phenomenon is related to the fact that
entangled states can evolve faster than untangled configurations,
employing the same amount of resources [ Giovannetti, Lloyd and Maccone
[2006] ] . More involved is the characterization of the global features
of bipartite entanglement when we deal with systems of larger dimension.
This represents a very appealing issue from more then one point of view.
Indeed besides its application in quantum information theory and related
fields of investigation, such as complexity [ Mezard, Parisi and
Virasoro [1987] ] , it represents an interesting problem in statistical
mechanics. This will be the central theme of this thesis. We will tackle
this problem by studying a random matrix model that describes the
statistical properties of the purity of one of the two subsystems,
namely the local purity of the global state. For the sake of clarity, we
will divide this work in two parts.

In the first part, we will focus on the case of pure global states,
yielding the description of isolated quantum systems. We will study the
eigenvalues distribution for the reduced density matrix of a subsystem
@xmath . Before the advent of the field of quantum information, this
random matrix model was studied by Lubkin in 1978 [ Lubkin [1978] ] ,
who was moved by a more fundamental motivation: “With Lucretius [
Lucretius [98 a.C. - 55 a.C.] ] I find disorder of the universe
repugnant. @xmath my favorite key to understanding quantum mechanics is
that subsystems cannot be isolated by tracing from an enveloping pure
state without generating impurity: The probabilities associated with
measurements develop because the observer must implicitly trace himself
away from the observed system”. In this paper, Lubkin investigated the
following problem: if an @xmath dimensional pure bipartite state is
chosen at random, what probability distribution will describe the
eigenvalues of one of the two subsystems? This problem results
completely defined if we interpret by random pure states those vectors
of the Hilbert space selected by the unique uniform Haar measure on the
unitary group @xmath , that is typical states (with respect to this
uniform measure). From the computation of the first two cumulants for
@xmath , he concluded that for a typical pure quantum state of a large
system, the smaller subsystems are very nearly maximally mixed, that is
“impure” showing almost no signs of the fact that the (initial) global
state (the universe) is pure. It was only almost ten years later that
this topic became of central importance in quantum information theory,
when Loyd and Pagel, apparently unaware of Lubkin’s work, after
determining the explicit expression of the distribution of the Schmidt
coefficients of the reduced density matrix, computed the approximate
expression for the typical entropy [ Lloyd and Pagels [1988] ] , whose
exact formula was conjectured by Page [ Page [1993] ] and later proved
in [ Foong and Kanno [1994] , Sánchez-Ruiz [1995] , Sen [1996] ] . For
the measure on the Schmidt simplex, see also [ Życzkowski and Sommers
[2001] ] . All these results confirmed the conclusions of Lubkin, which
translated in quantum information language sound: if the global system
is divided in two subsystems @xmath and @xmath , the amount of quantum
information contained in the whole system is greater then the sum of the
information in the separate parts, that is typical (random) states are
entangled with high probability.

Random states play a key role in quantum communication algorithms, such
as quantum data hiding protocols [ Di Vincenzo, Leung and Terhal [2002]
] and superdense coding [ Harrow, Hayden and Leung [2004] ] . This has
spoored the appearance of many algorithms for generating random states [
Zanardi, Zalka and Faoro [2000] ] , based also on chaotic maps [
Bandyopadhyay and Lakshminarayan [2002] , Scott [2004] ] ,
pseudo-integrable maps [ Giraud and Georgeot [2005] ] or operators [
Weinstein and Hellberg [2005] ] and sequence of two-qubit gates [
Znidaric [2007] ] . Ideally, we would like to compute the complete
expression for the probability distribution of the eigenvalues of the
reduced density matrix. Alternatively, one should compute all its
moments or cumulants. In particular, the exact expression for the first
three cumulants have been computed in [ Scott and Caves [2003] ] , while
in [ Giraud [2007a] ] we find the exact formula for the @xmath -th
generic moment (and cumulant), and the explicit expression for the first
five cumulants. The probability distribution for the nonnull eigenvalues
of the reduced density matrix of @xmath or @xmath have been computed for
the case in which the dimensions of the corresponding Hilbert spaces
@xmath and @xmath are @xmath and @xmath , in [ Giraud [2007b] ] . In
this thesis we will introduce a different and more general approach for
studying the statistics bipartite entanglement, relying on the
techniques of classical statistical mechanics [ Facchi, Marzolino,
Parisi, Pascazio and Scardicchio [2008] , De Pasquale, Facchi, Parisi,
Pascazio and Scardicchio [2010] ] . In particular, in Chap. 2 we will
introduce a partition function for the canonical ensemble, the role of
the energy being played by the purity of subsystem @xmath , chosen as a
measure of the quantum correlations between @xmath and @xmath . The
partition function will depend on a Lagrange multiplier @xmath which
corresponds to a fictitious inverse temperature, which fixes the value
of the average purity. In other words, being @xmath the conjugate
variable of the purity it deforms the Haar measure, localizing it on the
corresponding manifold of states with a given average entanglement,
whose associated uncertainty becomes smaller as the dimension of the
quantum system increases. We will prove the equivalence, for our system,
between the canonical ensemble and microcanonical description in terms
of isoentangled manifolds [ Sinolecka, Zyczkowski and Kus [2001] ] . We
will therefore explore the entire Hilbert space, from typical to
maximally entangled and separable states, corresponding to different
regimes of temperatures, see Chaps. 3 and 5 . In Chap. 4 we will
describe a metastable solution for the system in the region of negative
temperatures. In particular, by computing the dominant contribution of
the partition function thru the method of steepest descent and
minimizing (or maximizing) the free energy of the system for positive
(or negative temperatures), we will determine the probability
distribution of the Schmidth coefficients corresponding to a given value
of average entanglement, and not only for @xmath (typical states). Of
course, once we know the partition function we can also compute the
moments of the purity distribution and we will prove the consistency of
our results with the cumulants’ analysis provided in the papers cited
above. We will unveil the presence of three main regimes in the system,
the separable, the typical and the maximally entangled phases, separated
by first and second order phase transitions. Finally in Chap. 6 we will
overview our results abandoning the temperature and using the purity as
our physical variable. One of the main results of our analysis will be
the computation of the volume of the isopurity manifolds in the Hilbert
space, that is the probability distribution of the purity. In particular
this volume will be maximum for typical states, while the iso-entangled
manifolds given by maximally entangled and separable states shrink to a
vanishing volume. The latter case has been predicted in [ Życzkowski,
Horodecki, Sanpera and Lewenstein [1998] ] for the more general case of
arbitrary mixed states, by proving the existence of a topological lower
bound for this volume.

In the second part of the thesis, we will extend the above analysis to
the case of a large quantum system in a mixed state, with a fixed value
of the global purity. A statistical mixture describes the lack of
complete knowledge of our physical system, when due to the interaction
with the environment, it undergoes a dissipative evolution. In general,
a complete microscopic description of the dynamical evolution of a
system coupled to the environment (or bath) is a complex many-body
problem which requires the solution of a potentially infinite number of
coupled dynamical equations. According to an open system approach, this
issue is tackled by retaining only basic information about the
environment and describing the system dynamics in terms of a master
equation [ Petruccione and Breuer [2002] , Gardiner and Zoller [2004] ]
. The lack of a complete knowledge about the bath leads to master
equation coefficients (MEC s), which may be either unknown or obtained
from a microscopical derivation carried out within some approximation
scheme. Some tomographic approaches, based on the idea of studying the
evolution of a Gaussian probe in order to provide the sought-for bridge
between dynamical parameters and measurable quantities (the probe’s
cumulant) have been proposed in order to retrieve the above coefficients
or checking the approximation schemes for a wide class of Gaussian Shape
Preserving master equations, both in the Markovian and convolution less
non-Markovian evolution [ Bellomo, De Pasquale, Gualdi and Marzolino
[2009] , Bellomo, De Pasquale, Gualdi and Marzolino [2010a] , Bellomo,
De Pasquale, Gualdi and Marzolino [2010b] ] . If we deal with isolated
quantum systems, their density operator reduces to a rank one
projection, and the analysis of its quantum correlations can be
performed with the techniques introduced in Chaps. 2 - 6 . The general
case of arbitrary mixed states is far more involved than the case of
pure states studied in the first part, due to more than one reason. The
first one is related to the definition of a random sampling for the
system. While for the case of pure states the only natural choice is
obtained by requiring invariance under the full group of unitary
transformations, for the case of mixed states, if we impose this unitary
invariance we are just stating that the probability density depends only
on the eigenvalues, while on the other hand we do not have a unique
natural measure on the simplex of eigenvalues [ Wootters [1990] ] . It
follows that, since no single distinguished probability measure exists,
we can introduce many ensembles for random density operators. One
possibility is given by adding an ancillary system of the same
dimension, then determine a purification of our density operator, and
consider the measure induced on it, by partial tracing, for instance
from the Haar measure on the unitary larger group [ Braunstein [1996] ,
Hall [1998] , Życzkowski and Sommers [2001] ] . This strategy will be
followed in Chap. 7 . Other sampling techniques are based on the Bures
distance [ Hall [1998] , Slater [1999] , Bengtsson and Życzkowski[2006]
] or, alternatively on the multi-partite systems [ Collins, Nechita and
Życzkowski [2010] , Życzkowski, Penson, Nechita and Collins [2010] ] .
The absence of a unique measure for the set of density matrices is an
extremely delicate point. Indeed, there are some properties which
strictly depend on the chosen measure, such as the volume of separable
states, while other statistical properties, such as the relation between
the probability of entanglement as a function of the purity of the
global state, are not very sensitive to the measure [ Życzkowski [1999]
] . Another aspect that makes the generalization of the approach
introduced for the set of pure states very hard, is related to fact that
from the definition of statistical mixture it follows that the purity of
one subsystem (the local purity of the global system) cannot be
considered a bonafide measure for the quantum correlations between
subsystems @xmath and @xmath , but should be substituted by its convex
roof [ Wootters [2001] , Amico, Fazio, Osterloh and Vedral [2008] ,
Horodecki, Horodecki, Horodecki, and Horodecki [2009] ] . We will
discuss this point at the end of Chap. 1 . However, the above
substitution does not allow for a simple analytic treatment of the
partition function. We will thus devote the second part of the thesis to
the study of the statistical distribution of the @xmath -local purity,
which can be considered as a lower bound for the bipartite entanglement
between two parts of the global system. By generalizing the partition
function introduced for the case of pure states, we will compute the
canonical moments for the local purity, following different techniques.
In particular in Chap. 8 , we will introduce the Gaussian approximation
for the elements of the unitary groups on the set of density matrices
describing our system and on their purification, and compute the average
@xmath -purity for @xmath up to order @xmath , being @xmath . In Chap. 9
we will compute the exact expression for the first moment of the local
purity at @xmath , by exploiting the properties of the twirling
transformations (establishing a formal connection between our statical
problem and the theory of quantum channel), and then, thru the solution
due to Zuber of some basic integrals over the unitary group, we will
determine the exact expression for the @xmath -th generic moment, and
explicitly compute the first two cumulants for the local purity at
@xmath , that is for typical random states. We will therefore generalize
the exact expressions computed for the pure case in [ Scott and Caves
[2003] , Giraud [2007a] ] . Finally, we will compute the high
temperature expansion of the first moment of the local purity in the
canonical ensemble.

As a final remark, notice that the classical statistical mechanics
approach we will follow in this thesis in order to characterize the
behavior of bipartite entanglement for a large quantum system is
general, and for instance can be adopted also for determining the
statistical distribution of the potential of multipartite entanglement,
as shown in [ Facchi, Florio, Marzolino, Parisi and Pascazio [2010] ] .

### Chapter 1 An introduction to bipartite entanglement

The origin of the word “entanglement” goes back to 1935. It is the
English translation made by E. Schrödinger of the German word
“Vershrälung”, which is a colloquial expression indicating the action of
“folding the arms”, Fig. 1.1 . Schrödinger introduced this name in the
dictionary of quantum physics in order to describe one of the most
striking manifestations of quantum phenomena, that is “the best possible
knowledge of a whole does not include the best possible knowledge of its
parts, even though they may be entirely separated” [ Schrödinger [1935a]
, Schrödinger [1935b] , Schrödinger [1936] ] . This is due to presence
of correlations of exclusively quantum nature, namely entanglement. In
other words, the presence of quantum correlations, with no classical
counterparts, is responsible for the fact that while for a classical
bipartite system the knowledge of the total system is completely
equivalent to the knowledge of both its subsystems, in the quantum case
this is only a necessary condition.

The phenomenon of entanglement is profoundly rooted in the mathematical
structure of quantum mechanics, whose natural framework is given by
complex Hilbert spaces. In particular, entanglement is a direct
consequence of the linearity of the Hilbert space (expression of the
superposition principle), when applied to composite systems, that are
described by the tensor product of the Hilbert spaces associated to each
subsystem [ Horodecki, Horodecki, Horodecki, and Horodecki [2009] ,
Facchi [2009] ] .

The peculiarities of this quantum phenomenon make the entanglement an
extremely important resource in quantum information processing. It is
believed to be the main responsible for the speed up in quantum
computation and quantum communication [ Nielsen and Chuang [2000] ,
Benenti, Casati and Strini [2004] ] . Furthermore, many quantum
protocols could not be conceived without the existence of entangled
states, an outstanding example is given by quantum teleportation [
Bennett, Brassard, Cr peau, Jozsa, Peres, Wootters et al [1993] ] .
Besides its important applications in relatively simple systems, that
can be described in terms of a few effective quantum variables,
entanglement has also been widely investigated in many-body systems [
Amico, Fazio, Osterloh and Vedral [2008] , Horodecki, Horodecki,
Horodecki, and Horodecki [2009] ] , from many points of view. In
particular, on the one hand, the methods used in quantum information
have proved to be extremely useful for the control and the manipulation
of this kind of systems, on the other hand the interplay between quantum
information and quantum statistical mechanics has unveiled some peculiar
properties of entanglement in quantum critical models [ Osterloh, Amico,
Falci and Fazio [2002] , Osborne and Nielsen [2002] , Vidal, Latorre,
Rico and Kitaev [2003] ] . As a consequence of the powerful role played
by entanglement in the study of fundamental quantum phenomena and its
applications to innovative technologies, the task of characterizing and
quantifying entanglement has emerged as a prominent theme of quantum
information theory.

This chapter is devoted to the analysis of some fundamental aspects of
bipartite entanglement. We will show that there are many basic open
questions, revealing that we are still far from a complete comprehension
of this phenomenon. We will start from the definition of entangled state
in Sec. 1.1 . Then, in Sec. 1.2 , we will focus on the only class of
states for which the basic properties of bipartite entanglement,
together with an appropriate measure, can be considered well understood,
namely the pure quantum states. Finally, in Sec. 1.3 we will show in
what sense the study of entanglement and its quantification become
extremely involved for an arbitrary quantum state, and report some
fundamental results obtained in the last decades.

#### 1.1 Bipartite entanglement

E. Schödinger defined entanglement as “not one but rather the
characteristic trait of quantum mechanics”. As already mentioned, this
phenomenon is strictly related to the mathematical formulation of
quantum mechanics, relying on the structure of complex Hilbert spaces.

The smallest non trivial Hilbert space is two dimensional, and describes
the simplest quantum system, the qubit . This is the fundamental unit of
quantum information, as the bit is the indivisible unit of classical
information. A privileged orthonormal basis of this two dimensional
Hilbert space is the computational basis, @xmath , which can be seen as
the quantum version of the only two possible values associated to a
single bit, @xmath . The way a qubit differs from a bit is that a linear
combination of the states @xmath and @xmath is still a possible state
for the qubit. This derives from the vectorial structure of the Hilbert
space, and represents the simplest expression of one of the cornerstone
of quantum mechanics, the superposition principle .

Let us now consider a composite bipartite system, and indicate with
@xmath and @xmath its two parts. In classical physics, the states of the
total system belong to the Cartesian product of the spaces associated to
@xmath and @xmath , and are always given by a convex combination of
products of states describing each subsystem independently. The
dimension of the global system is then the sum of the dimensions of its
subspaces. On the contrary, the Hilbert space @xmath where the states of
the total system live is given by the tensor product of the Hilbert
subspaces @xmath and @xmath associated to @xmath and @xmath
respectively, @xmath , and the dimension of @xmath is the product of the
dimensions of @xmath and @xmath . If for instance, we refer to a system
of @xmath qubits, we can study the properties of two subsystems given by
@xmath and @xmath qubits. The associated Hilbert spaces have dimensions
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , respectively ( @xmath ). Let us now come
back to a generic bipartite system, and to the difference between the
classical and quantum approach. It is again the superposition principle
which plays the key role. Indeed an arbitrary pure state @xmath cannot
in general be expressed by the product of separate states of each
subsystem, as would happen in the classical case: this is the formal
definition of the entanglement. In other words, we will define the state
@xmath entangled, with respect of the bipartition @xmath if and only if

  -- -- -- -------
           (1.1)
  -- -- -- -------

for some vectors @xmath and @xmath of each subsystem. If condition ( 1.1
) is not satisfied, the state will be said to be separable, or
unentangled. Let us remark that the separability of the state of the
global system strictly depends on the bipartition we are considering, as
it refers to the quantum correlations between the specific subsystems.
From Eq. ( 1.1 ) it follows that if a pure state @xmath is entangled it
is given by a superposition of at least two product states:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

This describes interference, i.e. non classical correlation, among
probability amplitudes for the two subsystems. For example, the
probability amplitude of having subsystem @xmath in the state @xmath and
subsystem @xmath in the state @xmath interferes with the probability
amplitude of having subsystems @xmath and @xmath in states @xmath and
@xmath . It is due to the nonclassical properties of quantum states that
many schemes of quantum information and quantum technologies (quantum
computation [ Nielsen and Chuang [2000] ] , quantum teleportation [
Bennett, Brassard, Cr peau, Jozsa, Peres, Wootters et al [1993] ] ,
dense coding [ Bennett and Wiesner [1992] ] and quantum cryptography [
Bennett and Brassard [1984] , Ekert [1991] , Deutsch, Ekert,
Macchiavello, Popescu and Sanpera [1996] , Fuchs, Gisin, Griffiths, Niu
and Peres [1997] ] ) have been realized.

Until now we have only referred to pure states, which correspond to
normalized vectors of a given Hilbert space. They describe isolated
quantum systems whose states are completely determined as far as the
theory allows. However, in practice the state of a physical system is
not often perfectly determined. For instance in a laboratory the systems
we measure undergo uncontrolled interactions with the environment. An
example is given by the emission of atoms from a thermal source: we only
know the distribution of the kinetic energy of the emitted particles,
not the kinetic energy of each of them. In such cases, we say that our
knowledge of the system is incomplete. We only know that the state of
the system belongs to a given ensemble of pure states associated to a
set of probabilities, @xmath satisfying the condition of unit total
probability, @xmath . The system is then defined to be in a statistical
mixture , or equivalently in a mixed state. From a mathematical point of
view, an arbitrary quantum state is described by a density operator
@xmath on @xmath (a positive, self-adjoint and unit trace operator),
which in case of a pure state @xmath reduces to the projection operator
@xmath . A generic mixed state can be expressed in an infinite variety
of convex combinations of pure states all of which have exactly the same
consequence for any conceivable observation of the system. It naturally
follows that entangled mixed states are no longer equivalent to
non-product states, as for pure states. A mixed bipartite state is
separable if and only if it can be written as a convex combination of
product states:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are in general mixed states of the corresponding
subsystems @xmath and @xmath . If condition ( 1.3 ) is not satisfied,
@xmath is said to be an entangled state. It can be easily proved that
entanglement is responsible for those properties of composite systems
which do not change under local transformations and classical
communication (exchange of classical bits between the two subsystems).
We say that bipartite entanglement is invariant under LOCC , L ocal O
peration and C lassical C ommunication. This has led to the introduction
of some criterions in order to properly identify classes of equally
entangled states [ Grassl, Rötteler and Beth [1998] , Linden, Popescu
and Sudbery [1999] , Albeverio and Fei [2001] ] , and to the
complementary study of the orbits in the Hilbert space associated to a
given quantum state by means of local unitary operations [ Sinolecka,
Zyczkowski and Kus [2001] ] .

Despite the simplicity of definitions ( 1.3 ) and ( 1.1 ), it is in
general quite hard to check whether a state is separable or not, with
respect to a given bipartition. Another open problem is the
quantification of entanglement. In Sec. 1.2 we will answer these two
points for the case of pure states, and in Sec. 1.3 we will then show
how this analysis becomes far more involved for the case of mixed
states.

#### 1.2 Bipartite pure states

Bipartite pure states represent one of the few cases for which the
problem of revealing and also quantifying quantum correlations has a
quite exhaustive answer. In the first part of this section we will
discuss some fundamental properties of bipartite entanglement, by the
introduction of one important tool, the Schmidt decomposition. In the
second part, we will consider the problem of quantification of bipartite
entanglement through the von Neumann entropy.

##### 1.2.1 Schmidt decomposition

Let us consider a pure bipartite state @xmath in @xmath . We introduce
the following notation for the dimension of the three Hilbert spaces
considered: @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Without loss of generality we
also set @xmath . If we introduce an orthonormal product basis @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , we can represent the state as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The coefficients @xmath are the elements of an @xmath complex
rectangular matrix @xmath , whose singular values @xmath , @xmath (i.e.
the square root of the eigenvalues of the matrix @xmath ) determine the
Schmidt decomposition of the total state @xmath :

  -- -- -- -------
           (1.5)
  -- -- -- -------

It is uniquely determined only if the singular values are not
degenerate. Indeed, the previous expression can be derived from the
singular value decomposition of the coefficient matrix, namely @xmath ,
with @xmath and @xmath unitary matrices on @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively, and @xmath the diagonal matrix @xmath . The unitary
matrices @xmath and @xmath , determine the orthonormal set

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

If the singular values of @xmath are not degenerate its singular value
decomposition is unique, up to multiplication of one or more columns of
@xmath by unit phase factors and simultaneous multiplication of the
corresponding columns of @xmath by the same unit phase factors. On the
other hand, degenerate singular values do not have unique singular
vectors. Consequently, if there are degenerate @xmath , @xmath , the
singular value decomposition of @xmath is not unique. The real numbers
@xmath are called Schmidt coefficients and, due to the normalization
condition on the state of the global system, @xmath , obey @xmath
(notice that in the literature @xmath instead of @xmath , @xmath , are
usually defined as Schmidt coefficients). The set of all possible
vectors @xmath forms a @xmath dimensional simplex @xmath , known as the
Schmidt simplex . The Schmidt decomposition is of central importance for
the characterization and the quantification of the entanglement
associated with pure states. It enables to investigate many important
properties of a quantum composite system by looking at the behavior of
its subsystems, through the analysis of the corresponding reduced
density operators. As it will be more clear at the end of this section,
this is strongly related to the very essence of entanglement. The state
of each subsystem, @xmath (or @xmath ), is described by the density
operator @xmath (or @xmath ) defined by partial tracing over the
complementary subsystem, @xmath (or @xmath ), where @xmath indicates the
partial trace over subsystem @xmath (this definition of a reduced
density operator is also valid for an arbitrary state @xmath ). From Eq.
( 1.5 ) we immediately get that @xmath and @xmath have the same nonzero
eigenvalues, the Schmidt coefficients, and their eigenbases coincide
with the orthonormal bases @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , called Schmidt
bases for @xmath and @xmath . The number of nonvanishing @xmath is equal
to the rank of both reduced density operators. It is called Schmidt
number for the state @xmath , and together with the Schmidt
coefficients, is invariant under local unitary operations: they will be
the key ingredients for quantifying the entanglement between subsystems
@xmath and @xmath . Indeed, a bipartite pure state is separable with
respect to the bipartition @xmath if and only if there is only one
nonzero Schmidt coefficient, which must be equal to @xmath . This is
equivalent to saying that each subsystem is in a pure state. If it is
not the case, the state @xmath is entangled. In particular, a pure state
@xmath is called maximally entangled if and only if all its Schmidt
coefficients are equal to @xmath , or equivalently subsystem @xmath is
in a completely mixed state. It is worth noticing that we have
introduced the expression “maximally entangled state” without referring
to any measure of entanglement. Indeed these states present the maximal
degree of entanglement with respect to every (reasonable) measure. They
are a very peculiar class of quantum states, and can be considered the
greatest manifestation of the presence of quantum correlations between
subsystems. More formally, they give rise to the most striking violation
of a class of inequalities, Bell inequalities, that must be satisfied by
classical correlations. If a bipartite system is in a maximally
entangled state, we have that to a perfect knowledge of the state of the
composite system ( @xmath is a pure state) it corresponds the maximal
ignorance of the state of its two parts ( @xmath is in a completely
mixed state), since the global information is completely shared between
the two subsystems. This situation never happens in the classical case,
where the complete knowledge of the state of the global system and of
the state of both subsystems is equivalent. In quantum mechanics this
represents just a necessary condition, that becomes sufficient only for
the case of separable (unentangled) bipartite states, when both the
global system and its subsystems @xmath and @xmath are in a pure state [
Facchi [2009] ] . This behavior, is the most impressive signature of
quantum correlations, i.e. entanglement.

##### 1.2.2 von Neumann entropy and purity

Bipartite entanglement is a very complex property of quantum states, and
the task of capturing all its manifestations with an appropriate measure
is in general very hard. Until now is has not been found a unique answer
to this question. Nevertheless, pure bipartite states represent one of
the few cases for which this intricate feature simplifies very much. The
Schmidt decomposition is an elementary necessary and sufficient
criterion for separability of pure bipartite states. In the last section
we have seen that the Schmidt coefficients, and obviously their number,
are invariant under local unitary operations on the system. Therefore,
any reasonable measure of entanglement for pure bipartite states must be
an appropriate function of these quantities. A widely accepted measure
of entanglement is the von Neumann entropy of the reduced density
operators @xmath and @xmath describing the two subsystems @xmath and
@xmath of the global pure state @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath , @xmath , being the Schmidt coefficients of @xmath , and @xmath
defined to be zero. The von Neumann entropy goes from @xmath for
separable states to @xmath for maximally entangled states. It is the
unique entanglement measure for pure states that beside being invariant
under LOCC is also continuous and additive if there are several copies
of the system ( @xmath ). These properties are some of the requirements
that, according to an axiomatic approach, a good measure of entanglement
has to satisfy. We refer to Sec. 1.3.2 for a brief review about some
peculiar aspects of entanglement quantification.

Historically, the von Neumann entropy was the first entanglement measure
to have an operational interpretation: it quantifies the quantum
information of the system, i.e. the deeply nonclassical interplay
between the information provided by an entangled state about the whole
system and the information regarding its subsystems. In 1995 Schumacher
showed that the von Neumann entropy corresponds to the minimum number of
qubits needed to encode a quantum state produced by a statistical
source, in an ideal coding scheme [ Schumacher [1995] ] . In this sense
it is exactly the quantum counterpart of the classical Shannon entropy
which counts the minimum number of bits (units of classical information)
one needs to encode the output of a random source using an ideal code.
As already pointed out at the end of Sec. 1.1 , the main difference
between classical and quantum information, is that if a state is
entangled with respect to a given bipartition, it provides more
information about the global system then about its two parts, whereas
this can never happen for a classical state. Translated in terms of
statistical mechanics, the subsystems of an entangled state can exhibit
more entropy than global system, i.e. they can show more disorder than
the system as a whole. This never happens in two cases: when we have a
classical system (whose statistical disorder is quantified by the
Shannon entropy) and if we deal with a quantum separable state. Once
again, entanglement manifests itself as the distinctive character of
quantum mechanics.

The definition of the von Neumann entropy as a good candidate for
measuring bipartite entanglement in case of pure states is supported by
the so-called “uniqueness theorem” [ Vidal [2000] , Horodecki, Horodecki
and Horodecki [2000] , Nielsen [2000] , Donald, Horodecki and Rudolph
[2002] ] which states that in the asymptotic regime all other
entanglement measures, introduced on the basis either of quantum
information or of thermodynamical considerations, coincide on pure
bipartite states and reduce to the von Neumann entropy of the
corresponding reduced density matrices. A more convenient measure of
entanglement from a computational point of view is the purity @xmath .
It corresponds (up to a constant) to the so-called linear entropy @xmath
, that is the first-order term of the expansion of the von Neumann
entropy:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the purity of one of the two subsystems is defined as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can easily see that the purity lies in the compact interval @xmath ,
whose boundaries from left to right refer to maximally entangled and
separable states, with respect to the bipartition @xmath (the
corresponding bounds of the linear entropy are @xmath and @xmath ). In
this thesis the purity will be the fundamental tool in order to
investigate the statistical behavior of bipartite entanglement of pure
quantum states.

#### 1.3 Bipartite mixed states

Beside, and maybe “before”, the problem of properly quantifying
entanglement, an open question of quantum information theory is to
determine whether an arbitrary (mixed) quantum state is separable or not
with respect to a given bipartition, namely the separability problem. We
have already stressed that pure bipartite states represent a singularity
in this complex scenario since the Schmidt decomposition on the one hand
provides a simple necessary and sufficient criterion for checking the
separability of pure states, on the other hand it naturally leads to the
quantification of entanglement in terms of the mixedness of its
subsystems. On the contrary, the complete characterization of the convex
set of separable mixed states reveals itself to be extremely involved [
Życzkowski [1999] ] . We will devote the present section to a brief
overview of the main separability criteria and measures of bipartite
entanglement for a generic mixed state [ Amico, Fazio, Osterloh and
Vedral [2008] , Horodecki, Horodecki, Horodecki, and Horodecki [2009] ,
Bruss [2002a] ] .

##### 1.3.1 Separability criteria

A very strong necessary separability condition for quantum bipartite
states is given by Peres’ positive partial transpose ( PPT ) criterion [
Peres [1996] , Horodecki, Horodecki, and Horodecki [1996] ] . It says
that if a quantum state @xmath is separable, the state obtained by
partial transposition is positive. Partial transposition indicates the
application of the partial transpose operator to only one of two
subsystems, namely @xmath , where the Latin indices refer to subsystem
@xmath ( @xmath ) and the Greek ones to subsystem @xmath ( @xmath ). The
same holds for partial transposition with respect to subsystem @xmath .
This condition which is necessary for arbitrary dimensions of @xmath and
@xmath , is also sufficient for low dimensional systems, @xmath and
@xmath . The PPT criterion, is an “operational recipe” for checking the
separability of a given state. Other operational approaches are the
reduction [ Horodecki and Horodecki [1999] ] and the majorization
criteria [ Nielsen and Kempe [2001] ] . From these effective techniques,
especially from the PPT condition, a more general technique in terms of
linear maps has been derived. However, even if linear maps criteria
provide both necessary and sufficient conditions to be satisfied by any
bipartite separable system, they do not supply any simple procedure for
determining if a bipartite state is separable. In this sense they can be
defined “non operational” [ Bruss [2002a] ] . The positive maps
criterion says that a quantum state @xmath is separable with respect to
a given bipartition @xmath if and only if for any positive maps @xmath
and @xmath one has that @xmath and @xmath . This condition is,
automatically satisfied by the PPT criterion, with @xmath . However, the
positive maps criterion is nonoperational, since its application would
require a complete knowledge of the set of all positive maps, and this
is itself an open problem. As special case of positive maps, there is
the criterion of the so-called entanglement witnesses. It says that a
quantum state @xmath is entangled if and only if there exists an
Hermitian operator @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath for any separable
state @xmath . However, if the expectation value of @xmath on @xmath is
non negative, this does not guarantee that @xmath is separable. This can
be clarified introducing the following geometric interpretation: each
entanglement witness defines an hyperplane in the Hilbert space @xmath
that separates @xmath from the set of separable states. This geometric
approach also helps to understand how to optimize @xmath : one can
perform a parallel transport of the hyper-planes [ Lewenstein, Kraus,
Cirac and Horodecki [2000] ] or replace them by curved manifolds [ G hne
[2004] ] both tangent to the set of separable states, see Fig. 1.2 .
Entanglement witnesses are explicitly related to positive maps by the
Jamiolkowski isomorphism [ Jamiolkowski [1972] ] , according to which
one has that given an entanglement witness @xmath there exist a positive
map @xmath , such that @xmath , where @xmath is the projection operator
on maximally entangled states ( @xmath ). Observe that notwithstanding
these optimization techniques, the problem of finding a complete
characterization of the convex set of separable states [ Życzkowski
[1999] ] is still open, since it would need in principle an infinite
number of entanglement witnesses.

##### 1.3.2 Entanglement measures

Quantifying entanglement is one of the central topics of quantum
information theory. As already mentioned, entanglement represents an
extremely complex property of quantum states and for arbitrary states
there is not a unique definitive measure. In Sec. 1.2.2 , we have seen
that in the asymptotic regime, when we consider the tensor product
states of a large number of identical copies of the system, due to the
uniqueness theorem, the entanglement finds a sort of regularization, at
least on pure states. Following an axiomatic approach, there exists a
set of postulates that a good measure of entanglement should fulfill:
monotonicity under LOCC, vanishing on separable states, continuity,
additivity, subadditivity and convexitiy [ Horodecki, Horodecki,
Horodecki, and Horodecki [2009] , Amico, Fazio, Osterloh and Vedral
[2008] , Bruss [2002a] ] . However, there are contrasting believes about
the necessity of all these requirements for properly quantifying
entanglement, and furthermore it is still not known if there exists a
measure satisfying all of them [ Vedral, Plenio, Rippin and Knight
[1997] , Vidal [2000] ] . A natural question may also be whether,
despite the absence of a unique measure of entanglement, we can order
all the states of a given bipartite system with respect to the degree of
entanglement [ Virmani and Plenio [2000] ] . The answer is negative,
since there exist incomparable states even in the case of pure states.
This lack of a single order can be explained, at least qualitatively, in
terms of the complexity of entanglement, in the sense that there are
many manifestations of entanglement and it may happen that one state
shows more entanglement of one type than another state, and the
situation is reversed for another type of entanglement [ Miranowicz
[2004] , Verstraete, Porras and Cirac [2004] ] .

Two very important measures of quantum correlations are the entanglement
of distillation @xmath , defined as the maximal number of singlets that
can be produced from a given bipartite quantum state by means of any
LOCC operation, and the entanglement cost @xmath , which is
complementary to @xmath and measures the minimal number of singlets
needed to produce a given quantum state by LOCC operations. We recall
that the singlet state is a particular maximally entangled state for a
qubit, whose expression in the computational basis is @xmath (for
simplicity, we indicate the tensor product @xmath as @xmath ). It has
been proved that the entanglement of distillation and the entanglement
cost are, respectively, the lower and upper bounds of any entanglement
measure satisfying appropriate postulates in the asymptotic regime [
Horodecki, Horodecki and Horodecki [2000] ] . Both @xmath and @xmath
fulfill the additivity axiom, but their continuity has not been
completely proved. There are also indications that the entanglement of
distillation is not convex [ Shor, Smolin and Terhal [2001] ] .

A technique which enables to extend entanglement measures defined on
pure states to arbitrary states is the convex-roof method. It says that
if @xmath is a measure defined on pure states, its natural extension to
a mixed state @xmath is @xmath , where the minimum is taken over all
possible convex combinations of pure states, @xmath , being @xmath an
increasing function of bipartite entanglement. In this way it is defined
another important measure of entanglement, the entanglement of
formation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

being @xmath . It is the convex-roof extension of the von Neumann
entropy [ Wootters [2001] ] . This measure is continuous and convex but
its full additivity for bipartite systems has not been established yet [
Vidal, Dür and Cirac [2002] ] . Finally, by analogy with pure states, a
measure of entanglement more convenient for analytical treatment is the
convex-roof extension of the purity of one of the two subsystems:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that in this case we have to maximize over the mixture of pure
states corresponding to @xmath , since the purity is a decreasing
function of the bipartite entanglement.

The main topic of this thesis will be the study of the statistical
properties of bipartite entanglement, shared by large bipartite quantum
systems. A complete overview will be discussed for the case of bipartite
pure states, as anticipated at the end of Sec. 1.2.2 , by considering
the purity as the tool for measuring entanglement. The generalization of
this analysis to the case of bipartite mixed state, as might be
expected, will reveal far more complicated then the previous one.

## Part I Pure States

### Summary

In the first part of this thesis we will characterize the statistical
properties of bipartite entanglement for a large quantum system in a
pure state. This problem will be tackled by studying a random matrix
model that describes the distribution of an entanglement measure, the
purity of one of the two subsystems [ Facchi, Marzolino, Parisi,
Pascazio and Scardicchio [2008] , De Pasquale, Facchi, Parisi, Pascazio
and Scardicchio [2010] ] . In particular, we will introduce a partition
function for the canonical ensemble as a function of a fictitious
temperature. The purity will play the role of the energy of the system,
that is different temperatures will correspond to different degrees of
entanglement. The outcome of this statistical approach to bipartite
entanglement will be twofold. On the one hand we will distinguish three
main entanglement phases (or regions): maximally entangled, typical and
separable phase. These regions are separated by a first and a second
order phase transition. On the other hand, by the explicit computation
of the entropy of the system, we will evaluate the volume of the
manifolds in the Hilbert space with constant purity (isopurity
manifolds), answering to the question of determining how probable is
finding an entangled state, for a large quantum system.

This part of the thesis is organized as follows. In Chap. 2 we will
introduce the notation and set the bases of our classical statistical
mechanics approach to the problem. In Chap. 3 we will study the case of
positive temperatures, where at very low temperatures we will find very
entangled states. Negative temperatures will be investigated in Chaps. 4
and 5 where we will show the existence of two branches, a stable one
associated to a partial factorization of the state, and a metastable
branch which contains the 2D quantum gravity point. We will also
investigate finite size corrections. Finally, in Chap. 6 we will
overview the results of the previous chapters, by reinterpreting them
directly from the point of view of quantum information.

### Chapter 2 A statistical approach to bipartite entanglement

In this chapter we will introduce the bases of our approach to the study
of bipartite entanglement for a large quantum system. The first
requirement will be setting the statistical ensemble of pure states, and
this will led to the introduction of a random matrix model for the
system in Sec. 2.1 . The next step will be the definition, in Sec. 2.2 ,
of the fundamental tool for this statistical approach: the partition
function of the system for the canonical ensemble, where the role of the
energy will be played by the entanglement measure we will choose, the
purity of one of the two subsystems. Since the exact computation of the
partition function results very complicated due to the positivity
constraint on the eigenvalues, we will recur to the method of steepest
descent and impose a set of saddle point equations for the Schmidt
coefficients.

#### 2.1 Random matrix model and Haar measure

Consider a bipartite system ( @xmath , @xmath ). In Sec. 1.1 we have
seen that the states of the total system live in the tensor product
Hilbert space @xmath . Without loss of generality we set @xmath . We
also assume that the system is in a pure state @xmath . A statistical
analysis of bipartite entanglement is equivalent to answer the following
question: what is the probability of finding a state with a given value
of entanglement in the Hilbert space @xmath ? In order to answer this
question, we have to solve two preliminary points:

-   introducing a proper measure of entanglement

-   defining a probability measure on @xmath , according to which the
    states are sampled.

The answer to the first point is almost straightforward. In Chap. 1 we
have seen that for the case of pure states the von Neumann entropy of
one of the two subsystems, @xmath , is a good measure of bipartite
entanglement. However, at the end of Sec. 1.2.2 we have also noticed
that the von Neumann entropy can be replaced for computational
convenience by a more simple function, the purity, which derives from
its linearization:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The minimum is attained when all the eigenvalues @xmath , the Schmidt
coefficients of the global state @xmath , are equal to @xmath (subsystem
@xmath in a completely mixed state and maximal entanglement between the
two bipartitions), while the maximum is attained when one eigenvalue is
1 and all others are 0 (this detects a factorized (unentangled) state).
Let us now switch to the second point. The idea of taking a quantum
state randomly is equivalent to assuming the minimal knowledge about the
system. Random states can be considered typical in the sense that they
represent the states to which an arbitrary evolving quantum state can be
compared. For the case of pure states there is a unique unbiased
measure, as it is enough to identify the minimal knowledge with the
maximal symmetry for the system. Thus the sampling criterion has to be
invariant under the full group of unitary transformations [ Hall [1998]
] , and corresponds to the unique (left and right) invariant Haar
(probability) measure @xmath on the unitary group @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

We will define the typical vector states @xmath [ Lubkin [1978] , Page
[1993] ] as pure random states given by the action of a random unitary
matrix @xmath on an arbitrary reference state @xmath , @xmath , see Fig.
2.1 . The final state @xmath will therefore be independent on @xmath .
Henceforth, all measures will be tacitly assumed to be probability
measures (normalized to @xmath ), if not stated otherwise. For example,
@xmath .

Nevertheless, it is important to add that the Harr measure is not the
only possible sampling choice. Other distributions can also be
considered but they encode additional information on the system (in this
sense, Haar is the most neutral). These alternative distributions could
be treated in our approach by constraining the system by means of
Lagrange multiplier. For an approximate realization of this Haar measure
by means of short quantum circuits see [ Arrow and Low [2009] ] , where
it is proved that one can extract Haar-distributed random states by
applying only a polynomial number of random gates.

##### 2.1.1 Induced measure on subsystems

In order to describe the statistical properties of the purity of a
bipartite system we need to determine the induced measure on the reduced
density operator describing the state of one of the two subsystems, for
instance @xmath . Representing @xmath in terms of its spectral
decomposition @xmath , with @xmath a complete set of orthogonal
projections defined up to a unitary rotation, we have that the set of
the Hermitian reduced density matrices @xmath can be written as a
Cartesian product [ Życzkowski, Horodecki, Sanpera and Lewenstein [1998]
, Życzkowski [1999] ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the family of the complete sets of orthonormal
projections on @xmath and @xmath is the Schmidt simplex. It follows that
the measure on the reduced density operators @xmath is a product measure

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is defined on the unitary group @xmath , i.e. on the
eigenvectors of @xmath , and @xmath on its eigenvalues. By construction
the two measures are both induced by the Haar measure over the larger
unitary group @xmath and are given by the Haar measure on @xmath ,
@xmath and, for the eigenvalues, by [ Lubkin [1978] , Page [1993] ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The square of the Vandermonde determinant ( @xmath ) derives from
integrating out the eigenvectors, and the normalization constant can be
written in terms of the Euler gamma function @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is worth observing that the measure over the eigenvalues in not
uniform. In particular the Vandermonde determinant introduces a
repulsion between pairs of Schmidt coefficients.

#### 2.2 The model

In Sec. 1.1 we mentioned some studies related to the idea of determining
iso-entanglement manifolds, through the introduction of invariants under
LOCC [ Grassl, Rötteler and Beth [1998] , Linden, Popescu and Sudbery
[1999] , Albeverio and Fei [2001] ] , and by means of the complementary
study of the orbits in the Hilbert space associated to a given quantum
state [ Sinolecka, Zyczkowski and Kus [2001] ] . The statistical
approach presented in this thesis is slightly different, in the sense
that we will describe manifolds with constant average purity. However,
at the end of this chapter (Sec. 2.3 ) we will prove the equivalence
between this approach and the one based on the microcanonical ensemble,
in which the purity of distinct manifolds is fixed. Let us start with
the introduction of a partition function [ Facchi, Marzolino, Parisi,
Pascazio and Scardicchio [2008] ] from which all the thermodynamic
quantities, for example the entropy or the free energy, can be computed:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Recall that the measure @xmath is a product measure, see Eq. ( 2.4 ).
The parameters @xmath and @xmath in definition ( 2.7 ) are extremely
relevant for our analysis. The coefficient @xmath can be interpreted as
the inverse of a (fictitious) temperature @xmath selecting different
regions of entanglement, @xmath . More formally, it is a Lagrange
multiplier which enlightens different regions of the Hilbert space with
a given value of average purity, @xmath . In particular we have that:

-   for @xmath we obtain typical states (sampled by @xmath ,

-   for @xmath we expect to find more entangled states, which in the
    limit @xmath should become maximally entangled ( @xmath ),

-   for @xmath we are going towards the set of separable states, reached
    when @xmath ( @xmath ).

In this scenario, the purity corresponds to the energy of the system,
and varies in the interval @xmath according to the different profiles of
the distribution of the Schmidt coefficients. The parameter @xmath is a
scaling coefficient . It is a positive integer (either 2 or 3, as we
shall see) and refers to the scaling properties of the system. Its value
needs to be chosen in order to yield the correct thermodynamic limit,
that is in order to keep the exponent of the partition function
extensive. Since the number of degrees of freedom of @xmath is @xmath
(for a large system), @xmath needs to satisfy the constraint:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Around maximally entangled states (for @xmath ) we have @xmath so @xmath
, while around separable states (for @xmath ) we have @xmath and hence
@xmath .

In the following we will assume @xmath , since this does not change the
qualitative picture, the extension to @xmath being straightforward but
computationally cumbersome.

##### 2.2.1 Saddle point equations

From the cyclic property of the trace, we have that the purity depends
only on the eigenvalues of @xmath , thus the integral over the unitary
group deriving from the measure on @xmath factorizes in the partition
function, and we have only to integrate on the (positive) Schmidt
coefficients, modulo the constant factor @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Recall they we are assuming all the measures to be probability measures,
thus @xmath . By introducing a Lagrange multiplier for the delta
function in Eq. ( 2.9 ), we get:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The argument of the partition function can be interpreted as the
Boltzmann factor of a gas of @xmath point charges (Coulomb gas) at
positions @xmath ’s on the positive half-line [ Dyson [1962] ] . The
potential energy of the gas of eigenvalues is given by a harmonic
potential and a two dimensional electrostatic repulsion between pairs of
charges. The analogous of the integral in Eq. ( 2.2.1 ) is known for the
case in which the integration limits are @xmath , as Selberg’s integral
[ Mehta [2004] ] . The constraint of the positivity of the eigenvalues
makes the computation of this integral far more complicated. The exact
solution can always be found by means of the orthogonal polynomials
method, but the expressions for @xmath grows enormously in complexity
with increasing @xmath , see [ Giraud [2007a] , Facchi, Marzolino,
Parisi, Pascazio and Scardicchio [2008] ] for the first few moments. In
the limit of large @xmath , we will overcome this problem by looking for
the stationary point of the exponent of the partition function @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The function @xmath represents the potential associated to the Coulomb
gas of eigenvalues. By deriving @xmath with respect to both the @xmath
’s and @xmath we get @xmath saddle point equations for the system:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In particular, the domain of integration for @xmath lies on the real
axis, but we will see that the saddle point for @xmath lies on the
imaginary @xmath axis. Thus the contour needs to be deformed to pass
through this point along the line of steepest descent, see appendix A .
The minimum or the maximum of @xmath , for positive or negative
temperatures respectively, in the thermodynamic limit, will correspond
to the free energy of the system. In the following chapters we will
separately analyze the range of positive and negative temperatures, and
unveil the presence of some critical temperatures for the system,
associated to first and second order phase transitions.

#### 2.3 Equivalence between canonical and microcanonical ensemble

Before considering different ranges of temperatures, we will devote this
section to the proof of the equivalence, for our system, between the
microcanonical and the canonical ensembles. In the first case we
represent the total Hilbert space @xmath as given by isopurity
manifolds, that is with a fixed value of the purity. On the other hand
in the canonical ensemble we fix only the average purity for each
submanifold. What follows will be independent on the specific value of
the temperature @xmath .

In order to compare the two approaches, we compute the relative
fluctuations of the rescaled average purity:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the average purity @xmath ( @xmath )and its mean square
fluctuation @xmath in the canonical ensemble are given by [ Huang [1987]
] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.15)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We recall that the coefficient @xmath has to be chosen in order to yield
an extensive quantity at the exponent of the partition function, namely
of @xmath (see Eq. ( 2.8 )). It can be easily shown that @xmath . See
Fig. 2.2 : the indices @xmath and @xmath , labeling the purity and its
average, identify different isopurity manifolds in @xmath .

The proof of the equivalence of the two ensembles is thus
straightforward:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

namely the fluctuations of the average purity can be neglected for a
large quantum system, @xmath .

### Chapter 3 Positive temperatures

In this chapter we will study how bipartite entanglement between @xmath
and @xmath can affect the probability distribution of eigenvalues of one
of the two subsystems, in the range of positive temperatures. In
particular, we will show the emergence of two classes of symmetries. In
Sec. 3.1 , by the introduction of a natural scaling for the eigenvalues
of subsystem @xmath in the limit of a large quantum system, we will
translate the problem of finding the most probable set of eigenvalues
@xmath , into the task of getting the corresponding density
distribution. In Sec. 3.2 the saddle point equations will be then
reduced to an integral equation for this density function, know as
Tricomi equation. In Sec. 3.3 we will find a two parameter continuous
family of solutions, among which we will select the one yielding the
higher Boltzmann factor for the Coulomb gas of eigenvalues, i.e. the
most probable density distribution for every fixed value of the
temperature. We will see that there exist two classes of symmetries for
the density distribution, lying in nearby intervals of positive
temperatures, that can be interpreted as two phases for the system: the
maximally entangled and the typical phases. The two regimes are
separated by a second order phase transition for the system, whose
presence will be unveiled in Sec. 3.4 by studying the entropy of the
system. We will conclude with a reinterpretation, in Sec. 3.5 , of the
results obtained in this chapter, directly from the point of view of
entanglement.

#### 3.1 Natural scaling and density of eigenvalues

In Sec. 2.2 we argued that, in order to yield the correct thermodynamic
limit, the exponent of the partition function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

has to be an extensive quantity, that is of the same order @xmath of the
volume of states @xmath . See Eq. ( 2.8 ). As far as we increase @xmath
typical states enhance their degree of entanglement and become maximally
entangled in the limit @xmath . It then follows that for this range of
temperatures the correct scaling exponent is @xmath . In order to
determine the thermodynamic properties of the system, we solve the
saddle point equations ( 2.12 )-( 2.13 ) in the continuous limit by
introducing the natural scaling

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Observe that @xmath , where @xmath . In Fig. 3.1 we show the effects of
this scaling from the point of view of the eigenvalues and their
labeling indices: they become continuous functions in the limit @xmath .

In this scaled setup, the properties of the system are determined by the
density distribution @xmath of the Schmidt coefficients. Obviously, it
will depend on @xmath , that is on the level of entanglement between
@xmath and @xmath . In the limit @xmath we define in general:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The probability distribution of the Schmidt coefficients needs to
satisfy two consistency conditions:

-   nonnegativity: @xmath , for all @xmath

-   normalization:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (3.4)
      -- -------- -- -------

As will be discussed in the next section, the above constraints on
@xmath will select the physical solutions of the saddle point equations,
for different values of @xmath . Notice that the standard definition (
3.3 ) for @xmath naturally satisfies the above constraints.

#### 3.2 Tricomi’s equation

The set of @xmath saddle point equations ( 2.12 )-( 2.13 ) for the
Schmidt coefficients @xmath and the Lagrange multiplier @xmath , reduces
to a couple of integral equations for the density @xmath and @xmath . In
both cases, they depend on the inverse temperature @xmath .

Let us consider the sum over index @xmath in Eq. ( 2.12 ). According to
the natural scaling it becomes:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.5)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath indicates the Chauchy principal value:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

In Eq. ( 3.5 ) we have also introduced the identity @xmath . With this
technique, we get that the saddle point equations, with @xmath and
@xmath , become:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Eq. ( 3.7 ) is an integral equation for the density of eigenvalues
@xmath . It is a singular Fredholm equation of the first kind, known as
Tricomi’s equation [ Tricomi [1957] ] . According to Tricomi [ Tricomi
[1957] ] the solution, @xmath lies in a compact interval @xmath , (
@xmath ). We expect that as this integral equation depends on the
temperature, also its solution will depend on @xmath . Let us set

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last expression maps the domain @xmath of @xmath into the interval
@xmath associated to @xmath . Observe that by definition @xmath fulfills
the normalization condition ( 3.4 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the new rescaling Eq. ( 3.7 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

We recall that @xmath is a Lagrange multiplier introduced in the
partition function due to the unit trace condition on the reduced
density operator @xmath , see Eq. ( 2.2.1 ). According to Tricomi’s
theorem, the normalized solution of this integral equation is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The constraint ( 3.8 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

fixes the Lagrange multiplier @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that @xmath is an imaginary number, as anticipated at the end of
Sec. 2.2.1 . Thus the contour of integration for @xmath in the partition
function needs to be deformed with respect to real axes, in order to
pass through this point along the line of steepest descent. Finally, by
substituting the last expression in Eq. ( 3.13 ) and performing the
principal value integral in ( 3.14 ) we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The solution of the Tricomi equation depends on the fictitious (inverse)
temperature @xmath . The physical solutions must have a density @xmath
that is nonnegative for all @xmath . The numerator of ( 3.17 ) is non
negative for @xmath , with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that @xmath for every @xmath and @xmath . The condition @xmath ,
imposes that the points @xmath should be restricted to a (possibly cut)
eye-shape domain given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where ( 3.10 ) expresses the positivity of eigenvalues and @xmath are
the level curves corresponding to @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

See Fig. 3.2 (a).

Observe that the level curves @xmath are symmetric with respect to the
line @xmath and intersect at @xmath and at @xmath . The right corner of
the eye is at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

and belongs to the boundary as long as @xmath . For @xmath the eye is
cut by the line @xmath , as shown in Fig. 3.2 (b). In other words the
domain is symmetric as long as @xmath , whereas for lower values of
@xmath this symmetry is lost. Let us remark that all points inside each
domain correspond to solutions of the saddle point equations, that is,
we have a two parameter continuous family of solutions.

In the next section we will show how to select the density of
eigenvalues which maximizes the partition function. It corresponds to
the most probable distribution of the Schmidt coefficients, for a given
temperature. In particular, we will distinguish two classes of
distributions. They will correspond to different ranges of @xmath ,
associated to the two symmetries we have found for the physical domains
of the solution of the Tricomi equation: @xmath and @xmath .

#### 3.3 The solution

We will now compute the density of eigenvalues which gives the maximum
contribution to the partition function. It is the solution corresponding
to the maximum Boltzmann factor for the gas of eigenvalues, or
equivalently to the minimum of @xmath (or @xmath since @xmath ). The
potential computed for this minimizing solution will be the free energy
of the system.

##### 3.3.1 Thermodynamics of the system and minimization of the free
energy

By applying the natural scaling ( 2.8 ), the potential for the gas of
eigenvalues ( 2.11 ) with @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.23)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In the limit @xmath we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.27)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Observe that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath satisfy the thermodynamic
relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

and they will be the free energy, the internal energy and the entropy
densities of the Coulomb gas of eigenvalues when computed on their most
probable distribution. In order to compute @xmath we integrate Eq. (
3.12 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which it follows

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.31)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Thus by inserting in Eqs. ( 3.27 )-( 3.29 ) the physical solution ( 3.17
) of the Tricomi equation and observing that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
                 
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.35)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In Sec. 3.2 we have determined the domain of @xmath in the space @xmath
, for different ranges of the inverse temperature @xmath . As already
observed all the points of this domain yield a solution of the saddle
point equations ( 2.12 )-( 2.13 ). In order to find the most probable
distribution of the Schmidt coefficients we now have to minimize @xmath
(or @xmath ) in the physical domain ( 3.20 ). The contour plots of the
free energy density are shown in Fig. 3.3 .

Notice that @xmath , as well as @xmath and @xmath , is symmetric with
respect to the line @xmath . This @xmath symmetry will play a major role
in the following. The only stationary point (a saddle point) of @xmath
is at the right corner of the eye ( 3.22 ), see Figs. 3.2 and 3.3 .
Thus, the absolute minimum is on the boundary. The behavior of the free
energy at the boundaries of the allowed domain is shown in Fig. 3.4 for
different temperatures.

We deal with two regimes of solutions corresponding to different ranges
of temperature. Recall that the temperature in our model is the Lagrange
multiplier associated to isopurity manifolds of the Hilbert space.
Different symmetries of the physical domain will correspond to different
symmetries in the distribution of the Schmidt coefficients. More
precisely we have:

-   for @xmath , where @xmath , when the domain of the physical solution
    of the Tricomi equation is eye-shaped, the absolute minimum is at
    the corner of the eye, Eq. ( 3.22 )

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.37)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   for @xmath , the absolute minimum is at the right upper corner of
    the cut eye-shaped allowed region, @xmath , namely at

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.38)
      -- -------- -- --------

See the red dots in Figs. 3.2 (b) and 3.3 . For the distribution of
eigenvalues corresponding to these minima, @xmath coincides with the
free energy of the system, while @xmath and @xmath can be identified
with the internal energy density and the entropy density, respectively.

##### 3.3.2 Distribution of the Schmidt coefficients

We will study the behavior of our system starting from high values of
@xmath , that is low values of internal energy @xmath (purity). In the
previous sections we unveiled the presence of two regimes. In this
section we will show that they correspond to a different symmetry in the
distribution of the eigenvalues.

###### Wigner semicircle distribution: @xmath - towards maximally
entangled states

For @xmath , we have found that the minimum of the free energy for the
gas of eigenvalues corresponds to the corner of the eye (Eq. ( 3.37 ))
From the expression ( 3.17 ) for the physical solution of the saddle
equations, we get the semicircle law (see Fig. 3.5 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

whence, by ( 3.9 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

This distribution is displayed in Fig. 3.5 . Observe that as @xmath
becomes larger the distribution of the Schmidt coefficients becomes
increasingly peaked around 1. This means that all the eigenvalues tend
to @xmath . See the natural scaling ( 3.2 ): for temperatures @xmath
tending to zero quantum states become maximally entangled. The internal
energy and the entropy of the system for this solution can be easily
obtained by plugging the condition on the parameters @xmath and @xmath (
3.37 ) into the expressions ( 3.34 )-( 3.35 ) for @xmath and @xmath
respectively:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.42)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Wishart distribution: @xmath - typical states

At higher temperatures @xmath the solution acquires a different shape,
becoming asymmetric with respect to the center of its support.
Analogously to the previous case, by plugging the relations ( 3.38 )
between @xmath , @xmath and @xmath at the minimum of @xmath into the
physical solution of the saddle point equations ( 3.17 ), we get the
distribution of the Schmidt coefficients:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

By ( 3.9 ) it yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . See Fig. 3.6 . This is the Wishart distribution.

The change from the semicircle to the Wishart distribution is
accompanied by a phase transition (the first of a series), as we shall
see in Sec. 3.4 . In Fig. 3.7 we plot the relation ( 3.38 ) between the
half width of the distribution @xmath and @xmath .

It runs monotonically from @xmath when @xmath to @xmath when @xmath .
Moreover, the inverse temperature @xmath reaches a minimum equal to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

at @xmath . Therefore, the above solution can be analytically continued
down to @xmath , which is slightly negative, but not below. We will
study the solution for negative temperatures in the next chapter. Let us
now compute the thermodynamic quantities for the Wishart distribution.
The internal energy @xmath (proportional to the average purity) is
obtained by plugging ( 3.38 ) into the expression ( 3.34 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

In particular, at @xmath ( @xmath ) we get @xmath , at @xmath ( @xmath )
we get @xmath , and at @xmath ( @xmath ) we get @xmath . See Fig. 3.8 .
Observe that @xmath is continuous at @xmath .

From Eqs. ( 3.38 ) and ( 3.35 ) we can also compute the entropy and the
free energy for the Wishart distribution

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.49)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

in terms of @xmath .

Summarizing, for @xmath all eigenvalues of @xmath are equal to @xmath ,
that is subsystem @xmath is in a maximally mixed state. As the inverse
temperature is decreased, for @xmath , all eigenvalues remain of @xmath
their distribution being characterized by the Wigner semicircle law,
while for @xmath the eigenvalues, still of @xmath , follow the Wishart
distribution which diverges at the origin, that is some eigenvalues of
@xmath vanish. Let us remark that the distributions of eigenvalues we
have found are consistent with the scaling coefficient @xmath . Indeed,
for any value of the inverse temperature @xmath , the domain of @xmath
involves the rescaled eigenvalues @xmath which are of @xmath , that is
the eigenvalues @xmath are of @xmath . In other words, the range of
positive temperatures refers to those submanifolds of the total Hilbert
space @xmath given by pure states @xmath showing a high level of
entanglement between subsystems @xmath and @xmath . Observe that the
internal energy is of @xmath , that is the purity is of @xmath , as will
be discussed at the end of this chapter.

##### 3.3.3 Analysis of moments and cumulants

Notice that from the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

we have that the free energy is proportional to the generating function
of the connected correlations of @xmath . More precisely, the
derivatives of @xmath evaluated for @xmath , yield the moments of @xmath
with respect to the measure @xmath introduced in Sec. 2.1.1 , i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

These functions fully determine the statistical distribution of @xmath
on the set of pure bipartite states and in the high temperature regime
provide an expansion of @xmath . In [ Facchi, Marzolino, Parisi,
Pascazio and Scardicchio [2008] ] we can find the expression for the
@xmath th cumulant @xmath of the purity @xmath (in one to one
correspondence with the first @xmath moments) in the limit of large
@xmath and @xmath , for the case of balanced bipartitions, @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

and also the cumulants for the more general case of unbalanced
bipartitions. For instance, the first and second cumulants are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath . They reduce to ( 3.53 ) for @xmath and @xmath .
The exact expression (that is valid also for small @xmath ) at @xmath of
the first @xmath cumulants can be found in [ Giraud [2007a] ] . In
particular for the case of balanced bipartitions, @xmath , the first two
cumulants are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

while for more general case of @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                                
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We recall the relationship between the cumulants and moments of a
generic probability distribution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

and in particular

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.61)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.62)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

More generally, we can also define the moments of @xmath for @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the canonical measure

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

The latter is a deformation of the Haar measure @xmath obtained by
including a non uniform weight which explicitly depends upon the purity
@xmath , thru @xmath . In particular, as @xmath increases, @xmath
enhances the role of the states with lower values of @xmath (i.e. larger
values of bipartite entanglement between the two subsystems @xmath and
@xmath ), to the extent that for @xmath only the maximally entangled
states contribute to ( 3.63 ).

#### 3.4 Second order phase transitions

We are now ready to unveil the presence of the first critical point for
the system at @xmath . In the previous section, we have found that the
densities of eigenvalues corresponding to the two contiguous intervals
of temperature @xmath and @xmath show a different symmetry, which
correspond to the Wishart and the Wigner semicircle distributions. They
are associated to two distinct entanglement phases for the system: the
maximally entangled and the typical phases. In the former all the
eigenvalues are of @xmath , whereas in the second regime some
eigenvalues go to zero. A second order phase transition at @xmath
separates the two phases. It is due to the restoration of the @xmath
symmetry @xmath (“parity”), present in the thermodynamic quantities, see
Eqs.  ( 3.34 ), ( 3.35 ) and ( 3.36 ). It corresponds to the reflection
symmetry of the semicircle distribution @xmath around the center of its
support ( @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath ), that is not present
in the Wishart distribution.

The direct proof of the presence of a second order phase transition in
the system at @xmath can be obtained from the expression of the entropy
density @xmath . See Eq. ( 3.43 ) for @xmath and Eq. ( 3.49 ) for @xmath
. From both equations we get the same values of the entropy at @xmath
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand the first derivative of @xmath with respect to @xmath
is discontinuous at @xmath . However, also @xmath as a function of
@xmath has a discontinuous first derivative at @xmath , see Eqs. ( 3.37
) and ( 3.38 ). By reminding that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.66)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

one easily obtains that the discontinuities compensate. For @xmath we
have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the step function. Thus the system undergoes a second
order phase transition at @xmath that, however, is fairly mild. Indeed,
the entropy @xmath , together with its first derivative, is continuous,
although the second derivative shows a finite discontinuity of @xmath at
@xmath . See Fig. 3.9 . In other words, the heat capacity of the system,
corresponding to @xmath , does not diverge, although its first
derivative is discontinuous.

Observe, also, that the entropy is unbounded from below when @xmath ,
see Eq. ( 3.43 ). The interpretation of this result is quite
straightforward: the minimum value of @xmath is reached on a submanifold
(isomorphic to @xmath [ Sinolecka, Zyczkowski and Kus [2001] ] ) of
dimension @xmath , as opposed to the typical vectors which form a
manifold of dimension @xmath in the Hilbert space @xmath . Since this
manifold has zero volume in the original Hilbert space, the entropy,
being the logarithm of this volume, diverges.

#### 3.5 Entropy density vs average entanglement

We conclude the analysis of positive temperatures, reinterpretating our
results from the point of view of quantum information. To this end we
will write the entropy density @xmath as a function of the internal
energy density @xmath , or average entanglement @xmath . In Sec. 3.3.2
we computed these thermodynamic quantities as functions of the parameter
@xmath , both for the semicircle law and for the Wishart distribution.
If we invert the expressions for the internal energy, Eqs. ( 3.42 ) and
( 3.48 ), we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

which plugged into Eqs. ( 3.43 ) and ( 3.49 ) give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

This function is plotted in Fig. 3.10 . It counts the number of vectors
with a given (average) degree of bipartite entanglement between
subsystems @xmath and @xmath : @xmath where @xmath is the volume
occupied by each submanifold.

In particular by expanding ( 3.69 ) in the critical region, that is for
@xmath , we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.70)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Therefore, the second order phase transition at @xmath is signaled by a
discontinuity in the third derivative of @xmath , see Fig. 3.11 ,
whereas at this point the entropy shows a discontinuity of the second
derivative with respect to @xmath , see Fig. 3.9 . In fact, in general,
if @xmath and @xmath are entropy, energy and temperature, respectively,
and @xmath is the specific heat, one gets @xmath and @xmath
Discontinuities of the @xmath -th derivative of @xmath translate,
therefore, into discontinuities of the @xmath -th derivative of @xmath .

Let us finally discuss the significance of these results.
In the range of positive temperatures @xmath the eigenvalues of the
reduced density matrix of our @xmath dimensional system are always of
@xmath . As a consequence, the value of energy (average purity) in Eq. (
2.1 )

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.71)
  -- -- -- --------

is always small: there is therefore a lot of entanglement in our system.
Notice that the purity becomes an intensive quantity if multiplied by
@xmath : @xmath . There are however, important differences as purity
changes (it is important to keep in mind that in the statistical
mechanical approach pursued here, the Lagrange multiplier @xmath fixes
the value of the energy/purity). As pointed out in Sec. 3.3.2 , when
@xmath (where @xmath ) the eigenvalues are distributed according to the
semicircle law (Fig. 3.5 ), while for @xmath (where @xmath ) they follow
the Wishart distribution (Fig. 3.6 ). The two regimes are separated by a
second order phase transition. Notice that the value @xmath , which
corresponds to infinite temperature @xmath , refers to vectors in the
Hilbert space that are typical according to the Haar measure. One is
therefore tempted to extend these results to negative temperatures [
Facchi, Marzolino, Parisi, Pascazio and Scardicchio [2008] ] and indeed
this can be done up to @xmath , corresponding to the slightly negative
temperature @xmath . However, as we have seen, a mathematical difficulty
emerges and no smooth continuation of this solution seems possible
beyond @xmath .

In the next chapter we will see that two branches exist for negative
@xmath : one containing a phase transition at @xmath and in which purity
is always of @xmath and one in which purity is of @xmath . The latter
becomes stable as soon @xmath becomes negative through a first order
phase transition. We remind that larger values of purity, towards the
regime @xmath yield separable (factorized) states. We are therefore
going to look at the behavior of our quantum system towards separability
(regime of small entanglement).

### Chapter 4 Negative temperatures: metastable branch

By analytic continuation, the solution at positive temperatures of the
previous chapter can be turned into a solution for negative @xmath ,
satisfying the constraints of positivity and normalization. As this is
an analytic continuation of the solution obtained for @xmath , we are
not assured that this is indeed a stable branch. In this chaper we will
study this analytic continuation, but we anticipate that this is
metastable as soon as @xmath becomes negative (namely for @xmath ). We
call this solution the metastable branch, postponing the proof of its
metastability to Chap. 5 . The metastable branch is of interest in
itself because, as we shall see, it entails two phase transitions. The
first one is at @xmath and corresponds to the so-called 2D quantum
gravity free energy (see [ Di Francesco, Ginsparg and Zinn-Justin [1995]
] ), provided an appropriate double-scaling limit (jointly @xmath and
@xmath ) is performed. The second phase transition, at @xmath , is due
to the restoration of the @xmath symmetry that was broken at the phase
transition at @xmath , described in the previous chapter.

This chapter is organized as follows. In Secs. 4.1 and 4.2 we will
determine the physical solution of the Tricomi equation for the range of
negative temperatures and select the one which maximizes the potential
energy density of the system. Thus, in Sec. 4.3 , we will unveil the
presence of the two mentioned second order phase transitions for the
system, and discuss them by studying the behavior of the entropy
density. Finally, we will devote Sec. 4.4 to the overview and the
reinterpretation of our results in terms of the average entanglement.

#### 4.1 Physical domain and maximization of the free energy

By keeping the same value of the scaling coefficient @xmath used for the
positive temperatures, the saddle point equations for the potential
energy of the Coulomb gas, lead in the continuous limit to the Tricomi
equation ( 3.12 )-( 3.13 ), now with @xmath . We recall that its
solution is given by Eq. ( 3.17 ) that is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

being defined for @xmath . The density distribution is nonnegative for
@xmath , where @xmath and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

See Eqs. ( 3.18 ) and ( 3.19 ). For @xmath we have @xmath when

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the level curves associated to @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

As displayed in Fig. 4.1 (a) at @xmath , they are symmetric with respect
to the line @xmath and intersect at @xmath and @xmath . On the other
hand the condition @xmath , implies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

being @xmath the level curves ( 3.21 ), @xmath , already computed for
@xmath . For @xmath they are still symmetric with respect to the line
@xmath but intersect only in @xmath . The two couples of level curves,
@xmath and @xmath intersect at points

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore, conditions ( 4.6 ) and @xmath , expressing the positivity of
the eigenvalues, determine the physical domain of the solution @xmath of
the Tricomi equation, namely the (possibly cut) eye-shaped domain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The right corner of the eye is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and belongs to the boundary as long as @xmath . This equation is the
analogue of Eq. ( 3.22 ) for positive temperatures. For @xmath the eye
is cut by the line @xmath . See Fig. 4.1 (b). Notice that, similarly to
what found for the case of positive temperatures, the physical domain
does not display the same symmetries for the entire range of negative
temperatures. We have already noticed that all points inside the
physical domain correspond to solutions of the saddle point equations,
for every fixed temperature. The solution corresponding to the most
probable distribution of the Schmidt coefficients can be found by
maximizing the free energy density @xmath (or @xmath , @xmath ) of our
Coulomb gas. For the explicit expression of the free energy we still
refer to Eq. ( 3.36 ). The contour plots of the free energy density are
shown in Fig. 4.2 .

The behavior of @xmath at the boundaries of the allowed domain is shown
in Fig. 4.3 for different temperatures. Notice that the free energy
density displays a @xmath symmetry with respect to the line @xmath , as
already found for the range of positive @xmath . See Fig. 3.3 . The
symmetries displayed by the physical domains for different ranges of
@xmath will naturally emerge in the distribution of the Schmidt
coefficients. Apart from @xmath , the free energy density @xmath has no
stationary points for @xmath . Thus, the most probable distribution will
correspond to an absolute minimum of @xmath on the boundary.

In particular we have that:

-   for @xmath the right corner of the eye ( 4.10 ) is the global
    minimum,

-   for @xmath the absolute minimum of @xmath is at the right upper
    corner of the allowed region, namely at

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.11)
      -- -------- -- --------

The division of the range of negative temperatures in two parts is the
first signature that the point @xmath will correspond to a change of
symmetry in the distribution of the Schmidt coefficients, as can be
expected from what seen for @xmath in the previous chapter. Condition (
4.11 ) implies a further arrangement in subintervals of the range @xmath
. Recall that the boundary @xmath consists of two level curves, @xmath
and @xmath , corresponding to nearby intervals of inverse temperature.
See Eq. ( 4.9 ). Therefore Eq. ( 4.11 ) entails

-   for @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.12)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   for @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.13)
      -- -------- -- --------

Notice that Eq. ( 4.12 ) coincides with the condition ( 3.38 ) found for
@xmath , and leads to the Wishart distribution. We conclude that Eq. (
4.12 ) is the analytic continuation of the curve ( 3.38 ) which runs
monotonically from @xmath when @xmath to its minimum @xmath at @xmath .
See Fig. 3.7 : the continuous and the dashed lines refer to @xmath and
@xmath , respectively. On the other hand, Eq.( 4.13 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

admits two real solutions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

They run from @xmath , when @xmath , (with derivative zero) up to @xmath
when @xmath (with derivative @xmath ) and then from @xmath , when @xmath
, (with derivative @xmath ) up to @xmath , when @xmath .

See Fig. 4.4 .

#### 4.2 Distribution of the Schmidt coefficients and thermodynamics of
the metastable branch

In this section we will compute the density function for the Schmidt
coefficients. They will display different symmetries for different
ranges of @xmath (or @xmath ), reflecting the symmetry of their domains
discussed in the previous section. We will explore the whole range of
negative temperatures, from @xmath ( @xmath ) to @xmath ( @xmath ). We
will then compute the entropy, the internal energy and the free energy
of the Coulomb gas of eigenvalues.

###### Wishart distribution: @xmath - typical states and quantum gravity

When @xmath the probability distribution of the Schmidt coefficients is
obtained by plugging ( 4.12 ) into the generic expression ( 4.1 ) for
the solution of the Tricomi equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is the Wishart distribution ( 3.45 ) we have found for @xmath in
Chap. 4 . At @xmath , where the inverse temperature

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

is minimum, for @xmath , (see Fig. 3.7 ) the density function becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

or equivalently

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

It displays a different shape with respect to the other distributions in
this range of temperatures. Indeed for @xmath the derivative at the
right edge of the distribution diverges, whereas at @xmath it vanishes.
See Fig. 4.5 . In Sec. 4.3 we will show that the Coulomb gas of
eigenvalues undergoes a second order phase transition at @xmath .

The internal energy, entropy and free energy for the system
corresponding to this family of solutions can be determined by inserting
( 4.17 ) with @xmath in Eqs. ( 3.34 )-( 3.36 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

These expressions determine the thermodynamic properties of the Coulomb
gas, and will be employed in the analysis of the phase transition for
the system.

###### Asymmetric arcsine distribution: @xmath - towards maximally
entangled states

For this range of temperatures the relation between @xmath and @xmath is
more involved. Indeed we find two families of solutions. By ( 4.15 ) and
( 4.1 ) we have that: when @xmath the distribution of the Schmidt
coefficients is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.23)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

while for @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.25)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The density functions corresponding the these two nearby subintervals of
inverse temperatures are shown in Fig. 4.6 . Notice that this eigenvalue
density diverges both at the left edge @xmath and at the right edge
@xmath . It can be seen as an asymmetric arcsine distribution, as it is
not symmetric with respect to the center of its domain, @xmath .

By plugging ( 4.24 ) and ( 4.26 ), with @xmath in the Eqs. ( 3.34 )-(
3.36 ) we compute the internal energy, entropy and free energy for the
system. Beyond @xmath we get for @xmath ( @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.27)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.28)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and for @xmath ( @xmath ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

###### Arcsine distribution: @xmath - almost maximally entangled states

At @xmath ( @xmath ) the @xmath symmetry is restored. We have seen that
for @xmath , the global minimum of the physical domain is given by Eq. (
4.10 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Observe the analogy with Eq. ( 3.37 ) for the Wigner distribution,
@xmath . We immediately have that for all inverse temperatures lower
than @xmath the solution of the Tricomi equation is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

being @xmath (Eq. ( 3.9 )).

See Fig. 4.7 . The eigenvalues distribution is symmetric with respect to
the center of its domain. In the next section, we will show that at
@xmath the system undergoes a second order phase transition related to
the @xmath symmetry, that mirrors the critical point at @xmath . The
function ( 4.34 ) or ( 4.35 ) is the arcsine distribution. Furthermore,
while @xmath does not depend on the temperature, @xmath shrinks around
@xmath as @xmath lowers, i.e., recalling the natural scaling ( 3.2 ),
@xmath for @xmath . In other words, the metastable branch for the system
leads to maximally entangled states, for very high @xmath ’s. However,
as already anticipated at the beginning of this chapter, we will show
that this solution, characterized by the same scaling coefficient @xmath
of positive temperatures, belongs a metastable branch for the system. On
the contrary, the stable branch will approach the region of states
showing a significant separability between systems @xmath and @xmath .
Furthermore, we will find that the volume occupied by states with @xmath
( @xmath ) diverges.

The thermodynamic functions @xmath (internal energy density) and @xmath
(entropy density) computed for the arcsine distribution are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.37)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The next section will be devoted to the analysis of the two critical
points for the metastable branch, @xmath and @xmath .

#### 4.3 Second order phase transitions for the metastable branch

The metastable branch for @xmath , is characterized by the presence of
two second order phase transitions for the system. Similarly to what
seen in the previous chapter for the range of positive temperatures,
they correspond to a change in the symmetry of the distribution of
eigenvalues. The thermodynamic quantity we will consider in order to
characterize these critical points is the density entropy.

The first phase transition of the system, as @xmath lowers from @xmath
to @xmath , appears at the gravity temperaure , @xmath , that is @xmath
. This point is at the convergence of two solutions, the Wishart and the
asymmetric arcsine distribution, given by Eqs. ( 4.16 ) and ( 4.23 )
respectively. We have also observed that the Wishart distribution at
@xmath shows a vanishing derivative at the right edge. See Figs. 3.6 (b)
and 4.5 (a). In order to characterize this phase transition we expand
Eqs. ( 4.17 ) and ( 4.24 ) for @xmath and invert the series:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.39)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

which, by setting @xmath , returns

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.40)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Therefore the entropy in the critical region @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.41)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The entropy and its first derivative are continuous at @xmath , while
its second derivative diverges at this point. See Fig. 4.8 . Thus the
critical exponent for the first derivative of the heat capacity is
@xmath .

By expanding the free energy for @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.42)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

If one relaxes the unit trace condition ( 3.8 ), our model coincides
with one that has been studied in the context of random matrix theories
[ Morris [1991] ] . The objects generated in this way, thru an
appropriate double scaling limit @xmath and @xmath correspond to
chequered polygonations of 2D surfaces, a theory of pure gravity.
Therefore, the constraint @xmath is irrelevant for the critical
exponents in this region. This is why we call this solution the gravity
distribution for the gas of eigenvalues. The second critical point for
the system is given by @xmath ( @xmath ), and corresponds to the
restoration of the @xmath symmetry of the density function of the
eigenvalues, namely from the asymmetric to the symmetric arcsine
distribution. We already noticed that it represents the specular
counterpart of the phase transition at @xmath . Similarly to the gravity
point, we expand Eqs. ( 4.26 ) and ( 4.33 ) for @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

and for @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

We finally expand the entropy for @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

The entropy together with its first derivative is continuous, while its
second derivative displays a finite jump ( @xmath ) at @xmath .

See Fig. 4.9 .
Let us briefly overview the behavior of the system for the scaling
@xmath . We plot the interesting behavior of the minimum eigenvalue
@xmath (see Eqs. ( 3.9 ) and ( 3.10 )) plotted in Fig. 4.10 .

For @xmath , @xmath coincides with the origin (left border of the
solution domain). This variable signals both second order phase
transitions at @xmath and at @xmath . The @xmath symmetry is broken for
@xmath . Notice, however, that the gravity critical point at @xmath
remains undetected by @xmath , while it is detected by the vertical
derivative displayed by the average and the width of the solution domain
at @xmath . See Fig. 4.11 . However, since @xmath and @xmath

lie on an analytic continuation of the solution obtained for @xmath , we
are not assured that this is a stable branch. In the next chapter we
will show that a first order phase transition occurs at @xmath in this
scaling. In Fig. 4.12 we overview the results presented for the scaling
@xmath by plotting the internal energy @xmath and the entropy density
@xmath as a function of the inverse temperature, @xmath . For @xmath we
have a stable branch for the system (solid line), whereas for @xmath we
will see that the solution is metastable. For the sake of future
convenience let us record that at @xmath the internal energy density
reads @xmath , at @xmath @xmath , and at @xmath we have @xmath .

#### 4.4 Entropy density as a function of average entanglement

Let us now reinterpret the behavior of the system directly from the
point of view of quantum information. In this section, we will study the
behavior of the entropy as a function of the internal energy, that is
the average purity (see Eq. ( 3.71 )). Its expression for @xmath and
@xmath is extremely involved. On the contrary for the other two ranges
of @xmath we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

which plugged into Eqs. ( 4.21 ) and ( 4.37 ) give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

As can be expected, by analytic continuation we find that @xmath for
@xmath has the same expression obtained for the interval @xmath (see Eq.
( 3.69 )). Let us now compute @xmath in the critical region unveiled in
the last section. At @xmath ( @xmath ) the average purity is @xmath . By
expanding @xmath for @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

and inverting the series we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.49)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath . From Eqs. ( 4.21 ) and ( 4.28 ) we get that for @xmath
the entropy is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.50)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Notice that even if we are exploring a metastable solution for the
system, and thus the Maxwell relations may not be satisfied, at @xmath
we have @xmath . Furthermore, the second order phase transition at
@xmath is unveiled by a divergence for @xmath of the third derivative of
the entropy, @xmath (see Fig. 4.13 ), while we have seen that its second
derivative with respect to @xmath diverges with different rates on both
sides of @xmath . This behavior can be justified by observing that the
solution @xmath found by minimizing the free energy in the physical
domain, is also a stationary point for the system. This can be inferred
from the plot in Fig. 4.3 (a) of the free energy on the boundary of the
domain, as @xmath and @xmath tend to @xmath (see Fig. 4.2 (a)).

Let us now consider the other critical point at @xmath ( @xmath ). We
have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.51)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.52)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.53)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

See Fig. 4.14 . Observe that in this case, the second derivative of the
entropy with respect to the internal energy is discontinuous, as found
by deriving @xmath with respect to @xmath .

Note incidentally that the point @xmath ( @xmath ), connecting real
solutions of Eq. ( 4.13 ), is not a critical point for the system.
Indeed for @xmath we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.54)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

It then follows that the entropy has a linear behavior for @xmath , that
is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

Indeed the divergences in the derivative of the entropy and in the
derivative of the inverse temperature with respect to @xmath at this
point compensate. In Fig. 4.15 we show the behavior of the entropy for
the metastable branch.

Let us briefly comment on the fact that the metastable branch which
emanates from the analytic continuation of the solution at positive
@xmath described in the previous chapter has not led us towards
separable states. See also Fig. 4.16 where we plot the entropy as a
function of the internal energy. We recall that in this scaling ( @xmath
) the average purity is @xmath , namely of @xmath . The eigenvalues
remain of @xmath (and so does purity) even though the temperature can be
(very) negative (as @xmath crosses @xmath ). In order to find separable
states we will have to look at the stable branch in the next chapter. We
conclude that until now we have studied the region of the Hilbert space
given by highly entangled states.

### Chapter 5 Negative temperatures: stable branch of separable states

In this chapter we will search the stable solution of the system at
negative temperatures. We will find that for @xmath the most probable
solution for the Coulomb gas of eigenvalues involves the evaporation of
one Schmidt coefficient from @xmath to @xmath . In other words, it will
appear a new phase for the system related to the set of separable
states. This solution will be associated to the appearance of a new
critical point for the system, whose nature will be different from the
phase transitions discussed in the previous chapters. In particular, by
maximizing the potential energy of the Coulomb gas, we will find that at
@xmath a competition starts between two solutions: one with all the
eigenvalues of order @xmath , and one with an isolated eigenvalue of
@xmath and all the others of @xmath , namely the typical and separable
phases. At @xmath we will unveil the coexistence of these two phases,
and the system undergoes a first order phase transition. Finally, for
@xmath the stable phase for Coulomb gas will be given by separable
states. However, in order to yield the correct thermodynamic limit in
this statistical analysis, we will need to properly modify the scaling
coefficient with respect to the stable solution of positive temperatures
(and the metastable branch for negative temperatures). This will
introduce a new scale in the inverse temperatures and, in particular,
the phase transition in the new scaling will be at @xmath .

In Sec. 5.1 we will discuss the new scaling for the system, which will
affect the saddle point equations, whose physical solution will be
obtained in Sec. 5.2 . In Sec. 5.3 we will look for the most probable
distribution of the Schmidt coefficients by maximizing the free energy
of the Coulomb gas, and then unveil the presence of the new separable
phase. In Sec. 5.4 we will discuss the thermodynamics of the system and
identify the first order phase transition from typical to separable
states. We will conclude this chapter with a brief overview about the
finite size corrections, in Sec. 5.5 : on the one hand we will explain
our numerical results, on the other hand we will provide a mapping
between the results shown in Chaps. 3 and 4 and the stable solution for
negative temperatures described in the next sections.

#### 5.1 Natural scaling for @xmath

From definition ( 2.7 ) of the partition function, one expects that for
any @xmath , as @xmath , the system approaches the region of the phase
space associated to separable states: here the purity is @xmath and thus
the scaling coefficient in Eqs. ( 2.7 )-( 2.8 ) is @xmath . From the
point of view of the parameter @xmath , this can be interpreted as
follows: by adopting the scaling @xmath for the exponent of the
partition function, we will explore the region @xmath of the scaling
@xmath introduced for positive temperatures. Notice that the critical
point @xmath for the solution at negative temperatures now reads @xmath
and escapes to @xmath in the thermodynamic limit, as pictorially shown
in Fig. 5.1 .

We will show that the solution ( 3.46 ), according to which all the
eigenvalues are @xmath , becomes metastable in the region of negative
temperatures, and the most probable distribution of the eigenvalues is
such that one eigenvalue is @xmath : this solution in the limit @xmath
will correspond to the case of separable states. By following an
approach similar to that adopted for positive temperatures, we will
first look for the set of eigenvalues @xmath satisfying the saddle point
equations ( 2.12 )-( 2.13 ) with @xmath , and get, as in Sec. 3.3 , a
continuous family of solutions. We will select among them the set
maximizing ( @xmath ) the free energy ( 2.11 ), with @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since we are approaching the limit @xmath the states occupying the
largest volume in phase space are separable. We define @xmath as the
maximum eigenvalue of order of unity, whereas the other eigenvalues are
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

From this it follows that we need to introduce the natural scaling only
for the sea of the first @xmath eigenvalues:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

In the limit @xmath we will describe the behavior of the rescaled
eigenvalues in terms of a continuous, non negative and normalized
density function as discussed in section Sec. 3.1 (see Eqs. ( 3.3 ) and
( 3.4 )).

#### 5.2 Saddle point equations

In order to solve the saddle point equations for the expression ( 2.12
)-( 2.13 ), we will separately consider the contribution of the first
@xmath eigenvalues and of the isolated eigenvalue:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
                 (5.4)
     @xmath      (5.5)
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the @xmath limit, by neglecting contributions of @xmath , we get:

  -- -------- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath         (5.7)
     @xmath   @xmath         (5.8)
     @xmath   @xmath         (5.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- -------

where @xmath is the density of the first @xmath eigenvalues and ( 5.8 )
is the condition deriving from the saddle point equation ( 5.5 )
associated to @xmath . By the same change of variables introduced in
Sec. 3.2 , see Eqs. ( 3.9 ) and ( 3.10 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , the solution of the integral equation
( 5.7 ) can be expressed in terms of @xmath . It can be easily shown
that the solution of this Tricomi equation is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the normalization constraint ( 5.9 ) on the rescaled eigenvalues
fixes the Lagrange multiplier

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The region of the parameter space @xmath such that the density of
eigenvalues @xmath is nonnegative reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that the physical domain for the sea of the first @xmath
eigenvalues has the same expression of the domain found for the range of
positive temperatures ( 3.20 ) at @xmath , namely @xmath (see Fig. 5.2 ,
which is the analog of Fig. 3.2 ).

This is consistent with the change in the temperature scaling from
@xmath to @xmath : we are “zooming” into the region near @xmath of the
range of temperatures analyzed in Chap. 3 . Furthermore, as could be
expected from what seen for positive temperatures, the solution of the
saddle point equations is a two parameter continuous family of
solutions. In the next section we will determine the distribution of
eigenvalues that maximizes the free energy of the Coulomb gas of
eigenvalues.

#### 5.3 Thermodynamics of the Coulomb gas

Will now set the basis for the thermodynamic characterization of the
Coulomb gas of the Schmidt coefficient, when the scaling coefficient is
@xmath . From Eqs. ( 5.1 ) and ( 5.2 ) we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

By applying the natural scaling we have ( 5.3 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.15)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.17)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Finally, in the limit @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.19)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

being @xmath the reduced free energy of the sea of eigenvalues

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.22)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

As shown for the range of positive temperatures and for the metastable
branch, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath will be the free energy, the internal
energy and the entropy densities of our Coulomb gas when computed at its
most probable distribution, i.e. on the solution @xmath which maximizes
the exponent of the partition function or equivalently minimizes @xmath
( @xmath ).

##### 5.3.1 Minimization problem: separable states

It is easy to see that @xmath , has no stationary points, but only a
global minimum @xmath at @xmath , indicated by the red dot in Fig. 5.3
(a). This point yields the Wishart distribution ( 3.45 ) or ( 3.46 )
found at @xmath for the case of positive temperatures:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where one should remember that now the @xmath ’s are also scaled by
@xmath , see Eq. ( 5.3 ). We stress that this result is valid for all
@xmath . In order to check this solution we have to compute the free
energy on the boundary of this domain, see Fig. 5.3 (b) (which is the
analog of Fig. 3.4 (a)).

Thus by minimizing the potential energy for the sea of eigenvalues we
get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

A new stationary solution, in which the largest isolated eigenvalue
@xmath becomes @xmath , can be found by minimizing @xmath and yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is defined for @xmath . This expression can be also obtained
directly by plugging Eq. ( 5.12 ) into the saddle point equation ( 5.8 )
corresponding to the isolated eigenvalue @xmath . This eigenvalue, of
@xmath , evaporates from the sea of eigenvalues of @xmath , as
pictorially represented in Fig. 5.4 .

The isolated eigenvalue moves at a speed @xmath , which diverges at
@xmath : another symptom of criticality. However, this new solution,
when it appears at @xmath , is not the global minimum of @xmath : it
becomes stable at a lower value of @xmath . This can be immediately seen
from the plot, in Fig. 5.5 , of the free energy ( 5.26 ) as a function
of the detached eigenvalue @xmath for different values of @xmath .

When @xmath there are no stationary points, but only a global minimum at
@xmath . According to the solution corresponding to this point, @xmath
is still in the sea of the eigenvalues @xmath and the stable density
function is given by the Wishart distribution ( 4.16 ) with the free
energy ( 4.22 ) (remember that, in the zoomed scale considered in this
chapter, @xmath corresponds to the very large inverse temperature @xmath
). At @xmath it appears a stationary point for the free energy density
corresponding to @xmath , see ( 5.27 ). Notice, however, that @xmath at
this point remains larger than its value at the global minimum, until
@xmath reaches @xmath . Finally, for @xmath the global minimum of @xmath
moves to the right, to the solution containing @xmath . The inverse
temperature @xmath represents a critical point for the system, which we
will soon see, undergoes a first order phase transition. The critical
temperature @xmath is the solution of the transcendental equation @xmath
, that is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

which yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The maximum eigenvalue is then a discontinuous function of the
temperature at @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

and in the limit @xmath , @xmath approaches @xmath : the state becomes
separable.
See Fig. 5.6 . We stress that Eqs. ( 5.23 ) and ( 5.27 ) are the
distributions of eigenvalues that gives the largest contribution to the
partition function, that is the the most probable distribution for the
isolated eigenvalue and for the sea of eigenvalues, respectively.

Thus, by inserting Eq. ( 5.27 ) in Eqs. ( 5.24 )-( 5.26 ), we determine
the internal energy @xmath , the entropy @xmath and the free energy
@xmath densities for the system:

-   for @xmath

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.31)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.32)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.33)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

-   for @xmath

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.34)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.35)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.36)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Summarizing, for @xmath the solution of saddle point equations
maximizing the free energy of the system is such that all eigenvalues
are @xmath , and through an appropriate scaling reduces to the Wishart
distribution described in Sec. 4.2 . We remark that, since the scaling
is @xmath , we are neglecting the contributions deriving from the sea of
eigenvalues, since they scale as @xmath (see Eq. ( 5.15 )). At @xmath a
new metastable solution appears with one eigenvalue of @xmath , and for
@xmath it becomes the stable solution, whereas the distribution of the
eigenvalues described in Sec. 4.2 becomes metastable. It is important to
emphasize that in the scaling @xmath , adopted in Chaps. 3 and 4 , the
interval of negative temperatures where the Wishart distribution refers
to all the eigenvalues, reads @xmath , and shrinks to zero in the
thermodynamic limit (that is why the solution found in Chap. 4 is
metastable).

#### 5.4 First order phase transition

We are now ready to unveil the presence of a first order phase
transition in the system. The branch ( 5.34 )-( 5.36 ) is stable for
@xmath while it becomes metastable for @xmath . On the other hand, the
solution @xmath , corresponding to ( 5.31 )-( 5.33 ) has a lower value
of @xmath for @xmath , and a higher one for @xmath . See Fig. 5.7 (a).
At @xmath there is a first order phase transition, signaled by a
discontinuity in the first derivative of the free energy, as shown in
Fig. 5.7 (b).

Indeed for @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

see Eq. ( 5.34 ). We have seen that at @xmath the free energy of the
global minimum at @xmath is equal to the free energy of the stationary
point at @xmath . Thus at this temperature our statistical model is
characterized by the coexistence of two phases, corresponding to typical
and separable states. In Fig. 5.8 we plot the entropy and the internal
energy densities versus @xmath .

Observe that at fixed temperature, @xmath , the internal energy of the
system goes from @xmath up to @xmath , while the entropy goes from
@xmath down to @xmath : the system moves from typical to separable
states. We have that @xmath and @xmath are given by convex combinations
of the boundaries of the associated intervals and describe the
coexistence of the two phases. More precisely, if our statistical
ensemble consists of @xmath identical copies of the system, we say that
during this first order phase transition a certain amount @xmath of them
is in the typical phase , that is with the largest Schmidt coefficient
null on average (i.e. of @xmath in the rescaling @xmath ), and a
complementary amount @xmath is in the seperable phase , the average of
@xmath being @xmath . Notice that there can be some (few) copies of the
system whose free energy is not maximal, in this sense we should have
written @xmath . However, these fluctuation can be considered negligible
for our scopes. Thus, as the energy of the system increases we have a
gradual transition from the typical to the separable phase. In
particular for a generic state @xmath , when we have both phases, the
internal energy @xmath and the entropy @xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

See Fig. 5.9 .

Since this first order phase transition refers to a reversible
isothermal process, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

We also have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath . The variation @xmath of the internal energy can
be interpreted as the specific latent heat of the evaporation of the
largest eigenvalue from the sea of the eigenvalues, from @xmath up to
@xmath . Summarizing, the entropy density as a function of the internal
energy density for the stable solution at negative temperatures reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is continuous together with its first derivative at @xmath , while
its second derivative shows a finite gap. See Figs. 5.10 and 5.11 .

At the critical point, for @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

see Eq. ( 5.34 ).

A few words of interpretation are necessary. As we have seen, it is the
stable branch of the solution that lead us to separable states at
negative temperatures. The analytic continuation of the stable solution
for positive temperatures emanates a metastable branch in which all
eigenvalues remain @xmath . By contrast, the new stable solution
consists in a sea of @xmath eigenvalues @xmath plus one isolated
eigenvalue @xmath . Let us now translate these results in terms of
purity (we stress again that @xmath is a Lagrange multiplier that fixes
the value of the purity of the reduced density matrix of our @xmath
dimensional system). The average entanglement of the states described by
the separable phase is given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.46)
  -- -- -- --------

Recall the scaling @xmath for the sea of eigenvalues. It is the analog
of ( 3.71 ) for the scaling @xmath . Assume that we pick a given
isopurity manifold in the original Hilbert space, defined by a given
finite value of the average purity @xmath . If we randomly select a
vector belonging to this isopurity manifold, its reduced density matrix
(for the fixed bipartition) will have one finite eigenvalue @xmath and
many small eigenvalues @xmath (yielding a correction @xmath to purity).
In this sense, the quantum state is largely separable. The probability
of finding in the above mentioned manifold a vector whose reduced
density matrix has, say, two (or more) finite eigenvalues @xmath and
@xmath (such that @xmath , modulo corrections @xmath ) is vanishingly
small. By contrast, remember (from the results of Chap. 3 ) that if the
isopurity manifold is characterized by a very small value @xmath of
purity, the eigenvalues of a randomly chosen vector on the manifold are
all @xmath (being distributed according to the semicircle or Wishart,
depending on the precise value of purity). This is the significance of
the statistical mechanical approach adopted in this thesis. We will come
back to this point in Chap. 6 .

#### 5.5 Finite-size corrections

The results of the previous section refer to the @xmath limit. In order
to understand how finite- @xmath corrections affect our conclusions we
have numerically maximized the free energy for various temperatures. The
two phases of the system discussed in the previous sections correspond
to the two solutions obtained by minimizing @xmath ( 5.1 ) on the @xmath
dimensional simplex of the normalized eigenvalues. Indeed, we have
numerically proved that @xmath presents two local minima at negative
temperatures: for @xmath the minimum giving the lower value of @xmath
corresponds to the distribution of eigenvalues ( 4.16 ), found in the
last chapter. The other minimum is reached when the highest eigenvalue
is @xmath . The point @xmath is a crossing point for these two
solutions, and for @xmath these two solutions are inverted, see Figs.
5.6 and 5.7 . Summarizing, there exists a negative temperature at which
the system undergoes a first order phase transition, from typical to
separable states. The first thing to notice is that qualitatively the
phase transition remains of first order even for finite @xmath . The
second is that the finite- @xmath corrections are quite relevant for the
location of the phase transition and the value of the maximum eigenvalue
as a function of @xmath . For example, for @xmath , the negative
critical temperature @xmath instead of @xmath . This is evinced from
Fig. 5.12 , which is the finite-size version of Fig. 5.7 . This can be
understood, as the corrections to @xmath around @xmath are quite large.
In the limit @xmath there is a hard wall for the maximum eigenvalue
@xmath , as the condition @xmath cannot be satisfied if @xmath . It is
therefore likely that all sorts of large corrections occur as @xmath
tends to @xmath , probably yielding an effective size to the corrections
which is a lower power of @xmath (or even possibly @xmath ). The limits
@xmath and @xmath do not commute.

To further explore this effect we have minimized @xmath with respect to
@xmath , for fixed values of the largest eigenvalue @xmath and for
different temperatures. The results for @xmath are shown in Fig. 5.13 .
One can see that between @xmath and @xmath there is a competition
between two well defined local minima, corresponding to the two
solutions discussed above.
At @xmath their free energies are equal. For higher @xmath the global
minimum corresponds to the solution ( 4.16 ), whereas on the other side
of @xmath the solution with @xmath minimizes @xmath . We have seen that
for @xmath the stable solution has no detached eigenvalues. By taking
into account the scaling @xmath we get that the solution is given by the
very first part of the gravity branch ( 4.22 ). In particular, recalling
the natural scaling ( 5.3 ) for eigenvalues, the maximum eigenvalue is
given by @xmath . On the other hand for @xmath the maximum eigenvalue is
given by ( 5.27 ). Therefore, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath can be retrieved from ( 4.17 ). The numerical results for
@xmath are compared with the expressions in Eq.  ( 5.47 ) in Fig. 5.14 .

The agreement is excellent. The corresponding free energy follows from (
5.36 ) and ( 4.22 ) with the appropriate scaling

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the limit @xmath we get @xmath , as expected from Eq. ( 5.33 ).
Notice that in order to have a correct finite size scaling of the
critical temperature @xmath one should take into account @xmath
corrections to the expression of @xmath , see Eq. ( 5.14 ). This would
enable a more exhaustive mapping between the two branches. This analysis
goes beyond our scopes. In the next chapter we will overview the results
of our statistical approach to bipartite entanglement, trying to connect
what found in the two scaling regimes @xmath and @xmath .

### Chapter 6 Overview

In this chapter we will summarize the main results obtained in the first
part of this thesis, dealing with the analysis of bipartite large
quantum systems in pure states. We will focus on those quantities that
are more directly related to physical intuition. In the classical
statistical mechanics approach we have adopted, the temperature plays
the usual role of a Lagrange multiplier, whose task is to fix the value
of energy (purity in our case). A given value of @xmath determines a set
of vectors in the projective Hilbert space whose reduced density
matrices have a given purity (isopurity manifold of quantum states). The
distribution of the eigenvalues of (the reduced density matrices
associated to) these vectors has been investigated in the last three
chapters and yields information on the separability (entanglement) of
these quantum states. The distribution of eigenvalues is the most
probable one [ Mehta [2004] ] , in the same way as the Maxwell
distribution of molecular velocities is the most probable one at a given
temperature. In this chapter we will abandon the temperature and fully
adopt purity as our physical parameter. In Sec. 6.1 we will determine
the probability distribution of the purity which is proportional to the
volume of the isopurity manifolds. Then in Sec. 6.2 we will overview the
different shapes of the distribution of eigenvalues for different phases
of the system, corresponding to different ranges of @xmath from @xmath
to @xmath .

#### 6.1 Entropy and volume of isopurity manifolds

Entropy counts the number of states with a given value of purity and is
proportional to the logarithm of the volume in the projective Hilbert
space. The explicit expressions of the entropy density @xmath as a
function of the purity @xmath of the state vectors in that volume, can
be read directly from Eqs. ( 3.69 ) and ( 5.43 ) for the stable
solution, by taking into account the correct scaling when the system
moves across different regions of the Hilbert space. In order to discuss
this delicate and important point let briefly recall the expression of
the partition function ( 2.7 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the dimension of subsystem @xmath in the state @xmath .
The power @xmath can be read as @xmath , where @xmath is the number of
degrees of freedom of @xmath . The scaling coefficient @xmath depends on
the degree of entanglement of the global system, or equivalently on the
temperature @xmath . In the region of positive temperatures, the purity
of the system scales as @xmath , and becomes an intensive quantity if
multiplied by @xmath , that is @xmath . The internal energy density is
then given by @xmath . On the other hand, when we approach the region of
separable states, @xmath , the purity is @xmath , from which it follows
that @xmath and @xmath . Thus, the entropy density (Eqs. ( 3.69 ) and (
5.43 )) reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath and @xmath , given by Eqs. ( 5.28 ) and ( 5.29 ). By
exponentiating expression ( 6.2 ) we get the volume @xmath (i.e. the
probability) of the isopurity manifolds

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

We have three main regions of entanglement, corresponding to the
maximally entangled phase ( @xmath ), the typical phase ( @xmath ) and
the separable phase ( @xmath ). Notice that @xmath refers to typical
states, @xmath , at the boundary between the solution for the positive
and the stable solution at negative temperatures. We have already
noticed in Sec. 5.5 that the thermodynamic potentials show large
corrections in the region @xmath . In particular, if on the one hand we
have neglected contributions of @xmath to the potential energy density (
5.14 ) in the region of negative temperatures ( @xmath ), on the other
hand the average purity of the system in the region of positive
temperatures ( @xmath ) is also of @xmath (see Eq. ( 3.71 )). In other
words when we derive the expression of the entropy as a function of the
internal energy we deal with the same order of fluctuations in @xmath
and @xmath . It follows that in order to yield a uniform connection
between the two branches at @xmath , we should have considered higher
order corrections in @xmath . However, this goes beyond our scopes. In
order to plot @xmath for finite @xmath , notwithstanding the presence of
these fluctuations, we have artificially modified the entropy as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

This function is continuous in @xmath , for finite @xmath , see Fig. 6.1
.

The presence of discontinuities in some derivatives of the entropy
detects the two phase transitions for the stable solution. Notice that,
as already pointed out, discontinuities of the @xmath -th derivative of
@xmath translate in discontinuities of the @xmath -th derivative of
@xmath . At @xmath there is a second order phase transition signaled by
a discontinuity in the third derivative, see Sec. 3.5 (Eq. ( 3.70 )).
The first order phase transition, which takes place between @xmath and
@xmath is signaled by discontinuities in the second derivative of the
entropy at those points. Actually, differently from @xmath , analyzed in
Sec. 5.4 (Eq. ( 5.4 )), the same check can not be explicitly performed
for @xmath , due to the large fluctuations in this region, mentioned
above.

Observe that entropy is unbounded from below: at both endpoints of the
range of purity, @xmath (maximally entangled states) and @xmath
(separable states), when the isopurity manifold shrinks to a vanishing
volume in the original Hilbert space, the entropy, being the logarithm
of this volume, diverges, and the number of vector states goes to zero
(compared to the number of typical vector states)

#### 6.2 Distribution of eigenvalues

In the previous chapters we have stressed that the presence of phase
transitions in the system can be easily read out from the behavior of
the distribution of the Schmidt coefficients, i.e. the eigenvalues of
the reduced density matrix @xmath of one subsystem. From Eq. ( 3.68 ) we
get the expression of the minimum eigenvalue @xmath as a function of
@xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

See Fig. 6.2 . We recall that @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath ,
Eqs. ( 3.37 ) and ( 3.38 ). The second order phase transition at @xmath
, associated to a @xmath symmetry breaking, is detected by a vanishing
gap.

On the other hand, the maximum eigenvalue @xmath coincides with the
upper edge of the sea of eigenvalues @xmath , as given by ( 3.68 ),
until it evaporates according to Eq. ( 5.34 ). Thus,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

as shown in Fig. 6.3 .

Notice that due to the double scaling in the maximum eigenvalue and the
purity in the two nearby intervals, @xmath and @xmath , we preferred to
separate the plot of @xmath vs @xmath in two distinct figures, Fig. 6.3
(a) and (b). In Chaps. 3 and 4 we have seen that in the different phases
the distribution of the eigenvalues of @xmath has very different
profiles. See Fig. 6.4 . While for @xmath the eigenvalues (all @xmath )
follow Wigner’s semicircle law (maximally entangled phase), they become
distributed according to Wishart for larger purities, @xmath (typical
phase), across the second order phase transition. This is a first
signature of separability: some eigenvalues vanish and the Schmidt rank
decreases. For even larger values of purity, @xmath , across the first
order phase transition, one eigenvalue evaporates, leaving the sea of
the other eigenvalues @xmath and becoming @xmath (separable phase). This
is the signature of factorization, fully attained when the eigenvalue
becomes @xmath at @xmath .

In the previous chapters, we have associated to each phase transition in
the system, a critical exponent, related to the behavior of the entropy
as a function of the inverse temperature @xmath . See the table in Fig.
6.5 .

For the first order phase transition, we have replaced the critical
exponent with the thermodynamic relation ( 5.42 ). Note that in this
case, at fixed temperature @xmath the purity, together with the entropy
of the system, varies in a finite interval associated to the coexistence
of the typical and separable phases.

We conclude the first part of this Thesis with an overview in Fig. 6.6
of the phenomenology of the phase transitions in bipartite entanglement.
Observe that while the second order phase transitions correspond to a
given value of the purity, the first order phase transition from typical
to separable states lies on a broad interval of @xmath , namely @xmath .
We have also included the two metastable branches. A metastable branch
is born at @xmath : it starts as Wishart, undergoes a second order phase
transition at @xmath (2D gravity), where a singularity is developed at
its right edge, then its support starts decreasing, undergoes a second
order phase transition at @xmath ( @xmath symmetry restoration) and
eventually becomes sharply peaked (with two singularities). The other
metastable branch is born at @xmath and corresponds to the separable
phase: it becomes stable at @xmath .

## Part II Mixed States

### Summary

In the first part of the thesis we have introduced a statistical
approach to the study of the behavior of bipartite entanglement of a
large quantum system in a pure state. In particular we have chosen as
entanglement measure the purity of one of the two subsystems, namely the
local purity of the global state. Nevertheless, pure states represent
only a special set of states as they refer to isolated quantum systems.
In practice physical systems are described by a statistical mixture of
pure states due to the interaction with the environment. In this second
part of the thesis we intend to generalize our statistical analysis to
the case of arbitrary mixed global states. Let us first observe that in
order to study the properties of bipartite entanglement for a large
quantum system in a mixed state, we should substitute the purity of one
of the two subsystems with its convex-roof counterpart, as seen in Chap.
1 . This considerably enhances the difficulty of the analytical
treatment of our problem and will not be discussed in this thesis. On
the other hand, a related interesting topic is the analysis of the
statistical distribution of the local mixedness of the global density
matrix, as an indicator of the average lower bound for the bipartite
entanglement (see Eq. ( 1.11 )). This problem will be tackled by
studying the moments of the local purity of the system.

This part of the thesis consists of three chapters. In Chap. 7 , by
following a standard approach in statistical mechanics, we will
determine the formal expression of the moments of the purity at a given
temperature. In fact, for the case of arbitrary mixed global states, due
to the nonfactorization of the integral over the unitary group, we
cannot directly compute the partition function by applying the method of
the steepest descent, as was done for the case of pure states. In Chap.
8 we will introduce a Gaussian approximation for the elements of the
unitary group acting on the global and local systems, in order to
determine the first moment of the purity at infinite temperature (
@xmath ), at @xmath , being @xmath the dimension of the subsystem whose
purity distribution we aim to study. This will lead to a first
generalization of the results achieved for the case of pure states in [
Page [1993] , Lloyd and Pagels [1988] , Facchi, Marzolino, Parisi,
Pascazio and Scardicchio [2008] ] . Finally in Chap. 9 , by exploiting
the symmetry properties of the twirling maps [ Vollebrech and Werner
[2001] ] and thru the solution of some basic integrals over the unitary
group due to Zuber [ Zuber [2008] ] , we will compute the exact
expression for the first two cumulants of the local purity at @xmath .
Our results, when reduced to the case of pure states, will be in
agreement with [ Scott and Caves [2003] , Giraud [2007a] ] . We will
conclude our analysis by determining the high temperature expansion of
the first moment of the local purity.

### Chapter 7 Statistical distribution of local purity

We will devote this chapter to the introduction of the physical and
mathematical setup that generalizes to the case of mixed quantum states
the statistical approach introduced in Part 1 for the study of the local
mixedness of pure states. In Sec. 7.1 we will introduce the concept of
local purity for a generic mixed bipartite state. It will play, in Sec.
7.2 , the role of energy of the system in the definition of the
partition function for a generic set of states with a given value of the
global purity. Finally in Sec. 7.3 we will write the formal expression
for the moments of the local purity, with respect to the canonical
ensemble, in order to characterize its statistical distribution.

#### 7.1 Entanglement and local mixedness

Consider a bipartite system given by two subsystems @xmath and @xmath ,
described by the Hilbert space @xmath , with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
. Without loss of generality we will assume that @xmath . In this second
part of the thesis we will slightly change the notation introduced in
the first part. In particular we will define the total Hilbert space as
@xmath , being @xmath our bipartite system, and will denote with @xmath
, @xmath , the spectrum of the global states in @xmath , while the
eigenvalues of each subsystems will be indicated by @xmath and @xmath ,
for @xmath and @xmath . (Recall that in the first part of the thesis the
symbol @xmath , @xmath , referred to the eigenvalues of the states
belonging to @xmath ).

In the previous chapters we have explored the total Hilbert space @xmath
from the point of view of bipartite entanglement between @xmath and
@xmath , that is in terms of manifolds with a fixed value of the purity
of one of the two subsystems (isopurity manifolds). The main result of
our analysis was the computation of the probability of finding a random
pure state (of a large quantum system) with a given value of average
entanglement between @xmath and @xmath , if sampled according to the
unique invariant Haar measure.

As mentioned in Chap. 1 , in general the states of @xmath are
represented by the set of nonnegative unit trace operators (density
matrices) @xmath which act on the Hilbert space @xmath , and reduce to
(projections onto) vectors in the Hilbert space @xmath if and only if
they have only one nonnull eigenvalue (equal to @xmath ). We indicate
with @xmath the set of all the states of @xmath and with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

the purity of an arbitrary state @xmath . The latter quantity provides a
characterization of the global mixedness of the system and induces a
partition of @xmath into a collection of distinct subsets

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The minimum value of @xmath is attained when @xmath is in the completely
mixed state @xmath , whereas the maximum @xmath is attained over the set
@xmath which includes all pure states @xmath . For each @xmath the
quantyties

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

represent its @xmath - local and @xmath - local purity functions, @xmath
and @xmath being the reduced density matrices of the subsystems @xmath
and @xmath , respectively. Notice that the local purities of @xmath can
be different in general, and vary in different ranges:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Clarifying the connection between the global and local purities of a
state is an important problem of quantum information theory [ Bose and
Vedral [2000] , Adesso, Serafini and Illuminati [2004] , Mazzola,
Bellomo, Lo Franco and Compagno [2010] ] which is closely related to the
characterization of bipartite entanglement [ Gühne and Tóth [2009] ,
Bruss [2002] b ] . In particular we have seen that for the pure states
@xmath of @xmath , belonging to the set @xmath , due to the Schmidt
decomposition ( 1.5 ), the @xmath and the @xmath -local purities
coincide

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and provide a measure of the bipartite entanglement between @xmath and
@xmath : the smaller @xmath is, the larger is the entanglement contained
in @xmath , see Sec. 1.2.2 . The double index of @xmath refers to the
equality between the local purities when the global state is pure (see
Eq. ( 7.5 )).

#### 7.2 The statistical approach: partition function

In the first part of the thesis, we have characterized the bipartite
entanglement between @xmath and @xmath by studying the statistical
distribution of @xmath on @xmath . In this section we will generalize
this statistical approach, based on the canonical ensemble, to the case
of generic states, being the pure states only a special class of them.

Let us briefly recall what seen for the @xmath . We have introduced the
partition function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the local purity @xmath of @xmath plays the role of the internal
energy density of the system and @xmath is a Lagrange multiplier which
fixes the value of the purity/energy selecting an isopurity manifold [
Sinolecka, Zyczkowski and Kus [2001] ] . See Eq. ( 2.7 ) for comparison:
here the coefficient @xmath , related to the scaling properties of the
system, has been reabsorbed in the definition of the fictitious
temperature. We also have that, @xmath is a (normalized) measure on the
space of pure states @xmath . From the structure of complex vector space
of @xmath , we have that the natural choice for @xmath has been induced
by the Haar measure @xmath on the unitary group @xmath , through the
mapping @xmath with @xmath an arbitrary reference unit vector of @xmath
. Noticing then that for every @xmath the reduced density matrix @xmath
can be written as @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath , the measure induced
over the density matrices @xmath by @xmath , factorizes into the product
of a measure over the unitary group @xmath (related to the eigenvectors
of @xmath ) and a measure @xmath over the @xmath dimensional simplex of
its eigenvalues @xmath , @xmath [ Życzkowski, Horodecki, Sanpera and
Lewenstein [1998] , Życzkowski [1999] ] . Thus the partition function
becomes

  -- -- -- -------
           (7.7)
  -- -- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the measure on the spectrum, with @xmath the unit step function and
@xmath a normalization coefficient, see Eqs. ( 2.5 ) and ( 2.6 ).

A natural question is what happens when the system @xmath is in a mixed
state @xmath of purity @xmath , rather than in a pure state. A
generalization of Eq. ( 7.6 ) is obtained by replacing @xmath with (say)
the @xmath -local purity @xmath of Eq. ( 7.3 ) and the measure @xmath
with a proper measure @xmath on the set @xmath . This yields the
following definition of the partition function of the @xmath -local
purity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a probability measure on the set of mixed states (see
below), and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a normalization factor. An analogous expression for the @xmath -local
purity partition function @xmath is obtained by simply replacing @xmath
with @xmath in Eq. ( 7.9 ). Notice however that for @xmath , @xmath will
in general differ from @xmath . Moreover, it is worth stressing that the
function @xmath provides only statistical information on the local
mixedness of @xmath , but not directly on its bipartite entanglement
properties: this is due to the fact that for generic mixed states @xmath
of @xmath the local purities @xmath and @xmath are not entanglement
measures, see Sec. 1.3.2 . We have also seen that a generalization of
Eq. ( 7.6 ) that retains the ability of characterizing the statistical
properties of the bipartite entanglement of @xmath for @xmath could in
principle be constructed by replacing @xmath with its convex-roof

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the maximum is taken over all ensembles @xmath which provide a
convex decomposition of the mixed state @xmath (e.g. see [ Bennett, Di
Vincenzo, Smolin and Wootters [1996] , Cornelio and de Oliveira [2010] ]
). Eq. ( 7.11 ) coincides with Eq. ( 1.11 ) being @xmath . The quantity
@xmath is a proper measure of the bipartite entanglement, but the
resulting partition function does not allow for a simple analytic
treatment and will not be discussed in this thesis. The average local
purity we will determine with our statistical approach can be seen as
the average lower bound for the bipartite entanglement of the global
system, with respect to the bipartition @xmath .

Finally, another delicate point is that, differently from what seen for
the case of pure states, there is no unique measure on mixed states [
Życzkowski and Sommers [2007] ] . Indeed, as previously discussed for
@xmath , the Hermitian matrix @xmath can be always diagonalized by a
unitary rotation, and as consequence we can write the measure @xmath as
the product of a measure on the @xmath dimensional symplex of the
eigenvalues and a measure of on the unitary group @xmath related to the
eigenvectors. However, if on the one hand it would be natural to take
the Haar measure on @xmath so that @xmath , on the other hand the
measure on the eigenvalues can be chosen in different possible ways [
Slater [1999] ] . Thus, we need to properly specify the choice of @xmath
, since the consistency requirement that for pure states Eq. ( 7.9 )
should reduce back to Eq. ( 7.6 ), i.e. @xmath , does not eliminate such
ambiguity. In order to overcome this point we will use a balanced
purification strategy. In other words we introduce a composite Hilbert
space

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is @xmath and @xmath are isomorphic Hilbert spaces. In this @xmath
dimensional Hilbert space, each @xmath of @xmath can be represented by
those pure states @xmath which provide a purification for such density
matrix, i.e. which satisfy the identity

  -- -- -- --------
           (7.13)
  -- -- -- --------

Thanks to this identification we can now induce a measure on @xmath by
sampling the pure states on @xmath according to the unique, unitarily
invariant Haar measure which, as usual, is induced by the Haar measure
on the unitary group @xmath through the mapping @xmath , where @xmath is
an arbitrary reference vector and @xmath . Thus, with this choice the
partition function becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where in computing @xmath we have used the fact that the reduced density
matrix of subsystem @xmath is obtained from @xmath by tracing over
@xmath and @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Analogously to what seen for the pure case, @xmath , by writing @xmath
with @xmath , we finally get

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where @xmath is the Haar measure on @xmath and

  -- -- -- --------
           (7.17)
  -- -- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that, from the properties of the Euler gamma function @xmath ,
the normalization constant @xmath concides with @xmath in Eq. ( 2.6 ) if
we replace @xmath and @xmath with @xmath , namely @xmath is equivalent
to @xmath in Eq. ( 7.8 ) for @xmath . The above definition is equivalent
to have identified the measure @xmath of Eq. ( 7.9 ) with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the case of pure states, i.e. @xmath , when the density operator of
the system reduces to @xmath , the matrix @xmath becomes a rank one
projection. Thus expression ( 7.2 ) reduces to ( 7.7 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 7.3 Asymptotic behavior and analysis of moments

In the first part of this thesis we have applied the method of the
steepest descent in order to determine the leading contribution to the
partition function at @xmath . This analysis could be performed because
of the factorization of the integration over the unitary group. It led
to a complete characterization (in the thermodynamic limit) of the
statistical distribution of the local purity of @xmath , @xmath (and
hence of the bipartite entanglement of the system) computed with respect
to a canonical ensemble for different regions of the Hilbert space,
selected by the inverse temperature @xmath . In other words, in the
limit of large @xmath , we have determined the most probable
distribution of the Schmidt coefficients which maximizes the
distribution ( 3.64 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e. typical states with respect to the above canonical measure. In this
context we have noticed that the system undergoes two main phase
transitions (for the stable solution), related to different
distributions of the eigenvalues @xmath of the typical states: a second
order phase transition, mentioned above, associated to a @xmath symmetry
breaking, and related to the vanishing of some eigenvalues of @xmath ,
followed by a first order phase transition, associated to the
evaporation of the largest eigenvalue from the sea of the others. By
tuning the inverse temperature (or equivalently by deforming the Haar
measure with the non uniform weight @xmath ), we have determined the
statistical behavior of the system at different levels of entanglement.
As noticed in Sec. 3.3.3 , this is equivalent to determine all the
moments of the purity at different values of @xmath .

For @xmath , the integration over the unitary group @xmath in Eq. ( 7.2
) does not factorize, making the computation of the partition function
far more complicated than for the case of pure states ( 7.7 ). The only
notable exception is the case of maximally mixed states (i.e. @xmath ),
when the Dirac delta of Eq. ( 7.2 ) selects a unique diagonal matrix
@xmath (the totally mixed state of @xmath ). This makes the exponent
equal to @xmath for all @xmath and yields the following exact expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, even if for @xmath the situation is much more complicated, for
small @xmath , the evaluation of the moments @xmath associated with
@xmath admits exact analytical treatment, as we will show in the next
two chapters. The moments of the purity for a generic set of states
@xmath are formally defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

and represent the average value of @xmath over the canonical measure

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath as in Eq. ( 7.19 ). For pure states ( @xmath ) they coincide
with the moments @xmath defined in Eq. ( 3.63 ). In the case of a
totally mixed state ( @xmath ) Eq. ( 7.22 ) yields instead values which
are independent from the temperature @xmath , namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

For intermediate values of @xmath and for sufficiently small @xmath we
can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

which has been obtained by expanding Eq. ( 7.23 ) up to the first order
contribution in @xmath . Incidentally, notice that in agreement with
Eq. ( 7.25 ), the @xmath -corrections of Eq. ( 7.26 ) vanish when @xmath
. The above expression shows that, at least in the high temperature
regime, we can focus on the unbiased moments @xmath . In the remaining
part of the thesis we will compute the moments of the purity and infer,
at the end of Chap. , the asymptotic behavior of the average local
purity in the mean field approximation.

### Chapter 8 Gaussian approximation

In this chapter we will focus on the first moment of the local purity
@xmath for a generic state @xmath . In particular, we will consider two
distinct approaches based on the Gaussian approximation for the elements
of the unitary matrices belonging to @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is
the dimension of the global system.

In Sec. 8.1 we will use the fact that the integral over the eigenvalues
of the density operator @xmath , with purity @xmath , and the integral
over the unitary group associated to its eigenvectors can be evaluated
independently, the former by introducing the empirical density
distribution of the eigenvalues, the latter by approximating the
elements of the unitary matrices acting on @xmath as independent and
identical complex Gaussian random variables. In Sec. 8.2 , we will
follow a different strategy which applies the same Gaussian
approximation to the enlarged Hilbert space @xmath . Both approaches
will lead to the evaluation of the first moment of the local purity at
the order @xmath .

#### 8.1 Divide and conquer

The approach we will discuss in this section for the computation of the
first moment @xmath of the local purity @xmath is based on the
possibility to perform separately the integral over the unitary group
and the integral over the spectrum. Indeed, let us consider the
expression ( 7.2 ) of the partition function. It is worth introducing
the spectral decomposition of @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath with @xmath are the projections over the reference basis
@xmath , that is @xmath , @xmath . By defining the reduced density
matrix @xmath , associated to each eigenstate @xmath of @xmath , the
partition function becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . As already observed the explicit computation of @xmath of
Eq. ( 8.2 ) involves a nontrivial integration over the unitary group [
Itzykson and Zuber [1980] ] . We will consider here the first order
moment ( 7.23 ). We get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath                     (8.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath and @xmath stands for two independent averages (the first
over the eigenvalues and the second over the unitary matrices @xmath ).
We will separately compute these quantities in Sec. 8.1.1 and 8.1.2 ,
respectively, and then compute the first order moment of the purity
@xmath up to order @xmath .

##### 8.1.1 Average over the eigenvalues

In order to evaluate the average over the eigenvalues @xmath , @xmath ,
we will introduce the empirical density function of the eigenvalues
@xmath and the joint density function @xmath . Given a typical
realization of eigenvalues, the empirical density function is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The above definition enables to encode the information on the
eigenvalues @xmath , @xmath , in the probability distribution @xmath on
the interval @xmath . The empirical density function is thus correctly
normalized

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

We also have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where, in fact, in order to compute @xmath we should take the average of
( 8.4 ) over the distribution of the eigenvalues (in particular we get
@xmath ). We will show that the contribution of fluctuations is of
higher order in @xmath . If the global system is in a generic mixed
state, with purity @xmath , the distribution of the eigenvalues must
satisfy the constraint

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since the purity is of @xmath , the above condition can be satisfied
only if one or more eigenvalues are of @xmath . In what follows we will
first consider the simplest scenario with only one dominating
eigenvalue, and then we will generalize the analysis to the case of more
than one eigenvalue of order @xmath , proving the equivalence of the two
approaches.

###### One eigenvalue of @xmath

Let assume to have one eigenvalue of @xmath , detached from the sea of
the first @xmath eigenvalues of @xmath , namely

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath for @xmath . The constraint ( 8.7 ) is satisfied up to order
@xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this hypothesis, the distribution of the eigenvalues ( 8.4 ) splits
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the normalized probability density of the first @xmath
eigenvalues

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Its first two moments are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

As before, @xmath has been computed by neglecting the average over the
distribution of the eigenvalues. This choice will be justified at the
end of this subsection. In order to evaluate the average @xmath , @xmath
we need to introduce the joint empirical density function, which
similarly to Eq. ( 8.4 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

the prime standing for @xmath . Under the above hypothesis the joint
density probability splits as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have introduced the joint probability density of the sea:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

It easy to show that the above definition can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Notice that @xmath is the marginal probability of the above joint
density function, that is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, given @xmath and @xmath belonging to the sea of the first
@xmath eigenvalues, we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and from Eqs. ( 8.12 ) and ( 8.13 ) we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We are now ready to compute the explicit expression for @xmath and
@xmath (with @xmath ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In the limit of large values of @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.23)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Notice that the average values computed above show fluctuations of
@xmath and @xmath . We will soon show that this result does not depend
on our hypothesis on the distribution of the eigenvalues, and can be
generalized to the case of more eigenvalues of @xmath .

Before considering this point, let us compute the density distribution
of the sea of eigenvalues in the thermodynamic limit. Similarly to what
seen in Sec. 3.1 we can introduce the natural scaling for the sea of
eigenvalues

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

and define, in the thermodynamic limit, the density function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The distribution @xmath is normalized and satisfies the constraint ( 8.8
):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.27)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

being @xmath the domain of the scaled eigenvalues and @xmath . In
analogy to the Wishart distribution found at @xmath for the eigenvalues
@xmath in Chap. 3 , we set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are determined by conditions ( 8.27 ) and ( 8.28
):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Therefore, expression ( 8.29 ) becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

being @xmath and @xmath . Notice that when @xmath , @xmath reduces to
the unbiased average density at @xmath found for the distribution of the
eigenvalues of the reduce density matrix @xmath in Chap. 3 . By
comparing ( 8.11 ) and ( 8.26 ) we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which all moments can be easily evaluated

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.34)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In particular, @xmath , in agreement with ( 8.13 ), that is @xmath .

###### @xmath eigenvalues of @xmath

In general, for large @xmath , a density matrix @xmath with purity
@xmath can have finite number @xmath of eigenvalues of order @xmath ,
say @xmath for @xmath , with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the first @xmath eigenvalues @xmath for @xmath . Thus the constraint
on the purity of the global system is satisfied up to order @xmath ,
that is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The empirical density ( 8.10 ) generalizes to

  -- -- -- --------
           (8.37)
  -- -- -- --------

with the empirical density for the sea of the first @xmath eigenvalues
of @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus in this set up the joint probability density shows three main
contributions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.39)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

being @xmath the joint probability density for the sea, analog to ( 8.16
),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can now compute the average product of eigenvalues @xmath , @xmath .
For @xmath , from Eq. ( 8.37 ) we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.41)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

On the other hand for @xmath , from Eq. ( 8.39 ) we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.42)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                         
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

that recalling condition ( 8.35 ) becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

By comparing Eqs. ( 8.23 ) and ( 8.24 ) with Eqs. ( 8.41 ) and ( 8.43 ),
we conclude that the average over the eigenvalues does not depend on our
assumption on the (finite) number of eigenvalues of @xmath .

##### 8.1.2 Unitary group average

The next step, in order to compute the first moment of the purity ( 8.3
), is the evaluation of the average over the unitary group

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , and @xmath , @xmath being the @xmath -th vector of the
reference basis, with @xmath .

Let us, first of all, choose a convenient representation of the tensor
product structure of @xmath , i.e. @xmath , with @xmath . Given @xmath
and @xmath , we define the tensor product of the two vectors as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath being the integer part of @xmath . Therefore, for any @xmath ,
the representation of the partial trace

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to write the explicit expression for @xmath , we have to choose
the computational orthonormal basis for the system. Let @xmath be an
element of the unitary group @xmath . Its columns @xmath , with @xmath ,
form an orthonormal basis of @xmath , i.e. @xmath , as follows from
@xmath . Thus, we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the elements of the reduced density matrix @xmath , @xmath , are
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the last two relations we can finally write the explicit expression
for @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us compute the average ( 8.44 ) over the unitary group. If @xmath is
sampled according to the Haar measure, we can parametrize its columns as
@xmath for @xmath : the phases @xmath are independent identically
distributed (i.i.d.) random variables with a uniform probability density
on @xmath , and the squared moduli @xmath are uniformly distributed on
the simplex @xmath [ Życzkowski and Sommers [2007] ] . Since the volume
of the simplex is @xmath , the joint probability density of the square
moduli, on @xmath , reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

and therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

In appendix B we show how @xmath random variables can be generated with
a uniform distribution on the simplex @xmath .
If we integrate out the last @xmath variables, @xmath , by defining

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and finally

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

In particular for @xmath we get the probability density of the amplitude
of an arbitrary element of @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath -th moments of this density function are given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Beta function,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

For large @xmath ( @xmath ) the probability density @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

It follows that in the thermodynamic limit we can approximate @xmath
with @xmath , i.i.d. random variables with probability density functions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

We then have that @xmath ’s are i.i.d. complex Gaussian random variables
with zero mean and variance @xmath . Notice that, in the above
approximation, unitarity is satisfied at order @xmath . Indeed,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

while

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

The above quantity measures the additional fluctuations introduced by
the Gaussian approximation, which enables us to easily evaluate the
average

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

Indeed, by @xmath and @xmath it follows that, when @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

while, for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
              
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Incidentally, notice that ( LABEL:eq:i=j ) can be computed exactly by
using ( 8.58 ) and reads @xmath . Therefore,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.68)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

When @xmath , one gets @xmath .

##### 8.1.3 Average purity

From the eigenvalue averages ( 8.23 ) and ( 8.24 ), and from the average
( 8.68 ) over the unitary group we can evaluate the average purity at
order @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.69)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

which for @xmath yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that for @xmath Eq. ( 8.69 ) is in agreement with the
thermodynamic behavior of the pure states distribution computed in [
Scott and Caves [2003] , Facchi, Marzolino, Parisi, Pascazio and
Scardicchio [2008] ] for the general case of unbalanced bipartions.
Furthermore, Eq. ( 8.70 ) yields @xmath , according to the results of
Chap. 3 for @xmath (see Fig. 3.8 where @xmath ), which can be also
inferred from Eq. ( 3.53 ) for @xmath .

#### 8.2 Multiply and conquer

In this section we introduce an alternative approach for the computation
of the cumulants of the partition function @xmath of Eq. ( 8.2 ) that
will allow us to determine the leading terms of the average purity
@xmath . We will then compute the first moment of the distribution of
the local purity and compare the result with the one obtained in the
previous section. In particular, we go back to expression ( 7.2 ) of the
partition function which involves the integration over the larger
unitary group @xmath acting on the enlarged purification space @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.71)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here, @xmath , where @xmath is a reference state and @xmath an element
of the unitary group @xmath . If we choose the vector @xmath as
reference state, the partition function ( 8.71 ), according to the
tensor product representation introduced in Sec. 8.1.2 , reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the explicit expression of the Haar measure over the unitary group
for the representation @xmath , @xmath , with the joint probability
density @xmath given by Eq. ( 8.53 ). By introducing the simplified
notation, @xmath , we rewrite the partition in the more compact form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the Haar measure over the unitary group reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

With the same technique introduced in the first part of this chapter,
let us determine the explicit expression for the purity for @xmath and
@xmath . The matrix elements of the density matrix @xmath according to
the notation introduced in Sec. 8.1.2 are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

We then get that the purity of the global system, whose value is
constrained to be @xmath , is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

whereas for the purity of subsystem @xmath we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Analogously to what seen in Sec. 8.1.2 , for large @xmath we will
consider the @xmath ’s as i.i.d. complex Gaussian random variables, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

The fluctuations due to this approximation scale as @xmath (see Eqs. (
8.62 ) - ( 8.64 )). However, will show that the fluctuations of the
average purity are of order @xmath . We now have all the elements for
obtaining an alternative – and more direct – derivation of ( 8.69 ).

##### 8.2.1 Average purity

The average purity ( 8.3 ) reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

and involves 4-point correlation functions the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . See Eq. ( LABEL:eq:pAz ). The two
dominant contributions come from the contractions @xmath and @xmath that
involve sums over @xmath or @xmath terms in ( LABEL:eq:pAz ). The
remaining contractions yield higher order corrections. The first
contraction reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

hence the first leading term is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

The second contraction reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the condition @xmath is equivalent to @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus the other dominant contribution reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

which, by virtue of ( 8.77 ), yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand, if we require both the conditions @xmath and @xmath
for @xmath and @xmath to be satisfied, we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

Other correlations between the above indices lead to higher order
corrections. Summing up the results we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

in agreement with ( 8.69 ), and with the first cumulant computed in [
Facchi, Marzolino, Parisi, Pascazio and Scardicchio [2008] ] for both
balanced and unbalanced bipartitions, at @xmath .

The techniques discussed in this chapter can be generalized to the
computation of the leading terms of the higher order moments of the
local purity. In the next chapter we will exactly compute the first two
moments of the local purity for a generic set of states in @xmath ,
confirming the results found in the previous section thru the Gaussian
approximation.

### Chapter 9 Exact moments and twirling maps

In this chapter we will determine the high temperature expansion of the
first moment of the local purity, from the exact computation of its
first two moments for @xmath . This generalizes previous results
achieved for the case of pure states both in the thermodynamic limit [
Lubkin [1978] , Lloyd and Pagels [1988] , Życzkowski and Sommers [2007]
, Facchi, Marzolino, Parisi, Pascazio and Scardicchio [2008] ] and for
systems with finite dimension [ Scott and Caves [2003] , Giraud [2007a]
] . In Sec. 9.1 we will establish a formal connection between our
problem and the theory of quantum channels. We will exploit the symmetry
properties of the so called twirling transformations in order to compute
the exact expression of the first moment of the purity of one subsystem
for the case of pure states and then, through a purification scheme
apply the same strategy to the case of arbitrary mixed states. However
the generalization of this procedure to the computation of higher
moments is very hard to be performed, since the purification procedure
introduces a higher number of copies of the system making the structure
of the total Hilbert space more involved. In Sec. 9.2 we will introduce
an alternative approach based on the solution of some basic integrals
over the unitary group. We will then compute the exact expression of the
first two cumulants, and determine in Sec. 9.3 the high temperature
expansion of the first moment of the local purity.

#### 9.1 Exact computation of the first moment by a twirling map

In this section we will determine the exact expression of the first
moment of the local purity of an arbitrary mixed state. In particular we
will exploit the properties of the so called twirling transformations [
Vollebrech and Werner [2001] , Lee, Chi, Oh and Kim [2003] , Hayashi,
Markham, Murao, Owari and Virmani [2008] , Bennett, Di Vincenzo, Smolin
and Wootters [1996] , Bennett, Brassard, Popescu, Schumacher, Smolin and
Wootters [1996] ] . This approach will also establish a formal
connection between our problem and the theory of quantum channels. We
start in Sec. 9.1.1 by deriving a general expression for the moments
@xmath in the case of pure @xmath (i.e. the quantities @xmath of Eq. (
3.52 )) and verify that it yields the exact value given by Page [ Page
[1993] , Giraud [2007a] , Scott and Caves [2003] ] for @xmath . We will
then generalize this technique to the case of mixed @xmath in Sec. 9.1.2
, and compute the exact expression of the first moment of the local
purity.

##### 9.1.1 Pure initial states

Let us consider a fixed (normalized) pure state @xmath of the global
system @xmath and parametrize the pure states of @xmath through the
mapping @xmath , with @xmath distributed according to the unique
invariant Haar measure @xmath , as done in Chap. 2 . The reduced density
matrix of subsystem @xmath associated to @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is an orthonormal basis of @xmath , with @xmath . From Eq.
( 9.1 ) the local purity of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where in the last term we used the property of the trace @xmath , for
any operator @xmath on @xmath , and write the resulting expression as a
product of two expectation values on @xmath . We can recast Eq. (
LABEL:eq:purityPureV ) into a more compact form by doubling the Hilbert
space, i.e. adding the auxiliary copies @xmath and @xmath of @xmath and
@xmath , respectively. Namely,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

that is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath               (9.4)
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- -------

Here, the trace is performed over all degrees of freedom (i.e. @xmath ),
@xmath is the identity operator on @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the swap operator on @xmath . The swap operator is a unitary,
self-adjoint transformation which, for all operators @xmath and @xmath
on @xmath and @xmath , gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Recall that by definition of the Haar measure on @xmath , the first
moment @xmath of Eq. ( 3.52 ) is obtained by averaging over all possible
@xmath (see also Sec. 2.1 ), that is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath is the Completely Positive Trace
Preserving (CPTP) twirling channel [ Vollebrech and Werner [2001] , Lee,
Chi, Oh and Kim [2003] , Hayashi, Markham, Murao, Owari and Virmani
[2008] , Bennett, Di Vincenzo, Mor, Shor, Smolin and Terhal [1999] ]
which transforms the operators @xmath of @xmath into

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath being the usual Haar measure. This map plays an important role in
quantum information theory where it was first introduced as a tool for
characterizing the distillability of bipartite entanglement [ Bennett,
Brassard, Popescu, Schumacher, Smolin and Wootters [1996] , Bennett, Di
Vincenzo, Smolin and Wootters [1996] ] . It has several properties which
allow us to simplify the calculation. For instance, it is known that
@xmath maps all the states of the system into (generalized) Werner
states [ Vollebrech and Werner [2001] , Lee, Chi, Oh and Kim [2003] ] .
Furthermore it is self-adjoint – i.e. its description in Heisenberg
picture, when we extend the action of quantum channels from density
matrices to linear operators on @xmath , coincides with @xmath . In
particular, this last property can be used to rewrite ( 9.7 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

One of the main reasons that make the twirling channels very useful for
our scopes is that the explicit expression for the action of @xmath can
be obtained by exploiting the symmetry of @xmath . In particular it is
possible to show that @xmath can be decomposed as a linear combination
of projectors on the symmetric and antisymmetric subspaces of @xmath
(with respect to the bipartition @xmath ). More precisely, introducing
the swap operator which exchanges @xmath with @xmath (or equivalently
@xmath with @xmath and @xmath with @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

it can be shown that the action of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.11)
                                         
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                         
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the dimension of @xmath and @xmath is the identity
operator on @xmath . This is the central formula of our approach with
the twirling transformations, and will lead to the exact computation of
the first moment of the local purity both for pure and mixed global
states. This can be achieved for @xmath , either using Eq. ( 9.7 ) or
Eq. ( 9.9 ). We have first to compute the quantities @xmath and @xmath
with @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (9.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where in the second expression we have used the fact that @xmath is
invariant uder @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Replacing all this in Eq. ( 9.11 ) we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and thus

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.15)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

(Here we exploited the fact that @xmath ). Notice that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

while

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, by using the condition @xmath and the identities

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

which coincides with the exact value found in [ Giraud [2007a] ] , see
Eq. ( 3.3.3 ).

We mention that the same technique can also be applied to higher moments
@xmath . The extension of Eq. ( 9.7 ) for @xmath is obtained by
introducing @xmath copies of @xmath organized in @xmath couples, i.e.
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . We then introduce the following
generalized twirling transformation acting on @xmath @xmath @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath is a generic operator on @xmath . This channel
is a proper generalization of the map @xmath whose properties can be
established along the lines of [ Zuber [2008] ] . With this choice we
can express the @xmath -th moment of the purity ( 3.52 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath is the identity on the @xmath copies of @xmath ,
i.e. @xmath , and @xmath is the swap operator which exchanges subsystems
@xmath with @xmath pairwisely, i.e. @xmath .

##### 9.1.2 Mixed initial states

Consider now the case @xmath . Following the parameterization introduced
in Sec. 7.2 we split the average over the set @xmath of the density
matrices of global purity @xmath , as an average over the unitaries
acting on @xmath followed by an average over the space of the
eigenvalues, see Eq. ( 7.2 ). Specifically this is accomplished by
writing

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , @xmath a generic unitary transformation on @xmath , and
@xmath a diagonal density matrix which can be chosen as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.23)
                                         
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here, by keeping the same notation of Chap. 8 , we have set @xmath ,
where @xmath and @xmath are orthonormal sets of @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. Introducing then the ancillary systems @xmath and @xmath
isomorphic to @xmath and @xmath respectively, we define the following
purification of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us fix the spectrum @xmath of the global density matrix @xmath of
the system. The set of vectors in @xmath with the same Schmidt
coefficients is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and yields the set of density matrices ( 9.22 ) with the
same spectrum @xmath . Here, we have set @xmath and @xmath . By partial
tracing over subsystem @xmath we obtain the set of reduced density
matrices

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.26)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is an orthonormal basis of @xmath , and @xmath . Notice
that @xmath does not depend on @xmath . The local A-purity of @xmath
becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.27)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In analogy to what seen for the pure case, it can be casted as an
expectation value on @xmath by doubling the Hilbert space

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.28)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the swap operator between @xmath and @xmath . Here, we have
introduced the ancillary bipartite systems @xmath , and @xmath (here
@xmath are the auxiliary copies of @xmath , and @xmath respectively),
thus @xmath and @xmath . Therefore, by integrating over @xmath we get,

  -- -- -- --------
           (9.30)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath is the twirling transformation on @xmath , Eq. ( 9.8 ). As
mentioned in the previous subsection, from the properties of the
twirling maps @xmath , @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

See Eq. ( 9.9 ) for comparison. We will thus use the last identity.
According to Eq. ( 9.11 ) we have to compute @xmath and @xmath where
@xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

We get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (9.33)
                 
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (9.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, from Eq. ( 9.11 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.35)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with @xmath . Replacing this expression into Eq. ( 9.31 ) and using the
identities

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.36)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

we finally get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which depends on the spectrum @xmath only through the purity of @xmath ,
i.e. @xmath . This immediately tells us that averaging upon @xmath ,
while keeping fixed @xmath , in ( 7.9 ), will give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Some special cases:–

It is worth noticing that for a balanced bipartition @xmath Eq. ( 9.38 )
yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

as found by using the Gaussian approximation in Chap. 8 , see Eqs. (
8.70 ) and ( 8.90 ). On the other hand for @xmath (i.e. pure global
states), Eq. ( 9.39 ) coincides with that obtained in [ Giraud [2007a] ,
Facchi, Marzolino, Parisi, Pascazio and Scardicchio [2008] ] .

Finally, consider the case in which @xmath is maximally mixed, i.e. is
the density matrix @xmath . In this case @xmath and Eq. ( 9.38 )
correctly gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

in agreement with the general result ( 7.25 ). In analogy to what seen
for pure states, the above analysis can in principle be extended to the
case of higher moments of @xmath

  -- -- -- --------
           (9.41)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath is the identity on the @xmath copies of @xmath ,
i.e. @xmath , and @xmath is the swap operator which exchanges @xmath
with @xmath for @xmath , @xmath . However, for @xmath Eq. ( 9.11 ) is no
more valid and the application of the twirling transformation is far
more complicated than for @xmath , since it cannot be reduced to a
combination of projection operators on the symmetric and antisymmetric
subspaces. In the next section we will introduce an alternative approach
for the computation of moments of the local purity of an arbitrary mixed
state, that will lead to a formula for the @xmath -th moment of @xmath
and to the exact expression for its first two cumulants.

#### 9.2 Moments of the local purity at @xmath

The technique we will introduce in this section in order to exactly
compute the moments of the purity is based on the explicit solution due
to Zuber of some basic integrals over the unitary group [ Zuber [2008] ]
. Notice that, as mentioned above, also the symmetry properties of the
twirling maps can be determined along the lines of these solutions. We
will exactly compute the first two moments and determine the dependence
on the spectrum of the higher order ones.

##### 9.2.1 First moment

Let us introduce a purification for @xmath on the doubled Hilbert space
@xmath . According to what seen in the previous section, after
integrating over all states in @xmath with a given spectrum @xmath , we
will show that the only dependence on the latter is in terms of the
purity @xmath , fixed by the delta function in the partition function (
7.9 ). If we fix the spectrum of the global density matrix @xmath of the
system as @xmath (see Eq. ( 9.23 )), the purification of @xmath in the
space @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath and @xmath ) are the reference
bases in @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath and @xmath ), respectively. We have
seen that those vectors in @xmath with the same Schmidt coefficients are
given by @xmath , @xmath , with @xmath and yields the set of density
matrices with the same spectrum @xmath , namely @xmath . By partial
tracing over subsystem @xmath one obtains the set of reduced density
matrices @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.43)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Thus we can write the local purity as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (9.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

which, by inserting the completeness relation for subsystem @xmath ,
becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (9.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can now compute the first moment of the purity ( 7.23 ) at @xmath .
More generally, by recalling that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.46)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.47)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.48)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

From Eq. ( 9.2.1 ) we have that the average over the unitary group of
the first moment particularizes to

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

are the matrix elements of @xmath . This integral can be explicitly done
by applying the solution for the basic integral over the unitary group
@xmath given by Zuber [ Zuber [2008] ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the sum over the Young diagrams @xmath where @xmath is
the character of the symmetric group @xmath associated to @xmath ,
depending on the conjugacy class of the permutation @xmath , @xmath is
the dimension of the representation of @xmath in terms of the linear
group @xmath , and @xmath is the Kroneker delta function @xmath .
Applying this solution to ( LABEL:eq:unint ) we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath depends on the permutation @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is the transposition (swapping) of pairs of nearby indices (
@xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the set of the conjugacy classes of the symmetric group
@xmath , @xmath . From ( LABEL:eq:prim_momZuber ) it can be easily
inferred that the only possible contributions of the spectrum are
related to the conjugacy classes of the symmetric group @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.58)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

By summing and by using the explicit expressions of the coefficients (
9.54 ) [ Zuber [2008] ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first moment of the purity of subsystem @xmath , is the average (
9.60 ) over the spectrum of the system. By plugging ( 9.60 ) into (
LABEL:eq:MAnx0 ), we finally get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

in total agreement with Eq. ( 9.38 ), derived by using the properties of
the twirling transformations.

##### 9.2.2 k-th moment

The technique shown in the previous section can be easily generalized in
order to compute from ( 9.50 ) higher moments at @xmath . More
precisely, we can write

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Thus, Eq. ( 9.53 ) for @xmath gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath depends on the permutation @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and, analogously to Eq. ( 9.57 ), @xmath is the swapping of pairs of
nearby indices, @xmath or @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

Observe that when @xmath we retrieve @xmath (see Eq. (
LABEL:eq:prim_momZuber )). The different contributions from the spectrum
can be classified in terms of the conjugacy classes of the symmetric
group, as shown in Eq. ( 9.2.1 ). However, for @xmath , they do not
depend only on the identity and the purity @xmath . They show a more
complex dependence on the spectrum, thru its higher order invariants
@xmath , with @xmath . Thus the integral on the spectrum (
LABEL:eq:MAnx0 ) is in general non trivial.

##### 9.2.3 Second moment

Let us now compute the second moment of the purity. In this section we
will consider the case of arbitrary bipartite states, with purity @xmath
, generalizing some results found for the case of pure states @xmath , [
Lubkin [1978] , Lloyd and Pagels [1988] , Scott and Caves [2003] ,
Giraud [2007a] , Facchi, Marzolino, Parisi, Pascazio and Scardicchio
[2008] ] . The second moment of the purity can be directly computed by
setting @xmath in Eq. ( LABEL:eq:unintk ). The expression for the
coefficients @xmath in ( 9.53 ), when @xmath is [ Zuber [2008] ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.66)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The symmetric group @xmath consists of five conjugacy classes, giving
the following contributions to the integral ( LABEL:eq:kMomUnitIntl ) in
terms of the spectrum of @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.67)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath defined in ( 9.65 ), where, in this case, we set
@xmath .
We can now compute the expression for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath      @xmath            (9.68)
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

In particular if @xmath we get

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath      @xmath            (9.70)
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the exact expression for @xmath and @xmath , Eqs. ( 9.61 ) and (
9.68 ) respectively, we can now compute the second cumulant of the
purity at @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.72)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

For the case of balanced bipartitions, @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.73)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Notice that for the pure case, corresponding to @xmath for all @xmath ,
we retrieve the results of Eqs. ( 3.3.3 ) and ( 3.57 ), as found in [
Scott and Caves [2003] , Giraud [2007a] ] . Furthermore in the large
@xmath limit we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.74)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

as found in [ Facchi, Marzolino, Parisi, Pascazio and Scardicchio [2008]
] , see Eq. ( 3.55 ).

#### 9.3 High temperature expansion of the first moment of the purity

In Chap. 7 we have seen that for @xmath due to the nonfactorization of
the integral over the unitary group, the computation of the partition
function is more involved than for pure states, with the only exception
given by completely mixed states @xmath . However, for sufficiently
small @xmath , that is in the high temperature regime, we can study the
statistical distribution of the local purity by expanding its @xmath -th
moment around @xmath , up to order @xmath , as shown in Eq. ( 7.26 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

In particular, by plugging in the above expression for @xmath Eqs. (
9.60 ) and ( 9.72 ) for the first moment and the second cumulant in
@xmath we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.76)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

which for the case of balance bipartitions, @xmath , particularizes to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.77)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Eq. ( 9.77 ) for @xmath can be compared with the results we have found
in Chap. 3 , where @xmath was scaled as @xmath . With this choice our
expression yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.78)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

in exact agreement with the behavior of the average purity studied in
Chap. 3 . Indeed, by expanding the inverse temperature in Eq. ( 3.38 )
around @xmath (corresponding to @xmath ), we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, from Eq. ( 3.48 ) for the internal energy @xmath we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Fig. 9.1 we show the behavior of the first moment of the local purity
@xmath as a function of @xmath , for different values of the global
purity @xmath and for balanced bipartions @xmath .

Summarizing we have determined the exact analytical expression for
@xmath for the set @xmath ( 7.2 ) of:

-   maximally mixed states, @xmath (see Eq. ( 7.25 ))

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (9.82)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   arbitrarily mixed states @xmath at @xmath (see Eq. ( 9.39 ))

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (9.83)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   pure states @xmath and for every @xmath ’s (see Eqs. ( 3.48 ), (
    3.38 ) and ( 3.42 ))

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.84)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

    for @xmath and @xmath , respectively.

Finally we have also found the high temperature expansion of the first
moment, see Eq. ( 9.77 ).

### Conclusions and outlook

In this thesis, we have discussed the behavior of bipartite entanglement
of a large quantum system. We have seen that given a bipartite system,
the purity of one part can be considered a measure of quantum
correlations between the two subsystems only for the case of pure states
(that is for isolated quantum systems), while for the more general case
of mixed states, this quantity is just a lower bound, and should be
substituted with its convex roof. In particular, we have developed a
canonical approach for the study of the distribution of the Schmidt
coefficients for a fixed value of the average entanglement. We have thus
introduced a partition function depending on a fictitious temperature,
which localizes the measure on the set of states with higher and lower
entanglement with respect to typical (random) states, with respect to
the Haar measure. The role of the energy in the partition function is
played by our entanglement measure/indicator, the purity of one
subsystem.

In the first part of the thesis, we have obtained a complete
characterization of the distribution of the purity and of the
eigenvalues for the case of pure states. The global picture is
interesting as several locally stable solutions exchange stabilities. On
the stable branch (solutions of minimal/maximal free energy for
positive/negative temperatures) we have unveiled the presence of three
main thermodynamic phases for the system, namely the maximally
entangled, the typical and the separable phases, separated by critical
points. In particular we have enlightened a second order phase
transition, associated to a @xmath symmetry breaking and related to the
vanishing of some Schmidt coefficients, followed by a first order phase
transition, associated to the evaporation of the largest eigenvalue from
the sea of the others. In the different phases the distribution of the
Schmidt coefficients has very dissimilar profiles. While for large
@xmath (small purity) the eigenvalues, all @xmath , follow the Wigner
semicircle law, they become distributed according to the Wishart law for
smaller @xmath and larger purity, across the second order transition.
For even smaller (and eventually negative) values of @xmath , when
purity becomes finite, across the first order phase transition, one
eigenvalue evaporates, leaving the sea of the other eigenvalues @xmath
and becoming @xmath . This is the signature of separability, this
eigenvalue being associated with the emergence of factorization in the
wave function (given the bipartition). This interpretation is suggestive
and hints at a profound modification of the distribution of the
eigenvalues as @xmath , and therefore the purity, are changed.
Summarizing, for the stable solution the purity goes asymptotically from
@xmath to @xmath . This analysis has been achieved by properly scaling
@xmath , in order to yield the correct thermodynamic limit in the
partition function. By keeping the same scaling of positive temperatures
also for negative @xmath ’s, we have determined a metastable solution
for the system. It shows two phase transitions that are both of second
order. The first one, called gravity branch, takes place when the
Wishart distribution, characterizing typical states, evolves into an
asymmetric arcsine distribution. Then, with a second order phase
transition, the distribution of the Schmidt coefficients returns
symmetric, leading for @xmath to maximally entangled states. At the
gravity branch we can interpret the expansion of the free energy around
the critical temperature as the partition function of random @xmath D
surfaces, yielding a theory of pure gravity [ Morris [1991] , Di
Francesco, Ginsparg and Zinn-Justin [1995] ] .

In the second part of the thesis we have considered the more involved
case of mixed states and through the same statistical approach, we have
determined the exact expression of the first two cumulants at @xmath and
the high temperature expansion, for the first moment of the local
purity. We have thus generalized the results of [ Giraud [2007a] , Scott
and Caves [2003] ] , valid for the case of global pure states.
Furthermore, we have also introduced an interesting connection between
our problem and the theory of quantum channels, more precisely we have
exploited the symmetry properties of the twirling transformations [
Vollebrech and Werner [2001] ] in order to compute the exact expression
for the first moment of the local purity.

Our characterization of bipartite entanglement of Haar-distributed
states, where the least set of assumptions is made on their generation,
can be used in an experiment, mutatis mutandis , as a check of the lack
of correlations. If one observes that the moments of the purity deviate
from the expected values, one could argue for non-randomness (or
additional available information) of the states. In turn, our fictitious
inverse temperature @xmath acquires physical meaning, in that it
measures deviations from typicality. This analysis also answers to
another, more practical, question: since during the study of some
features of entanglement one often relies on numerical simulations, it
is important to know to what extent entangled quantum states may be
considered typical [ Życzkowski, Horodecki, Sanpera and Lewenstein
[1998] ] .

The analysis performed in this thesis for the study of bipartite
entanglement of large quantum systems, offers several possible
perspectives for future investigation. From the point of view of quantum
information, it would be of great interest to determine the evolution of
the entanglement phase transitions we have studied for the case of pure
states, for the more general case of mixed states, when a new degree of
freedom, given by the purity of the global state, is introduced. In this
context, another outstanding result would be to understand whether these
phase transitions survive even in the multipartite entanglement scenario
[ Facchi, Florio, Marzolino, Parisi and Pascazio [2010] ] , if one views
the distribution of purity (over all balanced bipartitions) as a
characterization of the global entanglement of the many-body wave
function of quantum systems [ Facchi, Florio, Parisi and Pascazio [2008]
] .
Finally, we observe that the phase transitions investigated in this
thesis, through a classical statistical mechanics approach are not
quantum phase transitions [ Sachdev [1999] ] . Nevertheless,
entanglement is known to be a good indicator of quantum phase
transitions [ Osterloh, Amico, Falci and Fazio [2002] ] , not only for
what concerns bipartite entanglement [ Vidal, Latorre, Rico and Kitaev
[2003] , Verstraete, Popp and Cirac [2004] ] but also for the case of
multipartite entaglement [ Costantini, Facchi, Florio and S. Pascazio
[2007] , De Pasquale, Costantini, Facchi, Florio, Pascazio and Yuasa
[2008] ] . Thus it would be interesting to investigate the link, if any,
between these different phase transitions, and therefore apply the
techniques shown in this work in order to explore new appealing features
of many-body systems, such as spin chains and systems which show a
critical behavior.

We believe that, since the approach followed in this thesis is rooted on
the intersection of many aspects of theoretical physics (from classical
statistical mechanics, to quantum information, to random matrix theory)
it can be regarded as a useful methodological framework for further and
even more general topics of investigation.

### Appendix A Steepest descent method

The steepest descent method is an approximation scheme to evaluate a
class of contours integrals in a complex domain of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the large @xmath limit, being the contour @xmath contained within the
domain of analyticity @xmath of @xmath . The steepest descent method is
an application of the Cauchy’s integral theorem according to which the
contour of integration can be deformed in @xmath without changing @xmath
. If we assume that the global maximum of @xmath is not on the boundary
of @xmath , it corresponds either to a singularity of the function or to
a regular point where the derivative of A vanishes,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

We will focus on the second case. A point @xmath where condition ( A.2 )
is satisfied is, in general, a saddle point for the curves of constant
@xmath . In order to avoid cancellations due to the oscillatory behavior
of the phase of the integrand we need to choose as contour of
integration a path of steepest descent , that is a directed curve whose
tangent at each point has a direction in which the rate of descent is
maximal ( direction of steepest descent ). Indeed it can be proved that
such curves are defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus along this path the phase of the integrand remains constant and the
leading contribution to the integral comes from a neighbourhood of
@xmath . If we make the change of variables

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

the path of steepest descent @xmath can be mapped onto the positive real
axis:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

We have assumed that the upper limit of integration can be extended up
to @xmath due to the fast exponential decay away from @xmath . By
applying the Watson’s lemma for @xmath , in the limit @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the directions of steepest descent for the
case @xmath , that is @xmath for @xmath and @xmath . For a more general
form of the integral ( A.1 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

provided @xmath is an analytic function in a region of the complex plane
that includes @xmath , we have to multiply expression ( A.6 ) by the
constant factor @xmath . We remark that in most cases the leading term
of this general expression can be retrieved by expanding @xmath around
the maximum and approximate expression ( A.1 ) with a Gaussian integral.

Another generalization of the above results is given by the @xmath
dimensional integral on @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the limit @xmath it can be shown that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

being @xmath and @xmath the Hessian matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

### Appendix B How to generate uniform random variables on the simplex

In this appendix we discuss a useful trick in order to generate random
numbers with the probability density function ( 8.52 ).
Consider @xmath i.i.d. random variables @xmath with an exponential
density function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let us define @xmath , for @xmath . In what follows, in order to
simplify the notation, if not specified the indices will run between
@xmath and @xmath . The joint density function of the normalized random
variables @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.2)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where we have used the definition of the Gamma function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and since @xmath is an integer number, we get @xmath . Therefore, the
random variables

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

are distributed with joint probability density ( 8.52 ).