## Zusammenfassung

In [ 1 ] wurde ein Zwei-Higgs-Doublet-Modell mit maximaler Symmetrie
unter generalisierten CP-Transformationen vorgeschlagen. Dieses
sogenannte MCPM hat ein einzigartiges Massenspektrum, das die Natur zwar
nicht exakt beschreibt, aber eine gute Näherung darstellt. Das Modell
sagt die Existenz von fünf Higgs-Bosonen mit speziellen Eigenschaften
voraus.

In dieser Arbeit habe ich das MCPM in die Monte-Carlo-Simulation
MadGraph implementiert. Damit lassen sich Ereignisse für beliebige
Tree-Level-Prozesse generieren, die dank standardisierter Schnittstellen
mit vielen Programmen wie PYTHIA oder GEANT weiter verarbeitet und
schließlich zum Ausschluss oder zur Entdeckung des Modells in
Beschleuniger-Experimenten verwendet werden können. Die Implementierung
wurde mit verschiedenen Methoden erfolgreich validiert. Anschließend
wurde damit ein erster Vergleich einiger MCPM-Prozesse mit dem
Untergrund aus Standardmodell-Prozessen sowie mit bisherigen
experimentellen Studien durchgeführt. Die Ergebnisse deuten darauf hin,
dass sich aus den Daten, die am LHC in den nächsten Jahren erwartet
werden, entweder Ausschlussgrenzen oder Spuren des MCPM gewinnen lassen
könnten.

###### Contents

-    1 General two-Higgs-doublet model
-    2 Developing the MCPM
    -    2.1 Generalised CP transformations
    -    2.2 Requirements for the MCPM
    -    2.3 Consequences
    -    2.4 Electroweak symmetry breaking
-    3 The MCPM with three generations
    -    3.1 Particle properties and couplings
    -    3.2 Parameter space
-    4 Phenomenology at the LHC
    -    4.1 Higgs production
    -    4.2 Higgs decays
    -    4.3 Angular distribution and resonances
    -    4.4 Standard model background
-    5 Introduction to MadGraph 5
-    6 MCPM implementation
-    7 Production cross-sections and decay widths
    -    7.1 Methodology
    -    7.2 Results
-    8 Event distributions
    -    8.1 Methodology
    -    8.2 Angular distribution
    -    8.3 Resonance shapes
-    9 Comparison of MCPM signals to SM background
    -    9.1 Raw signal
    -    9.2 Imposing cuts
-    10 A brief look at the @xmath search
-    A The THDM Lagrangian
-    B Particle spectrum
-    C Feynman rules
-    D Parameters and their relations
-    E Higgs boson decay modes
-    F Instructions on usage
-    G List of particles and parameters
-    H Production cross-sections and decay widths
-    I Full processes: Additional plots
-    J Comparison of MCPM signal with background
-    Acknowledgements

## Chapter \thechapter Introduction

The Standard Model of particle physics (SM) is one of the success
stories of theoretical physics. This quantum field theory, which is
based on a @xmath gauge group, describes all the fundamental particles
that have been observed so far and the strong, electromagnetic and weak
interactions extremely well. Only the Higgs boson it predicts is yet to
be discovered.

However, from a theoretical point of view the SM is somewhat
unsatisfactory. Its particle and mass structure seems arbitrary. There
are three generations of fermions, but no explanation for this number.
Of these fermions, the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are much heavier than
the corresponding particles of the first and second generation ¹ ¹ 1
Here the @xmath quark masses evaluated at @xmath GeV have been used [see
1 ] . :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -----

There is no explanation for this mass hierarchy, either. Finally, the SM
features the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa (CKM) matrix @xmath . The
absolute values of its entries are given by [ 2 ]

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

which is to a good approximation unity. Again, the SM does not provide
any reason for this. Not counting the representation assignments, there
are 18 free parameters in the theory [ 3 ] .

A lot of research has been done on possible extensions of the SM. One
ansatz is the extension of its scalar sector from one scalar doublet to
two scalar doublets. By requiring that such a two-Higgs-doublet model
(THDM) is invariant under so-called generalised CP transformations, a
model with intriguing features can be constructed: the maximally
CP-symmetric two-Higgs-doublet model (MCPM). It has been developed and
studied by various authors in the last years [ 4 ; 5 ; 6 ; 1 ; 7 ; 8 ; 9
; 10 ] . In the MCPM, the fermions of the first two generations are
massless, while the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath get a mass through
electroweak symmetry breaking [ 1 ] . The CKM matrix is the unity
matrix. Although this is not precisely as observed, it is a good
approximation to nature.

The MCPM predicts the existence of five Higgs bosons. These couple to
the fermions in a unique way. One Higgs boson behaves similar to the
Higgs boson in the SM. However, four of the five Higgs particles couple
only to the second generation fermions, although these are massless in
the theory [ 7 ; 8 ] . Thus the model has a phenomenology that is
different from the SM and other extensions of the SM. In chapter
Monte-Carlo Event Generation for a Two-Higgs-Doublet Model with Maximal
CP Symmetry the MCPM and its phenomology are developed and explained.

One obvious question remains unanswered: can this theory be either
discovered or excluded at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN? To
answer this, the experimental data has to be confronted to Monte-Carlo
simulation results. In this Bachelor thesis, I implemented such a
simulation of the MCPM based on the event generation package MadGraph [
11 ] . With this tool it is now easy to numerically calculate tree-level
cross-sections for arbitrary processes and to generate events for
further analysis. This constitutes the main part of this project and is
documented in chapter Monte-Carlo Event Generation for a
Two-Higgs-Doublet Model with Maximal CP Symmetry .

The MadGraph implementation of the MCPM was systematically validated in
different ways. The results are presented in chapter Monte-Carlo Event
Generation for a Two-Higgs-Doublet Model with Maximal CP Symmetry .
Using this new tool, the most relevant MCPM signatures were compared to
the background from SM processes. It was also checked whether the
results of the search for a @xmath boson are likely to have already
excluded the MCPM or a part of its parameter space. This analysis is the
topic of chapter Monte-Carlo Event Generation for a Two-Higgs-Doublet
Model with Maximal CP Symmetry .

## Chapter \thechapter The maximally CP-symmetric two-Higgs-doublet
model (MCPM)

In this chapter the maximally CP-symmetric two-Higgs-doublet model is
developed. At first, the framework of two-Higgs doublet models is
introduced. Generalised CP transformations are defined and it is
analysed under which conditions a THDM is invariant under these
transformations. Based on these criteria, the MCPM is constructed. Its
particle spectrum and properties after electroweak symmetry breaking are
derived. Finally, the phenomenology of the MCPM particles at colliders
such as the LHC is sketched, including Higgs boson production
mechanisms, their decay modes and the background from SM processes.

### 1 General two-Higgs-doublet model

A general two-Higgs-doublet model is a theory based closely on the SM.
It features the gauge group @xmath with gauge fields @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , corresponding to colour, weak isospin and weak hypercharge,
respectively. There are also the usual fermions: for each generation
@xmath there are up- and down-type quarks @xmath as well as charged
leptons @xmath and neutrinos @xmath . The theory is chiral, i. e. left-
and right-handed fermion fields are treated differently. The left-handed
fermions are organised in @xmath doublets

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

while the right-handed fermions @xmath , @xmath , @xmath transform as
singlets. Let us for now consider @xmath generations of these fermions
(later the observed three families will be assumed).

The gauge and fermionic sectors of the Lagrangian are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -----
     @xmath   @xmath      (4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -----

following the usual conventions. A detailed explanation of the symbols
and quantities used here can be found in appendix A .

All of this is just as in the SM. However, the scalar sector is
different. Instead of one complex scalar doublet, there are two such
fields, denoted by

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (6)
  -- -------- -- -----

Both of these scalar doublets are assigned weak hypercharge ² ² 2 In the
context of supersymmetric models, the two scalar doublets are usually
assigned different weak hypercharges of @xmath and @xmath respectively.
However, this is only a matter of convention, see [ 4 ] for details.
@xmath . Their properties are given by the scalar sector of the
Lagrangian density,

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (7)
  -- -------- -- -----

@xmath is the Higgs potential. Its most general gauge-invariant and
renormalisable form is

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (8)
  -- -------- -- -----

with arbitrary coefficients @xmath .

The last part of the Lagrangian describing the THDM are the Yukawa terms
coupling the fermionic to the scalar fields:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (9)
  -- -------- -- -----

The Yukawa couplings @xmath are matrices in the generation space and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now all parts of the THDM can be put together.

###### Definition 1 (Thdm)

A general two-Higgs-doublet model is a quantum field theory described by
the Lagrangian density

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (10)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the different sectors are given in ( 5 ), ( 7 ) and ( 9 ).

### 2 Developing the MCPM

#### 2.1 Generalised CP transformations

In quantum field theories charge conjugation (C) and parity
transformation (P) play important roles. Especially interesting is their
combination. The CP transformation was long thought to be a fundamental
symmetry of nature, until its violation was discovered in 1964 [ 12 ] .
It is strongly related to the question why there is more matter than
antimatter in the universe, which has still not been answered
satisfactorily [ 13 ] .

Under a standard CP transformation (denoted by @xmath ) scalar fields
transform as

  -- -- -- ------
           (11)
  -- -- -- ------

and spinor fields as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (12)
  -- -------- -- ------

with

  -- -- -- ------
           (13)
  -- -- -- ------

due to the parity transformation [ 14 , section 3.6] ³ ³ 3 The fields
may gain additional minus signs under a @xmath transformation. This is a
matter of convention. .

In this standard CP transformation the spinor fields of the different
generations do not mix, neither are the two Higgs fields transformed
into each other. However, it is possible to define generalised CP
transformations that allow these kinds of mixings [ 15 ] . For instance,
such a transformation might consist of the usual charge conjugation and
parity transformation, but additionally transform @xmath into @xmath and
@xmath into @xmath .

In other words, generalised CP transformation are standard CP
transformations together with a change of basis in the scalar doublet
space and a change of basis in the generation space. These basis changes
are not totally arbitrary. Just like two successive standard CP
transformations never change the physics of a system, two successive
generalised CP transformations are not allowed to change the physical
states of the particles either.

###### Definition 2 (Generalised CP transformation)

A generalised CP transformation @xmath transforms the spatial
coordinates as in ( 13 ), scalar fields @xmath ( @xmath ) as

  -- -- -- ------
           (14)
  -- -- -- ------

and spinor fields @xmath with @xmath generations as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (15)
  -- -------- -- ------

The matrices @xmath , @xmath have to satisfy the condition that two
successive gauge transformations do not change the fields at all or are
at most equal to a gauge transformation:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (16)
  -- -------- -- ------

The transformation properties of the gauge fields are described in [ 1 ]
.

Generalised CP transformations can be classified and further analysed,
see for instance [ 4 ] .

#### 2.2 Requirements for the MCPM

It is now interesting to analyse which conditions a THDM has to satisfy
to be invariant under @xmath transformations. In [ 1 ] the concept of
maximal CP symmetry has been introduced ⁴ ⁴ 4 Despite its name, maximal
CP symmetry does not require a symmetry under all generalised CP
transformations. Requiring such a broad symmetry would necessarily lead
to massless Higgs bosons. See [ 1 ] for more details. ⁵ ⁵ 5 Note that in
this thesis the abbreviation MCPM (for maximally CP-symmetric
two-Higgs-doublet model) will exclusively refer to a specific model
which will be defined later, not to any THDM with maximal CP symmetry. :

###### Definition 3 (Maximal CP symmetry)

A THDM is called maximally CP-symmetric if for each @xmath there is a
suitable @xmath for each fermionic field such that the theory is
invariant under the generalised CP transformation described by @xmath
and the different @xmath . Here @xmath are the Pauli matrices.

It has been found [ 1 ] that this requirement is not enough to restrict
the THDM to a theory with unambiguous mass spectrum and properties.
Instead, it yields different possible scenarios. However, some of these
cases predict a phenomenology that has already been ruled out by
observations and can be excluded for this reason.

A THDM describing nature has to fulfill the following conditions [ 1 ] :

-   When the scalar fields acquire vacuum expectation values, the
    electroweak @xmath symmetry is spontaneously broken to the
    electromagnetic @xmath symmetry. The Higgs potential is stable in
    the sense of [ 6 ] .

-   After symmetry breaking, the theory predicts none of the following:

    -   Large lepton flavour-changing neutral currents.

    -   Mass-degenerate massive fermions.

    -   Massless Higgs bosons.

#### 2.3 Consequences

The requirement of maximal CP symmetry together with the
phenomenological restrictions given above confines the Higgs potential (
8 ) to a very specific form [ 4 ; 6 ] :

###### Theorem 1

The Higgs potential of a maximally CP-symmetric THDM which satisfies the
criteria given in section 2.2 has the form

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (17)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

with real parameters satisfying

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (18)
     @xmath      (19)
     @xmath      (20)
     @xmath      (21)
     @xmath      (22)
  -- -------- -- ------

The consequences for the Yukawa couplings depend on the number of
generations. The result for @xmath family of fermions is surprising [ 1
] :

###### Theorem 2

In a maximally CP-symmetric THDM with one generation that satisfies the
criteria given in section 2.2 , all Yukawa couplings @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath in ( 9 ) must be zero.

In other words, in the maximally CP-symmetric THDM with only one fermion
family no fermion will get a mass through electroweak symmetry breaking.
This is remarkable: While in the SM the number of generations is totally
arbitrary, the MCPM requires at least two generations for fermion masses
to appear.

For @xmath generations the situation is different [ 1 ] :

###### Theorem 3

The Yukawa sector of a maximally CP-symmetric THDM with two generations
(numbered 2 and 3 for reasons that will become clear later) which
satisfies the criteria given in section 2.2 is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

with real parameters @xmath .

Here @xmath couples to one generation of fermions (labelled 3), @xmath
to the other (labelled 2), both with the same coupling constants. This
will lead to a specific mass spectrum after symmetry breaking: one
generation will become massive, while the other remains massless, as
will be demonstrated in section 2.4 . So for two fermion families, the
requirement of maximal CP symmetry yields an intrinsic mass hierarchy.

The general case of @xmath generations has not been fully analysed so
far. However, a maximally CP-symmetric THDM with three generations, the
so-called MCPM, can be created in a straightforward way: By identifying
the solution for one generation with the first family ( @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath ) and the solution for two generations with the second
( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ) and third ( @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath ) families ⁶ ⁶ 6 Now the labels 2 and 3 for the two
generations in ( 23 ) make sense. and combining them, the MCPM is
defined [ 1 ] . In other words, the three-generation MCPM is introduced
with the following properties: The second and third generation of
fermions couple to the second and first Higgs doublet respectively, and
the first family of fermions is uncoupled to the scalar fields.

###### Definition 4 (Mcpm)

The THDM with three fermion generations, Higgs potential ( 17 ) and
Yukawa sector

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (24)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

with parameters @xmath satisfying ( 18 ) to ( 22 ) and @xmath is called
MCPM. It is maximally CP-symmetric, as can be seen from theorem 2 and
theorem 3 .

This MCPM is the topic of this thesis. I should stress that it does not
follow necessarily from the requirement of invariance under generalised
CP transformations. It is not the most general maximally CP-symmetric
THDM with three generations. However, it is a very manifest choice and
leads to interesting properties after spontaneous symmetry breaking, as
will be seen soon.

#### 2.4 Electroweak symmetry breaking

The Higgs potential ( 17 ) is minimised by vacuum expectation values
(vev) for the scalar doublets. Without loss of generality these values
can be chosen such that only the second component of @xmath gets a
non-zero vev @xmath [ 1 ] :

  -- -- -------- -- ------
        @xmath      (25)
        @xmath      (26)
  -- -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (27)
  -- -------- -- ------

plays the same role as the vev in the SM.

The scalar doublets can then be expanded around this vacuum state. In
unitary gauge this reads [ 6 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (28)
     @xmath   @xmath      (29)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

Here @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are real scalar fields, @xmath is a
complex scalar field with

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (30)
  -- -------- -- ------

These fields are excitations from the vacuum state, so they represent
physical particles: the physical Higgs bosons of the MCPM. The @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath are uncharged and their own antiparticles, the @xmath
pair turns out to be charged. As scalars all Higgs bosons have spin 0.

The gauge fields behave exactly as in the SM. The electroweak @xmath
symmetry is broken down to the electromagnetic @xmath symmetry. The
@xmath and @xmath fields form the massive @xmath and @xmath bosons and
the massless photon @xmath [see for instance 14 , chapter 20.2] .

In addition, the scalar sector ( 7 ) with Higgs potential ( 17 ) yields
mass terms for the Higgs bosons. These masses are given by [ 1 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (31)
     @xmath   @xmath      (32)
     @xmath   @xmath      (33)
     @xmath   @xmath      (34)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

with

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (35)
  -- -------- -- ------

due to ( 18 ). The scalar sector also yields different interactions
between the Higgs particles and gauge bosons.

In the Yukawa sector of the MCPM ( 24 ) only the fermions of the third
generation couple to @xmath , and only @xmath has a non-zero vacuum
expectation value. Hence only the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath become
massive through electroweak symmetry breaking, while the fermions of the
first and second generation stay massless. The tree-level fermion masses
in the MCPM are [ 1 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (36)
     @xmath   @xmath      (37)
     @xmath   @xmath      (38)
     @xmath   @xmath      (39)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

Similar to the SM Higgs boson, the @xmath couples to all massive
fermions, i. e. to the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . However, the other
Higgs particles behave differently. In ( 24 ) the second scalar doublet
@xmath couples only to the fermions of the second generation. Therefore
its quantised excitations, the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , couple to
the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , although these particles are massless
in the MCPM. The Feynman diagrams of the Higgs-fermion couplings can be
found in fig. 1 .

The strength of these interactions is even more surprising. Because the
coupling of @xmath to the third generation fermions and the coupling of
@xmath to the second generation fermions in ( 24 ) share the same
coupling constants @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , the corresponding
interaction vertices are weighted with the third-generation fermion
masses. This is very different from the SM, where the second-generation
fermions couple to the Higgs boson proportionally to the
second-generation fermion masses, i. e. a lot more weakly.

Finally, the CKM matrix turns out to be the unity matrix [ 1 ] , the
quark mass eigenstates are weak interaction eigenstates as well. This
again is not like in the SM, where the CKM matrix can be arbitrary (it
is parametrised by four free parameters).

### 3 The MCPM with three generations

#### 3.1 Particle properties and couplings

Now the phenomenological properties of the MCPM can be put together. A
list of all the particles and their key characteristics can be found in
appendix B . For the most important Feynman rules see appendix C . There
are four key differences between the MCPM and the SM:

1.  In the MCPM, the first two generations of fermions are massless at
    tree level. In the SM all fermions except the neutrinos are massive.

2.  In the MCPM, the CKM matrix is restricted to be unity. In the SM it
    is an arbitrary unitary matrix.

3.  There are five physical Higgs bosons (two of which are charged) in
    the MCPM compared to one in the SM.

4.  Four of these Higgs bosons couple to second-generation fermions, but
    weighted with the third-generation fermion masses. There is no
    equivalent structure in the SM.

Looking at the first two points, the MCPM does not seem to describe
nature very well. However, the theory gives quite a good approximation.
While there is no doubt that there are massive fermions in the first two
generations, they still are a lot lighter than the @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , see ( 1 ). The CKM matrix is certainly not quite @xmath , but
close to it, see ( 2 ). So the MCPM approximates nature not too badly
with relatively few parameters (11 compared to 18 in the SM).
Generalised CP transformations might be approximate symmetries of
nature. They might even be exact symmetries that are broken in some way.
Finally there is also the possibility that radiative corrections
generate fermion masses for the first two generations. Thus although
there are some obvious spots of bother, this theory should not be
discarded too easily and can provide a starting point for more research
on the CP transformation behaviour of our world.

So far the last two points of the list given above have neither been
observed nor excluded by experiment. To discover or discard the MCPM as
an exact, broken or approximate symmetry, they have to be studied
carefully and checked at collider experiments like the LHC.

#### 3.2 Parameter space

There are 11 coefficients in the MCPM Lagrangian before symmetry
breaking, not counting the representation assignments:

-   Gauge couplings: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath

-   Higgs potential: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath

-   Yukawa coefficients: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath

With ( 36 ) to ( 39 ) and ( 31 ) to ( 34 ), these and all other relevant
variables such as @xmath can be expressed through measurable quantities.
A useful set consists of particle masses, the Fermi constant @xmath and
the electromagnetic and strong coupling constants @xmath and @xmath .
The list of independent parameters of the MCPM then reads:

-   Couplings and gauge bosons: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath

-   Fermion masses: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath

-   Higgs masses: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath

See appendix D for a list of important quantities expressed through
these independent parameters.

The gauge field properties and the fermion masses have already been
measured extensively and with high precision, see [ 2 ] for a summary.
While there is no direct evidence for any of the Higgs particles so far,
electroweak precision measurements can be used to exclude a part of the
parameter space for the Higgs particle masses [ 10 ] . In addition,
results from the search for the SM Higgs boson probably apply to the
@xmath as well, yielding strong restrictions on @xmath .

### 4 Phenomenology at the LHC

#### 4.1 Higgs production

In proton-proton collisions, e. g. at the LHC, Higgs bosons can be
produced via different processes. The most obvious one is
quark-antiquark fusion, which is very similar to the Drell-Yan process [
14 , section 17.4] . The corresponding Feynman diagram is shown in fig.
2 . As discussed in section 3 , the @xmath couples only to @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , while the other Higgs bosons couple only to the
second-generation fermions. Hence the following quark-level processes
are possible (if energetically allowed):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

In [ 7 , section 4.1] the cross-sections for these kind of processes
have been calculated as

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (40)
     @xmath   @xmath      (41)
     @xmath   @xmath      (42)
     @xmath   @xmath      (43)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

Here @xmath is the center-of-mass energy and

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (44)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the parton distribution function (PDF) of the proton for
quark @xmath .

Other production mechanisms include gluon-gluon fusion, see fig. 3 . For
the SM Higgs boson this is the dominant production process [ 16 ] . The
@xmath behaves in the same way. However, it turns out that for all the
other MCPM Higgs bosons quark-antiquark fusion is dominant [ 7 ] . This
difference in behaviour is caused by the fact that the @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath couple to the second-generation fermions, which are not that
much suppressed in the PDFs, but the coupling strength is proportional
to the heavy third-generation fermions. Hence quark-antiquark fusion is
a lot stronger for these Higgs bosons than for the SM Higgs boson or the
@xmath .

Still, the production cross-sections are rather small. Evaluating ( 40 )
to ( 43 ) at the LHC design energy @xmath TeV and for Higgs masses
around 150 GeV yields cross-sections for each Higgs boson with an order
of magnitude of 4000 pb (where the @xmath are slightly more likely to be
produced than the @xmath and @xmath ). For heavier Higgs bosons around
400 GeV this value drops to mere 80 pb. For exact numbers see [ 7 ,
fig. 12] or appendix H .

#### 4.2 Higgs decays

The Higgs bosons can decay in a number of ways. Similar to Higgs boson
production, the most important modes stem from the fermion-fermion-Higgs
vertices ⁷ ⁷ 7 Of course these decays are only possible if the Higgs
bosons are heavy enough. Given current restrictions on the SM Higgs
boson mass and taking into account that the @xmath behaves in a very
similar way, this is probably not true for the @xmath mode. [ 7 ,
section 3.1] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath                                                         
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

The corresponding Feynman diagram is given in fig. 4 .

According to [ 7 ] , the decay width of such a process is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (45)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

where the vertex coefficients @xmath , @xmath and the colour factor
@xmath depend on the process and are given in table 12 in appendix E .
These factors are proportional to the third-generation fermion masses.
Because the @xmath is significantly heavier than the @xmath and @xmath ,
the @xmath and @xmath channels dominate the decays, while the down-type
quark and leptonic modes are suppressed by factors of roughly @xmath to
@xmath . The total decay width amounts to approximately 9 GeV for a
Higgs mass of 150 GeV or 24 GeV for heavy Higgs bosons of 400 GeV.

In addition to these simple fermionic channels, Higgs bosons can decay
into other Higgs bosons and gauge bosons. In [ 7 , section 3.2 to 3.4]
it has been shown that these decays are irrelevant for light Higgs
bosons, but become important for Higgs boson masses above roughly 400
GeV. However, analysing and simulating these channels goes beyond the
scope of this project.

#### 4.3 Angular distribution and resonances

Apart from total cross-sections, the dependency on angular variables
such as the polar angle @xmath , the pseudorapidity @xmath or the
azimuthal angle @xmath as well as the invariant mass of the decay
products of the Higgs bosons is interesting.

The Higgs bosons in the MCPM are scalars. In their rest frame, there is
no preferred spatial direction and their decay is isotropic. For
reactions involving production and decay of Higgs bosons this implies

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (46)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath denote the angles in the rest frame of the
virtual Higgs particle.

Note that this need not hold true in the lab frame. The quarks forming
the Higgs bosons can each have arbitrary momenta ⁸ ⁸ 8 Up to an upper
limit. This is described by the parton density functions. , so the
virtual Higgs particle need not be at rest in the lab frame. In fact, it
is usually moving fast in either of the beam directions. Therefore the
angular distribution of its decay products is distorted and peaks in the
beam directions.

In processes including production and decay of an unstable particle such
as a Higgs boson, the intermediate particle is not necessarily on-shell.
Using the energies and momenta of its decay products, the invariant mass
squared

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (47)
  -- -------- -- ------

of a virtual Higgs boson can be reconstructed easily. The dependency of
the cross-section on this invariant mass is described by the
relativistic Breit-Wigner distribution [ 17 , section 2.4.4]

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (48)
  -- -------- -- ------

Here @xmath and @xmath are the mass and decay width of the Higgs boson
involved in the process, and @xmath is a constant of proportionality.
This function peaks at @xmath , it describes the resonance shape of the
process. Note that this is only an approximation valid in the limit of
narrow widths, @xmath . For broad peaks such as the Higgs processes of
interest there will be some deviations. Most notably, the width of a
broad resonance peak will slightly differ from the decay width of an
on-shell intermediate particle [see for instance 14 , section 7.3] .

#### 4.4 Standard model background

The MCPM Higgs bosons will never be produced on their own without any
background; there are a lot of ordinary QCD and QED processes with the
same final state that compete with Higgs production and decay.

For the leptonic channels

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

the most important SM background is the Drell-Yan process consisting of
annihilation of a quark-antiquark pair into an excited photon or @xmath
boson, which decays into a pair of leptons [ 14 , section 17.4] . The
corresponding diagram is shown in fig. 5 . There are similar diagrams
for the @xmath and @xmath channels involving virtual @xmath bosons. All
of these processes have large cross-sections. However, leptons can be
detected efficiently, and it is easy to reconstruct the four-momentum
and thus the invariant mass of the virtual particle in such a process.

The quark channels are more complex. In addition to Drell-Yan-type
processes, there are various QCD processes that yield two jets, see for
instance fig. 6 . Cross-sections of the strong interaction are typically
large. The situation gets even worse when taking hadronisation, jet
tagging and reconstruction into account, which are complicated and
therefore difficult to simulate and challenging experimentally.

So while the Higgs bosons of the MCPM decay mostly into quarks and much
less into leptons, the huge background and the experimental difficulties
of hadronic channels suggest that the leptonic channels are more
promising [ 7 ] . Of these, the muonic events are most interesting, as
the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath couple to them in a way that is unique to
the MCPM.

While there is certainly a large background hiding possible MCPM
signals, the situation is not hopeless. The gauge bosons involved in the
Drell-Yan-type processes have spin 1, while the Higgs bosons are
scalars. This leads to a different angular distribution of the leptons
or jets. In their rest frame, virtual photons and @xmath bosons decaying
to leptons approximately lead to a @xmath distribution [ 3 , section
25.4] , which peaks in the beam directions. On the other hand, spin-0
particles decay isotropically as explained above. So by only looking at
the central region of the detector, the SM background is reduced more
strongly than the MCPM signal events.

In addition to separating the MCPM signature from the SM background, one
also has to differentiate the MCPM signals from other SM extensions.
Here the characteristic generation structure of the MCPM is important:
While the @xmath channels are relatively strong, the Higgs decays into
other leptons are suppressed.

Taking everything into account, the MCPM has a unique phenomenology. The
@xmath behaves in a similar way as the SM Higgs boson and is therefore
of less interest. For the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , the main
production channel at the LHC is predicted to be quark-antiquark fusion.
These Higgs bosons decay mostly into @xmath and @xmath quarks, but the
resulting jets are hard to tag and reconstruct and there is a huge QCD
background. Therefore the most promising channels are the muonic Higgs
decays as shown in fig. 7 , where the main background comes from
Drell-Yan processes involving virtual photons or @xmath bosons.

## Chapter \thechapter Implementation of Monte-Carlo event generation

It is possible to calculate the production cross-section for Higgs
bosons at the LHC using ( 40 ) to ( 43 ). With ( 45 ) and similar
expressions for other decay modes, the branching ratios for the
different Higgs particles can be calculated. Assuming that the Higgs
bosons are on-shell (i. e. "real" particles as opposed to virtual ones),
the cross-section for the full process @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (49)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the production cross-section for Higgs boson @xmath and
@xmath is the branching ratio of the decay @xmath . This is the
narrow-width approximation and usually valid if the intermediate
particle is much heavier than the initial and final particles [ 18 ] .
This assumption is likely justified for the MCPM, which allows the
calculation of cross-sections for the MCPM without any Monte-Carlo
simulation, as has been done in [ 7 ] .

However in such a calculation a lot of effects cannot be easily taken
into account, such as hadronisation and detector behaviour. For a full
analysis a different approach is needed: the random generation of events
with Monte-Carlo methods followed by the simulation of QCD and detector
effects. This approach yields data that is directly comparable to
experimental results.

The main part of this project was the implementation of such a
Monte-Carlo event generation for the MCPM. The framework of MadGraph 5
has been used, which will be explained below. Afterwards the key
features of the MCPM implementation are described.

### 5 Introduction to MadGraph 5

MadGraph 5 [ 11 ] is the latest version of the matrix element generator
MadGraph. It is bundled with the event generation package MadEvent. For
simplicity, both will be referred to as MadGraph in the following. Given
an arbitrary process for any implemented model, the program lists all
contributing tree-level diagrams. For each of these diagrams, events are
randomly produced and the cross-section or decay width is calculated.

The output of such a simulation is a list of events in the Les Houches
Event File (LHEF) standard [ 19 ] . For each event, it includes the
particles involved and their four-momenta. This can be read by programs
such as PYTHIA [ 20 ] , with which hadronisation effects can be
simulated. It is also possible to perform a detector simulation on the
results, for instance using GEANT [ 21 ] . Event generation with
MadGraph can thus be used as the first part of a complete Monte-Carlo
analysis leading to a comparison of theory and experiment — and
ultimately the discovery or exclusion of new physics models such as the
MCPM.

MadGraph is a very flexible framework and allows the implementation of
new models in a simple way using the Universal FeynRules Output (UFO)
format [ 22 ] . Its major downside is the limitation to tree-level
processes. However as seen in chapter 4 , the interesting and relevant
processes do not involve any loops, so this drawback is acceptable.

### 6 MCPM implementation

In the course of this project, I have implemented the MCPM in MadGraph
using the UFO interface [ 22 ] . Basically, the model is described by
three lists:

-   A list of the parameters of the MCPM. As independent parameters, the
    quantities listed in section 3.2 were used. For these variables,
    default values were chosen according to PDG recommendations [ 2 ] .
    For the Higgs boson masses, values consistent with the restrictions
    presented in [ 10 ] were set.

-   A list of the particles of the MCPM and their properties, including
    spin, mass, electromagnetic charge and colour charge.

-   A list of the interaction vertices in the MCPM. For each vertex, the
    participating particles and the corresponding Feynman rule had to be
    given. Some important Feynman rules have already been calculated in
    [ 7 ] , others had to be derived first.

The MCPM model files are written in Python and span roughly 1300 lines.
For more details, see appendix G .

All particles and couplings of the MCPM are included. This not only
allows the analysis of signal processes involving Higgs bosons, but also
the simulation of any tree-level background process. There is one
important feature: strictly speaking, the MCPM forbids masses for the
first two generations of fermions at tree-level. However nature seems to
disagree with this prediction. This suggests that generalised CP
transformations might only play the role of approximate symmetries, as
discussed in section 3 . It may be sensible to analyse a model that
combines the scalar sector of the MCPM with the experimental evidence
for fermion masses and the CKM matrix [ 7 ] . For this reason the
MadGraph implementation of the MCPM lets the user set fermion masses for
the first two families as well. This affects phase space calculations,
but the interactions remain unchanged. In a similar way the CKM matrix
can be set to an arbitrary matrix, which changes SM processes, but not
the Higgs boson vertices. With these parameters the user can decide
whether to analyse the strict MCPM as described in chapter Monte-Carlo
Event Generation for a Two-Higgs-Doublet Model with Maximal CP Symmetry
or a hybrid theory with fermion masses and a SM-like CKM matrix. If any
SM processes play a role (for instance for background simulation), the
latter seems to make more sense and will be used in the following.

Now the model can be used in the same way as other models are used in
MadGraph. In order to generate events for a process, only a few commands
are necessary. As an example, the lines

    Ψimport model MCPM -modelname
    Ψgenerate p p > h1 > m- m+
    Ψoutput -f
    Ψlaunch

lead to the generation of events for the process @xmath . The free
parameters can be set in a configuration file. For detailed instructions
on how to use the model, see appendix F .

## Chapter \thechapter Validation

The MadGraph implementation of the MCPM was validated in two different
ways. First, total cross-sections and decay widths were checked for a
number of different scenarios. For this purpose Higgs-boson production
and decay were treated independently. Second, angular dependencies and
invariant mass distributions were analysed for full processes.

### 7 Production cross-sections and decay widths

#### 7.1 Methodology

The Monte-Carlo simulation was validated by simulating different
processes with MadGraph and comparing the resulting cross-sections as
well as decay widths to the corresponding theoretical values. Production
and decay were treated independently, i. e. the Higgs bosons were
assumed to be on-shell.

As discussed in section 4 , the relevant production processes are

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

via quark-antiquark fusion. As before, @xmath denotes the fragmented
remnants of the protons. The interesting decay modes include

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

These three production and six decay processes were simulated.

For the MCPM parameters, PDG recommendations [ 2 ] were used. Of course
this leaves open the Higgs masses. Here four different points in
parameter space have been chosen that fulfill two conditions:

-   They cover a wide range of the energies relevant at the LHC. In
    addition the ratios of the Higgs masses to each other are varied.

-   All parameter sets agree with the electroweak precision measurements
    discussed in [ 10 ] within one standard deviation. They also agree
    with the stability criterium ( 35 ).

The chosen Higgs mass values are given in table 1 .

The center-of-mass energy was set to @xmath and no phase-space cuts have
been applied. For the decays, 20,000 events have been produced in each
MadGraph run. The production processes are more complex as they include
multiple diagrams weighted by the PDFs of the proton. Here MadGraph was
set to simulate 100,000 events in each run. The PDF CTEQ5L [ 23 ] was
chosen for compatibility reasons.

The theoretical values were calculated for the same processes and
settings. While the calculation of the decay widths ( 45 ) was
straightforward and was done analytically, the production cross-sections
( 40 ) to ( 43 ) include the PDF and hence had to be calculated
numerically, using the CTEQ5L Fortran libraries [ 23 ] .

For each of the nine processes given above and each of the four
parameter sets in table 1 , a cross-section or decay width was simulated
with MadGraph and a theoretical value was calculated. So in total there
are 36 data points, each allowing the comparison of the Monte-Carlo
result with the expectation.

#### 7.2 Results

The results of this procedure can be found in appendix H . Fig. 8 shows
residual plots, i. e. the deviations of MadGraph and theoretical
results. Without a doubt, the Monte-Carlo results agree well with the
expectation. For the decays, the numbers are exactly the same in all the
five digits MadGraph indicates. The largest deviation in the production
cross-section data is only 0.06 per cent, which is still well below one
standard deviation of the Monte-Carlo results ⁹ ⁹ 9 This is even better
than one might naively expect. Should there not be some statistical
fluctuations leaving only 68% of data points within one standard
deviation of the theoretical values? The answer lies in the internal
mechanisms of MadGraph [ 11 ] . The software calculates the
cross-sections for individual quark-level processes precisely, the only
uncertainty is introduced through the PDFs. However it gives out a
standard deviation that does not represent this uncertainty of the
calculated cross-section or decay width, but the magnitude of
statistical fluctuations that are to be expected for an experiment
observing the number of events set in MadGraph. . The MCPM model in
MadGraph passes its first test.

### 8 Event distributions

After validating the MadGraph results on the level of production
cross-sections and decay widths, full processes including virtual Higgs
bosons were simulated. The angular distributions and resonance shapes of
the decay products were analysed.

#### 8.1 Methodology

The processes

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (50)
     @xmath   @xmath      (51)
     @xmath   @xmath      (52)
     @xmath   @xmath      (53)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

of the form shown in fig. 7 were simulated with MadGraph. Only MCPM
Higgs bosons were allowed as intermediate particles, no SM background
was included.

The parameters were chosen as in section 7 with three exceptions: every
run included 100,000 events, and the newer PDF CTEQ6L [ 24 ] was used.
The Higgs masses were set to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (54)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (55)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

This parameter set will be referred to as set @xmath in the following.
It complies with the restrictions found in [ 10 ] .

For these processes and parameters, MadGraph calculates the following
total cross-sections:

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (56)
     @xmath   @xmath      (57)
     @xmath   @xmath      (58)
     @xmath   @xmath      (59)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

with negligible statistical errors.

In addition to calculating cross-sections, the resulting event files
were examined using the tool MadAnalysis, which is included in the
MadGraph 5 package. It allows the analysis of arbitrary distributions
based on the four-momenta of the particles. In the following, angular
dependencies and invariant mass distributions are shown. As MadAnalysis
did not provide all the features needed, some routines had to be added
by hand, including the correct handling of statistical uncertainties.
ROOT [ 25 ] and GNUPlot [ 26 ] were used for fitting and plotting.

#### 8.2 Angular distribution

As described in section 4.3 , the Higgs bosons should decay
isotropically in their rest frame, which is the same as the
center-of-mass frame of the decay products. The distribution is
different in the lab frame. For the four Monte-Carlo samples generated,
the angular distributions in both reference frames were analysed, some
of the results are shown in fig. 9 and fig. 10 . More plots can be found
in appendix I .

For the @xmath and @xmath distributions in the Higgs boson rest frame,
constant-value fits were performed. They agree well with the data, the
@xmath values are listed in table 2 .

#### 8.3 Resonance shapes

In addition to angular distributions, the dependency of the
cross-section on the invariant mass of the Higgs boson is important. For
each possible intermediate particle a resonance peak at its mass is
expected. Its form should approximately be described by the relativistic
Breit-Wigner distribution ( 48 ), see section 4.3 .

For the four channels given above the invariant mass distribution was
analysed. Fig. 11 shows the resonance shape in the @xmath channel, the
others are similar. Breit-Wigner distributions were fitted to the data
with good agreement. The resulting fit parameters were then compared to
the Higgs boson masses ( 55 ) and the Higgs boson decay widths ( 45 ),
which were calculated for the dominant fermionic decay modes (see
section 4.2 ). The results can be found in table 3 .

There are some small deviations. The reduced @xmath values are in the
region of 2, and the fitted parameters slightly differ from the Higgs
boson masses and decay widths. As explained in section 4.3 , this is not
surprising and a consequence of the relatively large widths of the Higgs
bosons ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 Considering that the bin size used for this analysis is
0.5 GeV, binning effects also seem possible. However decreasing the bin
size does not change the results by a relevant amount. .

Taking everything into account, the MCPM implementation produces exactly
the expected angular distributions and resonance peaks. Together with
the cross-section check in section 7 , this result concludes its
validation. Due to time constraints, not every process and not every
parameter configuration have been tested. Nevertheless, I consider the
model to be validated satisfactorily in order to be used for analysis.

## Chapter \thechapter Analysis of MCPM signatures

The MCPM MadGraph implementation can now be used to analyse an important
question: can the MCPM be discovered or excluded at the LHC? A full
answer requires a thorough analysis including the simulation of
fragmentation and detector behaviour, which goes well beyond the scope
of this thesis. For the hadronic channels any superficial analysis using
only quark-level events is meaningless, as hadronisation and jet
reconstruction are complicated and important. These channels will not be
further analysed.

However there is no hadronisation for leptons, and muons can be
reconstructed relatively precisely. For the @xmath channel the
hard-process events generated by MadGraph are worth a look even without
fragmentation and detector simulation. Using the new MadGraph
implementation, the MCPM signatures are first compared to the SM
background, both without and with phase-space cuts. Then ATLAS results
from 2011 are checked against the MCPM predictions.

### 9 Comparison of MCPM signals to SM background

In this section the MCPM signal events are compared to the SM background
for the @xmath channel. First the raw signals are analysed. Then basic
@xmath and @xmath cuts motivated by detector properties are applied.

#### 9.1 Raw signal

For this analysis, both signal and background events were generated with
MadGraph ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 Signal and background can be treated separately.
Because of the different chirality structures, there is no interference
between signal and background diagrams. . The relevant signal processes
are once again the production of @xmath and @xmath bosons via
quark-antiquark fusion with subsequent decay into @xmath pairs, see fig.
7 . As described in section 4.4 , the background is dominated by the
@xmath and @xmath Drell-Yan processes. These lead to the same final
state as the signal procesess and thus cannot be reduced easily.

The same parameters as in section 8 were used. This includes the Higgs
boson mass set @xmath ( 55 ) with @xmath GeV and @xmath GeV. In order to
analyse a broader spectrum of resonances, a second Higgs mass set @xmath
was chosen in addition:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (60)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (61)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

For the background simulation, more than 500,000 events were generated
in each run. All simulations were performed for the LHC design energy
@xmath TeV as well as its current center-of-mass energy @xmath TeV. In
the following the plots for 14 TeV are shown, the corresponding 7 TeV
plots can be found in appendix J .

Fig. (a)a shows the signal and background cross-sections. The resonance
peaks of the Higgs bosons are tiny in comparison to the background. This
can be quantified by comparing the MCPM and SM cross-sections for the
invariant mass range ¹² ¹² 12 By choosing a smaller invariant mass bin,
e. g. @xmath , the ratio @xmath increases. But from an experimental
point of view it makes sense to use relatively large mass bins in order
to get more statistics and due to detector resolution. between @xmath
and @xmath . One finds

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (62)
  -- -------- -- ------

if the Higgs bosons are in the range of 150 to 250 GeV. For heavier
Higgs bosons these factors decrease. See appendix J for more detail.

#### 9.2 Imposing cuts

There is no detector that is able to detect and reconstruct every muon.
For instance, in the ATLAS detector at CERN the muon trigger chambers
only cover the pseudorapidity region @xmath [ 27 , chapter 6] . In
addition, muons are efficiently reconstructed only for high transverse
momenta @xmath . It is therefore sensible to impose cuts on the
Monte-Carlo events. Starting from the event samples used in the last
section and requiring

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (63)
     @xmath   @xmath      (64)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

should give a more realistic picture of MCPM discovery potential.

While this of course decreases statistics, there is one advantage. As
discussed in section 4.4 , the spin-0 Higgs bosons are more likely to
decay into this central region than the spin-1 @xmath bosons and photons
which make up the background. Hence these cuts reduce the background
more drastically than the signal events.

Fig. (b)b shows the resulting invariant mass distribution. As expected,
the MCPM signature is more clearly visible. For Higgs masses around 150
to 200 GeV and looking only at the resonance regions where the invariant
mass of the muons is in the range of @xmath to @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (65)
  -- -------- -- ------

Again, this value decreases for heavier Higgs bosons. More data can be
found in appendix J .

Now one can calculate how much statistics is needed so that the MCPM
resonance peaks are locally significant compared to the background,
i. e. larger than @xmath , where @xmath is the statistical uncertainty
of the background. Conventionally @xmath is considered a discovery,
while @xmath is often used for exclusion limits ¹³ ¹³ 13 These values
are valid only locally, i. e. in the invariant mass range corresponding
to the resonance peaks, and they cannot be simply translated into
exclusion limits based on confidence levels. More sophisticated
statistical tools are needed for this. . I calculated the integrated
luminosities @xmath needed for local @xmath and @xmath significance. The
results are shown in table 4 .

I have to stress though that these luminosities are very rough
estimates. Only local significance in one channel is described, the
combination of different peaks and different channels will improve the
situation a bit. On the other hand, these numbers do not include
detector efficiencies and resolution, only background and signal
tree-level processes are taken into account. The experimental reality is
much more complicated.

Keeping this caveat in mind, these numbers may nevertheless hint at the
order of magnitude of statistics needed for MCPM signatures to become
visible. As of October 31, 2011, the ATLAS detector at CERN collected a
total of 5.25 @xmath of data at @xmath TeV [ 28 ] . It is expected that
the LHC will collect significantly more data in 2012 and will reach its
design energy of @xmath TeV a few years later. Looking at the critical
luminosities in table 4 , the next years will be an exciting time for
the MCPM. Although a formal @xmath discovery seems very unlikely to
happen soon, there might be either hints at the MCPM or exclusion limits
on its Higgs boson mass space.

### 10 A brief look at the @xmath search

The MCPM is not the only extension of the SM that predicts @xmath
events, and due to reconstruction efficiency and low background this
channel is used in various searches for signs of new physics, for
instance @xmath boson resonances (for an introduction to @xmath physics,
see [ 29 ] ). In [ 30 ] , 1.21 @xmath of data taken with the ATLAS
detector at @xmath TeV were analysed for excesses over the SM
predictions. In contrast to the estimates in the last section, the
@xmath search includes a proper analysis of hadronisation, QCD
background faking muons and detector properties.

In [ 30 ] , the expected and measured number of events passing certain
cuts were compared for different invariant mass bins. The most relevant
cut is on the transverse momentum @xmath : Each muon has to satisfy

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (66)
  -- -------- -- ------

Due to detector geometry,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (67)
  -- -------- -- ------

is required. Other cuts limit the position of the primary vertex and the
impact parameter.

Using MadGraph, the cross-sections for the usual @xmath signatures
involving @xmath and @xmath bosons were simulated. The parameters and
cuts were chosen such as to closely resemble the parameters of the
@xmath search ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 Some cuts could not be replicated in MadGraph,
for instance restrictions on the primary vertex position. . For the
Higgs boson masses, two different sets of parameters @xmath and @xmath
were chosen, see table 5 . Notably, parameter set @xmath represents a
best-case scenario with a large Higgs boson resonance peak at 120 GeV.
The technical parameters were chosen as in section 9 .

Table 6 shows the results of the @xmath search and the MCPM predictions
for the two settings. Even for the best-case scenario @xmath the MCPM
predicts less of an excess than the statistical and systematical
uncertainties of data and background analysis.

A thorough analysis including detector simulation will further decrease
the MCPM prediction. Thus it can be concluded that the data presented in
[ 30 ] is probably not sufficient to discover or exclude the MCPM for
Higgs boson masses above 100 GeV. Of course, the combination with other
channels and the analysis of the full data taken in 2011 might yield a
different picture.

## Chapter \thechapter Summary

In this Bachelor thesis I implemented a two-Higgs-doublet model with
maximal CP symmetry, the MCPM, into the Monte-Carlo event generation
package MadGraph.

The MCPM is an extension of the Standard Model that is based on the
requirement of invariance under generalised CP transformations. It
features a unique fermion structure, in which only the third-generation
fermions are massive. Of course this does not describe nature precisely,
but the model gives a good approximation of what has been observed. The
theory also predicts five Higgs bosons, of which four couple only to the
second-generation fermions. At colliders such as the LHC, these Higgs
bosons will be produced mainly via quark-antiquark fusion. Their @xmath
decay modes seem most promising for a discovery. For a proper search for
MCPM signatures, a Monte-Carlo simulation is needed.

In the course of this thesis, the MCPM was implemented into MadGraph,
allowing the calculation of cross-sections and the random generation of
events for arbitrary tree-level processes. The output is in the LHEF
format and can be used for further analysis, for instance using PYTHIA
and GEANT. Therefore this MadGraph implementation can be used as the
starting point for a full and thorough Monte-Carlo simulation of the
MCPM.

The implementation was validated successfully with different methods. It
was then used to compare the MCPM signatures to the SM background at LHC
energies. This analysis was only done for the @xmath channel and
restricted to hard processes, so the results are only a rough
approximation. It was found that even after applying appropriate cuts,
the Higgs boson resonance peaks are small compared to the background.
For a Higgs boson of 150 GeV (200 GeV), 6.7 @xmath (22 @xmath ) of data
at a center-of-mass energy @xmath TeV have to be collected so that a
local @xmath significance becomes possible, not taking detector
inefficiencies into account. It seems that the exclusion of a part of
the Higgs mass parameter range or the discovery of small local excesses
hinting at the MCPM might be within reach in the next years. Finally the
MCPM predictions were compared to 2011 results of the @xmath search at
the ATLAS detector, again hinting that more data must be collected in
order to discover or exclude the MCPM for Higgs masses of more than
about 100 GeV.

## Chapter \thechapter Further details of the MCPM

## Appendix A The THDM Lagrangian

The Lagrangian of a general THDM is given in ( 10 ) with the separate
sectors given in ( 5 ), ( 7 ) and ( 9 ). The MCPM is more specific, its
Higgs potential and Yukawa sectors can be found in ( 17 ) and ( 24 ). In
these terms, the following quantities appear:

-   @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are fermionic fields
    representing up-type quarks, down-type quarks, charged leptons and
    lepton neutrinos. @xmath is a generation index, three generations
    have been observed in nature.

-   With the projection operators

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (68)
      -- -------- -- ------

    the left-handed and right-handed chiral projections of these fields
    can be defined as @xmath .

-   The left-handed particles are organised in SU(2) doublets,

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (69)
      -- -------- -- ------

-   There are two complex scalar doublets

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (70)
      -- -------- -- ------

-   @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the gauge fields of the @xmath gauge
    group.

-   @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the corresponding coupling constants.

-   Their field strength tensors are given by

      -- -------- -------- -- ------
         @xmath   @xmath      (71)
         @xmath   @xmath      (72)
         @xmath   @xmath      (73)
      -- -------- -------- -- ------

-   The covariant derivatives are

      -- -------- -------- -- ------
         @xmath   @xmath      (74)
         @xmath   @xmath      (75)
         @xmath   @xmath      (76)
         @xmath   @xmath      (77)
         @xmath   @xmath      (78)
         @xmath   @xmath      (79)
      -- -------- -------- -- ------

-   @xmath and @xmath are @xmath and @xmath generators in the
    fundamental representation.

-   @xmath and @xmath are the structure constants of these
    representations.

-   There are Higgs potential and Yukawa coefficients. In the general
    THDM these are called @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
    In the MCPM with three generations the coefficients are @xmath ,
    @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

-   Colour and spinor indices are suppressed (with the exception of the
    quark colour indices @xmath in the covariant derivative).

-   Feynman slash notation is used:

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (80)
      -- -------- -- ------

## Appendix B Particle spectrum

All the particles of the MCPM and their most important properties and
couplings can be found in table 7 , table 8 and table 9 .

## Appendix C Feynman rules

In [ 7 , appendix A] the MCPM Lagrangian after symmetry breaking is
presented and the Feynman rules for several vertices are derived. The
most important vertices and the corresponding expressions are given in
table 10 and table 11 below.

## Appendix D Parameters and their relations

As described in section 3.2 , the independent parameters used in the
analysis are @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . All other quantities can
be calculated from these parameters as follows [ 7 , appendix A] :

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (81)
     @xmath   @xmath      (82)
     @xmath   @xmath      (83)
     @xmath   @xmath      (84)
     @xmath   @xmath      (85)
     @xmath   @xmath      (86)
     @xmath   @xmath      (87)
     @xmath   @xmath      (88)
     @xmath   @xmath      (89)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

## Appendix E Higgs boson decay modes

In ( 45 ) the width of Higgs decays into fermion-antifermion pairs was
given, including coefficients that are specific to the different decay
modes. These coefficients have been calculated by Maniatis and Nachtmann
[ 7 , table 2] and are listed in table 12 below.

## Chapter \thechapter Technical aspects of the MadGraph implementation

## Appendix F Instructions on usage

The MCPM model in MadGraph is used in the same way as every MadGraph
model, see [ 11 ] for an overview. First it has to be loaded. After
starting the MadGraph binary in a shell this can be done with the
command

    Ψimport model MCPM -modelname

where the option            -modelname           is needed to ensure the
correct particle names. Then processes are defined and the event
generation started:

    Ψgenerate p p > h1 > m- m+
    Ψadd process p p > h2 > m- m+
    Ψoutput -f
    Ψlaunch

The            generate           and (optionally)
           add process           commands are used to specify the
processes MadGraph has to evaluate, while            output          
and            launch           launch the event generation. The
particle names used in the implementation are given in the following
section. Before events are produced, MadGraph asks the user whether the
standard parameters are to be used or if he wants to modify them.

During the simulation, an in-browser status page keeps the user
informed. In the end, MadGraph gives out the contributing Feynman
diagrams, the cross-sections or decay widths, the corresponding
uncertainty and a compressed file containing the generated events in
LHEF [ 19 ] format. This can be used for further analysis, for instance
with MadAnalysis or PYTHIA [ 20 ] .

## Appendix G List of particles and parameters

A list of MCPM particles and parameters with their MadGraph names are
presented in table 13 and 14 respectively.

The parameters may be a bit confusing, because the @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath can be set to be massive, while the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
are always massless. This does not have anything to do with the MCPM. As
explained in section 6 , some of the consequences of strict symmetry
under generalised CP transformations have been dropped in this
implementation, so it is generally possible to set masses for the first-
and second-generation fermions. However, MadGraph treats the very light
fermions as massless (even in the SM, where the theory certainly
predicts something else). This does not change the physics at collider
experiments in the TeV range, but it saves some computation time.
Therefore the list of parameters includes the masses of some fermions of
the first two generations.

MadGraph also allows to set decay widths for all particles, which are
named similarly to the mass parameters. This is important for further
analysis with programs such as PYTHIA, but these parameters do not
influence the generation of events with MadGraph at all.

## Chapter \thechapter Results of the validation

## Appendix H Production cross-sections and decay widths

The first check of the Monte-Carlo simulation consisted of the
calculation of cross-sections and decay widths, see section 7 . The
results are listed in table 15 for the Higgs boson production and in
table 16 for the decay.

## Appendix I Full processes: Additional plots

Fig. 13 shows the distribution of pseudorapidity @xmath in the lab frame
for the @xmath channel. In fig. 14 the resonance peak for the @xmath
mode can be seen. In either case, the processes and parameters described
in section 8.1 were used.

## Chapter \thechapter Results of the analysis of MCPM signatures

## Appendix J Comparison of MCPM signal with background

In section 9 , the MCPM @xmath signature was compared to the SM
background. Fig. 15 shows the cross-sections of MCPM and SM as a
function of the invariant mass of the muons for @xmath TeV, both with
and without cuts. In table 17 the size of the Higgs resonance peaks is
compared to the background for a variety of settings.

## Acknowledgements

First and foremost, I would like to thank Dr. Markos Maniatis and
Dr. Victor Lendermann for their very capable and ever-patient support
during the course of this project. I would also like to express my
sincere gratitude for my supervisors, Professor Hans-Christian
Schultz-Coulon and Professor Otto Nachtmann, whose doors were always
open for me. Finally, this thesis has benefitted greatly from
discussions with Dominik Neuenfeld, Dr. Rainer Stamen, Merle Reinhart,
Antje Brehmer, Jennifer Kieselmann, Eric Wisotzky and Dr. Martin
Spiegel.