## Chapter 8 BPS bounds in minimal gauged supergravity

#### 8.1 Introduction

The procedure described in the previous chapter might seem somewhat
abstract at this moment, but here and in the next chapter we will see
very explicitly how to perform it both for minimal and non-minimal
gauged supergravity for the Minkowski and AdS vacua. In this chapter we
realize the general procedure outlined above in the case of minimal
gauged supergravity. Due to some technical reasons, e.g. the form of the
Killing spinors, we use slightly different conventions from the rest of
the thesis. This simplifies substantially the discussion and allows us
to concentrate on the physical meaning of our analysis.

The main motivation for our analysis comes from the following paradox.
Similarly to BPS states in asymptotically flat spacetimes, the authors
of [ 119 ] provided a BPS bound in asymptotically anti-de Sitter
spacetime that in the static case reduces to:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Supersymmetric configurations would have to saturate the bound with
@xmath , for a given mass @xmath , electric charge @xmath , and magnetic
charge @xmath in appropriate units. However, in @xmath minimal gauged
supergravity, Romans [ 102 ] found two supersymmetric solutions, one of
which does not saturate the BPS bound, and therefore an apparent paradox
arises. The main aim of this chapter is to resolve this conflict. The
resolution of the paradox will lie in understanding the BPS ground
states of gauged supergravity, the associated superalgebras, and in a
proper definition of the mass in asymptotically AdS @xmath spacetimes,
as we will explain in the coming sections.

Minimally gauged supergravity has only two bosonic fields, the metric
and the graviphoton @xmath . Shortly repeating our analysis from the
previous part of the thesis to ease the reading, the most general static
and spherically symmetric solution of Einstein’s equation with a
negative cosmological constant and an electromagnetic field is given by,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and with nonvanishing components of the graviphoton

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this class, there are two solutions that preserve some fraction of
supersymmetry [ 102 ] . The first one is the so-called AdS “electric
Reissner–Nordström (RN)” solution, for which the magnetic charge @xmath
is set to zero and @xmath so that the factor @xmath has the form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

This solution preserves one half of the supersymmetries (it is 1/2 BPS).
Clearly, it saturates the BPS bound ( 8.1 ). Notice that the function
@xmath has no zeros. Therefore, there is no horizon and the point @xmath
is a naked singularity ³⁶ ³⁶ 36 In AdS spacetimes, supersymmetry does
not seem to provide a cosmic censorship, contrary to most cases in
asymptotically flat spacetimes [ 120 ] . Whether cosmic censorship in
AdS @xmath can be violated is still an open problem, see e.g. [ 121 ] .
This issue however has nothing to do with the paradox or contradiction
mentioned above. . Asymptotically, for @xmath , the solution is that of
pure AdS @xmath , with cosmological constant @xmath in standard
conventions.

The second supersymmetric solution is the so-called “cosmic dyon”,
having zero mass @xmath but nonzero fixed magnetic charge @xmath . Such
a solution will never satisfy the BPS bound ( 8.1 ). Moreover, the
electric charge @xmath can take an arbitrary value:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Again, there is a naked singularity at @xmath . However, asymptotically,
when @xmath , the solution does not approach pure AdS @xmath , due to
the presence of the magnetic charge. Instead, the solution defines
another vacuum, since @xmath , but this vacuum is topologically distinct
from AdS @xmath in which @xmath . For this reason ³⁷ ³⁷ 37 One may argue
that ground states should not have naked singularities. Clearly, this
discussion is related to cosmic censorship in AdS, which we mentioned in
the previous footnote. It is important to disentangle this discussion
from the derivation of the BPS bounds. In fact, we already know that in
matter coupled supergravity there is a magnetic ground state without
naked singularities, c.f. chapter 6.3 . , we call this vacuum magnetic
anti-de Sitter, or mAdS @xmath .

The cosmic dyon solution is 1/4 BPS, i.e. it preserves two out of eight
supercharges. For both the electric RN-AdS and the cosmic dyon, the
Killing spinors were explicitly constructed in [ 102 ] . The fact that
the BPS bound ( 8.1 ) is not satisfied for the cosmic dyon leads to a
contradiction since states that admit a Killing spinor should saturate
the BPS bound.

In this chapter we show that the cosmic dyon in fact satisfies a
different BPS bound that follows from a superalgebra different from the
usual AdS @xmath superalgebra. We will determine the new BPS bound
starting from the explicit calculation of the supercharges and computing
the anticommutator ³⁸ ³⁸ 38 An alternative approach based on the
Witten-Nester energy was proposed in an unpublished paper by Izquierdo,
Meessen and Ortín, leading to similar conclusions. . In summary, to
state the main result of this chapter, for stationary configurations,
the new BPS bounds are:

-   For asymptotically AdS @xmath solutions with vanishing magnetic
    charge, @xmath , the BPS bound is

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (8.7)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where @xmath is the angular momentum.

-   For asymptotically magnetic AdS @xmath solutions with @xmath , the
    BPS bound is simply

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (8.8)
      -- -------- -- -------

    with unconstrained electric charge @xmath and angular momentum
    @xmath .

Other values for the magnetic charges are not considered. The
quantization condition requires it to be an integer multiple of the
minimal unit, @xmath , but it is not known if any other supersymmetric
vacua can exist with @xmath .

The meaning of the BPS bound is not that all solutions to the equations
of motion must automatically satisfy ( 8.7 ) or ( 8.8 ). Rather, one
constructs a physical configuration space consisting of solutions that
satisfy a BPS bound like ( 8.7 ) or ( 8.8 ), as mentioned in the
previous chapter.

Our procedure also provides a new way of defining asymptotic charges in
AdS @xmath backgrounds with automatically built-in holographic
renormalization, somewhat different than the procedure developed in [ 23
, 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 ] . The same technique can also be
applied to non-minimal gauged supergravity, which will be the topic of
the next chapter.

Additional motivation to study more closely the magnetic AdS @xmath case
and its superalgebra is provided by the AdS/CFT correspondence. There
are suggestions in the literature [ 19 ] that excitations of the dual
theory are relevant for condensed matter physics in the presence of
external magnetic field, e.g. quantum Hall effect and Landau level
splitting at strong coupling. A better understanding of the mAdS
superalgebra could then provide us with more insights about the dual
field theory.

###### Plan of this chapter

First, in section 8.2 , we explain our conventions about the minimal
gauged supergravity we consider. We follow the procedure of chapter 7
and derive the form of the asymptotic supercharges and their
anticommutator. We then take special interest in deriving explicitly the
form of the anticommutator for spherically symmetric AdS configurations,
showing how the difference between AdS and magnetic AdS arises. We then
extend the results to include the solutions with non-spherical symmetry
in section 8.4 . We see that for toroidal topology we find somewhat
different results compared to both the AdS and the mAdS cases, while the
hyperbolic solutions are in complete analogy to the spherical mAdS. In
the last section of this chapter we take a more abstract approach and
write down the full superalgebra for all the asymptotic vacua that are
discussed. Some of the intermediate calculations that facilitate the
discussion in this chapter are left for the appendices and referred to
when needed.

#### 8.2 Minimal gauged supergravity

First we compute the supercurrent from the lagrangian of minimal @xmath
@xmath gauged supergravity following the conventions of [ 55 ] (which is
written in 1.5-formalism):

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (8.9)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

where @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (8.11)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

The spin connection satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

for a given vielbein @xmath . The @xmath -term in the Lagrangian is
related to the presence of a negative cosmological constant @xmath .

In most of our calculations, such as in the supercurrents and
supercharges, we only work to lowest order in fermions since higher
order terms vanish in the expression of the (on shell) supersymmetry
algebra, where we set all fermion fields to zero. The supersymmetry
variations are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath gauge transformations act on the gauge potential and on the
spinors in this way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

We use the conventions in which all the spinors are real Majorana ones
³⁹ ³⁹ 39 In conventions here, the two real gravitini in the gravity
multiplet are packaged together in the notation:

@xmath (8.18)

where each gravitino is itself a 4-component Majorana spinor. Similar
conventions are used for the supersymmetry parameters. In other words,
the @xmath indices are completely suppressed. , and the gamma matrix
conventions and identities of appendix A .

The quantities @xmath and @xmath for this theory are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence the supercurrent has the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

This expression is gauge invariant due to the cancelation between the
variation of the gravitino, the vector field and the supersymmetry
parameter. Furthermore we can show that the supercurrent is conserved

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

if we enforce the equation of motion for @xmath and use the antisymmetry
of the Levi-Civita symbol.

The Dirac brackets defined for the given theory read (we only need those
containing gravitinos):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can now check if ( 7.8 ) holds with the above form of the
supercurrent. It turns out that, up to overall normalization, we indeed
have the right expression without any ambiguity of improvement terms. We
only need to rescale, since the factor of @xmath in ( 8.21 ) does not
appear in the supersymmetry variations ( 8.13 )-( 8.15 ). The
supercharge is then defined as the volume integral ⁴⁰ ⁴⁰ 40 For volume
and surface integrals in this chapter, we use the notation that

@xmath (8.26)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the second equality follows from the Gauss theorem via the
equations of motion (in what follows we will always deal with classical
solutions of the theory). The Dirac bracket of two supersymmetry charges
is then straightforwardly derived as the supersymmetry variation of (
8.27 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is again a boundary integral.

The above formula is reminiscent of the expression for the Witten-Nester
energy [ 122 , 123 ] , which has already been implicitly assumed to
generalize for supergravity applications [ 124 , 125 ] (see also [ 30 ]
). Thus, the correspondence between BPS bounds and positivity of
Witten-Nester energy is confirmed also in the case of minimal gauged
@xmath supergravity by our explicit calculation of the supercharge
anticommutator.

#### 8.3 Two different BPS bounds with spherical symmetry

In this section, we derive two BPS bounds based on the two BPS sectors
that we consider. What is relevant for the BPS bound are the properties
of the asymptotic geometries and corresponding Killing spinors. The
Killing spinors of AdS @xmath and magnetic AdS @xmath (“cosmic
monopole”) are given in App. E , see also [ 102 ] . Since only the
asymptotics are important, we can set @xmath in the cosmic dyon
solution. The AdS @xmath solution is characterized by @xmath , while
mAdS @xmath by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The corresponding Killing
spinors take a very different form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a doublet of constant Majorana spinors, carrying @xmath
arbitrary parameters. From here we can see that AdS @xmath is fully
supersymmetric and its Killing spinors show dependence on all the four
coordinates. mAdS @xmath on the other hand is only @xmath BPS: its
Killing spinors satisfiy a double projection that reduces the
independent components to @xmath and there is no angular or time
dependence. We will come back to this remarkable fact in section 8.5 .

The form of the Killing spinors is important because the bracket of two
supercharges is a surface integral at infinity ( 8.28 ). Writing out the
covariant derivative in ( 8.28 ), one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

and it depends on the asymptotic value of the Killing spinors of the
solution taken into consideration. Therefore the superalgebra will be
different in the two cases and there will be two different BPS bounds.

The procedure to compute the BPS bound is the following. From ( 8.27 )
we have a definition of the supercharges @xmath and @xmath . We will
then make use of the following definition for the fermionic supercharges
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e. any spacetime and gamma matrix dependence of the bosonic
supercharges @xmath is left into the corresponding fermionic @xmath . We
are thus able to strip off the arbitrary constant @xmath in any explicit
calculations and convert the Dirac brackets for @xmath into an
anticommutator for the spinorial supercharges @xmath that is standardly
used to define the superalgebra. Therefore now we compute the surface
integrals ( 8.28 ) for the Killing spinors of AdS @xmath and mAdS @xmath
respectively. After stripping off the @xmath ’s, we find the
anticommutator of fermionic supercharges given explicitly in terms of
the other conserved charges in the respective vacua. The BPS bound is
then derived in the standard way by requiring the supersymmetry
anticommutator to be positive definite, see e.g. [ 126 ] for details.

##### 8.3.1 Asymptotically AdS@xmath states

We now derive the resulting supersymmetry algebra from the asymptotic
spinors of AdS @xmath . For this we use the general expression ( 8.31 )
for the Dirac brackets of the supersymmetry charges, together with the
asymptotic form of the Killing spinors, ( 8.29 ). Inserting the Killing
spinors @xmath of ( 8.29 ) in ( 8.31 ), we recover something that can be
written in the following form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the charges @xmath can be written down explicitly from the surface
integral ( 8.31 ). They will define the electric charge ( @xmath ),
momentum ( @xmath ), angular momentum ( @xmath , with @xmath spatial
indices), and boost charges ( @xmath ). The charge @xmath would
correspond to a magnetic charge, which we assumed to vanish by
construction. Without the charge @xmath , the above bracket will fit in
the @xmath superalgebra (see more below). We will therefore take as
definition of asymptotically AdS solutions the ones for which @xmath
vanishes. This choice of fall-off conditions is similar to the case of
@xmath supergravity, where the asymptotic charges are required to
generate the @xmath superalgebra [ 127 ] . Extensions of the @xmath
superalgebra where the charges @xmath and @xmath are non-zero have been
discussed in [ 128 ] .

From the previous expression we see that conserved charges like @xmath ,
@xmath et cetera will arise as surface integrals of the five terms (or
their combinations) appearing in the supercovariant derivative. We are
going to see how this works analyzing each term in the supercovariant
derivative, explicitly in terms of the ansatz of the metric ( 8.2 ) and
vector fields ( 8.4 ). This will provide us with a new definition of the
asymptotic charges in AdS @xmath with no need to use the holographic
renormalization procedure anywhere. As an explicit example one can
directly read off the definition of mass @xmath from the explicit form
of the asymptotic Killing spinors. In the stationary case,

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (8.34)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

We are going to take into consideration both static and rotating
solutions, but we will carry out our procedure and explain the
calculation in full detail only the case of the electric RN-AdS black
hole and comment more briefly on the rotating generalizations.

-   Electric RN-AdS

    Here we take into consideration solutions of the form ( 8.2 ) - (
    8.4 ) with zero magnetic charge, @xmath . We now evaluate the
    various terms in ( 8.31 ).

    To begin, it is easy to determine the piece concerning the field
    strength, namely

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.35)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Inserting the Killing spinors for AdS @xmath described in ( 8.29 ),
    and exploiting the Clifford algebra relations we get

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.36)
      -- -------- -- --------

    with the definition of the electric charge

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.37)
      -- -------- -- --------

    From here we can identify the term @xmath appearing in ( 8.33 ).

    Next we consider the term containing the “bare” gauge field @xmath .
    This gives a possible contribution to the charge @xmath in ( 8.33 ).
    As we mentioned above, we assumed this contribution to vanish for
    asymptotically AdS solutions. One can explicitly check this for the
    class of electric RN-AdS solutions given in ( 8.2 ), since the only
    nonzero component of the vector field is @xmath (see ( 8.4 )), hence

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.38)
      -- -------- -- --------

    The term with the partial derivative @xmath in ( 8.31 ) in the
    supercovariant derivative gives nonvanishing contributions for
    @xmath and it amounts to the integral:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.39)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Clearly, this term will contribute, together with other terms, to
    the mass.

    The integral containing the spin connection is:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.40)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where we have used

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.41)
      -- -------- -- --------

    and the value of the spin connection:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.42)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Also ( 8.40 ) will contribute to @xmath , and therefore to the mass.

    The last contribution of the supercovariant derivative, the term
    proportional to @xmath , yields

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.43)
      -- -------- -- --------

    In deriving this we have used the formula @xmath . Again, this term
    contributes to the mass formula.

    Collecting all the terms that contribute to the mass (the derivative
    term ( 8.39 ), the sum of the spin connection term ( 8.40 ), and the
    gamma term ( 8.43 )) gives rise to:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.44)
      -- -------- -- --------

    The integral has to be performed on a sphere with @xmath . Taking
    this limit one can see that in this expression all the positive
    powers of @xmath are canceled. Hence all possible divergences cancel
    out, and we are left with a finite contribution. In this sense, our
    method provides a holographic renormalization of the mass. In the
    cases we can compare, our method agrees with previously known
    results.

    Performing the integral on the remaining finite part we find:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.45)
      -- -------- -- --------

    To sum up, for the electric RN-AdS solution, the brackets between
    supercharges read:

      -- -------- -- -- --------
         @xmath         (8.46)
      -- -------- -- -- --------

    Now we can strip off the constant linearly independent doublet of
    spinors @xmath on both sides of the above formula to restore the
    original @xmath and spinor indices:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.47)
      -- -------- -- --------

    This expression coincides with the one expected from the algebra
    @xmath (see ( 8.75 ) in the next section) if we identify @xmath and
    @xmath .

    The BPS bound for the electric RN-AdS solution is then ⁴¹ ⁴¹ 41 See
    e.g. [ 126 ] for details on the general procedure of deriving of BPS
    bounds from the superalgebra. :

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.48)
      -- -------- -- --------

    The state that saturates this bound, for which @xmath , preserves
    half of the supersymmetries, i.e. it is half-BPS. It is the ground
    state allowed by ( 8.48 ) and represents a naked singularity. All
    the excited states have higher mass and are either naked
    singularities or genuine black holes.

    It is interesting to look at the case of extremal black holes, in
    which inner and outer horizon coincide. This yields a relation
    between the mass and charge, which can be derived from the solution
    given in ( 8.2 ). Explicit calculation gives the following result [
    109 ] :

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.49)
      -- -------- -- --------

    This lies above the BPS bound unless @xmath , in which case we
    recover the fully supersymmetric AdS @xmath space. Thus,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.50)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   Kerr-AdS
    The Kerr-AdS black hole is an example of a stationary spacetime
    without charges but with non-vanishing angular momentum. It is most
    standardly written in Boyer-Lindquist-type coordinates and we refer
    to [ 109 ] for more details. More details on how to calculate the
    angular momenta from the anticommutator of the supercharges can be
    found in App. F . The BPS bound is straightforward to find also in
    this case, leading to

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.51)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where the BPS state satisfies @xmath and in fact corresponds to a
    singular limit of the Kerr-AdS black hole because the AdS boundary
    needs to rotate as fast as the speed of light [ 112 ] . Note that in
    general for the Kerr black hole we have @xmath , where @xmath is the
    rotation parameter appearing in the Kerr solution in standard
    notation. Thus @xmath implies @xmath , which is exactly the singular
    case. All the excited states given by @xmath are however proper
    physical states, corresponding to all the regular Kerr-AdS black
    holes, including the extremal one. Thus the BPS bound is always
    satisfied but never saturated by any physical solution of the
    Kerr-AdS type,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.52)
      -- -------- -- --------

    as is well-known.

-   KN-AdS
    The BPS bound for Kerr-Newman-AdS (KN-AdS) black holes ⁴² ⁴² 42 See
    again [ 109 ] for more detailed description of the KN-AdS black
    holes. is a bit more involved due to the presence of both electric
    charge and angular momentum. We will not elaborate on the details of
    the calculation which is straightforward. The resulting BPS bound is

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.53)
      -- -------- -- --------

    and the ground (BPS) state is in fact quarter-supersymmetric. The
    BPS bound in general does not coincide with the extremality bound,
    which in the case of the KN-AdS black holes is a rather complicated
    expression that can be found in [ 109 , 112 ] . Interestingly, the
    BPS bound and the extremality bound coincide at a finite non-zero
    value for the mass and charge (with @xmath ),

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.54)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Now we have two distinct possibilities for the relation between the
    BPS state and the extremal KN-AdS black hole depending on the actual
    value for the electric charge (there is exactly one BPS state and
    exactly one extremal black hole for any value of charge @xmath ):

      -- -------- -- -- --------
         @xmath         (8.55)
      -- -------- -- -- --------

    So for small or large enough electric charge the BPS solution will
    be a naked singularity and the extremal black hole will satisfy but
    not saturate the BPS bound, while for the critical value of the
    charge the extremal black hole is supersymmetric and all
    non-extremal solutions with regular horizon will satisfy the BPS
    bound.

##### 8.3.2 Magnetic AdS@xmath

Unlike the standard AdS @xmath case above, the Killing spinors of
magnetic AdS @xmath already break @xmath of the supersymmetry, c.f. (
E.9 ). The projection that they obey is,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

for either the upper or lower sign, depending on the sign of the
magnetic charge. Furthermore, one has the following properties of the
projection operators,

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (8.57)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

and all remaining quantities of the form @xmath vanish, where @xmath
stands for any of the other twelve basis matrices generated by the
Clifford algebra.

These identities allow us to derive, from ( 8.31 ), the bracket

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

provided that the mass is given by

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (8.59)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

This expression simplifies further if we choose to put the vielbein
matrix in an upper triangular form, such that we have nonvanishing
@xmath and the inverse vielbein has only components @xmath . The mass is
then

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.60)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Notice that this mass formula is different from the one for
asymptotically AdS @xmath spacetimes.

Stripping off the parameters @xmath in ( 8.58 ), leaves us with a matrix
equation in spinor space. Due to the projection operators, one is
effectively reducing the number of supercharges to two instead of eight.
These two supercharges are scalars, since the Killing spinors are
invariant under rotation as they don’t depend on the angular coordinates
(see also in the next section). Denoting them by @xmath and @xmath , the
anticommutator then becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence the BPS bound is just

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

Saturating the bound leads to a quarter-BPS solution. None of the other
conserved charges, i.e. the electric charge and (angular) momentum,
influences the BPS bound due to the projection relation ( 8.57 ). Thus
@xmath and @xmath can be completely arbitrary.

In particular, for the case of of the Reissner-Nordström solution ( 8.2
) with fixed magnetic charge @xmath and @xmath arbitrary, the mass
integral ( 8.59 ) yields

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is exactly the mass parameter @xmath appearing in ( E.13 ). The
supersymmetric solutions found by Romans (the so-called cosmic
monopole/dyons) have vanishing mass parameter hence indeed saturate the
BPS bound ( 8.62 ).

Of course in the context of a rotating black hole vanishing mass results
in vanishing angular momentum due to the proportionality between the
two, i.e. an asymptotically mAdS Kerr-Newman with non-zero angular
momentum spacetime can never saturate the BPS bound ( 8.62 ).
Nevertheless, excitations over the magnetic AdS @xmath include all
Reissner-Nordström and Kerr-Newman AdS black holes that have fixed
magnetic charge @xmath and arbitrary (positive) mass, angular momentum
and electric charge. All these solutions satisfy the magnetic AdS @xmath
BPS bound.

#### 8.4 Non-spherical BPS bounds

As explained in the previous part of the thesis, the situation with
supersymmetric asymptotically AdS solutions with toroidal and hyperbolic
symmetry is slightly different. Magnetic ground states as mAdS @xmath ,
considered above for spherical symmetry, do not appear in the case of
toroidal topology. Contrary to this, in the case of hyperbolic topology
the only BPS ground state has non-vanishing magnetic charge, i.e. pure
hyperbolic AdS does not admit Killing spinors. Thus, apart from the two
cases with spherical symmetry discussed above, we have only two AdS-like
ground states with non-spherical symmetry. Their corresponding Killing
spinors can be found in appendix E . We now turn to each of them
separately, keeping the discussion short since it is very similar in
spirit and outcome to the previous section.

##### 8.4.1 Toroidal AdS@xmath

As explained in chapter 6 , the AdS ground state with flat topology is
called RiAdS and has vanishing mass, electric and magnetic charges. Its
Killing spinor breaks half of the supersymmetry due to the toroidal
compactification of coordinates. It is derived in details in appendix E
and reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

This result agrees with the one found in [ 109 ] . The toroidal black
holes can be seen as excitations over the background characterized by
these Killing spinors. To find the BPS bound, we plug the spinors ( 8.64
) in the formula for the Dirac bracket of two supercharges ( 8.31 ). We
first note the relations involving the projector ( E.14 ):

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (8.65)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

All the other gamma matrices between two projectors give zero: this
strongly limits the number of terms present in the superalgebra. The
anticommutator between two supercharges can now be computed. Due to the
projection identities ( 8.65 ) and the symmetries of the gamma matrices
⁴³ ⁴³ 43 @xmath are symmetric in their spinor indices, while @xmath is
antisymmetric (see App. A for our gamma matrix conventions). The four
terms in ( 8.66 ) are therefore the only non-vanishing contributions
from ( 8.31 ). only four terms appear, and the result is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

The mass @xmath has the following expression:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the central charge @xmath reads:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the vector field strength written as a two-form. The
above formulas are valid after choosing an upper triangular vielbein, as
in ( E.11 ). We omit the formulas for the momenta @xmath and @xmath ,
which are straightforward to derive from ( 8.31 ) and ( 8.64 ), but are
not particularly insightful since they vanish for static solutions.

The main outcome of our analysis is therefore that for static black
branes and toroidal black holes the BPS bound

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

must be satisfied.

To give an explicit example how the BPS bound constrains the solutions
space, we now restrict our attention to static solutions of the form (
6.73 ) with zero magnetic charge. The above mass formula can be
explicitly evaluated:

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (8.70)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

We see that the divergent part cancels (notice that the dependence on
@xmath drops out, as a consequence of the modular symmetry) and we are
left with the finite quantity @xmath for the mass density @xmath .
Furthermore, the formula for the central charge ( 8.68 ) gives zero when
computed on the ansatz ( 6.73 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

since @xmath is forced to vanish for asymptotically RiAdS solutions. We
then have @xmath , @xmath for these solutions. Consequently, the BPS
bound is just:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the BPS bound does not involve the electric charge, similarly
to the mAdS case. Moreover, this bound also holds in the
decompactification limit for black branes, where the mass density @xmath
is a finite number even if the mass @xmath is infinite. The BPS bound is
saturated for @xmath with an arbitrary electric charge @xmath . The
resulting spacetime has a naked singularity whenever @xmath , as already
explained in chapter 6 .

##### 8.4.2 Hyperbolic mAdS@xmath

For completeness sake, this short subsection is devoted to the
hyperbolic version of the magnetic AdS vacuum. From the explicit
calculation of the Killing spinor of the vacuum solution, with vanishing
mass and electric charge and magnetic charge @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

one can see that the situation is very much analogous to the spherical
mAdS case. The supersymmetry commutator and BPS bound trivially follow
from the same steps taken in section 8.3.2 . The bound is again

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 8.5 Superalgebras

##### 8.5.1 AdS@xmath

The procedure we used to find the BPS bound determines also the
superalgebras of AdS @xmath and mAdS @xmath , which are found to be
different. In fact, given the Killing spinors and Killing vectors, there
is a general algorithm to determine the superalgebra, see [ 118 ] and
chapter 13 in [ 55 ] .

For what concerns the pure AdS @xmath , in @xmath gauged supergravity
the superalgebra is @xmath , which contains as bosonic subgroup @xmath :
the first group is the isometry group of AdS @xmath and the second one
corresponds to the gauged R-symmetry group that acts by rotating the two
gravitinos. The algebra contains the generators of the @xmath group
@xmath ( @xmath ), and @xmath , the generator of @xmath . Furthermore,
we have supercharges @xmath with @xmath that are Majorana spinors. The
non-vanishing (anti-)commutators of the @xmath superalgebra are:

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (8.75)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

where @xmath , the gamma matrices are @xmath , and @xmath . @xmath does
not have the role of a central charge, as it does not commute with the
supercharges. Nevertheless it is associated to the electric charge ⁴⁴ ⁴⁴
44 If we perform a Wigner–Inönü contraction of the algebra, @xmath gives
rise to a central charge in the Poincaré superalgebra. See [ 55 ] for
further details. . The isometry group of AdS @xmath is @xmath ,
isomorphic to the conformal group in three dimensions, whose generators
are 3 translations, 3 rotations, 3 special conformal transformations
(conformal boosts) and the dilatation.

##### 8.5.2 mAdS@xmath

In the case of mAdS @xmath , the symmetry group is reduced. Spatial
translations and boosts are broken, because of the presence of a
magnetic monopole. There are 4 Killing vectors related to the invariance
under time translations and rotations. The isometry group of this
spacetime is then @xmath . Furthermore, we have also gauge invariance.
The projector ( 8.56 ) reduces the independent components of the Killing
spinors to 1/4, consequently the number of fermionic symmetries of the
theory is also reduced. We have denoted the remaining two real
supercharges with @xmath ( @xmath ). To sum up, the symmetry generators
of mAdS @xmath are:

-   the angular momentum @xmath , @xmath ,

-   the Hamiltonian @xmath ,

-   the gauge transformation generator @xmath ,

-   the two supercharges @xmath where @xmath .

From ( 8.61 ) the anticommutator between two supercharges is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since mAdS @xmath is static and spherically symmetric, we have the
commutation relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

The following commutators are then determined by imposing the Jacobi
identities:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next, we add the gauge generator @xmath to the algebra. Because of gauge
invariance, we have the commutators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the Jacobi identities one now derives that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

with a fixed normalization of @xmath . This commutator also follows from
the observation that gauge transformations act on the supersymmetry
parameters in gauged supergravity, together with the fact that @xmath
commutes with the projection operator @xmath defined in the previous
section.

The first commutator in ( 8.78 ) implies that the supercharges @xmath
are singlet under rotations. This is a consequence of the fact that the
mAdS @xmath Killing spinors have no angular dependence [ 102 ] . Group
theoretically, this follows from the fact that the group of rotations
entangles with the @xmath symmetry, as explained in [ 50 ] .

##### 8.5.3 RiAdS@xmath

The full superalgebra of RiAdS can be most clearly presented as follows.
After the projection we have only 4 real supercharges present, which we
label @xmath . The non-vanishing supercharge anticommutators can then be
read from ( 8.66 ):

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (8.81)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

and the action of the gauged @xmath symmetry leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

The other commutators vanish due to the form of the Killing vectors, the
fact that gauge transformations commute with translations and
compatibility with the super Jacobi identities. This shows that indeed
@xmath is a central charge, similar to the magnetic central charge in
the Poincaré superalgebra.

Due to the toroidal compactification, the theory is endowed also with
modular invariance. The metric and the Killing spinor are invariant
under transformations that act on both the parameter @xmath and the
coordinates @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the condition @xmath , i.e. @xmath . For a finite volume of the
torus, the superalgebra can be interpreted as corresponding to a modular
invariant quantum mechanics theory in one dimension, since one can
further reduce the @xmath theory, dual to RiAdS, on the two compact
spatial dimensions. This interpretation is no longer valid in the
infinite volume limit where the boundary is an infinite flat plane.

##### 8.5.4 Hyperbolic mAdS@xmath

As explained above, the situation for hyperbolic mAdS is fully analogous
to the one of spherical mAdS. This also holds for their superalgebras,
the only difference of course being that spherical symmetry encoded in
the structure constants for the angular momenta commutator changes into
hyperbolic symmetry. We will therefore not elaborate further on
hyperbolic mAdS @xmath solutions as their behavior is already captured
in our analysis of spherical mAdS. This remains being true in the next
chapter when we consider more complicated solutions allowing for running
scalars.

### Chapter 9 BPS bounds in the matter-coupled theory

#### 9.1 Introduction and general results

We continue our analysis of BPS bounds in the most general case of
matter coupled electrically gauged supergravity, i.e. coming back to the
lagrangian ( 2.1 ) and our original notation. After understanding more
clearly the vacuum structure of gauged supergravities in the previous
chapter, here we concentrate more on black hole solutions with
non-trivial scalar profiles. We find an unexpected similarity between
BPS solutions with very different asymptotics.

As we show in the following, the superalgebra structure does not change
when considering more general matter couplings in the theory. However,
the explicit definition of the asymptotic charges ( @xmath etc.) of a
given solution depends directly on the field content. We first derive
the form of the supersymmetry anticommutator for all possible solutions
of gauged supergravity with vectors and hypers. Then we focus on the
special cases of Minkowski, AdS, mAdS, and RiAdS asymptotics where we
evaluate the anticommutator explicitly. These calculations show that the
hypermultiplets do not produce additional central charges in the
superalgebra. We are also able to formulate renormalized expressions for
the mass in AdS and mAdS. Our results in AdS are in exact agreement with
the techniques of holographic renormalization [ 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 ,
28 , 29 , 30 ] . On the other hand, the mAdS mass takes a different form
and in some examples leads to qualitatively different results that have
no analog in previous literature.

From our knowledge of the minimal case and with the help of the susy
variations we can derive explicitly the supercharge, as done in appendix
G . The original expression for the supercharge is somewhat lengthy and
non-suggestive. However, using the equations of motion for the
gravitinos we can cast the supercharge into a much simpler form as a
surface integral (see the appendix for the technical details).

The important quantity for our purposes here is the Dirac bracket of two
supercharges. It can be derived from the supercharge ( G.10 ) and takes
the remarkably simple form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is the main general result of this chapter. It can be explicitly
evaluated on every spacetime that has an asymptotic Killing spinor.

Compared with the corresponding expression in the minimal case, ( 9.1 )
is just a straightforward generalization. A priori, one could expect
some more radical changes due to the presence of vector and
hypermultiplets, but this is not the case. We already see that the main
conclusions of the previous chapter remain the same, with the difference
that the definition of the asymptotic charges will generalize to
accommodate for the possibility of non-constant scalars ⁴⁵ ⁴⁵ 45 Note
that for a solution with constant scalars (both in the vector and in the
hypermultiplet sector) ( 9.1 ) is equivalent with the result for the
minimal case. Thus, the only difference between the asymptotic charges
in minimal and non-minimal supergravity lies in the possibility for
non-constant scalar profiles. . In order to give more precise
statements, we need to plug in the explicit Killing spinors of interest
in the general Dirac bracket ( 9.1 ).

In the following sections we consider more carefully the cases of
Minkowski, AdS @xmath , mAdS @xmath , and RiAdS @xmath asymptotics,
paying special attention to the asymptotic charges in stationary
solutions. In each of the cases we give an explicit example from the
study of black holes as an application of our results. Somewhat
surprisingly, we are able to find a very simple unified formula for the
mass of supersymmetric black hole spacetimes in all spherically
symmetric cases. This also leads to a better conceptual understanding of
the difference in the mass in AdS and mAdS spacetimes. We conclude with
some remarks on the connection of our results to alternative approaches
in literature.

#### 9.2 Asymptotically flat solutions

##### 9.2.1 General analysis

Here we will be interested in the superalgebra and asymptotic charges of
Minkowski spacetime. In the context of electrically gauged supergravity
with vector and hypermultiplets the necessary conditions for a Minkowski
vacuum were derived in chapter 3 ,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (9.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

together with constant scalars, vanishing field strengths and flat
@xmath metric. These are now the conditions that asymptotically flat
solutions will have to satisfy as @xmath (we always work in spherical
coordinates in this section).

The Majorana Killing spinors of Minkowski in spherical coordinates are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are two arbitrary and linearly independent constant
Majorana spinors. We will use the notation @xmath for Majorana spinors
and @xmath for the positive/negative chirality Weyl spinors that are
used in our notation. The chiral spinors are related to the Majorana
ones through

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Having the Killing spinors we can now in principle plug ( 9.3 ) in ( 9.1
) and derive the supercharge anticommutator directly. Of course, we
already know the general answer from the Poincaré superalgebra,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the charge conjugation matrix, @xmath is the momentum
operator, and @xmath is the complex central extension of the
superalgebra. The explicit eigenvalues of the operators @xmath and
@xmath for any asymptotically flat solution can be computed now from (
9.1 ). The additional @xmath and @xmath connections in ( 9.1 ) from the
matter multiplets can potentially lead to contributions to the
supersymmetry anticommutator that are not of the type ( 9.5 ). Since we
know that Minkowski asymptotics will necessarily lead to the Poincaré
superalgebra it follows that these additional connections must fall off
fast enough so that they do not contribute. ( 9.5 ) can in fact be taken
as a definition for asymptotically flat spacetimes. In practice, the
condition for the fall off of the connections will be equivalent with
imposing the metric to approach Minkowski space. This will be
illustrated more clearly with an explicit example.

In the next subsection we give the explicit expressions for @xmath in (
9.5 ) for the stationary case, but one can straightforwardly derive the
asymptotic charges in full generality if needed.

##### 9.2.2 Stationary solutions

For stationary solutions we find that the supersymmetry anticommutator
takes the following form ⁴⁶ ⁴⁶ 46 We rescale the central charges for
convenience. :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the complex central charge is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

as derived in detail in [ 129 ] ⁴⁷ ⁴⁷ 47 Note that the charges @xmath
and @xmath in ( 9.7 ) are the standard electric and magnetic charges as
commonly defined in literature. The electric charges come from the dual
field strengths @xmath . See chapter 2 for more details. . The
derivation of the central charge from ( 9.1 ) is a bit subtle and uses
the fact that @xmath contains a @xmath term, while @xmath contains
@xmath . This eventually leads to @xmath . This calculation picks out
the electric and magnetic charge carried by the graviphoton, which
explicitly depend on the asymptotic values of the vector multiplet
scalars.

The mass, on the other hand, remains unaffected by scalars,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

just as in the minimal case.

The BPS bound, as always for stationary asymptotically flat solutions,
is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that the hypermultiplet sector seems to be completely decoupled
from the above calculations since the hypers do not influence the
asymptotic charges. This suggests that the stabilization of the hypers
at a particular supersymmetric point in moduli space as described in
chapter 4 might be the generic situation in this case.

##### 9.2.3 Black hole example

As a standard example we can just briefly glance through the
single-centered supersymmetric black holes of chapter 5 , c.f. [ 73 ] .
First we take the most standard case of a static black hole as a warm up
for the static examples in AdS and mAdS. We then also explain the case
of a rotating BPS saturated Kerr-Newman metric, which provides a
non-trivial test of the BPS bound ( 9.9 ).

The metric and symplectic sections in spherical coordinates are

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (9.10)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

where @xmath are arbitrary constants that decide the asymptotic value of
the scalars, usually chosen such that @xmath asymptotes exactly to
@xmath ⁴⁸ ⁴⁸ 48 One does not really need to stick to a particular choice
for @xmath . We can always perform a coordinate transformation to make
sure that we have the correct asymptotics at @xmath . This has exactly
the same effect. . The rotation @xmath is present only when the Kähler
connection ( 3.18 ) is non-vanishing.

Let us consider as a first simple example the prepotential @xmath with
non-vanishing magnetic charge @xmath and electric charge @xmath (also
non-vanishing @xmath ). This implies that @xmath and @xmath . The @xmath
connection vanishes and therefore the metric is static, @xmath . To
normalize the Kähler potential we choose @xmath and find for the central
charge

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The mass can be calculated from ( 9.8 ) with the metric ( 9.10 ) and
spin connection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

This illustrates that the above spacetime is supersymmetric since @xmath
.

A slightly more challenging example is provided if we take the
supersymmetric Kerr-Newman spacetime from section 4.2 of [ 73 ] . We
will literally consider the same solution, taken in minimal supergravity
with a prepotential @xmath , such that @xmath . In oblate spheroidal
coordinates (c.f. (59) of [ 73 ] ), the harmonic functions that give the
solution are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Solving for the vector field strengths from this, we find that @xmath .
This means that

  -- -- -- --------
           (9.13)
  -- -- -- --------

The Kähler connection (c.f. ( 3.18 )) in this example is in fact
non-vanishing,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However, it goes as @xmath as @xmath and therefore does not contribute
to the supercharge anticommutator and keeps the Minkowski asymptotics.
If we further perform a redefinition @xmath , we obtain a stationary
supersymmetric metric in the familiar form

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (9.14)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

which is the Kerr-Newman metric with equal mass and charge, leading to a
nakedly singular rotating asymptotically flat spacetime. The mass can be
again found by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

after converting back to spherical coordinates ⁴⁹ ⁴⁹ 49 Eq. ( 9.15 )
holds also in the given set of Boyer-Lindquist coordinates, but in order
to use ( 9.8 ) one needs to first convert the relevant asymptotic
quantities in spherical coordinates. . This confirms that the
Kerr-Newman metric ( 9.14 ) is supersymmetric and that the angular
momentum, @xmath , indeed does not enter in the BPS bound ( 9.9 ) and
remains unconstrained by supersymmetry.

#### 9.3 AdS@xmath asymptotics

##### 9.3.1 General analysis

The necessary conditions for AdS @xmath vacuum, derived in chapter 3 ,
are:

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (9.16)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

with constant scalars, vanishing field strengths @xmath and AdS @xmath
metric with cosmological constant ⁵⁰ ⁵⁰ 50 @xmath is the cosmological
constant of pure AdS @xmath with constant scalars. The curvature of all
asymptotic AdS solutions will approach this value as @xmath . The reason
for defining @xmath is because the AdS Killing spinors explicitly
contain this constant instead of the gauge coupling constant @xmath .
@xmath . ( 9.16 ) will have to hold at @xmath for all asymptotically AdS
spacetimes, together with the usual conditions on the metric. Note that
we do not allow for asymptotic magnetic charge for the graviphoton, i.e.
@xmath . Unlike in the minimal case, this does not rule out the
existence of magnetic charges but only restricts them.

The last condition in ( 9.16 ) tells us that the @xmath ’s are
restricted in a certain way. We will assume that they are aligned in one
particular direction asymptotically ⁵¹ ⁵¹ 51 @xmath rotates under @xmath
and can always be put in a particular direction. This however does not
mean that existing solutions in literature are automatically written in
such a way. (direction @xmath ), i.e. only @xmath . The Majorana Killing
spinors for AdS were derived in App. E ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where it was implicitly assumed that @xmath for the gauging in the
minimal case. The end result for the supercharge anticommutator will of
course not depend on which direction for the moment maps is chosen, but
when @xmath the Killing spinors (the chiral ones can again be found
using ( 9.4 )) take the simplest form. In the explicit formulas for the
asymptotic charges it is clear how to leave the choice for the direction
@xmath completely arbitrary. The basic anticommutator for asymptotically
AdS solutions can be again derived directly using the chiral version of
( E.5 ) in ( 9.1 ). The result takes the expected form from the @xmath
superalgebra,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (9.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

as discussed in detail in the case of minimal gauged supergravity. Here
we also require that the @xmath and @xmath gauged conections in ( 9.1 )
fall off fast enough as @xmath in order to precisely recover the above
expression. ( 9.18 ) can be taken as a definition of asymptotically AdS
spacetimes. Any spacetime, whose Dirac bracket ( 9.1 ) does not simplify
to ( 9.18 ) is therefore not asymptotically AdS. In the explicit example
that follows the fall off will already be of the correct type, but in
principle one needs to always make sure that the spacetime in question
really is asymptotically AdS in the sense of ( 9.16 ) and ( 9.18 ). Each
of the asymptotic charges @xmath and @xmath can be explicitly derived,
but we will again concentrate on the mass and charge in the stationary
case.

##### 9.3.2 Stationary solutions

For asymptotically AdS solutions with vanishing magnetic charge @xmath ,
the supersymmetry anticommutator is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

with ⁵² ⁵² 52 Note that the following expression includes both the gauge
coupling constant @xmath and the asymptotic cosmological constant @xmath
.

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (9.20)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The angular momenta @xmath remain exactly as given in App. F ,
unaffected directly by the scalars. The BPS bound is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the scalars enter explicitly in the definition of the mass (
9.20 ), unlike for the asymptotically flat solutions.

##### 9.3.3 Static example

Here we will explicitly consider the static supersymmetric spacetimes
with non-constant scalars constructed by Sabra in [ 110 ] ⁵³ ⁵³ 53 As
explained in chapter 6 , they do not correspond to black holes but
rather to naked singularities due to the absence of an event horizon. .
Unlike in the asymptotically flat case, one cannot easily find what the
mass is just from looking at the metric.

Briefly summarized, the solution is in gauged supergravity with constant
FI parameters @xmath and an arbitrary number of vector multiplets. The
metric and symplectic sections are

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (9.23)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

It is immediately clear that the charge @xmath of this configuration
will be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denote the corresponding asymptotic values that will only
depend on the gauge parameters via the second row of ( 9.23 ). Since the
solutions are supersymmetric and static ( @xmath ) it follows that the
mass takes the exact same value as the charge @xmath . We can show this
explicitly for any given solution.

Let us for simplicity take the prepotential @xmath with electric charges
@xmath and FI parameters @xmath . The sections are therefore @xmath with
@xmath and @xmath . The asymptotic charge @xmath from ( 9.24 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to find the mass of this configuration we first need to perform
a simple coordinate rescaling to make sure that the metric asymptotes to
AdS in spherical coordinates (equivalently we could insist that @xmath
asymptotes to @xmath ). Transforming @xmath , with @xmath we achieve

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

which exactly asymptotes to AdS with cosmological constant @xmath in
spherical coordinates. The functions that further define the metric now
take the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The relevant spin connection components in this case are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we can use ( 9.20 ) to find the mass of this configuration:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

as expected. This is a rather non-trivial check that ( 9.20 ) gives the
correct expression for the AdS mass, and therefore reproduces correctly
results from holographic renormalization [ 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 , 28 ,
29 , 30 ] . Interestingly, we note that in the process of simplifying
the above formula, in “ @xmath ” one finds the mass to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e. picking the first subleading term of the Kähler potential after
normalizing it to asymptote to @xmath . This simple formula turns out to
give the mass for the static solutions both in Minkowski (c.f. ( 9.12 )
and ( 9.15 )) and in AdS. We now turn to magnetic AdS asymptotics and
show that the same formula effectively gives the mass also for
supersymmetric solutions in mAdS.

#### 9.4 mAdS@xmath asymptotics

##### 9.4.1 General analysis

Here the asymptotic conditions on the spacetime remain as in ( 9.16 )
with constant scalars, only now the magnetic field strengths are @xmath
under the restriction @xmath coming from Dirac quantization. As before,
we have the redefinition of the cosmological constant to be @xmath and
assume the moment map in direction @xmath to be non-zero.

For @xmath , the Killing spinors of mAdS @xmath were given App. E . Here
we can give the projections obeyed by the chiral Killing spinors as
straightforward generalization of the analysis in chaper 6.3 :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an arbitrary constant phase, and the choice of sign of
the second projection corresponds to the choice of sign for the charge
quantization condition. We choose to set @xmath , which can be done
without any loss of generality. However, some explicit solutions in
literature might implicitly use @xmath or other choices, which results
in rotation of the symplectic sections @xmath by @xmath in all the
equations that follow. The functional dependence of the Killing spinors
is only radial, @xmath . This can be seen explicitly by analyzing the
Killing spinor equation @xmath . Solving it also forces all
asymptotically mAdS spacetimes to satisfy @xmath as @xmath .

For asymptotically mAdS solutions with non-vanishing magnetic charge,
the supersymmetry anticommutator is just

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

with only two supercharge singlets as discussed above. The mass is given
by explicitly plugging ( 9.29 ) in ( 9.1 ) for any asymptotically mAdS
solution. It again turns out that the expression takes more convenient
form if we choose an upper triangular vielbein ⁵⁴ ⁵⁴ 54 Note that the
mass can only be defined upto an overall multiplicative constant, since
one can always rescale the asymptotic Killing spinor by @xmath ,
changing the mass by @xmath . For Minkowski and AdS, there are already
well-established conventions that fix @xmath , but this is not the case
for mAdS. :

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (9.31)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

The BPS bound in this case is simply

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that there is a crucial difference between the AdS and the mAdS
masses since the scalars enter differently in the expressions, e.g. in
the first term on the r.h.s. of ( 9.31 ). We will see in the next
subsection that this ultimately leads to a different notion of the mass
in the two cases and that the standard holographic renormalization
technique is equivalent to the mass definition ( 9.20 ), but does not
reproduce correctly ( 9.31 ). Note however that one can define another
conserved charge for asymptotically mAdS spacetimes, in analogy to the
central charge that appears in the Riemann AdS superalgebra (see section
9.5 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is always finite, since we have the identity @xmath . In this case
@xmath does not play any role in the superalgebra, but seems to be
relevant when one computes masses via the holographic renormalization
procedure (see more later).

##### 9.4.2 Black hole example

Here we concentrate on the static supersymmetric black holes with
magnetic charges of chapter 6.3 . The theory is again gauged
supergravity with an arbitrary number of vector multiplets and FI
gaugings @xmath . The magnetic charges are restricted by the equation
@xmath ⁵⁵ ⁵⁵ 55 We just choose the positive sign here without any loss
of generality. , and the metric and scalars are given by

  -- -- -- -- --------
              (9.34)
  -- -- -- -- --------

If we evaluate the mass of this solutions from ( 9.31 ) we get the
supersymmetric value @xmath .

To see this in some detail, let us again consider the simplest case of
prepotential @xmath that was also discussed carefully in chapter 6.3 .
We have @xmath @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

and magnetic charges

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

We again need to rescale @xmath and @xmath in order to have the metric
asymptote to mAdS in spherical coordinates just as above: @xmath , with
@xmath and cosmological constant coming from @xmath . The metric is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath . Evaluating ( 9.31 ) now gives

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (9.38)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

We are now in position to compare this result with the one obtained via
the holographic renormalization techniques of [ 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 ,
28 , 29 , 30 , 130 ] . As found in section 9 of [ 3 ] , the mass of the
above black holes is non-vanishing if one uses the explicit formulas
provided in [ 130 ] based on the procedure of holographic
renormalization [ 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 ] . In fact
these formulas give the same result as if ( 9.20 ) were used, i.e. the
holographic renormalization procedure does not consider the case of
magnetic AdS asymptotics separately. More precisely, the holographically
renormalized energy of asymptotically mAdS spacetimes is given by @xmath
, i.e. one needs to combine ( 9.31 ) and ( 9.33 ) in a quantity that
cannot be directly associated with the time-translation symmetry.

Remarkably, the effective formula that worked in the static cases for
Minkowski and AdS (see ( 9.12 ) and ( 9.28 )) turns out to give the
correct result once again,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Although the fundamental mass formulas ( 9.8 ),( 9.20 ) and ( 9.31 ) are
a priori considerably different, it turns out that the corresponding
supersymmetric solutions have such properties that in each case the mass
reduces to exactly the same simple formula.

#### 9.5 RiAdS@xmath asymptotics

##### 9.5.1 General analysis and static solutions

Here yet again the asymptotic conditions on the spacetime remain as in (
9.16 ) with constant scalars and vanishing electromagnetic field
strength. As before, we assume the moment map in direction @xmath to be
non-zero. Analogously to the cases above, the superalgebra remains
exactly the same as in the minimal case in the previous chapter so we
directly focus on the definition of the asymptotic charges, which
changes accordingly. They can be derived by realizing that the RiAdS
Killing spinor, derived in appendix E , in the standard conventions
adopted in this thesis, obeys

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an arbitrary constant phase.

We are mostly interested in describing objects with vanishing @xmath
like static black holes and branes. The relevant asymptotic charges in
this case are the mass @xmath and the central charge @xmath . In the
general case with arbitrary vector and hypermultiplets, they are defined
as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the anti-selfdual part of the graviphoton field
strength.

Compared to ( 8.67 ), the expression for the mass with vector and
hypermultiplets is changed only slightly in order to accommodate for the
cosmological constant, which is now dependent on the scalar fields via
the expression @xmath .

The expression for the central charge is reminiscent of the expression
for the magnetic charge caused by the graviphoton field strength ⁵⁶ ⁵⁶
56 @xmath are the electric and magnetic charge densities of the vector
field strengths appearing in the lagrangian. , just as in ( 8.71 ). The
magnetic charge, @xmath , is forced to vanish due to supersymmetry of
the vacuum as proven in [ 21 ] . @xmath is in fact the first subleading
term in the expression for the magnetic charge due to the extra @xmath
factor and is automatically finite in the limit @xmath . For constant
scalars, ( 9.42 ) clearly reduces to ( 8.71 ) and the central charge
vanishes. For non-constant scalar profiles, however, it is now possible
to generate a non-zero @xmath , which turns out to be crucial for
generating massive BPS black brane with an event horizon of chapter 6.4
.

The BPS bound for static asymptotically RiAdS solutions when a central
charge is allowed is therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

as already predicted. In case when both @xmath and @xmath vanish we
recover a 1/2 BPS solution like the ones in the previous section, while
in case @xmath we have a 1/4 BPS excitation. All other cases result in
non-supersymmetric excitations over RiAdS.

##### 9.5.2 Black brane example

As already explained in chapter 6.4 , one can find a class of 1/4 BPS
solutions, given by

  -- -- -- -- --------
              (9.44)
  -- -- -- -- --------

under the restriction @xmath , with the toroidal area element given by (
6.74 ). These solutions satisfy the BPS bound @xmath , where both
asymptotic charges are non-vanishing. Thus, unlike their spherical
analogs, the magnetic black branes have a non-vanishing mass.

To see this in some detail, consider the simple case of a prepotential
@xmath . We have @xmath and @xmath , with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

and magnetic charges

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that this solution is in almost complete analogy to the one
discussed above in the spherical case. It has a double horizon at @xmath
, which shields the singularity for any positive value of the arbitrary
parameter @xmath . Just as in the spherical example, we have to rescale
the radial coordinate @xmath with @xmath in order to have the proper
asymptotics. Evaluating ( 9.41 ) and ( 9.42 ) eventually leads to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

This proves that the mass is equal to the central charge. The solution
is a 1/4 BPS toroidal black hole in RiAdS for any finite value of @xmath
and black brane in AdS as @xmath . Note that, unlike the spherically
symmetric examples, the mass of the BPS black branes is not given by (
9.39 ).

From the form of the superalgebra it is clear that one should in
principle be able to add arbitrary electric charges to these solutions
and still keep them supersymmetric. To our best knowledge, such
solutions have not been yet constructed (see however [ 131 , 132 ] for
supersymmetric and extremal electric black branes that do not strictly
asymptote to AdS).

#### 9.6 Final remarks

To summarize, the main results of this chapter are the general mass
formulas ( 9.8 ), ( 9.20 ), ( 9.31 ), and ( 9.41 ) for asymptotically
flat, AdS, mAdS, and RiAdS spacetimes, respectively. We confirmed the
well-known result [ 129 ] for the central charge in Minkowski, showing
that the hypermultiplets do not alter it. We also showed that
supergravity does make a clear distinction between masses in AdS and
mAdS. Our analysis in AdS generalizes some previous works that did not
allow for non-trivial scalars, e.g. [ 133 ] . The results for
asymptotically AdS solutions are in fact equivalent to performing the
procedure of holographic renormalization [ 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 , 28 ,
29 , 30 , 130 ] , i.e. ( 9.20 ) can be directly used in AdS/CFT
applications. In the asymptotically mAdS case, to our best
understanding, ( 9.31 ) is the relevant mass formula that needs to be
used. Physically, the mass formula in mAdS might seem a bit
counter-intuitive as it allows for black hole solutions with vanishing
mass. However, from the point of view of the superalgebra this is the
only possibility for BPS objects in mAdS. Therefore @xmath should not
come as a surprise for the static magnetic black holes.

It is important to observe that the scalar profiles as functions of the
radial coordinate enter explicitly in the mass formulas ( 9.20 ) and (
9.31 ). Thus, the AdS and mAdS masses not only depend on the asymptotic
values of the scalars, but also on how the scalars approach these
values. This feature provides a new point of view towards the attractor
mechanism in AdS/mAdS. It shows that scalars are much more restricted to
behave in a particular way in comparison with the Minkowski case.
Nevertheless, for the spherically symmetric supersymmetric solutions it
turned out that the mass can be described by the same formula in all
three asymptotic vacua,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is usually chosen to be @xmath . This essentially means
that the mass is the first subleading term of the Kähler potential
expansion, no matter what the details of the solution and its
asymptotics are. It is interesting to understand the physical reasons
behind this.

### Chapter 10 Black hole superalgebras

#### 10.1 Introduction

In this chapter we are going to discuss a simple application of the
analysis of superalgebras, which results in a no-go theorem for static
supersymmetric black holes in AdS @xmath in theories without
hypermultiplets. The theorem is based purely on superalgebras and holds
very generally for @xmath @xmath supergravity, including possible higher
derivative theories. In the case of hypermultiplet gaugings, we give
(very constraining) conditions on the gauging that must be met in order
for a genuine BPS black hole in AdS @xmath to exist. Additionally, we
prove that the attractors for BPS black holes in Minkowski and mAdS are
unique. There are no possibilities for near-horizon geometries, other
than the ones already known from chapters 5 and 6 . We also briefly
comment on @xmath black hole superalgebras as these turn out to be very
closely related to their four-dimensional analogs and the main
conclusions about non-rotating BPS black holes and rings in AdS @xmath
are the same.

The proof is based on a simple observation: a supersymmetric black hole
interpolates between two different supersymmetric vacua. One is the
asymptotic spacetime which is typically at an infinite distance away
from the black hole itself, while the other is the near-horizon geometry
right outside the black hole horizon. These two vacua are solutions of
the equations of motions by themselves (in the static case) and need to
necessarily preserve some supersymmetry if the full solution is to be
supersymmetric. The full black hole solution thus approaches these two
vacua in the corresponding limits (usually in spherical coordinates
@xmath corresponds to the vacuum at infinity, e.g. Minkowski or AdS, and
@xmath to the near-horizon geometry, e.g. AdS @xmath S @xmath ). This
leads to a very simple mathematical relation between the superalgebras
of the asymptotic spaces - if the superalgebra of the vacuum at infinity
is denoted by @xmath and the near horizon superalgebra as @xmath , then
the full black hole symmetry algebra @xmath is a sub(super)algebra of
both asymptotic superalgbras, @xmath and @xmath . Since we want the full
solution to preserve some supersymmetry, @xmath must include some
fermionic charges. This discussion can be repeated in a similar manner
for all solutions in supergravity that interpolate between two distinct
BPS vacua, e.g. different kinds of black objects and M/D-branes (see [
134 , 135 ] ). Inverting the argument, it is clear that if two different
superalgebras do not have a common subsuperalgebra, there can never be a
supersymmetric solution that interpolates between the two corresponding
vacua.

We use this observation in the context of gauged @xmath @xmath
supergravity to show that there is no static near-horizon geometry (with
spherical symmetry) that can match to the AdS superalgebra in absence of
hypermultiplets, preserving a number of supercharges. There are two
major steps in this proof that have already been accomplished in
previous literature. The authors of [ 90 ] proved that in four
dimensional supergravities the only allowed near horizon geometry for
spherically symmetric static black holes in Minkowski or AdS is the
product spacetime AdS @xmath S @xmath . This result holds in full
generality, including possible higher derivative terms. The other
important step was achieved in [ 50 ] , where all possible
supersymmetric AdS @xmath S @xmath solutions were analyzed in the
context of general gauged @xmath @xmath supergravities with possible
vector, hyper-, and tensor multiplets. It was shown that only two
different classes exist, the fully BPS Bertotti-Robinson spacetime, and
a half BPS solution where the radii of the AdS @xmath and S @xmath are
different. These two solutions define their own distinct superalgebras.
The important point is that, even though particular details of the
solution might change depending on the theory, superalgebras remain the
same in supergravity, i.e. no matter how many additional higher
derivative corrections we consider they cannot influence the abstract
superalgebra charges and structure constants. This ensures that there
exist only two versions of @xmath which one can choose from in order to
find a supersymmetric black hole with Minkowski or AdS asymptotics in
four dimensions.

Our remaining job is therefore clear. We first need to consider
carefully the two near horizon superalgebras, @xmath , which is done in
section 10.2 . Then we list the possible asymptotic vacua at infinity,
Minkowski, AdS @xmath , and magnetic AdS @xmath , and their
corresponding superalgebras in section 10.3 . In section 10.4 we analyze
the possible black hole subalgebras, showing how the two near-horizon
geometries match to the Minkowski and mAdS superalgebras. We then show
that the AdS @xmath superalgebra has no common (spherically symmetric)
subsuperalgebra with the half-BPS near-horizon solution, while
explicitly constructing the common @xmath algebra inside the AdS @xmath
and the Bertotti-Robinson superalgebras. We remind the reader of the
conditions for existence of these two different vacua in the same
theory, thus completing the proof that static supersymmetric solutions
in AdS can never develop an event horizon and form black holes in the
absence of hypermultiplets.

Note that we discuss only static spherically symmetric solutions. Thus
all considered near-horizon and asymptotic geometries possess time
translation and 3d rotation symmetries. Every superalgebra in
consideration therefore includes the bosonic charges @xmath and @xmath ,
obeying the commutation relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

We require these generators and commutation relations, corresponding to
the group @xmath (or @xmath when time is compact as in AdS), to be
present also in the black hole superalgebra, @xmath . We are therefore
looking for a common subalgebra, @xmath , such that @xmath and @xmath
includes at least one fermionic symmetry.

In the end of this chapter, section 10.5 includes a short review of the
known results about BPS black objects in @xmath supergravity and we show
that the existence of non-rotating solutions in AdS @xmath is again
related to the realization of some very particular hypermultiplet
gaugings.

#### 10.2 Near-horizon superalgebras

In this section we consider more carefully the two available choices for
supersymmetric near-horizon geometries. One is the fully BPS, i.e.
@xmath conserved supercharges, Bertotti-Robinson solution, while the
other one is a 1/2 BPS solution which we choose to call magnetic AdS
@xmath S @xmath . The spacetime in both cases is a direct product of AdS
@xmath and S @xmath , but their corresponding superalgebras @xmath are
very distinct.

##### 10.2.1 Bertotti-Robinson superalgebra

The superalgebra of the fully BPS AdS @xmath S @xmath , @xmath , was
analyzed in detail in, e.g. [ 55 , 136 ] . Since this is the
near-horizon geometry of static asymptotically flat black holes (c.f. [
73 ] ), the superalgebra is very well known. We therefore do not go into
much depth here, just mentioning that the bosonic symmetry group is
@xmath which includes as a subgroup @xmath . There are eight
supercharges that are organized into two spinors @xmath . The relevant
commutation relations for our purposes here are ⁵⁷ ⁵⁷ 57 Note that we
keep the gamma matrix conventions of appendix A . In particular, all
gamma matrices are imaginary, and the charge conjugation matrix is
@xmath . :

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (10.2)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

The charges @xmath and @xmath that appear in the supercharge
anticommutator come from the @xmath symmetry of AdS @xmath . They are
always broken in the full black hole solution. But the superalgebra
(anti-)commutators can only produce symmetries on the right hand side.
This means that the black hole superalgebra has to necessarily include
only those supercharges whose anticommutator does not produce the broken
symmetries @xmath and @xmath . We will see explicitly how this happens
in section 10.4 .

##### 10.2.2 Magnetic AdS@xmathS@xmath

The magnetic AdS @xmath S @xmath , analyzed carefully in [ 50 ] , is the
near-horizon geometry of the static magnetic black holes in AdS @xmath
that were described in chapter 6.3 . These black holes do not asymptote
to the usual fully supersymmetric AdS @xmath solution, but rather to
magnetic AdS - a topologically distinct vacuum preserving two of the
original eight supercharges and distinguished by its non-vanishing
magnetic charges (in the electrically gauged theory). This is the reason
why we also choose to use the terminology magnetic AdS @xmath S @xmath .
Unlike its fully supersymmetric analog, the superalgebra of the magnetic
AdS @xmath S @xmath is not generally known. It can be straightforwardly
derived via the procedure of chapter 7 (knowing that half of the Killing
spinors components are projected out by the matrix @xmath ) and the use
of super-Jacobi identities, but it will not be needed for our purposes
here. It is enough to note the observation in [ 50 ] that the Killing
spinors do not transform under rotations, i.e. the supercharges flip
spin and become @xmath scalars. It is easiest to denote the four scalar
supercharges by @xmath . The important commutator for us here is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that this makes the superalgebras of the Bertotti-Robinson and the
magnetic AdS @xmath S @xmath very different. From ( 10.2 ) we can see
that spatial rotations do not leave any invariant spinor components,
while ( 10.3 ) shows the opposite behavior.

#### 10.3 Asymptotic superalgebras

Here we concentrate on the asymptotic superalgebras, @xmath . We analyze
the three BPS asymptotic vacua that are subject to the theorem of [ 90 ]
, i.e. we know that in these spacetimes all static black holes with
spherical symmetry become AdS @xmath S @xmath near the horizon. These
are the fully supersymmetric Minkowski and AdS @xmath solutions from
chapter 3 and the quarter-BPS magnetic AdS @xmath , analyzed in appendix
E .

##### 10.3.1 Poincaré superalgebra

The best known example of a superalgebra is of course the Poincaré
superalgebra. In @xmath @xmath , it consists of eight fermionic charges
packed in two spinors @xmath and ten bosonic symmetries from the
Poincaré group in four dimensions - one time translation @xmath , space
translations @xmath , spatial rotations @xmath , and boosts @xmath (
@xmath ). The important relations of the superalgebra for us are:

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (10.4)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

where @xmath is the complex central charge that accommodates for
electric and magnetic charges in asymptotically flat solutions.

##### 10.3.2 AdS@xmath superalgebra

A full account of the AdS @xmath superalgebra, @xmath , was already
presented in chapter 8 . Here we just selectively repeat some of the
facts needed for the purposes of the present chapter. The spacetime
symmetries of AdS @xmath have their exact counterparts in the Poincaré
group, although translations no longer commute with each other. Unlike
in the Poincaré case however, @xmath does not allow for central charges.
The gauge group generator, @xmath , corresponds to the R-symmetry group
and thus rotates the supercharges between each other. The relevant parts
of the superalgebra here are:

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (10.5)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

##### 10.3.3 mAdS@xmath superalgebra

The superalgebra of magnetic AdS @xmath was also derived in chapter 8 .
It is very simple due to the fact that it consists of only two
supercharges, time translations, rotations, and the gauge group
generator @xmath . The supercharges in this case are @xmath scalars,
which we denote by @xmath , @xmath . The important commutators are

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (10.6)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

#### 10.4 Black hole superalgebras and a no-go theorem

We finally turn into analysis of the superalgebras @xmath , belonging to
the full black hole solutions. We give the superalgebras of the known
supersymmetric black holes in Minkowski (c.f. chapter 5 ) and magnetic
AdS (c.f. chapter 6.3 ). We then search for possible black hole
superalgebras in AdS, proving a no-go theorem and showing how it can be
potentially circumvented.

##### 10.4.1 Asymptotically flat black holes

###### Bertotti-Robinson horizon

The most general static supersymmetric black holes in ungauged
supergravity are half-BPS and interpolate between the maximally
supersymmetric Bertotti-Robinson solution near the horizon and Minkowski
at infinity. The superalgebra of these black holes can be found by
projecting out half of the supersymmetries in ( 10.2 ) and ( 10.4 ). At
the horizon, it turns out the remaining supercharges obey @xmath .
Asymptotically, the four relevant supercharges from the black hole point
of view are given by @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . The black hole
superalgebra is therefore

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (10.7)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

where only four of the spinor components @xmath are linearly
independent. The time translations generator of the black hole
superalgebra, @xmath , has a different meaning when embedded in the two
bigger superalgebras. Near the horizon, @xmath from ( 10.2 ), while
asymptotically @xmath from ( 10.4 ). The rotation generators @xmath
remain exactly the same in ( 10.7 ), ( 10.2 ), and ( 10.4 ), while the
remaining bosonic generators, @xmath in the Bertotti-Robinson
superalgebra and @xmath in the Poincaré superalgebra, are broken ⁵⁸ ⁵⁸
58 Of course one needs to make sure that the remaining commutation
relations close under the super-Jacobi identities when breaking a given
bosonic or fermionic symmetry. In other words, not every way of
projecting out some symmetries from ( 10.2 ) and ( 10.4 ) leads to a
consistent (sub)superalgebra. This is however the case at hand, due to
the fact that @xmath commutes with the rotations and the remaining
supercharges in the Bertotti-Robinson superalgebra and @xmath is a
central charge in the Poincaré superalgebra. . The black hole
superalgebra can be rewritten in a more suggestive and clear form if we
write the remaining four supercharges in two complex parameters, @xmath
and @xmath . The superalgebra then takes the form

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (10.8)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

We will soon discover that the @xmath superalgebra in fact admits
another subalgebra that consists of the exact same fermionic and bosonic
charges with different structure constants.

These facts are all well-understood and expected for the case of
ungauged BPS black holes, yet they provide a clear and straightforward
realization of the general idea in section 10.1 . This is an example
where @xmath , i.e. the superalgebra of the full black hole solutions is
smaller than the corresponding superalgebras of the two limiting
spacetimes between which it interpolates. This need not be necessarily
the case as we discuss next.

###### Magnetic AdS@xmathS@xmath horizon

One can show that Minkowski and magnetic AdS @xmath S @xmath do not
share a common subalgebra that includes rotations and supercharges. The
rigorous proof follows the same considerations as will be presented in
detail for the case of @xmath superalgebra. If one considers all
possible projections and combinations of supercharges that exist in the
Poincaré superalgebra, ( 10.7 ) is the only consistent subalgebra that
follows the requirements of @xmath symmetry and broken spatial
translations and boost charges. It is clear that the supercharges in
this case are not rotationally invariant and therefore magnetic AdS
@xmath S @xmath cannot be a near-horizon geometry for any asymptotically
flat BPS solution.

##### 10.4.2 Magnetic AdS black holes

###### Magnetic AdS@xmathS@xmath horizon

The static BPS black holes in magnetic AdS, constructed originally in [
21 ] , are an example of supersymmetric solutions that interpolate
between magnetic AdS @xmath S @xmath near the horizon and mAdS @xmath at
infinity, as shown in [ 50 ] . The black holes are quarter-BPS and their
corresponding Killing spinors in fact obey the same projections as the
ones of pure mAdS @xmath . This means that the black hole superalgebra
is exactly the same as its asymptotic superalgebra, @xmath . On the
other hand, there is still a supersymmetry enhancement near the horizon,
where the solution preserves four instead of only two supercharges. The
projection that relates ( 10.3 ) to ( 10.6 ) corresponds to @xmath if we
would have kept the spinor indices. Observe that the supercharges are
scalars under rotations everywhere in spacetime, something that seems to
distinguish magnetic solutions in gauged @xmath @xmath supergravity. We
thus find that @xmath with no need to repeat again the black hole
superalgebra, ( 10.6 ).

###### Bertotti-Robinson horizon

Magnetic AdS does not share a common superalgebra with the
Bertotti-Robinson solution. This can be most easily seen when
considering the possible subalgebras of @xmath that have a bosonic group
@xmath . It turns out there are two such superalgebras (one was given in
( 10.7 ) and the other will be discussed in the coming subsection), but
neither of them has rotationally invariant supercharges. Therefore,
supersymmetric black holes in mAdS can never have a Bertotti-Robinson
horizon.

##### 10.4.3 Black holes in AdS@xmath?

Now we want to show that ( 10.5 ) has no common subalgebra with ( 10.3 )
under the requirement that the common subalgebra must include some
fermionic charges, as well as time translations and rotations. It is
clear that @xmath is a priori different from @xmath and the magnetic AdS
@xmath S @xmath superalgebra, thus the only way of finding common
subalgebras is to project away at least some of the supercharges. The
AdS @xmath superalgebra is written with two four-component spinors,
@xmath . Out of this eight supercharges, one can choose an arbitrary
linear combination to be preserved. The remaining supercharges in any
case will obey

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.9)
  -- -------- -- --------

The projection operator @xmath consists generally of combinations of the
basis @xmath matrices @xmath , @xmath and the @xmath spinor space
matrices spanned by @xmath . However, the requirements that @xmath is a
projection operator and that we only consider rotation invariant
subalgebras limits substantially the allowed choices for projection. An
additional requirement for a potential black hole superalgebra in this
case is that no space translations or boost charges are allowed, since
these are certainly not present in the near-horizon superalgebras ( 10.2
) and ( 10.3 ). These have to be then taken out of the AdS superalgebra,
and the choice of projection has to guarantee that the remaining
supercharges do not produce @xmath and @xmath in the new supercharge
anticommutator.

More technically speaking, the requirement of rotation invariant
superalgebra means that the projection operator must include @xmath and
@xmath in a symmetric way, as otherwise some of the angular momentum
generators will be broken. A simple example is if one chooses a
projection of the type @xmath , which results in a closed subalgebra
only if @xmath and @xmath are absent. This means that the projection may
only include combinations of matrices @xmath . However, matrices @xmath
and @xmath will not be able to project out the charges @xmath in the
supercharge anticommutator since they do not anticommute with @xmath .
On the other hand, @xmath and @xmath do not anticommute with @xmath and
will not project the translations @xmath out of the supercharge
anticommutator. We are therefore left only with @xmath as a potential
candidate for a projection that leads to a consistent rotationally
invariant superalgebra with broken spatial translations and boosts. Thus
we are left with four supercharges that obey the relation @xmath . The
resulting superalgebra commutators are

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (10.10)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

where @xmath from ( 10.5 ) and the @xmath and @xmath are indeed broken.
This is the @xmath superalgebra of the electric Reissner-Nordström-AdS
(RN-AdS) solutions, described in [ 102 ] . These solutions, and their
generalizations for arbitrary couplings with vector multiplets, [ 110 ]
, are static supersymmetric asymptotically AdS @xmath solutions that
represent nakedly singular spacetimes. This can be now more easily
understood from the superalgebra point of view from the following
argument.

Clearly, the @xmath superalgebra relations above do not correspond to a
subalgebra of the magnetic near-horizon geometry ( 10.3 ). More
importantly, no additional rotationally symmetric projections of the
supercharges in ( 10.10 ) can ever make the supercharges singlets under
the angular momentum generators. Therefore, there does not exist a
common rotationally invariant subsuperalgebra of @xmath and the magnetic
AdS @xmath S @xmath superalgebras. This could also be expected from the
fact that AdS @xmath and magnetic AdS @xmath S @xmath are topologically
distinct for their magnetic charge. Interestingly, a common subalgebra
of the AdS @xmath and the Robonson-Bertotti superalgebras does exist,
since @xmath . This can be seen by considering ( 10.2 ) and imposing the
breaking of the @xmath symmetries, together with the projection @xmath
for the supercharges. This again leads to the @xmath superalgebra,
although written in a different basis for the fermionic supercharges and
angular momentum parameters. This is therefore the superalgebra that
static BPS black holes in AdS @xmath must obey. The most intuitive form
of the superalgebra is written with two complex supercharges, @xmath and
@xmath , similarly to the case of flat black holes:

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (10.11)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

Now that we have established a possibility for a black hole in AdS
@xmath with a fully BPS near-horizon geometry, we need to remind
ourselves the algebraic conditions for existence of the two fully BPS
asymptotic vacua (AdS @xmath and AdS @xmath S @xmath ). From chapter 3
we know that the AdS @xmath S @xmath solutions require

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.12)
  -- -------- -- ---------

while the AdS @xmath vacuum is realized when

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (10.13)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

We therefore need to have a theory where both of these vacua are
allowed, i.e. where @xmath and @xmath can be realized in field space.
Clearly, this cannot happen in a theory where the moment maps are
constant. This is however conceivable for theories with hypermultiplets
(although we are not aware of explicit examples), where the moment maps
may vary in different points of spacetime via their dependence on the
hypers. This concludes our proof that static supersymmetric black holes
in AdS @xmath cannot exist in theories without hypermultiplets,
confirmed by the explicit solutions of [ 102 ] and [ 110 ] . It remains
to be seen whether explicit constructions of black holes with @xmath
superalgebra in theories with gauged hypermultiplets can be found.

#### 10.5 A glance at black objects in @xmath

Although slightly more complicated, the story of supersymmetric objects
with event horizon in five-dimensional supergravity is not dissimilar.
Due to the extra spatial dimension, in @xmath event horizons can have
both spherical (S @xmath ) topology (black holes) and ring-shaped (S
@xmath S @xmath ) topology (black rings). The previous discussion in
this chapter about static BPS black holes in @xmath has a natural
extension to “non-rotating” black holes and rings in @xmath . A common
term in @xmath literature, non-rotating refers to solutions whose
rotation vanishes at the event horizon. The near-horizon geometry is
therefore again static and described by a product spacetime with AdS and
spherical factors. For a good overview of the main results in this field
one can read the introductory chapters of standard references, e.g. [
137 , 138 , 139 , 140 , 141 , 142 ] .

In the asymptotically flat case, the non-rotating BPS black holes are
given by the supersymmetric limit of the BMPV solutions [ 143 ] with
near-horizon geometry AdS @xmath S @xmath (here S @xmath is a squashed
sphere for the generic cases with non-vanishing angular momentum,
becoming the maximally symmetric sphere in the static case). On the
other hand, the BPS black rings [ 144 ] in Minkowski have a near-horizon
geometry AdS @xmath S @xmath . Similarly to the static solutions in AdS
@xmath , at present there are no known non-rotating BPS black objects
(i.e. solutions with event horizon) in AdS @xmath .

Unlike in @xmath , the classification of near-horizon geometries in
@xmath (see e.g. [ 142 ] ) is a much more involved and still ongoing
research direction, so one cannot use the same arguments as above to
formulate a no-go theorem for AdS solutions. However, we can again show
that the flat near-horizon superalgebras can fit to the asymptotical
superalgebra of AdS @xmath , @xmath in @xmath @xmath gauged supergravity
⁵⁹ ⁵⁹ 59 In @xmath dimensions, @xmath supergravity has a total of @xmath
supercharges and is the theory most closely related to @xmath @xmath .
This is however not of special importance for us here, since it is
trivial to extend the discussion to theories with more supersymmetry
without changing the final outcome. The AdS @xmath superalgebra in
general @xmath -extended @xmath supergravity theories is @xmath (see,
e.g. [ 145 ] ). .

The flat near-horizon superalgebras were carefully considered in [ 139 ]
, where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath -dimensional near-horizon
geometries were connected to each other in a very suggestive manner ⁶⁰
⁶⁰ 60 This also implies that similar consideration will hold even in
@xmath . We will however not pursue this subject further in this thesis.
. The relevant superalgebras turn out to be the following (table 1 of [
139 ] ). The static AdS @xmath S @xmath exhibits @xmath where one of the
rotation groups ( @xmath ) is entagled with the supercharges and the
other one is not. The rotating BMPV solution still preserves @xmath on
the squashed sphere, which arrange themselves to preserve the same
number of supercharges in the superalgebra @xmath . The AdS @xmath S
@xmath of the black ring curiously gives rise to @xmath , where the
extra bosonic symmetries @xmath that decouple from the supercharges this
time arise from the AdS @xmath symmetry group.

Now it becomes clear that our discussion in section 10.2 of the group
@xmath becomes equally relevant in @xmath , where all of the possible
near-horizon geometries share the same fermionic symmetry, together with
some extra bosonic symmetries that are equally simple to understand and
handle. It is also easy to see that the spherically symmetric way of
breaking the AdS @xmath symmetry @xmath leads to the group @xmath @xmath
@xmath (see e.g. [ 137 ] for more details), which can obviously be
broken further to @xmath @xmath @xmath . From our previous discussion in
@xmath it is also clear that @xmath @xmath @xmath and/or @xmath @xmath
@xmath are subalgebras of the three different near-horizon
superalgebras. Therefore we conclude that on the level of superalgebras
it is allowed to have BPS black holes and rings and AdS @xmath with flat
horizons. One again needs to make sure that these vacua exist within the
same theory, which once more leads to the requirement of some specific
hypermultiplet gaugings in @xmath @xmath supergravity. To our best
knowledge, such examples are not excluded from existence, but also not
explicitly known at this moment.

### Chapter 11 Discussion and Outlook

#### 11.1 Lessons

What are the lessons to be learned and the conclusions to be drawn from
the case-study of @xmath -dimensional @xmath supergravity? I will try to
answer this broad question in the context of each separate direction in
theoretical physics as outlined in chapter 1 .

###### General Relativity

From the point of view of GR, @xmath @xmath supergravity is a particular
supersymmetric way of coupling matter to gravity. However, supergravity
does have to tell something about general GR solutions that are not
necessarily supersymmetric. We saw that the concept of BPS bounds, which
in the case of @xmath is equivalent with the Witten-Nester energy,
provides a stability criterion for very large classes of solutions. This
ensures that vacua such as Minkowski and AdS are stable and cannot decay
into negative mass states such as (nakedly singular) Schwarzschild
spacetimes. Our analysis in @xmath enriches this to include
Einstein-Maxwell theories with or without cosmological constant. This is
clearly related with the cosmological censorship conjecture. In fact,
for static solutions in Minkowski, we see that the BPS bound projects
all nakedly singular solutions. This is however no longer the case with
rotations in Minkowski and with asymptotically AdS spacetimes, where a
well-defined version of the cosmological censorship is still missing.
Often, for AdS and other interesting nontrivial solutions in GR,
physical intuition can be misleading and one needs to use all available
mathematical tools to gain further insight. In this respect, I think
that the study of classical solutions in supergravity can provide new
ideas and better understanding of the vacuum structure in General
Relativity.

###### Quantum gravity

We already connected the study of superalgebras and BPS bounds to the
classical theory of gravity. However, superalgebras are even more
interesting for their implications about the quantum aspects of gravity.
Due to supersymmetry, superalgebras do not renormalize after considering
quantum corrections. Thus, although explicitly derived from a particular
classical solution, the abstract (super)symmetry algebras remain the
same even if the original solution is deformed substantially in the
quantum theory. This has been used to provide the microscopic
description of entropy for the BPS black holes in chapter 5 . The same
principle should allow us to describe the black holes in chapter 6 on a
quantum level (see more ideas in this direction in the following
section). As seen in chapter 10 , we are able to prove that certain
classical solutions in AdS can never develop an event horizon even in
the full quantum regime. This means that they remain fundamental objects
(pure states with zero entropy) in the theory of quantum gravity,
whatever it is. Such examples already show that one does not necessarily
need to have the knowledge of a complete quantum theory in order to
understand the nature of quantum gravity. In this sense, much remains to
be learnt from classical (BPS) solutions of supergravity.

###### String theory

Although we did not directly touch the topic of string theory in this
work, we provided some string motivated examples, e.g. in sections 3.4 ,
5.3.1 , 6.3.6 . We saw that de Sitter space is not a supersymmetric
background and therefore it does not enjoy any nice stability properties
from BPS bounds. This is in a sense bad news for string theory and
supergravity as candidates to describe the real world around us, but
more research effort is needed before making any conclusive statements.
On the other hand, string theory does improve some of the supergravity
implications in this thesis. We saw that any effective @xmath @xmath
supergravity action coming from string theory includes at least one
hypermultiplet. This is enough to (potentially) evade the no-go theorem
for black holes in AdS of chapter 10 . This may be an indication that
string theory selects the more physically relevant supergravities, since
we expect the real world black holes to have non-zero entropy.

###### AdS/CFT correspondence

For the applications of the AdS/CFT correspondence, this work is
providing some new gravitational backgrounds that might have interesting
field theory duals. Although the usual version of AdS/CFT would only
apply to the asymptotically AdS @xmath solutions of previous chapters,
it is not hard to imagine that magnetic AdS has its own distinct dual
theory, waiting to be discovered (see the next section for more explicit
ideas in this direction). Additionally, our explicit method for finding
conserved charges in AdS from chapters 7 , 8 , 9 can be used for
explicit AdS/CFT calculations instead of the procedure of holographic
renormalization for quantities at the AdS boundary. It would also be
interesting to find BPS black holes in AdS with nontrivial scalar
profiles (e.g. the ones suggested in chapter 10 ), since those are
relevant for the understanding of superconductors and quantum phase
transitions in condensed matter physics.

###### Supersymmetry and supergravity

In the broad area of supersymmetry and supergravity, this work of course
mainly concentrates on a particular version of supergravity and its BPS
vacuum structure. However, the methods used in our analysis can be
easily applied in all other types of supergravity theories. In
particular, the reasoning in chapters 3 , 4 can be used to classify BPS
solutions in general, while some of the techniques in chapters 5 , 6
have their analogs in searching for higher dimensional black holes in
different supergravities. Furthermore, the method of chapter 7 and the
main idea of chapter 10 are immediately relevant for every other theory
with supersymmetry. As we will see in the next section, the study of
superalgebras can be particularly insightful when applied to @xmath
-dimensional supergravity. This unique highest dimensional theory is in
a way the meeting point of supergravity and string/M-theory. The
complete understanding of its classical solutions, which can be
facilitated in many ways by the contents of this thesis, might have a
profound physical meaning.

#### 11.2 Future directions

There is a host of open questions left for future exploration: some old
ones that were partially understood in the various chapters of this
work, and some new ones this thesis has uncovered. The following is just
a small list of topics of interest for me and some ideas on how to
approach them.

###### Classification of (BPS) black hole solutions with arbitrary
gaugings

The classification of black holes is one of the main motifs in this
thesis. Still, many things about black holes remain unexplored and
presently a full understanding of solutions does not seem a realistic
goal. On the other hand, the proper classification of BPS black objects
seems well under way. With the technical results in chapters 5 , 6 and
the superalgebra perspective of chapters 9 , 10 , we made a reasonable
progress towards the understanding of static BPS black holes. We can
briefly summarize a few important advances:

-   BPS black holes in Minkowski
    In the static case we proved our expectations from chapter 5 that
    the attractor mechanism and general form of the solutions in
    ungauged supergravity remain unchanged in the gauged theories. This
    is due to the fact that the near-horizon geometry of the
    Bertotti-Robinson spacetime is the only one allowed for static
    asymptotically flat BPS black holes. We further saw that one cannot
    find rotating black holes in Minkowski, since the BPS requirement
    @xmath leads to naked singularities whenever @xmath .

-   Spherical BPS black holes in AdS
    We proved that no static black holes can exist in absence of
    hypermultiplets. Furthermore, in case of an appropriate
    hypermultiplet gauging, we predicted the existence of a black hole
    with a fully BPS near-horizon geometry, resulting in the same
    attractor mechanism as for asymptotically flat black holes.

-   Spherical BPS black holes in mAdS
    We explicitly constructed a general class of static solutions in
    mAdS in chapter 6 and showed that they have a vanishing mass and a
    half-BPS magnetic AdS @xmath S @xmath near-horizon geometry. We
    proved that no rotating BPS solutions can exist, since the BPS bound
    restricts @xmath to vanish and the angular momentum is proportional
    to the mass, @xmath .

-   Toroidal black holes/black brane in RiAdS
    We presented a general class of solutions in RiAdS and showed that
    they obey the BPS criterion, @xmath . We further showed that no BPS
    solutions can exist if the graviphoton carries a magnetic charge.

-   Higher genus black holes in magnetic hyperbolic AdS
    In this case the BPS solutions share the properties of their
    spherical analogs. We thus showed that supersymmetric higher genus
    black holes always carry a non-vanishing magnetic charge of the
    graviphoton.

What remains to be done in order to fully understand BPS black holes in
@xmath @xmath supergravity is the following:

-   Investigate more carefully multicentered black hole solutions in
    Minkowski and potential rotating solutions with non-constant vector
    and hypermultiplet scalars.

-   Find explicitly static BPS black holes in AdS @xmath . It seems that
    the correct Killing spinors are already available [ 102 , 110 ] and
    one only needs to find a suitable hypermultiplet gauging to write
    down the complete solution. Alternatively, if an example of such a
    theory cannot be found, it would be desirable to extend the no-go
    theorem to any supergravity action.

-   Understand better rotating black holes in AdS and how rotating
    attractors differ from their static analogs. Construct examples of
    rotating black holes with non-constant scalars.

-   Analyze in more detail the attractor mechanism in mAdS. One can try
    to follow the ideas of chapter 3 in order to derive the algebraic
    conditions on the scalars in magnetic AdS @xmath S @xmath .

-   Examine the difference between toroidal black holes and black
    branes, e.g. how one would construct rotating BPS black branes in
    AdS that do not exist in the toroidal case. Find the possible
    near-horizon geometries for static solutions with flat horizons.

###### Lifshitz superalgebra and conserved charges

Due to the increasing interest in condensed matter applications of the
gauge/gravity dualities, it is important to carefully analyze the
Lifshitz spacetime. Lifschitz was shown to be a BPS solution in @xmath
@xmath supergravity with gauged hypermultiplets [ 146 , 147 ] and it can
therefore be potentially subjected to the procedure of chapter 7 . The
proper definition of conserved charges on the boundary of Lifshitz
spacetime is of particular importance in explicit applications, as
emphasized in e.g. [ 148 , 149 ] .

###### Microscopic entropy counting in AdS@xmath

An interesting question from a quantum gravity point of view is whether
one can correctly reproduce black hole entropy in AdS @xmath by counting
BPS state degeneracies. Unlike the case of asymptotically flat black
holes, the answer seems to lie in the dual 3-dimensional field theory
rather than in brane constructions. Brane constructions rely on the fact
that black holes in Minkowski exist for any value of the string coupling
constant. In AdS this is no longer the case - we have seen that the
scalar fields in AdS get stabilized exactly at the minimum of their
potential. However, due to the existence of the AdS/CFT dictionary, one
can try to analyze BPS states in the dual field theory providing an
independent entropy calculation. In practice it turns out that the
quantity that can be properly counted on the dual side is a certain
supersymmetric index. This research programme has been undertaken in the
case of rotating BPS black holes in AdS @xmath [ 150 , 151 , 152 , 153 ]
.

One can imagine similar considerations can be helpful in the
four-dimensional case as well, although the dual three-dimensional field
theory is more poorly understood. Still, the steps towards microscopic
counting in the dual theory are in principle clear. One first needs to
identify properly the black hole of interest from M-theory point of
view. This can be done purely at a superalgebra level, showing how the
black hole superalgebra fits in the 11-dimensional supergroup. The same
BPS states correspondingly exist in the dual Bagger-Lambert [ 154 , 155
, 156 ] or ABJM theories [ 56 ] since they have isomorphic algebras.
Once these states are identified, the problem of counting becomes rather
technical and depends on the particular details of the theory, as seen
in the higher dimensional case [ 150 ] . Nevertheless, the question of
microscopic counting is clearly approachable after the analysis of AdS
superalgebras in part III of this thesis.

###### mAdS@xmath/Cft@xmath and microscopic entropy counting in mAdS

The questions whether mAdS @xmath has its own field theory dual and what
such a theory might look like seem to be correlated with the question of
how to describe the microscopic degrees of freedom of BPS black holes in
mAdS. A known field theory dual would immediately give us a different
point of view towards entropy in mAdS. To construct such a dual is
however a much more complex issue. However, I believe that some of the
analysis in this thesis provides a good starting point to solving these
problems. The fact that mAdS black holes were embedded in M-theory in
chapter 6.3.6 is suggesting that a microscopic picture does exist. This
embedding still needs to be related to a proper brane solution in
11-dimensional supergravity and its superalgebra has to be analyzed by
the methods of part III . This will allow us to position the dual theory
in a broader perspective, since we already know how theories of multiple
M2 branes look like [ 154 , 155 , 156 ] . A particular possibility is
that the theory dual to mAdS @xmath is just a supersymmetry preserving
deformation of ABJM theory. This is however just a speculation that will
be confirmed only if the superalgebra of the conjectured bound state of
M2’s and Kaluza-Klein monopoles is a subalgebra of the M2 superalgebra [
135 ] . Fortunately, these issues can be discussed on a purely algebraic
level in the spirit of chapter 10 . This means that we do not explicitly
need to construct the conjectured bound state that describes mAdS in
M-theory. Rather, it is good start to find its superalgebra, which is
the common subalgebra of the 11-dimensional super-Poincaré group and the
mAdS @xmath S @xmath superalgebra.

We have therefore outlined the first few steps on the way of
constructing the mAdS dual. However, this is in no way a proof that a
dual theory needs to exist in the usual sense in which the AdS/CFT
correspondence holds. It is important to stress again that mAdS is a
different vacuum and its M-theory interpretation does not necessarily
lead to a brane construction and a well-defined field theory
description. At present this remains an interesting new possibility that
deserves further attention.

### Appendix A Notation, conventions and spacetimes

#### a.1 Notation and conventions

We mainly follow the notation and conventions from [ 37 ] . In
particular, our spacetime has a @xmath signature. Self-dual and
anti-self-dual tensors are defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath .

The gamma matrices satisfy

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

In addition, they can be chosen such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

An explicit realization of such gamma matrices is the Majorana basis,
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath                        (A.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath are the Pauli matrices. Their @xmath matrix indices
@xmath can be lowered or raised with the antisymmetric tensor. We then
obtain the following set of matrices:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Our conventions for the sigma matrices follow [ 37 ] ; in particular
they are symmetric and satisfy @xmath , and we have the relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Indices on bosonic quantities are raised and lowered as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

and similarly for quaternionic indices @xmath , raised and lowered with
the antisymmetric symplectic metric @xmath . As mentioned in the main
text, all fermions with upper @xmath index have negative chirality and
all fermions with lower index have positive chirality. Since @xmath was
chosen to be purely imaginary, the complex conjugation interchanges
chirality.

For the charge conjugation matrix, we choose

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

hence Majorana spinors have real components.

We also make use of the following identities, with curved indices:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Another important property that ensures the super-Jacobi identities of
@xmath hold is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are defined in section 8.5.1 .

Antisymmetrizations are taken with weight one half, and the totally
antisymmetric Levi-Civita symbol is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

With curved indices,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a tensor.

The action is defined by @xmath . We consider the ungauged lagrangian,
whose Einstein-Hilbert and scalar derivative terms read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

We set the Newton constant @xmath . As we use a @xmath metric signature,
we have to choose @xmath and @xmath positive definite to get positive
kinetic terms for the scalars.

We compute the Riemann curvature as follows ⁶¹ ⁶¹ 61 Note that this
definition, when applied to the Riemann curvature of the quaternionic
manifold, differs with a factor of @xmath compared with [ 37 , 60 ] . As
a consequence, there one has @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (A.18)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

where @xmath for Riemann spaces (the quaternionic and special Kähler
target spaces) and @xmath for Lorentzian spaces (space-time). The
overall minus sign in the latter case is needed to give AdS spaces a
negative scalar curvature. This gives a sphere in Euclidean space (with
signature @xmath ) a positive scalar curvature.

The spin connection enters in the covariant derivative

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (A.19)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

The Lagrangian ( A.17 ) is only supersymmetric if the Riemann curvature
of the hypermultiplet moduli space satisfies @xmath where @xmath is the
number of hypermultiplets, so the dimension of the quaternionic manifold
is @xmath (in applications to the universal hypermultiplet, we have
@xmath and hence @xmath ).

#### a.2 Metrics and field strengths

-   AdS @xmath S @xmath
    The line element, in local coordinates @xmath , is

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (A.20)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath is a real, overall constant which determines the size
    of both AdS @xmath and S @xmath . From ( 3.29 ) we find the only
    non–vanishing components

      -- -------- -- -- --------
         @xmath         (A.21)
      -- -------- -- -- --------

-   The pp-wave
    The line element of a four–dimensional Cahen-Wallach space [ 81 ] ,
    in local coordinates @xmath , is given by

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (A.22)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath is a symmetric matrix. Conformal flatness requires
    @xmath and @xmath . We denote @xmath as @xmath should be negative.
    This space is known as the pp-wave. From ( 3.29 ) we find the only
    non–vanishing components

      -- -------- -- -- --------
         @xmath         (A.23)
      -- -------- -- -- --------

### Appendix B Integrability conditions

#### b.1 Commutators of supersymmetry tranformations

A killing spinor @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

whence the commutator is

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

From ( 3.17 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

#### b.2 Fully BPS vacua

In the fully BPS case, all terms with a covariant derivative in ( B.2 )
and ( B.3 ) vanish. We furthermore see that ( B.3 ) does not contain a
term proportional to @xmath , so @xmath .

Some algebra now yields the necessary and sufficient conditions to match
the terms proportional to @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

which give the first conditions of section 3.2.3 . The other conditions
are obtained by comparing the parts proportional to @xmath .

#### b.3 Half BPS vacua

We use ( 5.37 ) to eliminate @xmath in terms of @xmath and for
convenience define @xmath . The remaining equation should hold for any
choice of @xmath . We can then use the independence of the gamma
matrices and the SU(2) matrices @xmath to find the conditions

1.  Terms proportional to @xmath , no gamma.

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (B.5)
      -- -------- -- -------

2.  Terms proportional to @xmath , two gamma

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (B.6)
      -- -------- -- -------

3.  Terms proportional to @xmath , no gamma

      -- -------- -- -- -------
         @xmath         (B.7)
      -- -------- -- -- -------

    where we used that @xmath , which follows from ( 5.42 ). Using
    @xmath from ( 5.39 ) we therefore find

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (B.8)
      -- -------- -- -------

    We now take components @xmath and use @xmath and @xmath . We then
    find @xmath , whence @xmath or @xmath . In the latter case also
    @xmath , because of the anti-self-duality property, and then @xmath
    . We conclude

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (B.9)
      -- -------- -- -------

4.  Terms proportional to @xmath , two gamma. Using ( B.9 ) we find

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (B.10)
      -- -------- -- --------

To summarize: we found two cases, one with @xmath , the other with
@xmath . We now list the remaining conditions for each case.

##### b.3.1 Case A: @xmath

The remaining conditions are

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (B.11)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

The first condition implies that the spacetime is maximally symmetric,
with constant curvature @xmath , and is then solved.

##### b.3.2 Case B: @xmath

The remaining conditions are

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (B.12)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

From the second condition we find the Riemann tensor

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (B.13)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

### Appendix C Isometries of special Kähler manifolds

In this appendix, we present some further relevant identities that are
used in the main body of the thesis. First, we have defined the moment
maps on the special Kähler manifold as follows. Given an isometry, with
a symplectic embedding ( 2.42 ), we can define the functions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since the Kähler potential satisfies ( 2.44 ), it follows that @xmath is
real. From this definition, we can verify that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Hence the @xmath can be called moment maps, but they are not subject to
arbitrary additive constants. Using ( 2.45 ) and ( 2.50 ), we find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

also called the equivariance condition.

We can obtain formulas for the moment maps in terms of the holomorphic
sections. For this, one needs the identities

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

which follow from the gauge transformations of the sections, see ( 2.42
). Using the chain rule in ( 2.50 ), it is now easy to derive

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and similarly

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Killing vectors ( C.6 ) are not manifestly holomorphic. This needs
not be the case because otherwise we would have constructed isometries
for arbitrary special Kähler manifolds, since holomorphic vector fields
obtained from a (real) moment map solve the Killing equation.

We now show that @xmath , following the discussion in [ 78 ] . We start
from the consistency conditions on the symplectic embedding of the gauge
transformations, equations ( C.4 ). We eliminate @xmath using ( 2.50 ),
and rewrite them as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . Multiplication of the first equation with @xmath and the
second with @xmath and subtracting leads to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have used the identity @xmath . Contracting equation ( C.5 )
with @xmath and using ( C.9 ) and ( 2.54 ) one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

as announced below equation ( 3.16 ). Contrating the first equation of (
C.7 ) with @xmath gives @xmath . It follows from contracting with @xmath
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here we have used the special geometry identities on the period matrix (
2.24 ).

### Appendix D The universal hypermultiplet

The metric for the universal hypermultiplet is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

It describes the coset space @xmath . There are eight Killing vectors
spanning the isometry group @xmath . In the coordinates of ( D.1 ), they
can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The moment maps @xmath are computed from

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The quaternionic two-forms @xmath satisfy @xmath , and can be written as

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (D.4)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

We then find the moment maps

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (D.5)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

These formulas are needed for some of the examples that we consider in
the main text of this thesis.

### Appendix E Asymptotic Killing spinors

In this appendix we follow the spinor conventions of chapter 8 for
convenience. We therefore use a doublet of real Majorana spinors instead
of the two complex chiral spinors used elsewhere in this work. See
chapter 9 for more explanation of how to change between real and chiral
spinors.

#### e.1 AdS@xmath

Here we give details about the Killing spinors for AdS @xmath . We
consider the metric in spherical coordinates

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and corresponding vielbein

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The non-vanishing components of the spin connection turn out to be:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the AdS @xmath solution, the field strength vanishes,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

To find the Killing spinors corresponding to this spacetime we need to
solve @xmath . This equation has already been solved in an unpublished
paper by Izquierdo, Meessen and Ortín and one can explicitly check that
the resulting Killing spinors are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a doublet of arbitrary constant Majorana spinors,
representing the eight preserved supersymmetries of the configuration.

It is important to note that the asymptotic solution of the Killing
spinor equations as @xmath (given the same asymptotic metric) cannot
change unless @xmath . This is easy to see from the form of the
supercovariant derivative ( 8.10 ) since any other term would
necessarily vanish in the asymptotic limit. More precisely, any gauge
field carrying an electric charge that appears in the derivative
vanishes asymptotically, the only constant contribution can come when a
magnetic charge is present. In other words, any spacetime with vanishing
magnetic charge and asymptotic metric ( E.1 ) has asymptotic Killing
spinors given by ( E.5 ).

#### e.2 Magnetic AdS@xmath

Now we will show that the asymptotic Killing spinors take a very
different form when magnetic charge is present. In this case the metric
is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

with corresponding vielbein:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The non-vanishing components of the spin connection turn out to be:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (E.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

As opposed to the previous section, now we have a non-vanishing gauge
field component @xmath , resulting in @xmath . If we require @xmath and
insist that @xmath , we get a solution described by Romans in [ 102 ] as
a “cosmic monopole” (which we call magnetic AdS @xmath ). The magnetic
charge satisfies @xmath , such that the metric function is an exact
square @xmath . The Killing spinors corresponding to solutions with
@xmath in our conventions are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

preserving two of the original eight supersymmetries. Note that in the
limit @xmath the Killing spinor projections continue to hold.
Furthermore, the functional dependence is manifestly different in the
expressions ( E.5 ) and ( E.9 ) for the Killing spinors of ordinary AdS
@xmath and its magnetic version. This leads to the conclusion that these
two vacua and their corresponding excited states belong to two separate
classes, i.e. they lead to two independent superalgebras and BPS bounds.
Note that one can also add an arbitrary electric charge @xmath to the
above solution, preserving the same amount of supersymmetry (the “cosmic
dyon” of [ 102 ] ). The corresponding Killing spinors [ 102 ] have the
asymptotic form of ( E.9 ), i.e. the cosmic dyons are asymptotically
magnetic AdS @xmath .

#### e.3 Riemann AdS@xmath

We now determine the Killing spinors of the ground state with toroidal
topology and vanishing mass and charges, @xmath . The metric is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Choosing upper triangular vielbein @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

one can straightforwardly derive the (non-vanishing) components of the
spin connection,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Killing spinors can now be computed from @xmath , and the solution,
with arbitrary constant spinors @xmath , is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Without restriction on @xmath , all eight supercharges are preserved,
but ( E.13 ) does not respect the identification of the coordinates
@xmath on the torus ⁶² ⁶² 62 Without the toroidal compactification, the
spacetime is of course normal AdS written in Poincaré coordinates. It is
therefore no surprise that ( E.13 ) is similar to ( E.5 ). . One can
make the Killing spinors well-defined on the torus by imposing a
projection on @xmath , namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Such a projection breaks half of the supersymmetries, and the Killing
spinors of RiAdS are therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

### Appendix F Rotations in AdS@xmath

Here we focus on stationary spacetimes with rotations. From the
supersymmetry Dirac brackets in asymptotic AdS @xmath spaces,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

we can derive a definition of the conserved angular momenta. The
explicit expressions are somewhat lengthy and assume a much simpler form
once we choose the vielbein matrix @xmath in an upper triangular form,
such that its inverse @xmath is also upper triangular. More explicitly,
in spherical coordinates we choose nonvanishing @xmath such that the
inverse vielbein has only non-vanishing components @xmath . The
resulting expressions for the angular momenta in this case become:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (F.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

It is easy to see that in case of axisymmetric solutions around @xmath ,
such as the Kerr and Kerr-Newman metrics in AdS, the angular momenta
@xmath and @xmath automatically vanish due to @xmath .

One can then use the formula for @xmath to derive the value of the
angular momentum for the Kerr black hole. This is still somewhat
non-trivial because one needs to change the coordinates from
Boyer-Lindquist-type to spherical. The leading terms at large @xmath
were found in appendix B of [ 127 ] and are enough for the calculation
of the angular momentum since subleading terms vanish when the limit is
taken in ( F ). The calculation of the relevant component of the spin
connection leads to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and gives the exact same result as in (B.8) of [ 127 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

This expression has also been derived from different considerations in [
157 ] , thus confirming the consistency of our results.

One can also verify the result for the asymptotic mass of the Kerr and
Kerr-Newman spacetimes using ( 8.34 ) and the metric in appendix B of [
127 ] . After a somewhat lengthy but straightforward calculation one
finds

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

as expected from previous studies (see, e.g., [ 109 , 157 ] ).

### Appendix G Supercharge of the general gauged theory

#### g.1 Additional details on @xmath @xmath gauged supergravity

Here we will give more details on the theory in consideration.
Alternatively, see [ 37 ] for a very detailed description. The bosonic
part of the supergravity lagrangian was given in ( 2.1 )-( 2.2 ). The
supersymmetry variations under which the full action is invariant (upto
higher order terms in fermions) are as follows. The fermionic variations
were already given in chapter 2 : ( 2.3 ),( 2.4 ),( 2.5 ). The bosonic
susy variations are as follows. The vielbein variation reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the vector multiplet sector we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The susy variation of the hypermultiplet scalars (hypers) is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

In order to derive the supercharge of the theory from the procedure
described in chapter 7 , we additionally need the Poisson/Dirac brackets
of the fundamental fields. It will suffice to list the non-vanishing
fermionic Dirac brackets that follow from the full lagrangian ⁶³ ⁶³ 63
The brackets for the bosonic fields can be derived directly from ( 2.1 )
if needed. (see e.g. [ 37 ] ):

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (G.5)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

Note in particular that we follow the original conventions of appendix A
for @xmath . Consequently, we define as a measure for the volume/surface
integrals

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

which are defined differently in chapter 8 .

#### g.2 Supersymmetry charge

From the susy variations one can fix uniquely the supersymmetry charge
@xmath by the requirement that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all fundamental fields (here denoted by @xmath ) in the theory. From
the supersymmetry variations ( 2.3 ),( 2.4 ),( 2.5 ), together with the
Dirac brackets ( G.5 ), one finds

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (G.8)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

up to higher order in fermions. The expression for the supercharge
simplifies considerably when evaluated on shell, due to the very
suggestive form of the equations of motion of the gravitinos:

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (G.9)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

After performing a partial integration of the first term on the
r.h.s. of ( G.8 ) and using ( G.9 ), the supercharge becomes a surface
integral:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (G.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

similarly to ( 8.27 ) in the minimal case.

### Acknowledgements

There are hundreds of people I would like to thank to for their
involvement with my life during my PhD years. The top of the list is
reserved for my parents and sister, who have always been the most
important and influential people for me. Unfortunately, I am bound to
forget to mention some of the other names in the list and therefore I
will only write about the people that have most directly contributed to
the successful completion of this work. To all my friends in Bulgaria,
Netherlands and the other parts of the world I would just like to say
that you are all a-mazing!

Academically, I am most grateful to my supervisor, Stefan Vandoren, for
allowing me to work with him and his scientific enthusiasm and insight,
patience and guidance in the last five years. I hope I have become at
least a bit sharper and more rigorous in my physics understanding due to
our daily interactions. Another important person in my academic life
that I need to mention is Bernard de Wit, who introduced me to the
subject of quantum field theory in first place. The two of them,
together with Biene Meijerman and the people in NUFFIC and the
university of Sofia (especially Hristo Dimov and Radoslav Rashkov),
backed me up crucially in the organizationally messy start of my PhD. I
hope my thesis was worth their effort.

My academic career has been additionally boosted by many other
colleagues through the years. I am very thankful to Stefanos Katmadas
for the hundreds of hours spent for answering my questions and random
physics discussions. I also learnt a lot during my collaboration with
Hugo Looijestijn and Chiara Toldo, who always kept my motivation and
enthusiasm at high levels. I further enjoyed the numerous discussions
and journal clubs with Anne Franzen, Chris Wever and especially Philipp
Höhn on non-string theory related physics. Other colleagues at the ITF
that have suffered from my never-ending questions are Stijn van
Tongeren, Alessandro Sfondrini, Ivano Lodato, Vivian Jacobs (special
thanks to Vivian and Chris for their help with the Dutch version of my
summary), Timothy Budd, Maaike van Zalk, Nabamita Banerjee, Erik
Plauschinn, and Jeroen Diederix. Outside Utrecht, I have profited from
various discussions and correspondence with Glenn Barnich, Gianguido
Dall’Agata, Riccardo D’Auria, Jan de Boer, Giuseppe Dibitetto, Roberto
Emparan, Stefano Giusto, Alessandra Gnecchi, Gary Horowitz, Dietmar
Klemm, Andrei Micu, Petya Nedkova, Tomas Ortín, Ashoke Sen, Ergin
Sezgin, and Kostas Skenderis. I am particularly grateful to Tomas Ortín
for passing us a set of unpublished notes written by him and two
collaborators (Patrick Meessen and Jose Izquierdo). In the end, I would
like to express my general gratitude to the people at the ITF, the DRSTP
schools and physics communities elsewhere for creating a friendly work
environment that welcomes young and inexperienced students.

Kiril Hristov,

18 April 2012.