##### Contents

-    1 The Lorentz and the conformal groups, and the concept of
    invariance
    -    1.1 Group theory
        -    1.1.1 Orthogonal groups
        -    1.1.2 Rotation groups
    -    1.2 Invariance under a group action
        -    1.2.1 Invariance of the laws of physics
    -    1.3 The Lorentz group
    -    1.4 The conformal group
        -    1.4.1 Conformal symmetry
    -    1.5 Invariance under Lorentz group (Lorentz invariance)
    -    1.6 Conformal invariance
-    2 Conformal transformations
    -    2.1 Conformal mapping
    -    2.2 Conformal covariance and conformal invariance, and the
        scalar wave equations
    -    2.3 Conformal transformations, and conformal invariance in
        gravitation
    -    2.4 Conformal transformations in Einstein gravity
    -    2.5 Explaining some axioms using conformal transformations
-    3 Einstein field equations
    -    3.1 Introduction
    -    3.2 The mathematical form
    -    3.3 The equivalent form
    -    3.4 The cosmological constant
    -    3.5 Energy-momentum conservation
    -    3.6 Non-linearity
    -    3.7 The equivalence principle
    -    3.8 The vacuum field equations
    -    3.9 Einstein-Maxwell equations
    -    3.10 The solutions
    -    3.11 The linearized field equations
        -    3.11.1 Derivation of Minkowski metric
    -    3.12 The de Sitter space
        -    3.12.1 Mathematical definition
        -    3.12.2 Properties
    -    3.13 De Sitter group and invariance
    -    3.14 The coordinate systems in de Sitter spacetime
        -    3.14.1 Static coordinate system
        -    3.14.2 Flat coordinate system
        -    3.14.3 Open slicing
        -    3.14.4 Closed slicing
        -    3.14.5 De Sitter slicing
    -    3.15 Solutions to Einstein equations from Birkhoff’s view point
-    4 The mathematical operators and Dirac’s six cone formalism
    -    4.1 Introducing the transverse projector
    -    4.2 Applying the transverse projector on operators in de Sitter
        spacetime
    -    4.3 The differentiation operator in de Sitter spacetime
    -    4.4 Transversifying the vectors on de Sitter spacetime
    -    4.5 Dirac’s six cone formalism
-    5 The conformally invariant equations for graviton
    -    5.1 The conformally invariant system of conformal degree 1
    -    5.2 The effect of Casimir operator on a tensor of second rank
    -    5.3 Obtaining the confomally invariant field equation using a
        conformal system of degree 1
    -    5.4 The conformally invariant system of conformal degree 2
    -    5.5 Obtaining the confomally invariant field equation using a
        conformal system of degree 2

###### List of Figures

-    2.1 a complex number in @xmath plane
-    2.2 illustrating two correspondent curves in complex planes
-    2.3 the equipotential curves for @xmath
-    2.4 the equipotential curves for @xmath
-    2.5 the equipotential curves for @xmath
-    2.6 the equipotential lines for @xmath
-    2.7 the equipotential curves for @xmath
-    2.8 the equipotential curves for @xmath

Introduction

Our intention in this thesis, pursuing Dirac’s work, is to obtain a
conformally invariant equation, to describe graviton. Evidently, the
Einstein equation is a peculiar one, which in addition to its simplicity
in mathematical form, could well describe important astrophysical
observations (at least in their classical limits). Nevertheless, this
equations has been confronted some ambiguities; for example when an
acceptable explanation of Dark Matter or Dark Energy is demanded. Some
physicists believe that by substituting the Einstein equation by an
alternative one, or finding a generalized theory of gravitation, this
problem can be resolved. Recently some interesting theories have been
proposed, like @xmath gravity, brane-world gravity, Lovelock gravity and
etc., which all of them can be categorized in modified gravitational
models.

Indeed our attempts are supposed to result in Maxwell-like equations for
gravitation. As we know, the electromagnetic theory is describing a
vector boson, namely the photon. This spin- @xmath boson which travels
with the speed of light, contains no mass. One important trait of
electromagnetic equations is the conformal invariance, which is in
harmony with the massless-ness of the described boson, namely the
photon. The Einstein equation are also describing a massless spin-
@xmath boson, namely the graviton. Hence, the gravitational waves should
travel with the speed of light. However, Einstein equations which are
supposed to describe the graviton, lake in conformal invariance.

It is worth to note that in this thesis, we consider a tensorial field
to describe graviton. What is done in this work is to review the paper
in [ 44 ] . Our method is the one which has been demonstrated by Dirac,
called the Dirac’s six cone.

Historically, Dirac tried to find a conformally invariant equation in
Minkowski space. He considered a flat six-dimensional space due to the
six dimensions of the conformal group @xmath . Afterwards, he derived
the field equations in the so-called space, and projected them on a
five-dimensional hyper-surface. Finally he projected them again on the
flat four-dimensional Minkowski space.

In this thesis however, after projecting the six-dimensional field
equations on the five-dimensional hyper-surface, applying some
transverse projector operators, called the induced metric, we will
project the five-dimensional equations on a four-dimensional curved de
Sitter space. The importance of de Sitter space is because of its
ability to being in consistent with the recent astrophysical data (like
accelerated expansion of the universe), since it possesses a constant
(the cosmological constant), correlated to the vacuum energy theory.
Therefore the final curved background in this thesis, would be the de
Sitter spacetime.

Moreover, the transverse projector operators will be introduced as
follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using this operator, we project all the operators like differentiation
operators or Casimir operators, from a flat five-dimensional space, on a
four-dimensional curved space. Therefore we shall project the equations,
derived by the Dirac’s cone, on the de Sitter space. Although the final
equations have the conformal invariance, but they are still incapable to
be transformed by the irreducible representations of the conformal group
and therefore do not have physical interpretations.

## Chapter 1 The Lorentz and the conformal groups, and the concept of
invariance

### 1.1 Group theory

In order to explain symmetries in physics, it is common to use groups,
therefore the important properties of the groups, must be defined.

###### Definition 1

A set of elements @xmath form a group, if there exist a linear
combination @xmath of these elements (called the product), such that the
following properties are confirmed for the set:

-    the group @xmath comprises the product @xmath .

-    the set @xmath comprises a unit element @xmath such that @xmath .

-    for every element of the group, there exist an inverse element,
    such that @xmath .

-    the contribution property:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Some peculiar virtues of groups have been listed below:

-   A group having the property @xmath for all of its elements, is an
    Abelian group.

-   In a continuous group, the elements are functions of one or several
    continuous variables, e.g. @xmath , in which @xmath is a continuous
    variable.

-   In any sequence, inside a compact group, there exists an infinite
    number of partial sequences, converging to an element of the group:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   Two groups @xmath and @xmath , are isometric, if there exists a
    bijective transformation between their elements (say @xmath and
    @xmath ) such that [ 1 ] :

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Now we introduce two important groups.

#### 1.1.1 Orthogonal groups

In mathematics, an orthogonal group of degree @xmath on field @xmath
(notated by @xmath ), is a group of @xmath matrices. The elements of
these matrices come from @xmath , and the group action is done via
matrix multiplication. This group is a subgroup of the general linear
group @xmath , which is defined by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The classic orthogonal group on real numbers, is notated by @xmath . The
determinant of any orthogonal matrix is @xmath . The matrices with
determinant @xmath , form a normal subgroup of the orthogonal group,
named the special orthogonal group @xmath . Both of these groups are
algebraic groups. When the field @xmath , is a set of real numbers,
these groups are shown simply by @xmath and @xmath . Also these groups,
form the compact Lie groups of dimension @xmath .

These geometric properties are comprised by orthogonal and the special
orthogonal real groups:

-   The orthogonal group is a subgroup of the Euclidian group @xmath ,
    formed by isometries from @xmath , keeping the origin unchanged.
    This group is the symmetric group of the hyper-sphere @xmath , and
    all the spherically symmetric geometrical objects, if the origin is
    kept unchanged.

-   @xmath is a subgroup of @xmath , consist of direct isometries, i.e.
    the isometries, keeping the origin and directions unchanged. This
    group is indeed the rotation group for all spherically symmetric
    geometrical objects, if the origin is considered at their center.

-   @xmath is a normal subgroup of @xmath , and if @xmath is an even
    number, this group also is a subgroup of @xmath . If @xmath is taken
    to an odd number, @xmath is the direct product of @xmath and @xmath
    . The rotation group @xmath , formed by @xmath number of rotations (
    @xmath is a correct number), is a normal subgroup of @xmath and
    @xmath .

Proportional to proper orthogonal basis, the isometries have the
following matrix form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The circular symmetric group is @xmath , from which @xmath as a Lie
group, is isomorphic to the sphere @xmath . This isomorphism, takes the
complex number @xmath to the orthogonal matrix [ 2 ] :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 1.1.2 Rotation groups

In classical mechanics, the isotropy of space, means the invariance of
nature’s rules. Let us consider two vectors @xmath and its rotated
version @xmath in three dimensional space. We can write:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One can state that the three basis of space, namely @xmath , rotate, and
are mapped to @xmath . i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The @xmath rotation matrix, must be real. The inverse transformation can
be written as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore we will have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

or

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

in which

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The rotation matrices exhibit orthogonal properties:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore, the rotation will be separated into two distinct sets. One
set is a group which is formed by matrices of determinant @xmath , and
another is the matrices of determinant @xmath , which do not form a
group. Since the rotations are described by three independent
parameters, the so-called set, constitutes a continuous three parameter
group. This rotation group is notated by @xmath , showing that there
exists an orthogonal group in three dimensions, comprising all @xmath
matrices of determinant @xmath [ 3 ] .

The three dimensional isometries, keeping the origin unchanged, are
listed below:

-   The identity @xmath .

-   Rotation around an axis, which is crossing the origin.

-   Rotation around an axis with an angle other that @xmath , which is
    combined with the reflections from the origin surface.

-   An inverse in the origin.

-   A reflection from an origin crossing surface.

The fourth and the fifth items, in a special case, and also the sixth
item, are known as special rotations [ 4 ] .

As it was mentioned from mathematical view points, a symmetry is
represented by a group. If the symmetric properties of a system is
represented by a group @xmath , a function (or some functions) describes
the system, possessing a part to represent the symmetry, and another
part to represent a real system. For example, if a system @xmath of
differential equations, accepts a symmetry group, it would be so rare to
reduce this system to a smaller system @xmath with a definite symmetry.
Indeed, the system @xmath , is derived from @xmath , by eliminating the
symmetry [ 8 ] .

### 1.2 Invariance under a group action

###### Definition 2

Let @xmath be a group of transformations on manifold @xmath . The set
@xmath is called @xmath -invariant, and @xmath is called a symmetry
group of S, if for a defined @xmath ( @xmath and @xmath ) we have @xmath
.

###### Definition 3

Let @xmath be a group of transformations on manifold @xmath . The map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in which @xmath is another manifold, is called a @xmath -invariant map,
if for all @xmath and @xmath which @xmath has been defined, @xmath . A
@xmath -invariant real valued function, is simply called invariant.

###### Theorem 1

Let @xmath be a group of transformations on manifold @xmath . A real
valued function @xmath is @xmath -invariant, if and only if for all
@xmath and generators @xmath we have [ 9 ] :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 1.2.1 Invariance of the laws of physics

In 1872, Felix Klein proposed Erlangen Program für Geomtry , based on
the group of symmetric transformations. In 1952, Fantappiè, having the
same idea and using expressions with a relativistic tendency, proposed
Erlangen Program für Physik , representing a distinct worlds by a
symmetric group, keeping the laws of physics, invariant. It must be note
that this world, is indeed a physical system which is defined by a
symmetric group.

Isotropy of spacetime and its homogeneity with respect to laws of
physics, assert that these laws are based on symmetry. Therefore it is
believed that the laws of physics can be separated using some symmetric
groups, which leave them invariant. To do this, one can use two groups,
describing two different physical worlds. The Galilei group and the
Lorentz-Poincarè group.

Note that the Galilei group is an special case of Lorentz group in
@xmath . Mathematically the Lorentz group can be expressed as a
rotation-translation group, in a way that a geometrical object, say
Minkowski spacetime, is leaved invariant.

### 1.3 The Lorentz group

The three dimensional rotations in classical and quantum mechanics, can
be investigated using the group of transformations, which keep the
measurements constant. In special theory of relativity, the Lorentz
transformations of the 4-dimensional coordinates @xmath , obeys the
following invariance:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Hence, the cinematics of special relativity, can be reexpressed by the
group of transformations, which keep @xmath invariant. This group is the
homogenous Lorentz group, consisting of normal rotations, as well as the
Lorentz group in Minkowski spacetime. The group of transformations which
create the invariance

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are called the inhomogenous Lorentz group or the Poincarè group. This
group consists of translations and reflections in spacetime.

The Lorentz group is a subgroup of the Poincarè group, composed of all
the isometries, which keep the origin unchanged. Mathematically, the
Lorentz group is the generalized orthogonal group @xmath . This group is
a 6-dimensional un-compact Lie group, and one of its subgroups is @xmath
[ 10 , 11 ] .

### 1.4 The conformal group

The isometric orthogonal transformations (preserving the distances),
also keep the angles, and consequently are conformal maps. Nevertheless
all the linear conformal transformations, are not orthogonal. In the
next chapter, these maps will be discussed explicitly.

The group of conformal mappings in @xmath , is denoted by @xmath ,
consisting of the product of the orthogonal group, by the dilation
group. If @xmath is an odd number, these two groups do not intersect,
and indeed are the following product:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Whereas if @xmath is an even number, these two groups will intersect and
therefore ( 1.10 ) is not a direct product. Instead it will be a product
by the subgroup of the dilation group with a positive scalar, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Also one can define [ 4 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 1.4.1 Conformal symmetry

It is well-known that the conformal group is more powerful in two
dimensions than it in higher ones. In two dimensions, this group
possesses infinite dimensions. When the space has an Euclidian metric,
any function obeying the Cauchy-Riemann equations, will be locally
conformally invariant. If we consider the definition of the conformal
symmetries, same as the way that general relativity keeps the light cone
invariant, we find out that any two-dimensional metric can be applied in
this form. We can find a transformation, to transform the so-called
metric, to the same metric, multiplied by a function. This property is
not valid for higher dimensions.

One of the definitions for the conformal symmetry, comes through the
group theory. This definition coincides the previous one, when the space
possesses more than two dimensions. To realize the conformal symmetry,
we ought to understand the mathematical field operators, which are
satisfying the Lagrange equations, which are used to define the
conformal group. These fields can be defined on a Minkowskian manifold
@xmath , or on a six-dimensional imaginary manifold @xmath , correlated
to @xmath .

The conformal group of spacetime, is organized of coordinate
transformations, as listed below:

-   dilation

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   special conformal transformations

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   inhomogenous Lorentz transformations.

Here, we notate the conformal group by @xmath , in which @xmath is
dimensions of spacetime. This transformation can be expressed as the
complete Poincarè group, which is a re-scaling transformation. Also
@xmath is a constant, and the special conformal transformation would be:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

This group has @xmath parameters and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

These special conformal transformations, are generated by @xmath , where
@xmath is the translation generator. The relation ( 1.13 ), takes @xmath
to @xmath [ 5 , 6 ] .

The conformal group @xmath is generated by the Killing equations; like
the group of motions, for a five-dimensional pseudo-sphere:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

which has been solved accurately in spherical coordinates. Therefore,
the fifteen natural generators of the conformal group, can be figured
out, in the natural coordinates of this space. It has been shown that
the square operator @xmath , would not be diagonal, when it is used to
express the conformal group in the Hilbert space of the harmonic
functions on a five-dimensional pseudo-sphere. Hence, to define the
conformal group in the Hilbert space of the harmonic functions on a
projective five-dimensional space, we write:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

contained in the complex space @xmath , and @xmath is a vector. With

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the substitutions:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we find out that @xmath can be written as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

in which @xmath is the Minkowski metric, conventionally having the signs
@xmath . Therefore @xmath exhibits the following fundamental form, in a
six-dimensional space:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is known that the conformal group can be described as the group of
motions, in a five-dimensional pseudo-spherical space. The most natural
generators of this group, can be derived by solving the Killing
equations, for one dimensional motions in spherical coordinates. Also
the generators of Poincarè group in this coordinates, are created by
inserting the Minkowsi space in @xmath [ 7 ] .

### 1.5 Invariance under Lorentz group (Lorentz invariance)

The Lorentz invariance, is an expression in physics, due to the
properties of spacetime, which implies that:

In two different frames, which are having relative motions and observing
a same event, the non-gravitational laws of physics, must have the same
predictions about that event.

A physical quantity is called Lorentz covariant, if it is transformed
under a given Lorentz representation. Such quantities, if left invariant
under the so-called transformations, would be Lorentz invariant.

Due to the representation theory of Lorentz group, the Lorentz covariant
quantities, consist of scalars, 4-vectors, 4-tensors and spinors. The
spacetime interval, is a Lorentz invariant quantity, just like the
Minkowski norm for any 4-vector.

The correct equations in any inertial frame, are also Lorentz covariant,
which can be written due to the Lorenz covariant quantities. According
to the principal of relativity, all fundamental laws of physics, must be
Lorentz covariant.

Just think for a moment that the theory of relativity, would have been
derived form the following rational statement:

The newtonian physics, is invariant under rotation @xmath and the
Galilean transformations @xmath .

The mentioned generators, obey the following relations:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

To investigate these relations, it is easier to add a term proportional
to @xmath , to the left hand side of the last equation. The coefficient
@xmath has the velocity dimensions. In fact, @xmath is dimensionless and
@xmath has the inverse velocity dimension. Afterwards one can construct
a theory, to be invariant with respect to the new group of motions. The
different of this group from Newtonian mechanics, arises only in speeds
closed to @xmath [ 12 , 22 ] .

### 1.6 Conformal invariance

Conformal invariance, has been proposed correlated to the scale
invariance, since the last century. For example, the vacuum Maxwell
equations are both scale and conformal invariant. This concept in
quantum field theory, is illustrated by a local energy-momentum tensor.

However, the applications of conformal invariance, have been recognized
in 1970. Till then it seemed that the consequences of conformal
invariance in spaces with arbitrary dimensions, were not interesting.
This will be quite different, when a two-dimensional space is
considered, since for two dimensions, the conformal group possesses
infinite dimensions.

In a word, conformal invariance, is a logical expansion of scale
invariance. The scale invariance, is dependent to the invariance of our
system, under the changes in homogenous length scales. However,
conformal invariance allows inhomogenous and local changes in scales and
the only need here is the invariance of angles. This expansion, is
indeed coherent, since it can be shown that an invariant system under
translations and rotations, at least at continuity limits, would be
scale invariant and exposes short range effects. Therefore, the
conformal symmetry is spontaneously generated.

For two-dimensional systems, conformal symmetry notably has improved our
knowledge about nature. Whereas the scale invariance can only put our
system in large parts, dependent to properties like symmetry, space
dimensions and number of order parameters, the conformal symmetry
proposes and assortment of partition functions.

Currently, researches on theoretical physics, show a considerable focus
on conformal invariance. However to use the technical tools to
understand it, one should have professional skills; lots of initial
concepts in string theory, require adequate knowledge of quantum theory
of fields. On the other hand we believe that it is time to apply some
methods in physics, based on conformal invariance. While conformal
invariance constitutes the basis of higher dimensional string theory, it
provides the possibility to study the fields on oscillating metrics.
This studies are of great importance in two-dimensional quantum gravity
[ 21 ] .

## Chapter 2 Conformal transformations

### 2.1 Conformal mapping

Conformal mapping, or conformal transformation or the angle preserving
transformation, is indeed the transformation @xmath , where @xmath would
be the complex number @xmath . Here @xmath is the amplitude an @xmath is
the phase. @xmath and @xmath are the cartesian coordinates (see figure (
2.1 )).

###### Axiom 1

A function @xmath is analytic at @xmath , if it is differentiable at
@xmath and in its neighborhood.

As long as @xmath is analytic, we have:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Considering the polar version of this equation, it is possible to equate
the amplitudes and the phases with each other. For the phases we can
write:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

in which @xmath is the argument of the derivative, for a constant
definite @xmath , and is independent of the direction from which we have
approached @xmath . To declare the importance of relation ( 2.2 ),
consider two curves, one @xmath in the @xmath plane, and an other curve
@xmath , corresponding to @xmath in the @xmath plane. As it is
illustrated in figure ( 2.2 ), the evolvement @xmath , makes an angle
@xmath by the real axis @xmath and corresponding to it, the evolvement
@xmath , makes an angle @xmath by the real axis @xmath .

From ( 2.2 ) we conclude

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

In other words, as long as @xmath is analytic and its differentiations
are nonzero, any line in the @xmath plane, will be rotated by an angle
@xmath in the @xmath plane. This conclusion is valid for any @xmath
-crossing line. Therefore we can apply it for two lines as well. The
angle between these two lines would be:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

This relation asserts that the angle between two lines, will be
preserved by analytic transformations. Such transformations, which keep
the angles, are called conformal transformations. The rotation angle
@xmath , and also @xmath , are usually functions of @xmath .

###### Axiom 2

An analytic function, is conformal every where it possesses nonzero
differentiations. In reverse, any conformal mapping of a complex
variable, having continuous partial differentiations, would be analytic.

As well as lots of other regions in physics, conformal mappings are of
great important in complex analysis.

###### Definition 4

A map which conserves the angles, but changes the directions, is an
isogonal map.

###### Axiom 3

A function @xmath is conformal, if and only if there exist two complex
numbers @xmath and @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Conformal transformations are rather profitable in solving physics
problems. Taking @xmath , the real and complex parts of @xmath , must
satisfy the Cauchy-Riemann and Laplace equations. Assume @xmath and
@xmath are respectively the real and the imaginary parts of @xmath .
Then:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, spontaneously a scalar potential is provided. For a
three-dimensional electrostatic potential we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is reliable in a space without any charge density. Generally, any
function which satisfies the Laplace equation, is called a harmonic
function. Therefore the above electrostatic potential, is a
three-dimensional harmonic function.

As stated above, the real and imaginary parts of a complex function are
harmonic, therefore complex analysis methods become sometimes
advantageous in solving electrostatic problems. Since @xmath satisfies
the Laplace equation, one can consider it as a part of the analytic
function @xmath , which here we call it a complex potential. To obtain
the potential for a sequence of charges, firstly we must derive @xmath
for a line of charges, which embarks on moving when it is at the origin.
If this line is located at @xmath , then it can be shown that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the linear charge density. And in general for a sequence
of charges we have:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The function @xmath can be used to solve electrostatic problems, with
simple charge distributions.

Instead of discussing @xmath , let us consider a map from the @xmath
plane (or @xmath plane) to the @xmath plane (or @xmath plane). In
special case, the curves with same potential, are mapped to lines
parallel to @xmath axis in the @xmath plane, since these curves are
defined to be @xmath -constant. Also the @xmath -constant curves are
mapped to horizontal lines in @xmath plane. This would be a big
simplification in geometry:

The straight lines, specially when they are parallel to the axis, are
far simpler than circles and are easier to be analyzed than other
geometrical objects. Specially when their centers do not coincide to the
origin.

Therefore let us introduce two different complex worlds; one the @xmath
plane an the other, which is primed, would be the @xmath plane. Assume
that we are in the @xmath coordinate system ¹ ¹ 1 Here the @xmath plane
is denoted by @xmath , and @xmath is used instead of @xmath and @xmath
instead of @xmath . and we wish to obtain a quantity like the
electrostatic potential @xmath . If solving this problem was hard in
@xmath , we could just translate it to @xmath to simplify the resolving
process. To do this, we solve the problem with respect to @xmath and
then, we translate it again to @xmath . If any physical problem exists
for which this solution is valid, then the problem is solved. Therefore
pursuing an inverse procedure, we find a solution, for which if we
wanted to obtain straightforwardly, we had could have confronted a
sophisticated work. Hence, mappings that relate @xmath and @xmath ,
should be selected accurately.

We ought to consider two necessary conditions:

-   First Condition: The differential equation which is describing the
    physics of our problem, must be simpler than a translation in @xmath
    . Since the Laplace equation is among the simplest ones, the @xmath
    world should obey the Laplace equation.

-   Second Condition: The applied mapping must conserve the angles. This
    condition is of great importance, since the equipotential curves and
    the filed lines, are supposed to be perpendicular to both @xmath and
    @xmath worlds.

Briefly speaking, our map must be conformal.

###### Theorem 2

Consider @xmath and @xmath be two curves in the complex plane @xmath ,
making an angle @xmath at point @xmath . Assume that @xmath is a map
with relation @xmath , which is analytical at @xmath . Also consider
@xmath and @xmath be transformed curves by @xmath , making the angle
@xmath with each other. Hence, we will have:

a) @xmath , or the map is conformal if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

b) if @xmath is harmonic at @xmath , therefore it will be harmonic at
@xmath .

Some examples of conformal mapping are listed below:

-   @xmath , where @xmath is an arbitrary constant. This simply can be
    regarded as a translation from the @xmath axis.

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   combining the formerly mentioned transformations, we obtain the
    following map:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    which will be conformal if

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Also when @xmath .

Such mappings are often called homographic transformations. One of the
advantages of these transformations is that they can map an infinite
domain from the @xmath plane, to a finite domain in @xmath plane. In
fact using them we can transform high valued points to a neighborhood of
point @xmath .
Example: A physical application [ 17 ]

Consider the following potential:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The real and the imaginary parts are respectively

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath :

The equipotential curves are shown in figure ( 2.3 ) and the two parts
of the potential are derived as:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath :

The equipotential curves are shown in figure ( 2.4 ) and the two parts
of the potential are derived as:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This solution is composed of two circular systems, and @xmath is the
potential function on two parallel lines of charge with opposite signs.

For @xmath :

The equipotential curves are shown in figure ( 2.5 ) and the two parts
of the potential are derived as:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from which, @xmath gives the field near the edge of a thin layer.

For @xmath :

The equipotential curves are shown in figure ( 2.6 ) and the two parts
of the potential are derived as:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which are two straight lines.

For @xmath :

@xmath gives the field near and outside of a corner, made of
perpendicular plates. The equipotential curves are shown in figure ( 2.7
). Also the potential is given by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath :

The potential and its real and imaginary parts are:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The equipotential curves are shown in figure ( 2.8 ), which are two
perpendicular hyperboloids, and @xmath would be the potential at the
vicinity of the middle point, between two separated charges. Also @xmath
can be regarded as the potential on the open part of a rectangular
conductor [ 9 , 16 , 23 ] .

@xmath

### 2.2 Conformal covariance and conformal invariance, and the scalar
wave equations

A new formulation of scalar field equations is given by Klein-Gordon
equation, when there exist a metric tensor @xmath and a scalar field
@xmath . This equation is covariant with respect to the gauge
transformations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the conformal transformations of the tensor field, i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

in which @xmath and @xmath are arbitrary functions of @xmath . In this
case, the square of the remnant mass @xmath is defined is a function of
given fields, in the form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is transformed as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

In equation ( 2.8 ), @xmath is the scalar curvature, and @xmath is the
covariant derivative in the Reimannian space @xmath . Also for the
metric tensor @xmath (the inverse of @xmath ) we have @xmath .

Considering a class of wave equations with constant mass, it has been
shown that we shall confront the transformation matrices @xmath ,
depending directly on the given tensor and scalar and vector fields. For
the vector field potential @xmath , we have equation ( 2.10 ) which is
the equation of motion of a free particle in Riemannian space @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation exposes the complete characteristics of a group, and is
comparable to the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is considerable in quantum mechanical expansions and the quantum
theory of fields, where the space curvature is assumed to be nonzero [
18 ] .

### 2.3 Conformal transformations, and conformal invariance in
gravitation

The conformal transformations are used frequently in studying the
relations between diversified theories of gravitation, and Einstein
relativity. Therefore inevitably, it is important to consider the
instructions of conformal transformations for geometrical quantities in
general relativity.

In special case, we concern about the conformal transformations of the
energy-momentum tensor, and as a must, we should proceed with the
delicate and exact principal of conservation (or the Bianchi identity)
in one of the conformal systems, as an origin for the others. The
importance of this principal, goes back to this fact that the conformal
transformations create a matter term, composed of the conformal factor,
and insert it into the conservation principal.

In the outstanding case of flat spacetime, this matter is created from
the work, done by the conformal transformations to curve the spacetime.

We also have to note the structure of conformal gravity. In this case
which is the simplest one, we should concern about the Brans-Dicke
theory, taking its parameter to be @xmath .

The conformal transformations are applied to investigate gravitation in
higher dimensional theories. In this way, we obtain the laws of
conformal transformations for scalar invariants, namely @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath , and consequently for the Gauss-Bonnet invariant in
arbitrary dimensions.

Conformal transformations of a metric tensor, exhibits some interesting
characteristics of gravitational theories, which are based on scalars.
Here the point is that we can demonstrate these theories, in two
different systems with conformal relations:

1) The Jordan system, in which the scalar field is coupled by the metric
tensor, non-minimally.

2) The Einstein system, where this field has a minimum coupling with the
metric tensor.

Note that the scalar based gravitational theories , are the lower limits
of the super string theory. It has been shown that some physical
processes like expansion of the universe or the perturbations in
density, are seemed to be different in related conformal systems.
Therefore, it seems to be crucial to investigate these transformations,
through diversified gravitational theories.

Lots os studies have been devoted to the problem of changes in
geometrical quantities under conformal transformations. However the
transformation laws, have not always been clarified and some simple
traits of them have not been investigated in details. Therefore, we
should discuss these laws explicitly, and also concern about conformal
transformations in higher-dimensional curvatures.

### 2.4 Conformal transformations in Einstein gravity

Let us consider the spacetime @xmath , where @xmath is a smooth manifold
and @xmath is the Lorentz metric on @xmath . The conformal
transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

in which @xmath is an uniform and nonzero function of spacetime. The
transformation in ( 2.12 ) is a congruence of the metric, independent of
points, and is called the conformal factor . This factor relies in the
interval @xmath .

The conformal transformations, increase or decrease the distances
between two definite points, in the same coordinate systems @xmath on
manifold @xmath , but leave the angles between the vectors, unchanged.
This leads to preservation of manifold’s structure. Assuming a constant
@xmath , we will have a congruent transformation. In fact, conformal
transformations are local congruences. We have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand, the coordinate transformations like @xmath , only
change the coordinate systems, not the geometry. Consequently, such
transformations differ from conformal transformations. This is an
accurate fact, since conformal transformations, lead to new physical
conditions. Whereas this concept, relates to different couplings between
physical fields and gravitation, we investigate different systems, in
which the physics of our problem is studied.

In a @xmath -dimensional spacetime, the determinant of metric, i.e.
@xmath is transformed in follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

From ( 2.13 ) we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, the concept of conformal flatness will be:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Minkowski metric. Using conformal transformations of
the metric, we are able to calculate such transformations of the
Einstein tensor, after obtaining the Christoffel symbols and Riemann and
Ricci tensors, in @xmath -dimensional spacetime. We have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this equation, the D’alembertian @xmath acts with respect to @xmath .
An important feature of conformal transformation is that they preserve
the Weyl curvature tensor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

This means that from ( 2.12 ) we conclude

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using ( 2.19 ) together with relations ( 2.12 ) and ( 2.14 ), one can
simply derive the Weyl Lagrangian. This Lagrangian is also invariant
under conformal transformations, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 2.5 Explaining some axioms using conformal transformations

###### Axiom 4

Assume @xmath be a complete Einstein manifold on which there exists a
vector field, generating a @xmath -parameter group of conformal
transformations. Thereupon @xmath is isometric to a continuous space
with positive curvature. In spacial case, @xmath is homeomorphic to the
sphere @xmath .

On the other hand, a pseudo-circular transformation from Riemannian
manifold @xmath with metric @xmath , to the Riamannian manifold @xmath
with metric @xmath , is a conformal transformation, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

This relation, takes the circular geodesics in @xmath to circular
geodesics in @xmath . This process can be denoted by the following
equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are real-valued functions on @xmath . Also

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Axiom 5

Assume @xmath and @xmath be two Riemannian manifolds with constant
curvatures @xmath and @xmath . Consider @xmath to be complete and also
there exists a pseudo-circular transformation from @xmath to @xmath .
Therefore @xmath

-    is the Euclidean space if @xmath ,

-    is a spherical space if @xmath ,

-    is a hyperbolic space if @xmath .

###### Axiom 6

In addition to the assumptions in axiom 5, assume that, is also complete
and the pseudo-circular transformation, is a homeomorphic transformation
from @xmath to @xmath . Therefore the constant curvatures @xmath and
@xmath must be positive and @xmath and @xmath are spherical spaces.

We should note that:

###### Theorem 3

A conformal transformation, which transforms an Einstein manifold to
another one, is a pseudo-circular transformation.

###### Theorem 4

If a complete Einstein manifold @xmath is transformed conformally to
another Einstein manifold @xmath , therefore @xmath

-    is the Euclidean space if @xmath ,

-    is a spherical space if @xmath ,

-    is a hyperbolic space if @xmath .

###### Theorem 5

If a complete Einstein manifold @xmath accepts its conformal
transformation to itself, thereupon @xmath would be the spherical space
[ 20 ] .

## Chapter 3 Einstein field equations

### 3.1 Introduction

The Einstein field equations are a set of 10 equations in general theory
of relativity, which explain the gravitational reactions, as a
consequence of the spacetime curvature under the influence of mass or
energy [ 25 ] .

Einstein equation was first proposed by Einstein in 1915, as a tensorial
equation. This equation equates the spacetime curvature (which is
described by Einstein tensor) to the energy (which is described by
energy-momentum tensor) [ 26 ] .

Just like the procedure in which the electromagnetic fields are
determined by Maxwell’s equations, using the charges and currents,
Einstein field equations are applied to determine the geometry of
spacetime, as a consequence of the presence of energy, mass and linear
momentum. This means that these equations, give the metric for a
definite form of energy in spacetime.

The correlations between the metric tensor and Einstein tensor,
demonstrates the field equations, as a set of partial differential
equations. The solutions to these equations, would be the metric tensor
components. Also the trajectories due to particle motions, can be
derived from the consequent geometry. Since Einstein field equations are
locally obeying energy-momentum conservation, these equations reduce to
Newtonian field equations, in weak field limits.

### 3.2 The mathematical form

Einstein field equation can be written as follows [ 25 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Ricci curvature tensor, @xmath the scalar curvature,
@xmath the metric tensor, @xmath the cosmological constant, @xmath the
gravitational constant, @xmath the energy-momentum tensor and @xmath is
the speed of light.

Einstein field equation, is a tensorial equation which relates a set of
@xmath tensors. Each tensor possesses 10 independent components.
Considering our freedom in choosing the spacetime coordinates, the
number of independent equations decreases to 6.

Albeit Einstein equations had been initially based on four-dimensional
spacetime, some theorists have expanded the results in @xmath
dimensions. These equations, which are technically regarded to be out of
the region of general relativity, are still referred to Einstein
equations. The vacuum field equations, define the concept of Einstein
manifold.

Despite the simple form, Einstein equations are indeed rather
complicated. For an ordinary distribution of matter and energy, Einstein
field equations become a set of equations for the metric tensor @xmath ,
on which the Ricci tensor and the Ricci scalar, will non-linearly
depend.

In fact, Einstein field equations, when fully written, are combined of
ten coupled non-linear hyperbolic-elliptical differential equations.

Introducing the Einstein tensor

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is a symmetric tensor of rank two, one can write the equations in
the following compact form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the cosmological term has been moved into the energy-momentum
tensor, pertaining the Dark energy concept. In geometrical units @xmath
, this equation reduces to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

in which the left hand side (lhs), indicates the spacetime curvature,
caused by the metric tensor. The right hand side (rhs) stands for the
matter/energy contents of spacetime. Einstein field equations can be
expressed as a set of equations, demonstrating how the spacetime will
curve, related to the matter/energy constituting the universe.

These equations, beside the geodesic equation, are the foundations of
general theory of relativity.

### 3.3 The equivalent form

Einstein field equations can also be written in the following equivalent
form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which becomes useful when we are interested in weak-filed limits, where
@xmath can be substituted by the Minkowski metric, with an acceptable
accuracy.

### 3.4 The cosmological constant

Historically, Einstein had included a cosmological constant in his
equation, relating to the metric.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath is a constant, the conservation of energy is still valid.
The cosmological term, initially introduced by Einstein to describe a
static universe (a universe with no expansion or contraction). This
attempt was unsuccessful because of two reasons; first, the so-called
static universe was unstable, and second, the Hubble’s observations of
distant galaxies, confirmed that our universe is not static, and is
indeed expanding. Therefore since Einstein had called @xmath as his
biggest blunder , it was taken to be zero, during the next decades [ 27
] .

Despite this misguiding for introducing the cosmological constant,
recent observational instruments, have assigned a definite value for it
which is confirmed by some observational data [ 28 , 29 ] .

Einstein have considered his cosmological constant, to be an independent
variable. However, the corresponding term in the field equation ( 3.1 )
can be algebraically moved to the other side, to become a part of the
energy-momentum tensor.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The vacuum energy is constant and is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore the existence of the cosmological constant, is equivalent to
the existence of a nonzero vacuum energy. These terms are currently
being used in general relativity.

### 3.5 Energy-momentum conservation

In general relativity, the energy-momentum conservation law is expressed
in the following form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

This relation can be derived from Bianchi identity, which can be
summarized as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

for which, a multiplication by @xmath , knowing that the metric tensor
is a covariant constant, gives:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The antisymmetric property of the Riemann tensor, provides this
opportunity to rewrite the second term of ( 3.10 ), in the following
way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

To obtain ( 3.12 ), we used the definition of the Ricci tensor. Now
multiplying both sides of ( 3.12 ) to the metric tensor, once again we
make another contraction.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

getting

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Applying Riemann tensor and Ricci scalar definitions, one obtains:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

One more, subtraction by @xmath yields:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which, the symmetry in the parenthesis and the definition of
Einstein tensor implies that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Einstein equations, we immediately conclude

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is the same as equation ( 3.8 ). This relation locally expresses
the energy-momentum conservation. This conservation law is of physical
interest. In his field equations, Einstein confirms that general
relativity possesses such conservation law.

### 3.6 Non-linearity

The non-linearity of Einstein equations, makes general relativity a
distinguishable theory, among the others in physics. For example,
Maxwell’s equations for electromagnetism, are linear in electric and
magnetic fields and corresponding distributions of charge and current
(since a linear combination of two solutions, is itself a solution).
Another example is the Schrödinger equation in quantum mechanics, which
is linear with respect to the wave function.

### 3.7 The equivalence principle

Einstein field equations and its approximations for weak fields and low
speeds, lead to Newton’s law of gravitation. In fact the constant which
appears in Einstein equations, is determined from these two
approximations.

### 3.8 The vacuum field equations

If the energy-momentum tensor @xmath becomes zero in a definite region,
as a consequence, the field equations transform to the vacuum case.
Taking @xmath in all filed equations, one can write the vacuum field
equations as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Deriving the trace of this equation (contraction by @xmath ) and knowing
that @xmath , we will have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

or

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting ( 3.21 ) in ( 3.19 ) provides a corresponding form for the
vacuum equations.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

When a nonzero cosmological constant is included, we will have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

This relation also has a corresponding vacuum form like

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The solutions to these equations are called vacuum solutions . Minkowski
spacetime is the simplest vacuum solution to Einstein equations. Some
other nontrivial solutions are the Schwarzchild and Kerr solutions.

Manifolds with @xmath , are called Ricci-flat manifolds , and the
manifolds in which Ricci tensor is proportional to the metric, are
called Einstein manifolds .

### 3.9 Einstein-Maxwell equations

If the energy-momentum tensor is considered to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

corresponding to an electromagnetic field in free space, then the
resultant equations from ( 3.1 ), get the Einstein-Maxwell field
equations.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, the covariant form of Maxwell’s equations are also
applicable in free space.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

in which @xmath denotes covariant differentiation, and the brackets
represents the antisymmetry. The first equation asserts that a
four-dimensional divergence of @xmath , vanishes.

The second equation, equates exterior differentiation to zero. Therefore
from Poincarè lemma, we can define a vector potential @xmath so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath stands for partial differentiations. Equation ( 3.30 )
sometimes is regarded as covariant Maxwell equation [ 30 ] . However,
there are some generalized solutions to this equation, without
possessing a generalized definite potential [ 31 ] .

### 3.10 The solutions

The solutions of Einstein equations are the spacetime structures. Hence,
this solutions are named metrics . These metrics describe the spacetime
structure, including the inertial characteristics of the contained
objects. Since the field equations are nonlinear, it is not possible to
solve them completely (inevitably we must make approximations). For
example, there is no known complete solution for the spacetime,
containing two separated masses (which is the theoretical model for
dipole stars). However in such problems, it is common to consider some
sort of approximations, called post-Newtonian approximations . Although
in several cases, the field equations have been solved completely,
resulting in exact solutions [ 32 ] .

Probing the exact solutions of Einstein equations, is one of the most
important activities in cosmology. These investigations, have led to
anticipations like black-hole existence, and also to proposing some
different models of universe’s evolution.

### 3.11 The linearized field equations

The linearized Einstein equation is an approximation, which is valid for
weak-filed limits and is applied to simplifying the problems in general
relativity or discussing the concept of gravitational waves. This
approximation can also be used to deduce Newtonian gravitation from
general relativity, as the weak-field limit.

These approximations can be derived, by considering that the spacetime
metric, differs only slightly from the Minkowskian one. Then the
difference between the metrics can be regarded as a field on the
original metric (background metric), and its behavior is investigated by
a set of linear equations.

#### 3.11.1 Derivation of Minkowski metric

Let us consider the following metric for our spacetime:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Minkowski metric and @xmath correlated to a field
located on the background metric. @xmath has to be ignorable versus
@xmath . That is @xmath (and also for all derivatives of @xmath ).
Therefore one can ignore all the multiplications of @xmath by itself
(and all its derivatives with respect to @xmath ). Then we shall assume
that all the indices of @xmath can be raised or lowered by a @xmath .

@xmath is always symmetric, and the condition @xmath implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which the Christoffel symbols can be calculated as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is used to calculate the Riemann tensor

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using @xmath we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore the linearized Einstein equations take the form ¹ ¹ 1
Stephani, Hans (1990), General Relativity: An Introduction to the Theory
of Gravitation Filed , Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-37941-5. :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 3.12 The de Sitter space

In mathematical physics, the @xmath -dimensional de Sitter space,
denoted by @xmath , is the Lorentz analogy of a @xmath -dimensional
sphere (with a canonic metric). This space is a maximally symmetric
Lorentz manifold, with a constant positive curvature, which would be
continuous for @xmath . From general relativity view point, the de
Sitter space is a maximally symmetric vacuum solution to Einstein
equations, possessing a positive cosmological constant (repelling)
corresponding to a positive density of vacuum energy with negative
pressure. When @xmath , de Sitter space is also a cosmological model.
This space has been proposed by Willem de Sitter, and independently by
Tullio Levi-Civita in 1917.

Formerly, this space was considered as a basis of general relativity,
instead of Minkowski space, forming a formalism called de Sitter
relativity [ 33 ] .

#### 3.12.1 Mathematical definition

De Sitter space is a sub-manifold of Minkowski space with one additional
dimension. Let us consider a Minkowski space @xmath with the standard
metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

The so-called sub-manifold is a hyperbolic surface, defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

in which @xmath is a positive constant having the dimension of length.
The induced metric which is defined on de Sitter space, is deduced from
Minkowski ambient space. One can inspect that this induced metric, is
non-degenerate exhibits a Lorentz form. Note that, if @xmath is
substituted by @xmath in the above definition, a two-surfaced
hyperboloid is achieved. The so-called induced metric in this case, is
definite and positive, and every surface, is a copy of a @xmath
-dimensional hyperboloid.

De Sitter space can also be regarded as the quotient of the fraction
@xmath of two indefinite nonorthogonal groups, which shows that this
space is symmetric and non-Riemannian. From topological view point, de
Sitter space is @xmath , therefore for @xmath , is continuous [ 34 , 35
, 36 ] .

#### 3.12.2 Properties

The isometry group od de Sitter space, is the Lorentz group @xmath .
Therefore its metric is maximally symmetric and has @xmath independent
Killing vectors. Every maximally symmetric spaces, have a constant
curvature. The corresponding Riemann tensor is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the Ricci tensor is proportional to the metric, de Sitter space is
an Einstein manifold.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

This means that de Sitter space is a vacuum solution to Einstein
equations, with the cosmological constant

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

The constant curvature of de Sitter space is given by the following
relation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath we have @xmath and @xmath [ 37 , 38 ] .

### 3.13 De Sitter group and invariance

The de Sitter group @xmath is composed of all @xmath matrices with
determinant 1, preserving the following quadratic form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The compact maximally symmetric subgroup @xmath of @xmath is isometric
to @xmath and is composed of matrices

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath [ 14 , 15 , 24 ] .

### 3.14 The coordinate systems in de Sitter spacetime

#### 3.14.1 Static coordinate system

It is possible to define the static coordinates @xmath in de Sitter
space as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the contained space in a @xmath -dimensional sphere in
@xmath . In this system, the de Sitter metric has the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

This metric is also known as the Einstein-de Sitter metric. Note that in
this coordinate system, there would be an event horizon (cosmological
horizon) at @xmath , as a result of the singularity in this point.

#### 3.14.2 Flat coordinate system

If we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , therefore for this system, the de Sitter metric in @xmath
coordinates will be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

in which @xmath is the flat metric on @xmath .

#### 3.14.3 Open slicing

In this system we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , forms a @xmath with the standard metric @xmath . In this
case the de Sitter metric takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a hyperbolic Euclidean space.

#### 3.14.4 Closed slicing

Assume that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath describes a @xmath . Therefore the metric will be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Changing the time variable to the conformal time using @xmath (or
equivalently @xmath ), we obtain a metric, which is conformally
equivalent to a static Einstein universe.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

This metric is of benefit when we concern about the Penrose diagrams of
de Sitter spacetime.

#### 3.14.5 De Sitter slicing

If we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath describes a @xmath , the metric takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

in which

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the metric of a @xmath -dimensional de Sitter space with @xmath as
the radius of curvature in open coordinate system. The hyperbolic metric
is given by the following relation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Continuing the open coordinate system analysis, this metric is derived
from the transformation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and also the substitution @xmath by @xmath , since these two, replace
their timelike/spacelike natures [ 39 ] .

### 3.15 Solutions to Einstein equations from Birkhoff’s view point

The Schwarzchild metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

is known to be directly related to the spherically symmetric metric, as
the original result of the Birkhoff’s theorem in 1923 [ 40 ] . This
metric is the vacuum solution to Einstein field equations, explaining
the exterior geometry of a spherical object of mass @xmath . One can
consider the Birkhoff’s theorem as follows:

A spcetime is spherically symmetric, if there exists a @xmath group of
isometries on it, which are isomorphic to a @xmath -sphere.

Nevertheless, the Schwarzchild solution is supposed to be static, the
results of Birkhoff’s theorem is not confined to static spherically
symmetric metrics. According to the previous section, the Einstein-de
Sitter metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the cosmological constant, is also capable to be
considered as a result of Birkhoff’s theorem. This metric has to be the
trivial solution to vacuum Bach’s conformal field equations, derived
from conformal Weyl gravity [ 41 ] , i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

This holds, since de Sitter spacetime is conformally flat and obeys the
@xmath conformal algebra, and therefore it would be conformally
symmetric. What we are about to do in this work, is to derive
conformally invariant equations for massless particles with spin-2, on a
de Sitter background. Previously, the conformal invariance of such
particles, beside investigating this property for scalars and partially
massless particles in de Sitter and Anti-de Sitter spacetimes, have been
studied [ 42 ] . In this work however, we shall use a different
approach, namely the Dirac’s six cone formalism to reconsider this,
which will be introduced in the next chapter.

## Chapter 4 The mathematical operators and Dirac’s six cone formalism

### 4.1 Introducing the transverse projector

Lets consider a spherical surface in @xmath -dimensional space.
Cartesian expression of this surface would be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

indicating a spherical shell with a unit radius. Now let us introduce
the transverse projector operator on this shell, in three-dimensional
space as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the components of @xmath on the sphere’s surface. Since
@xmath is a tangent vector, it is perpendicular to the radius vector of
the sphere, so

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

generally this operator can be defined as below:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Corresponding to the operator defined in ( 4.1 ), we introduce a
transverse projector, to project a vector from de Sitter ambient (flat)
space to de Sitter inherent (curved-hyperbolic) space.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

in which @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The metric will be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It can be shown that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is deduced from de Sitter space definition, and is equivalent to
the following relation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The differentiation operators are also capable to be projected from
ambient space onto curved space. In general relativity, this kind of
differentiation is called covariant differentiation. We have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

One can easily show that @xmath is the transverse component of
differentiation in the curved space, i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

It can be shown that for the Hubble parameter we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The vector components can be differentiated in the following way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore it can proved that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 4.2 Applying the transverse projector on operators in de Sitter
spacetime

Defining

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It can be shown that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The scalar Casimir operator of de Sitter group is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Applying the transverse projector on itself, yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is also possible to calculate covariant differentiations of the
transverse projector.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

For an arbitrary function @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can prove that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Differentiation in curved space, is not commutative and indeed has the
following cummutation relation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Also some other cummutation relations are valid and provable.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

We should mention that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 4.3 The differentiation operator in de Sitter spacetime

The differentiation operator is defined like

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

or

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is proved that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

in which @xmath is an arbitrary scalar field like the formerly
introduced function @xmath . Note that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a vector field. Therefore in general, for a vector field
we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

And since @xmath is supposed to be transverse, therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Casimir operators are classified as

-   @xmath operates on scalars,

-   @xmath operates on vectors,

-   @xmath operates on tensors (two components).

If @xmath is an arbitrary constant vector, its derivatives are zero,
however note that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

That is because of the existence of @xmath its derivatives do not
vanish.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Also we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can prove

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 4.4 Transversifying the vectors on de Sitter spacetime

The Laplace-Belzami operator is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since we are now familiar with the basics concepts of @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath and their commutation relations, it is worth to know
that the transposition of a differentiation between de Sitter ambient
space and coherent space, is done in the following way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since we possessed two indices, we had to differentiate twice. This is
called transverse projection , which is noted by . We have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

The term @xmath must results in an expressions, which vanishes when
multiplied by an @xmath ; in other words the result must be transverse.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath is transverse itself ( @xmath ), the rhs of ( 4.41 )
results in zero when it is multiplied by @xmath , @xmath or @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

The other calculations for , can be done in the same way. For example it
can be proved that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that it is common to consider @xmath .

### 4.5 Dirac’s six cone formalism

The Dirac’s six cone is a procedure through which the conformally
invariant equations are derived in six-dimensional space. Here the
variables are denoted by @xmath , where:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From differential calculus, we know that @xmath indicates the degree of
a differentiable function. For example for @xmath , this operator
results in @xmath . i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly in Dirac’s six cone formalism, the operator @xmath is regarded
as the conformal degree operator. The filed is denoted by @xmath and the
following relation is applied to find the equations in six-dimensional
space:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and the whole set are conformally invariant. The relation
between @xmath and the Casimir operators of de Sitter group is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

As an example, for the simplest case of @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Casimir operator of de Sitter group. Also for @xmath
:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

The following relation can be regarded as the connection between
six-dimensional space and de Sitter ambient space:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath is an extra component; it is not one of the 5
components of de Sitter ambient space and will vanish in our final
equations.

For the scalar field @xmath (the simplest case), the conformally
invariant system is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now since @xmath does not possess indices, and is invariant in all
systems, defining @xmath , we can construct a de Sitter scalar in the
form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

This solution is valid for a massless scalar field in de Sitter space.

The second stage, is a vector field for which @xmath . We have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath possesses six components; it has six degrees of freedom. Now
@xmath , the vector filed in de Sitter ambient space, must be deduced
from @xmath such that it is transverse.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

The vector in ( 4.53 ) would be transverse. By applying the operator
defined in ( 4.51 ) on the vector @xmath we get [ 43 , 44 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

The next step, is to derive an equation for @xmath , which is the last
part of this thesis and we shall concern about in the next chapter.

## Chapter 5 The conformally invariant equations for graviton

### 5.1 The conformally invariant system of conformal degree 1

Working with @xmath , the formalism of Dirac’s six becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

We introduce the second rank tensor @xmath from @xmath in de Sitter
ambient space.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes that the next expression is added to itself with a
commutation on its coefficients. Also the differentiations are done like

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now let @xmath operate on the tensor defined in ( 5.2 ). From ( 4.51 )
we know that @xmath is equivalent to @xmath .We have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

We rewrite the conformally invariant system as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The transversality condition implies that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath is traceless, therefore

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

### 5.2 The effect of Casimir operator on a tensor of second rank

Multiplying a @xmath to both sides of ( 5.6 ) yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using ( 5.7 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Substituting ( 5.7 ) in ( 5.8 ) we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

In chapter 4 we mentioned that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hence, from ( 5.6 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore the effect of @xmath on a tensor of second rank, can be
summarized as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using ( 5.3 ), this can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 5.3 Obtaining the confomally invariant field equation using a
conformal system of degree 1

From ( 5.5 ) and ( 5.6 ) we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us multiply ( 5.4 ) by @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now multiply ( 5.4 ) by @xmath . We have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

If ( 5.12 ) is multiplied by @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

or

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substitute this equation in ( 5.12 ).

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Also from ( 5.16 ) and ( 5.18 ) we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from which we obtain the conformally invariant system of degree 1, for
tensorial field.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Nevertheless Equation ( 5.20 ) is conformal, it does not possess
physical descriptions, since it is not capable to be transformed by the
irreducible representations of conformal group. This equation was
firstly proposed by Barut and Xu in 1982 by varying the coefficient in
the standard equation ¹ ¹ 1 A.O. Barut, B.W. Xu, J. Phys. A: 15 (1982)
207. . This equation in de Sitter inherent space has the following form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 5.4 The conformally invariant system of conformal degree 2

Generally we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath , the formalism of Dirac’s six cone becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us rewrite our information.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

The effect of @xmath on the tensor defined in ( 5.2 ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 5.5 Obtaining the confomally invariant field equation using a
conformal system of degree 2

It can be shown that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Also we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, an initial equation is achieved to demonstrate the effect of
@xmath on @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

If ( 5.35 ) is multiplied by @xmath , we will have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substitution in ( 5.35 ) yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

And since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

we obtain the following relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equation ( 5.40 ) is the conformally invariant equation of conformal
degree 2, for the second ranked tensor @xmath [ 44 ] .

Conclusion

The obtained equation in ( 5.40 ), is a conformally invariant equation
for graviton. As we know, graviton is an spin- @xmath elementary
particle, described by Einstein field equations. Since this particle is
supposed to be massless, it must be described by a conformally invariant
equation, which is the property that Einstein equation lacks. The
attempts in this thesis, were to obtain a conformally invariant equation
to describe graviton, or a tensorial field of rank 2. These attempts led
to equation ( 5.40 ).

Despite its conformal characteristics, this equation however does not
have physical descriptions, since it is not transformed by irreducible
representations of conformal group @xmath . Such problem, occurs for
Weyl gravity, which is regarded as a gravitational theory of higher
order with respect to Ricci scalar.

Therefore it is considerable to relate a tensor of higher rank to
graviton, and try to find the conformal equation using this new
tensorial field. Pursuing this assumption, led to obtaining an equation,
which beside its conformal invariance, is capable to be transformed be
the conformal group [ 45 ] . Theoretical physicists are still trying to
find the corresponding conformally invariant Lagrangian.

Appendix A

Proof of important relations in chapter 4

Proof of relation ( 4.12 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof of relation ( 4.13 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof of relation ( 4.14 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof of relation (4.17):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof of relation ( 4.19 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof of relation ( 4.20 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof of relation ( 4.21 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof of relation ( 4.24 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof of relation ( 4.25 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof of relation ( 4.26 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof of relation ( 4.30 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof of relation ( 4.36 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof of relation ( 4.53 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Appendix B

Detailed mathematical calculations of chapter 5

For @xmath The Conformal system due to Dirac’s six cone is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Or

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In general

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The transversality condition yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

And the tracelessness implies yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can show that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Multiply @xmath by (I):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From (II) we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The divergence of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also the transversality condition @xmath results in

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The divergence of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since our conformal degree degree is 1, we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us combine (III) and (IV). This yields have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now multiply both sides of equation (I) by @xmath . We obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using (I) we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The effect of @xmath on our tensor field, will be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore using equation (IV), equation @xmath by substitution yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally using equation (V) we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now let us multiply both sides of above equation by @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Substitution in @xmath yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Extending the operators on the vectors and partial differentials, leads
to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

After some simplifications, we will have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally, the conformal equation for tensor fields, with @xmath , is
derived, i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Another representation of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now let us prove the recursion relation between ( 5.20 ) and ( 5.22 ).
The transverse projections of all the parts of Barut and Xu conformal
equation, are as below

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note the following transformation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --