  “ A thesis has to be presentable… but don’t attach too much importance
  to it. If you do succeed in the sciences, you will do later on better
  things, and then it will be of little moment. If you don’t succeed in
  the sciences, it doesn’t matter at all! ”

  —Paul Ehrenfest (1880 – 1933)

The present Thesis is dedicated to a formal and phenomenological
investigation of extensions to two separate sectors of the Standard
Model of particle physics (SM): the electroweak sector and the strong
sector. The Thesis is divided into two main parts: Part I focuses on the
Lee-Wick Standard Model (LW SM), which, by providing a solution to the
Hierarchy problem, forms a natural extension of the electroweak sector,
while Part II studies the coloron theory , arising from extending the
strong sector gauge group.

Providing a general introduction about the current state of the SM and
the associated challenges in Chapter 1, we proceed in Chapter 2 to
analyze the tension between naturalness and isospin violation in the
LW SM. Chapter 3 discusses the global symmetries and the
renormalizability of LW scalar QED. A first complete calculation of QCD
corrections to the production of a massive color-octet vector boson
(colorons) is reported in Chapter 4. Finally, we conclude the Thesis in
Chapter 5 by summarizing the discussed results and presenting an outlook
for future research in the surveyed areas.

\field

Physics

\maketitlepage {copyrt} {dedication}

[]

{acknowledgment}

My personal interest in physics and astronomy developed a well-defined
shape first when I started reading the fascinating collection Library of
the Universe by Isaac Asimov, as a thirteen years old boy in my country
of birth, Iran. I realized then where my true passion resided and what I
wanted to pursue in the coming years academically. Seventeen years later
and after traveling through several continents, I am finally on the
verge of obtaining a Doctor of Philosophy degree from Michigan State
University in the United States of America.

On that account, several sincere gratitudes are in order. I would like
to thank my dear aunt, Mehry , for her unconditional love and
encouragement throughout the difficult times in my personal and
professional life. Without her continuous support, I might not have been
where I am today. I would like to thank Dr. Wayne W. Repko for welcoming
me into the captivating world of physics research, introducing me to a
first flavor of what lay ahead. I owe my professional enthusiasm to his
generous supervision. Finally I would like to thank my advisors
Dr. R. Sekhar Chivukula and Dr. Elizabeth H. Simmons for their patience
with me and their amazing professional guidance. I am truly honored to
be their pupil.

Thinking about “Mother Nature” and trying to unlock her secrets is an
incredibly exciting experience, and I am humbled by having the
opportunity to contribute, no matter how small, to the world of human
knowledge.

{preface}

  “ The world needs to wake up from its long nightmare of religious
  belief; and anything that we scientists can do to weaken the hold of
  religion should be done, and may in fact be our greatest contribution
  to civilization! ”

  —Steven Weinberg (1933 – )

The scientific method has been proven to be the only reliable method for
unraveling the mysteries of the natural world. Since the dawn of Homo
sapiens’ domination of the earth, curiosity has been the main thrust
behind the slow but steady progress of this “Wise Man”. The primitive
man, himself a product of a long evolutionary process on a planet which
from the cosmological perspective is nothing but a speck of dust in the
vast universe, looked with awe at the heavens and their apparent order.
Being inescapably confronted with the “big questions” of the origin and
the nature of life and the universe, this creature’s big brain saw
initially no way out but to speculate about the possible answers,
desperately trying to find temporary relief from curiosity. Indeed,
curiosity was a curse from which there appeared to be no escape.

In the bumpy course of human history, since reaching full behavioral
modernity around 50,000 years ago, various cultures and societies have
tried to dogmatize their speculative (and often superstitious)
resolutions in an effort to effectively terminate this curiosity
“disease”. To some it seemed appropriate to go so far as attempting to
prosecute and eradicate free-thought and intellectualism altogether.
Despite ignorant opposition, a thirst for knowledge has always compelled
many individuals not to succumb to superficial speculations, but rather
to try to inquire about the natural world through objective observations
and evidence-based empirical studies. Curiosity has played a central
role in the development of this scientific method of studying natural
phenomena.

Scientists across different cultures, throughout centuries, have
accumulated the acquired knowledge of those before them and expanded
upon it, “standing on the shoulders of giants” as Isaac Newton put it.
The scientific method stands in sharp contrast with the dogmatic
speculations preceding it, and as Steven Weinberg phrased, it has no
prophet or authority but it does have many heroes . In our modern
perspective, the evidence-based quest for truth about nature, inspired
by the age-old curiosity and facilitated through falsifiable hypotheses
and reproducible experiments, has culminated in what is called the
Natural Sciences, containing physics as a branch.

The magnificent success of science in unlocking the secrets of the
nature has had a tremendous impact on the development of the human
intellect and its maturity. It has enabled us, to a certain extent, to
leave behind childlike wishful-thinking and elect the rational deduction
of facts as the correct approach towards understanding our own nature
and our relationship with the world we live in. Objective observation,
lying at the heart of science and the scientific method, provides us
with the tools needed to tackle the global problems facing us as a
species. It implies the necessity of employing rationalism as an
alternative to tradition and the superstitious belief systems currently
plaguing a substantial percentage of the human population across the
planet, including in the developed world.

My hope is that one day humanity as a whole will achieve a level of
maturity to break the millennia-old shackles of ignorance and embrace
its own full intellectual potential which, if applied correctly, can
construct a far better world than the one we are currently living in!

[]

\TOC \LOT \LOF

[]
