# Chapter 1 Introduction

  “ The only thing that interferes with my learning is my education! ”

  —Albert Einstein (1879 – 1955)

\lettrine

[lines=1]Modern particle physics revolves around the idea of all matter
and energy being composed of elementary undividable discrete
constituents. In the modern physics nomenclature, this is referred to as
“quantization”. This concept dates back to at least the 6th century BC,
proposed first by ancient Greek philosophers such as Leucippus,
Democritus, and Epicurus, ancient Indian philosophers such as Kanada,
Dignāga, and Dharmakirti, and later studied by medieval Persian
scientists Alhazen and Avicenna, among others. Democritus was the first
to have coined the term átomos , meaning ‘‘indivisible”, to describe
these elementary constituents. The modern concept of atoms was
introduced in the 19th century, through the work of John Dalton in
chemistry, who thought of atoms as the fundamental particles of nature,
and hence, adopted Democritus’ terminology. By the early 20th century,
however, it became evident through the experiments of Rutherford and
others that atoms were not indivisible, but instead were composed of
even smaller components themselves. ¹ ¹ 1 There are many books dedicated
to reviewing the history of modern physics, with an emphasis on particle
physics and gravity. The enthusiastic reader is encouraged to consult
e.g. [ 8 ] - [ 11 ] , among many other excellent reviews.

On the theoretical side, the special theory of relativity was discovered
by Albert Einstein in 1905. Furthermore, in his account for the
photoelectric effect, Einstein proposed a radical concept regarding the
nature of light, describing it in terms of discrete packets of energy
(called photons ). These prominent theoretical breakthroughs led to a
profound change in scientific understanding of the physical world in
early 20th century. The notion of quantization of light, in particular,
paved the way for the subsequent discovery and development of quantum
mechanics through the work of Niels Bohr, Wolfgang Pauli, Werner
Heisenberg, and Erwin Schrödinger, to name a few. Experimental discovery
and identification of many subatomic particles and their properties,
such as the electron, proton, and neutron, together with their quantum
mechanical description, gave rise to ever more detailed models of atoms
in the first half of the 20th century.

The high energy scattering experiments throughout the 1950s and 1960s
uncovered the spectrum of a variety of new particles, initially all
thought to be ‘‘fundamental” exhibiting no further substructure,
referred to as the ‘‘particle zoo”. Meanwhile, theoretical progress
concerning the incorporation of the special theory of relativity into
quantum mechanics, initiated by Paul Dirac in 1920s, gave birth to the
development of a more comprehensive quantum theory by the mid 20th
century, called the quantum field theory. Quantum field theory
consistently describes all matter as being composed of point-like
fundamental particles, and the interactions among them as being mediated
by various quantized pockets of energy, themselves also identified as
fundamental particles. In light of this theory, the particle zoo could
be explained in terms of different bound-states of a limited number of
fundamental particles and their quantized interactions; this
dramatically simplified the high energy description of matter and
interaction forces. ² ² 2 The gravitational force has not yet been
described consistently by a quantized field theory.

Accordingly, many of the initially considered “fundamental” particles in
the zoo turned out to be described in terms of even more fundamental
constituents, and hence, the notion of being fundamental was now
reserved to apply only to a limited number of particles from which all
others were composed. Initially, the existence of many of these truly
fundamental particles were merely postulated in the quantum field
theoretical description of the particle zoo; however, the experiments in
the final decades of the 20th century unambiguously verified the
existence of all but one of these postulated particles, confirming their
lack of substructure up to the accessible energy scales.

According to the experiments, the currently accepted picture of the
elementary constituents of matter, exhibiting no further substructure,
contains the following: quarks existing in six different varieties
commonly referred to as “flavors” (up, down, charm, strange, top, and
bottom), and six leptons consisting of electron, muon, and tau, each
accompanied by a neutrino of the corresponding flavor ³ ³ 3 In light of
the discovery of neutrino oscillations, the actual three neutrino
particles have tiny masses, and are linear combinations of the flavor
neutrinos described above. (Fig. 1.1 ). Quarks and leptons are organized
in three “generations” or “families”, and are all spin– @xmath
particles, which makes them fermions (named after Enrico Fermi who made,
among other things, important contributions towards understanding the
behavior of these particles). A direct prediction of quantum field
theory is that all of these particles have a partner with the same mass
but opposite electric charge, forming the fundamental constituents of
antimatter .

Quarks tend to combine in special manners to form bound-states, called
hadrons . Hadron is a collective name for baryons (composed of three
quarks) and mesons (composed of a quark and an antiquark). The proton
(two up quarks and one down quark) and neutron (one up quark and two
down quarks) are, therefore, baryons in this classification. Various
numbers of protons and neutrons bind together to form the nuclei of
atoms of different elements in nature, accompanied by an appropriate
number of electrons in orbits around the nucleus to make the atom
electrically neutral. Hence, all known forms of matter, from simple
elements in the periodic table to complex molecules and structures made
of them, can be traced back to the bound-states of a handful of
elementary particles.

Next, let us take a look at the quantized interactions in nature among
the matter particles. There are four known forces in nature: gravity
(attractive between masses), electromagnetism (attractive between
opposite charges and repulsive between like charges), the strong nuclear
force (binding quarks inside the proton and neutron, and binding protons
and neutrons inside the nucleus), and the weak nuclear force
(responsible for certain radioactive decays). In the quantized
description provided by quantum field theory, electromagnetism is
mediated by a massless, electrically neutral particle, called the photon
, interacting only with electrically charged particles. The strong
interaction has eight massless, electrically neutral mediators, called
gluons , and is felt only by particles carrying the color quantum
number, i.e. quarks and gluons. Color can be perceived as the analogue
“charge” appropriate for the strong interaction; hence leptons, being
colorless, are not affected by the strong force. The weak interaction is
mediated by three massive mediators: @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath vector
bosons , where superscripts represent the appropriate electric charges.
The weak force is felt by all the left-handed ⁴ ⁴ 4 In the relativistic
limit, a particle is called right-handed if its direction of spin is
parallel to the direction of motion, and left-handed if the spin
direction is anti-parallel to its motion. quarks and leptons. All of
these fundamental force-carriers are spin-1 particles, which makes them
bosons (named after Indian mathematician and physicist Satyendra Nath
Bose, for his work related to Bose-Einstein statistics and the theory of
the Bose-Einstein condensate).

A consistent quantum field theoretical description of gravity currently
does not exist. A proposed quantized mediator of gravity takes the form
of a massless, electrically neutral, spin-2 particle, called the
graviton , with a tensor nature (as opposed to the spin-1 vector
mediators of the other three forces). This is motivated by the
macroscopic properties of gravitational fields as described by the
general theory of relativity. However, since the rest masses of the
elementary particles are extremely small, and the gravitational
interaction is much weaker than the other forces, gravity can be safely
neglected in the relevant energy scales currently under study in
particle physics.

The quantum field theoretical description of the electromagnetic,
strong, and weak forces, and their interactions with quarks and leptons
is collectively called the Standard Model of particle physics (SM). It
represents the currently accepted theory explaining the particle zoo and
other observed high energy phenomena with high precision. A final
elementary particle postulated in the SM, but yet remaining
undiscovered, is a massive, electrically neutral, spin-0 particle,
called the Higgs boson (named after Peter Higgs, one of the contributors
to the description of the so-called “Higgs mechanism” of spontaneous
symmetry breaking). This scalar particle has been postulated in order to
explain the origin of the masses of the quarks and leptons.
Incorporation of the Higgs scalar into the SM leads, however, to the
so-called Hierarchy Problem . Solving the hierarchy problem is currently
one of the main topics of research in particle physics. A potential
solution to the Hierarchy problem will be discussed at length in Part I
of this Thesis.

At this point, let us turn to a more comprehensive description of the
SM. In the 1950s and 1960s, it was realized by Chen Ning Yang, Robert
Mills, Martinus Veltman, and many others that quantized “gauge theories”
provided a promising candidate for the quantum description of the forces
encountered in nature. A familiar classical example of a gauge parameter
would be the location where the gravitational potential field equals
zero in the Newtonian gravity. This represents a global free parameter
in the theory, since its value is a constant, independent of space-time.
Depending on the problem at hand, the gauge parameter may be freely
chosen without affecting the outcome of the predictions for physical
observables, such as a particle’s kinetic energy in this potential
field. The same observation is true in quantum field theoretical
description of interactions, although in a slightly more complicated
context. A proper isolation and treatment of the gauge parameter turns
out to be of extreme importance and leads to consistent theories which
may describe a particular interaction with properties obtained from
experiment.

Let us examine more carefully how gauge theories emerge in context of
quantum field theory. Imagine a particular quantum field theory
possessing a specific global continuous mathematical symmetry; i.e. the
theory remains invariant under a continuous symmetry transforming
operation. The branch of mathematics dealing with symmetries is called
group theory. As mentioned before, “global” means that the mathematical
parameter in group theory describing the symmetry is not a function of
space-time; in other words, this symmetry parameter is a constant across
space-time of the theory. In that sense, the global continuous symmetry
of our quantum field theory is described by the particular mathematical
group associated with the symmetry under consideration, leaving the
theory invariant. Given this, if the ground state (vacuum) of the system
does not exhibit the same global continuous symmetry, the symmetry is
said to be “spontaneously broken” in this quantum field theory. In other
words, non-invariance of the ground state serves as the condition for a
spontaneous symmetry breaking (SSB), even though the Hamiltonian or
Lagrangian of theory is still fully invariant under the symmetry
transformation. Upon a spontaneous breaking of a global continuous
symmetry, according to Goldstone’s theorem [ 12 ] (named after Jeffrey
Goldstone who formulated and proved the theorem), a massless scalar
particle, called the Nambu-Goldstone boson , will be generated. This is
a peculiarity of quantum field theories with spontaneously broken global
continuous symmetries.

The situation turns out to be more interesting if our continuous
symmetry is “local”; i.e. the symmetry parameter is a function of
space-time of the theory. Such a quantum field theory is then called a
gauge theory . The reason for the terminology is that in order for the
theory to be invariant under the local continuous symmetry
transformation, a new massless vector degree of freedom, containing a
free gauge parameter, must be introduced. Mathematically, this vector
particle acts as if to ‘‘connect” different space-time points that have
different symmetry parameters. ⁵ ⁵ 5 Geometrically, the situation is
analogous to “parallel transporting” a vector on a curved surface, which
leads necessarily to the introduction of the “Christoffel symbols”.
Hence, a quantum field theory possessing one or more local continuous
symmetries necessarily contains massless vector bosons (one for each
symmetry generator), which makes it quite tempting as a suitable
candidate for describing quantized interactions in nature, mediated by
massless gauge bosons, such as electromagnetism and the strong
interaction.

What would happen if the local continuous symmetry of this gauge theory
were spontaneously broken? According to Goldstone’s theorem, again a
massless Nambu-Goldstone boson is released. It turns out, however, that
this Nambu-Goldstone boson combines with (or as is commonly referred to,
is “eaten” by) the vector boson of the gauge theory, making the latter
massive. The previously massless gauge boson with only two (transverse)
polarizations has now become massive and, consequently, has acquired a
third (longitudinal) polarization component, which is exactly provided
by the “eaten” Nambu-Goldstone boson. Hence, spontaneously broken gauge
theories contain massive gauge bosons (one for each broken symmetry
generator), making them again tempting as suitable candidates for
describing quantized interactions in nature, mediated by massive gauge
bosons, such as the weak interaction. Let us discuss how these ideas are
adopted in practice.

The quantum field theoretical description of electromagnetism, involving
photons, is called Quantum Electrodynamics (QED), developed among others
by Julian Schwinger [ 13 , 14 ] , Sin-Itiro Tomonaga [ 15 ] , Freeman
Dyson [ 16 ] , and Richard Feynman [ 17 ] . Feynman called it “the jewel
of physics” for its extremely accurate predications of various physical
observables, such as the anomalous magnetic moment of the electron and
the so-called Lamb shift of the energy levels of hydrogen. It represents
the first successful application of quantum field theory to the physics
of elementary particles, describing the quantum nature of the
interaction between light and electrically charged matter. QED is a
gauge theory with a local continuous @xmath symmetry, representing an
unobservable (local) phase. The @xmath symmetry has only one generator
and is unbroken; therefore, QED contains one massless, electrically
neutral gauge boson, identified with the photon. Since photons
themselves do not carry electric charge, they do not interact with one
another. The Abelian ⁶ ⁶ 6 In group theory, a group is called Abelian if
its generators commute with one another; otherwise, it is referred to as
non-Abelian . @xmath is a trivial example of an Abelian group, since it
has only one generator. nature of the @xmath group mirrors directly this
physical property of the theory.

The QED vacuum is a dynamical ‘‘polarizable medium”; i.e. it contains
virtual electron-positron pairs which are constantly created and
annihilated for a short period of time, according to the Heisenberg
uncertainty principle. In the presence of a ‘‘bare” charge (which is
formally infinite), these virtual pairs become polarized and induce a
net screening of the bare charge at low energies, corresponding to a
finite observed charge at long distance scales. ⁷ ⁷ 7 See the
renormalization discussion later on in this chapter. At high energies,
shorter distance scales from the bare charge are probed, which are less
screened by the dynamical vacuum. This results in a larger observed
charge and a stronger perceived electromagnetic force. As a consequence,
in QED the strength of the electromagnetic interaction increases
(logarithmically) with energy (see @xmath in Fig. 1.2 ); in other words,
the electromagnetic force becomes stronger at shorter distance scales.

Strong interaction field theory is based on an @xmath unbroken local
symmetry, and is called Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD). It was developed
by Chen Ning Yang and Robert Mills [ 18 ] , Murray Gell-Mann [ 19 ] ,
and many others. The @xmath group consists of the set of Special Unitary
@xmath matrices, and is a non-Abelian theory. It involves the color
quantum number (analogous to the charge in QED), which is only present
in quarks and gluons. The symmetry group is, therefore, formally
designated as @xmath (subscript @xmath standing for color). The QCD’s
@xmath symmetry group contains eight generators, corresponding to eight
massless gluons as force-carriers. In contrast with the photon, which
itself does not carry electric charge, gluons do carry color quantum
numbers and interact among themselves. This fact is reflected in the
non-Abelian nature of the theory. Moreover, contrary to the Abelian QED,
non-Abelian theories have as a peculiarity that the strength of the
force decreases logarithmically with increasing energy or equivalently
at shorter distance scales (see @xmath in Fig. 1.2 ); in other words,
quarks and gluons are practically free (i.e. non-interacting) inside
hadrons at close distances. This phenomenon is referred to as Asymptotic
Freedom [ 20 , 21 ] , and makes a perturbative treatment of strong
interaction possible at high energies. Although not yet formally proven,
it is generally assumed that QCD predicts the appearance of only
colorless bound-states of quarks in nature; i.e. all hadrons are
colorless, in agreement with observations. This is called color
confinement .

As mentioned previously, the asymptoticly free nature lying at the heart
of the strong interaction makes it possible to invoke perturbation
theory at high energies, since the strength of the interaction decreases
with an increasing energy. To be precise, in a perturbative treatment
the theory is expanded in terms of an asymptotic series as a function of
its (small) coupling constant ( @xmath for the strong force in Fig. 1.2
). The leading order term (LO) in the perturbative expansion corresponds
to the classical level interaction, and is called the “tree-level”
interaction. The subsequent terms in the expansion form the so-called
“quantum corrections” to the tree-level interaction with an increasing
level of complexity. Each of the higher order quantum corrections is,
however, proportional to a higher power of the perturbative coupling
constant, and is, therefore, increasingly suppressed. A perturbative
analysis in quantum field theory is, hence, only meaningful so long as
the coupling constant of the theory under consideration remains small,
increasingly suppressing the higher powers of quantum corrections.
Throughout this Thesis, we will extensively make use of perturbation
theory, confining the analyses to the energy regions where such a
treatment remains valid.

A field theoretical description of the weak force with three massive
gauge bosons, two of which carry opposite electric charges, is quite
subtle and hints at a gauge theory with spontaneously broken local
continuous symmetries (to explain the masses), and involving some degree
of mixture with the electromagnetic @xmath symmetry (to explain the
electric charges). Sheldon Glashow [ 22 ] , Steven Weinberg [ 23 ] , and
Abdus Salam [ 24 ] were independently able to show that a gauge theory
based on an @xmath symmetry, spontaneously broken to @xmath , produces
three massive gauge bosons (corresponding to the three broken
generators) with positive, negative, and neutral electric charges, along
with another gauge boson that is massless and electrically neutral
(corresponding to the unbroken generator). As previously noted, the weak
interactions affect only left-handed fermions, or equivalently,
right-handed antifermions. The subscript @xmath , thus, refers to the
left-handed nature of the weak force. The subscript @xmath represents
“hyper-charge”, a @xmath quantum number for the particles in the
unbroken phase. Upon the spontaneous symmetry breaking, the surviving
@xmath symmetry is identified with the ordinary QED (hence, the
subscript EM); the massless gauge boson associated with it is identified
with the photon, while the three massive gauge bosons are the @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath vector bosons, the force-carriers of the weak
interaction. In that sense, @xmath symmetry group provides a unified
gauge description of weak and electromagnetic forces, and is, therefore,
called Electroweak theory . It should be emphasized that electroweak
theory represents only a unified gauge description , rather than a true
physical unification of weak and electromagnetic interactions, since the
weak and electromagnetic coupling strengths remain distinct (Fig. 1.2 ).

At this stage, let us define more precisely the Higgs mechanism [ 25 ] -
[ 30 ] responsible for electroweak symmetry breaking. In electroweak
theory, the SSB is achieved by introducing a potential energy function
for a complex scalar @xmath doublet (denoted as @xmath in Fig. 1.3 ),
effectively adding four extra degrees of freedom to the theory. As
depicted in Fig. 1.3 , the potential develops a Mexican hat form, with
the stable minima consisting of points along a circle at the bottom of
the hat, representing an infinite number of degenerate vacua with
non-zero values (note that the vacuum with the zero expectation value is
unstable). One may choose any point on this circle ⁸ ⁸ 8 The different
points correspond to different choices of gauge and are, therefore,
physically equivalent. as the true vacuum of the theory, thereby,
allowing the development of a particular non-zero vacuum expectation
value (VEV). This choice leads to an explicit spontaneous breaking of
electroweak symmetry as described above. Fluctuations around this
non-zero VEV redeploys three massless scalar degrees of freedom as the
Nambu-Goldstone bosons (one for each broken symmetry generator), as well
as one massive scalar state, which is called the Higgs boson . In Fig.
1.3 , the Nambu-Goldstone bosons correspond to fluctuations along the
equipotential circle at the bottom, which is reflected in their massless
nature. The Higgs boson, on the other hand, is generated by fluctuations
in the radial direction where the potential changes, inducing a mass
term for this degree of freedom.

In electroweak theory, additionally, the coupling of the scalar doublet
to fermions is responsible for the fermion masses, with their masses
proportional to the strength of the associated couplings. This type of
coupling is called the Yukawa coupling (named after Hideki Yukawa who
was the first to introduce a coupling between scalars and fermions in
context of a different theory). The massive weak gauge bosons acquire
their masses by eating the Nambu-Goldstone bosons, as discussed earlier.
Therefore, in electroweak theory, gauge bosons and fermions are massless
in the unbroken electroweak symmetry phase, and become massive in the
broken phase. Even though the Higgs mechanism provides, among other
things, an economical solution to mass generation for both fermions and
weak gauge bosons, the Higgs boson itself remains elusive so far, and
forms the last missing piece of the SM. ⁹ ⁹ 9 As of early 2012, the
searches at the Large Hardon Collider (LHC) may indicate the existence
of a SM Higgs boson at around @xmath statistical significance. This
implies that the SM Higgs boson, if existed, is most likely to have a
mass constrained to the range 116-131 GeV by the ATLAS experiment [ 31 ]
- [ 33 ] , and 115-127 GeV by CMS [ 34 ] - [ 37 ] . These findings are,
however, statistically not strong enough to claim a discovery (the
@xmath threshold) and await the accumulation of more data.

To summarize, the SM has an @xmath gauge structure with a Higgs
mechanism for the SSB, and encompasses all known subatomic particles and
their interactions. Furthermore, using the experimentally determined
values of a number of parameters as input, the SM can, given its
renormalizable nature, make specific predictions regarding the outcome
of many other experiments with, in principle, an arbitrary degree of
accuracy. In order to test the SM predictions in the electroweak sector,
a number of high precision experiments, the so-called electroweak
precision tests , have been conducted. Data collected through these
experiments can be parametrized in various manners, ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 See
Chapter 2 for an elaborate discussion on these electroweak
parametrizations. in order to make comparison with the theoretical
predictions, and place tight constraints on the numerical values of many
of the SM input parameters. ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 As we shall see, experimental
deviations from the SM predicted value for these parameters can be
attributed to new physics, allowing one to place (lower) bounds on the
value of various beyond the Standard Model (BSM) variables. Fig. 1.4
summarizes the experimentally measured values of a number of parameters
predicted in the SM, and compares them with the theoretical prediction,
with the highest deviation lying within a @xmath bound. As one may
appreciate, the SM is impressively successful in predicting the values
of many observables, and passes the most stringent experimental tests.

As impressive as the SM might sound, there are, nevertheless, a number
of theoretical and observational indications suggesting that it cannot
represent a complete and final account of the quantum world, as the
ultimate theory of nature. These indications demand explicit extensions
and improvement of the SM, requiring inclusion of some new physics. An
illustrative list of SM shortcomings contains the following
observations:

-   The SM does not contain a quantum field theoretical description of
    gravity;

-   As indicated in Fig. 1.2 , the strength of the electromagnetic,
    strong, and weak interactions do not meet at one single energy. If,
    based on theoretical considerations, one is to take the idea of
    unifying the interactions seriously, the SM does not unify the
    coupling constants of the three forces, neither does it provide a
    unified description of all three as different manifestations of one
    fundamental interaction;

-   There are over twenty free parameters in the SM, the origin of which
    remains unexplained within the framework of the theory, and their
    numerical values need to be considered as input to the SM;

-   As presented in Fig. 1.4 , the SM predicted outcome for a number of
    experimental parameters deviates up to @xmath from the
    experimentally determined value, entertaining the possibility of
    some new physics substantially influencing those experiments;

-    Dark matter , its existence inferred from various sources of
    astronomical and cosmological observations, is not explained within
    the context of the SM. In other words, the particle content of the
    SM (Fig. 1.1 ) cannot account for the observed dark matter in the
    universe;

-   The SM prediction for the value of dark energy , presumably
    responsible for the observed accelerating expansion of the universe,
    is far too large by many orders of magnitude and is physically
    excluded;

-   The SM cannot account for the observed dominance of matter over
    antimatter in our universe;

-   The SM provides no justification for the observed homogeneity and
    isotropy of the universe at large distance scales;

-   Quantum corrections to the mass of the predicted Higgs boson are
    quadratically divergent (see below), making its mass highly
    sensitive to the ultra high energy behavior of the theory, around
    the Planck scale where gravity presumably becomes important. These
    corrections, therefore, tend to generate a large mass for the Higgs
    boson. In contrast, the actual mass of the Higgs boson must
    naturally lie near or below the electroweak symmetry breaking scale,
    many orders of magnitude smaller than the Planck scale. This
    requires a severe fine-tuning of the Higgs mass (and other SM
    parameters related to it), in order to remove the enormous
    contribution of the quadratically divergent quantum corrections, and
    produce a natural weak scale “light” Higgs. This spectacular
    cancellation is known as the Hierarchy problem . Another way to
    rephrase the Hierarchy problem is to contemplate why the weak energy
    scale is so much smaller than the Planck scale, or equivalently, why
    is gravity so much weaker than the other forces.

Let us elaborate on this last bullet note. Within the context of quantum
field theory, quantum corrections often introduce divergent
contributions to observables. This is a consequence of extrapolation of
the quantum field theory to very high energies, where the current
description presumably breaks down, and a new unknown and more
fundamental theory takes over. Nevertheless, in order to obtain
physically meaningful quantities with our current understanding, these
unphysical infinities must be properly parametrized and isolated (the
so-called regularization procedure), and disposed of, by being
reabsorbed into the definitions of physical quantities of the theory
(the so-called renormalization procedure). In other words, the
unrenormalized theory contains bare parameters (such as bare mass and
charge) which are formally infinite due to the quantum corrections.

Upon renormalization, the properly regularized divergences of the theory
are absorbed into the definitions of these bare parameters, rendering
finite results for the physical observables (such as renormalized mass
and charge). As noted before, in case of the Higgs mass the
contributions from the quantum corrections are quadratically divergent.
Reabsorbing these gigantic contributions into the definition of the bare
Higgs mass through the renormalization procedure requires a cancellation
to a remarkable degree of accuracy, in order to leave a finite, and in
comparison tiny, renormalized weak scale mass for the Higgs. In other
words, the renormalized Higgs mass is severely fine-tuned, leading to
the mentioned Hierarchy problem.

Many theoretical extensions of the SM have been proposed in order to
tackle and resolve one or more of the aforementioned SM issues. The main
effort in particle physics community has been concentrated towards
solving the Hierarchy problem, through somehow eliminating the quadratic
divergences in the Higgs mass by construction. This is usually achieved
by imposing some new symmetries, which result in a new set of (heavy)
particles, inducing a cancellation among the quantum contributions
originating from the ordinary particles and the new set of heavy
particles. The first half of this Thesis is, accordingly, dedicated to
elaborate on by far the simplest, although as we will see rather
peculiar, solution of the Hierarchy problem; namely, the Lee-Wick
Standard Model (LW SM), as discussed below.

There are various methods of regularization in use in particle physics,
each possessing certain advantages and shortcomings, depending on
specific circumstances. A method suggested by Wolfgang Pauli and Felix
Villars, published in 1949 [ 38 ] , involves introducing a set of
auxiliary “fictitious” particles (see below) into the theory, the
quantum contribution of which is subtracted from that of ordinary
particles. The mass parameter of these auxiliary fields acts as the
regulator, parameterizing the divergences of the original theory. Taking
the infinite limit of this mass parameter removes the fictitious
particles from the theory, and the original (divergent) theory is
recovered.

In the original formulation of the Pauli-Villars (P-V) regularization
method, the auxiliary particles were strictly introduced as a
mathematical tool into the theory, in order to regularize the infinities
associated with the quantum corrections of ordinary particles. In 1969
Tsung-Dao Lee and Gian-Carlo Wick explored the possibility of these
auxiliary fields’ being actual degrees of freedom, and the theoretical
implications of this consideration [ 39 ] . They were motivated by the
following observation: by construction, the divergences of the theory
are cancelled among the quantum contributions from ordinary particles
and their auxiliary “partners”. This feature made the resulting theory,
from a formal perspective, highly attractive. At that time, their
considerations led to a finite theory of QED [ 40 ] . ¹² ¹² 12 Modern
finite theory of QED is based upon the renormalization formalism, in
which the infinities are reabsorbed in the definitions of the bare
parameters, rather than being cancelled by introduction of heavy
partners.

P-V auxiliary fields inherently contain an overall negative sign as part
of their description, originally inserted to cancel divergences of
ordinary fields. Therefore, promoting these auxiliary fields from
fictitious to real particles turns them, by construction, into so-called
“ghosts”. Ghost fields, carrying this extra negative sign, contribute a
negative probability to the processes in particle physics, and hence,
are considered unphysical. The P-V ghosts as real degrees of freedom,
therefore, violate unitarity , indicating that the sum of the
probabilities of all processes in the theory would not equal one, and
lead to an unphysical theory. Coping with this problem, Lee and Wick
were able to show that the issue could be averted by relaxing causality
at very high energies, having as a consequence that these auxiliary
partners decay before they are produced. ¹³ ¹³ 13 For an elaborate
discussion on peculiarities related to the Lee-Wick theory, see e.g. [
41 , p. 282] . As a result, the Lee-Wick (LW) theory inherently violates
causality at small distance scales corresponding to very high energies,
beyond the reach of current collider probes. ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 Odd as the theory
might sound, one should bear in mind that causality in physics is an
axiom , and ultimately it is up to experiment to determine the energy
bounds within which this axiom is valid.

Lee and Wick also showed that, from a theoretical point-of-view, the
addition of this ‘‘auxiliary sector” to the original Lagrangian would be
equivalent to invoking a ‘‘higher-derivative term”. In the latter
approach, the kinetic term in the Lagrangian, ordinarily prescribed by a
quadratic derivative term, is viewed as the first entity in an infinite
expansion, and is extended to contain the next entity in the expansion
series, ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 From a formal perspective, the inclusion of more
LW partners per SM field is equivalent to adding more higher-derivative
expansion terms. which will be of a quartic form. ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 Odd terms in
the expansion are excluded by Lorentz invariance. Using the equations of
motion, one can prove the equivalence of the “auxiliary-field
formulation” and “higher-derivative term formulation” of the theory. The
Lagrangian with a higher-derivative term naturally produces a propagator
with higher powers of momentum in the denominator for the ordinary
fields, which, in calculations of quantum corrections, leads to a
softening or complete removal of any divergences. This is in accordance
with the auxiliary-field formulation, in which the auxiliary fields
soften or cancel the infinities induced by the ordinary fields.

In 2008 Benjamin Grinstein and Mark Wise examined the possibility of
applying LW theory to the SM [ 42 ] , since the resulting theory would
be naturally free of any quadratic divergences; hence, solving the
Hierarchy problem in an economical way. As mentioned above, the
higher-derivative terms added to various sectors of the SM produce the
higher momentum propagators, softening or removing all SM divergences.
Equivalently, in the auxiliary-field formulation, all bosons of the SM
are accompanied by a massive “Lee-Wick partner”, while all left-handed
and right-handed fermions have separately two corresponding massive
left-handed and right-handed LW partners, accomplishing the same result
as the higher-derivative formulation of theory.

In Part I of this Thesis, we take a deeper look into the LW SM, which,
in the context of resolving the Hierarchy problem, forms a natural
extension to the SM electroweak sector. As alluded to before, the
electroweak precision data may be parametrized in particular manners, in
order to make comparison with theory possible. One particular way of
parametrizing these data involves determining the quantum loop
correction contributions to the self-energy of massive gauge bosons
(also called vacuum polarization amplitude (VPA)); i.e. @xmath and
@xmath . The electroweak precision data place tight bounds on the value
of the parametrizations associated with these contributions. At low
energies, the postulated existence of the heavy LW partners introduces
new (previously non-existing) corrections to these parameters; for
example, due to the LW partners manifesting themselves as “virtual
particles” running in quantum correction loops. As the contributions of
LW particles are related to their masses, one can utilize the tight
constraints on the VPA electroweak parametrizations, deduced from the
electroweak precision tests, to place lower bounds on the LW masses.
This analysis [ 1 ] will be the subject of Chapter 2.

In 1971 Gerard ’t Hooft proved that the SM is a renormalizable theory [
43 ] . This implies that all divergences of the SM to all orders in
perturbation theory are absorbed by renormalizing a limited number of
the SM parameters, obtaining finite, physically meaningful quantities
for the observables. Generally, the renormalizability of a quantum field
theory may be qualitatively examined using a technique called power
counting . In this technique, one determines the powers of momentum in
quantum correction loops, which in turn may be used as an indication of
the number of divergent quantum correction amplitudes (to all orders) of
the quantum field theory. If this number is finite, the theory under
consideration is renormalizable and all of its divergences may be
absorbed in a redefinition of a finite number of its bare parameters.
If, however, by power counting the number of divergent amplitudes is
infinite, the theory is non-renormalizable.

The addition of higher-derivative terms to the SM Lagrangian, as
prescribed by LW theory, might naturally raise concerns regarding the
renormalizability of the resulting LW SM, since it potentially alters
the powers of momentum in the quantum correction loops.
Renormalizability has been previously explored in the higher-derivative
formulation of the theory by means of power counting arguments. It is,
however, not clear a priori how renormalizability manifests itself in
the auxiliary-field formulation. In Chapter 3, studying a LW scalar QED
theory as a toy model, we directly examine the symmetries and
renormalizability of this class of Abelian LW theories in the
auxiliary-field formulation, identifying the relevant symmetries which
lead to a renormalizable theory. ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 The analysis performed in the
context of LW scalar QED is expected to generalize to non-Abelian
LW theories, and in particular to the LW SM, although a formal proof is
yet to be provided.

In Part II of the Thesis, we turn our attention to investigating the
collider phenomenology of an extension to the strong sector of the SM
described by QCD. As explained previously, QCD is based upon an @xmath
local continuous symmetry. Since the late 1980s, it has been of
theoretical and phenomenological interest to extend the SM strong sector
to an @xmath gauge theory, spontaneously broken to QCD’s @xmath [ 5 ] -
[ 7 ] . This class of extensions represents an integral feature of
theories in which the electroweak symmetry breaking is induced by the
so-called strong dynamics , where a new type of strongly-coupled gauge
interaction forms a ‘‘composite Higgs” out of colored fermions. ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18
The situation is analogous to formation of “Cooper pairs” from electrons
in a superconducting medium below the critical temperature. In
accordance with Goldstone’s theorem, the spontaneous symmetry breaking
releases eight Nambu-Goldstone bosons, which are subsequently eaten by
eight out of the sixteen originally massless gauge bosons. Consequently,
we obtain, in addition to eight massless colored gauge bosons identified
with ordinary QCD gluons, eight massive colored vector bosons which we
generically refer to as the colorons .

From the phenomenological point-of-view, the main coloron production
channel in a hadron collider is the quark-antiquark annihilation
process. To date, all theoretical and phenomenological analyses of
colorons have been performed only at tree-level in perturbation theory
(LO). The next-to-leading order corrections (NLO) consist of the first
order quantum corrections in the perturbative expansion, and
additionally, the emissions of real soft and collinear particles which
are undetected due to the limited resolution of the detectors. Chapter 4
is devoted to the first complete and comprehensive study of coloron
production at NLO, taking into account the full corrections arising from
the real emission of gluons and light quarks, in addition to first order
quantum corrections [ 3 ] . The NLO study dramatically improves upon the
previous LO calculations, and makes it possible to predict new coloron
kinematic variables, which emerge only after a complete NLO analysis is
performed.

Finally, we conclude the Thesis in Chapter 5, by summarizing the main
contributions examined in the pervious chapters, and providing an
outlook for future research in these areas.

PART I

## Chapter 2 Custodial Isospin Violation in the Lee-Wick Standard
Model111This chapter is based on the paper first published in [1].

  “ If the facts don’t fit the theory, change the facts! ”

  —Albert Einstein (1879 – 1955)

### 2.1 Introduction \lettrine

[lines=1]The Lee-Wick Standard Model ³ ³ 3 A Lee-Wick extension of the
Higgs sector had been previously proposed in [ 53 ] - [ 55 ] . (LW SM) [
42 ] forms a natural and simple extension of the ordinary Standard
Model, which solves the Hierarchy problem in an economical way. As
discussed in Chapter 1, the Standard Model (SM) suffers from the
quadratic divergences brought forth by quantum corrections to the mass
of the SM Higgs boson. Absorbing these contributions by means of
renormalizing the bare Higgs mass requires a severe fine-tuning, and
introduces the Hierarchy problem. The LW SM, as an extension to the SM,
introduces new fermions, among other particles, with exotic properties
(see below) — the Lee-Wick (LW) fermions. Within the context of the
LW SM, the Hierarchy problem is remedied by an induced cancellation
among the ordinary fermion quantum contributions and those generated by
their LW counterparts. The bare Higgs mass will then contain no
quadratic divergences and can be renormalized in the usual way as
explained in Chapter 1, remaining insensitive to the high energy
behavior of the theory.

In the SM, the electroweak sector at one-loop may be fully parametrized
using the following five observables: the mass of the @xmath vector
boson @xmath , the so-called Fermi constant @xmath as a measure of the
symmetry breaking vacuum expectation value (VEV), the so-called Weinberg
angle @xmath indicating the degree of mixture between the
electromagnetic and weak forces, the mass of the Higgs boson @xmath ,
and the mass of the top quark @xmath . The values of these five
electroweak observables are extremely well-measured.

In order to extract the values of the electroweak observables from the
electroweak precision data, convenient parametrizations have been
introduced in terms of one-loop fermionic corrections to the electroweak
gauge bosons’ vacuum polarization amplitudes (VPA) (see e.g. Fig. 2.4 ).
In four-fermion scattering processes, oblique corrections are defined as
quantum corrections to the gauge bosons’ VPA which do not depend on the
identities of the initial and final state fermions. If such a flavor
dependence does exist, the corrections are referred to as non-oblique
corrections .

In general, the oblique corrections are parametrized using the
Peskin-Takeuchi @xmath and @xmath (or @xmath ) parameters [ 56 ] - [ 58
] . @xmath measures, for example, the size of the electroweak symmetry
breaking sector, while @xmath tracks isospin violation (defined below).
⁴ ⁴ 4 Within the context of the standard electroweak theory, the @xmath
parameter is defined as the zeroth-order ratio: @xmath . Small
experimentally measured deviations from this value is attributed to the
higher-order quantum corrections, and can place tight bounds on the new
physics contributions. If both non-oblique and oblique contributions are
present, one must employ, instead, the Barbieri et al. [ 59 , 60 ]
post-LEP electroweak parameters @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .
⁵ ⁵ 5 For the precise definition of these parameters, see Sec. 2.4.1 .
The well-determined experimental values of precision electroweak
observables can subsequently be used to place tight constraints on any
contribution from new non-SM physics to the gauge bosons’ VPA.

Since none of the LW degrees of freedom have been observed in
experiments, they must, if they exist, be heavy with masses beyond the
reach of previous collider searches. ⁶ ⁶ 6 As we will show in this
chapter, a lower bound for the LW particle masses will be of the order
of a few TeV, in which case, they might lie within the reach of the LHC.
As mentioned before, addition of these new heavy exotic particles to the
spectrum in virtual form risks running into conflict with precise
experimental data on the electroweak observables: virtual LW fermions,
running in quantum loops, contribute to the gauge bosons’ VPA; thereby,
modifying the values of the aforementioned (non-)oblique corrections. In
conjunction with the electroweak experimental data, this information can
be used to deduce lower bounds for the LW particle masses. In what
follows, we will discuss how the exotic properties of the LW fermions
solve the Hierarchy problem, and show, in detail, how corrections to the
post-LEP electroweak parameters can be utilized to constrain the
LW masses.

The LW SM features higher-derivative kinetic terms for each SM field. ⁷
⁷ 7 See Sec. 2.2 for the exact formal definition of the LW SM. As a
consequence, the field propagators fall off to zero with momentum more
rapidly than the ordinary SM propagators, and the infinities associated
with ultraviolet quantum fluctuations either become less severe or are
removed from the theory. In a scalar field theory all amplitudes turn
out to be finite by power counting. In a gauge theory the
higher-derivative kinetic terms generate new momentum-dependent
interactions that prevent the theory from being finite; however, a
simple power counting argument shows that all possible divergences are
logarithmic. Thus, the LW SM offers a potential solution to the
hierarchy problem. This was the main motivation for studying the model [
42 ] and analyzing its phenomenological implications [ 61 ] - [ 64 ] .

If a higher-derivative kinetic term is added to the Lagrangian, the
propagator of a LW SM field displays two poles, ⁸ ⁸ 8 Note that in
quantum field theory, the pole of a propagator (i.e. the zero-value of
its denominator) is identified with the mass of the particle the
propagator is representing. the lighter one corresponding to a SM-like
particle, and the heavier one corresponding to a new degree of freedom,
the LW partner. An equivalent formulation consists of separating the
poles in such a way that to each field there corresponds only one pole
and one mass. The LW poles are then characterized by a negative residue,
and, thus, act as Pauli-Villar regulators. However, unlike mere
regulators, the LW fields nontrivially participate in gauge and Yukawa
interactions.

In electroweak sector of the SM, the left-handed top and bottom quarks,
@xmath and @xmath , (and their replicas in the other two quark
generations, as well as the corresponding leptons) form a doublet under
the @xmath group, while their right-handed partners, @xmath and @xmath ,
are singlets. The doublet structure is referred to as isospin , in
analogy with the ordinary spin doublet for the spin– @xmath fermions. In
contrast with the ordinary spin doublet, however, members of these
isospin doublets are different flavors and have different masses,
leading to a violation of the isospin symmetry. The mass difference
among members of the isospin doublet is most prominent in this third
quark generation (top-bottom), compared to the other two generations,
with the top quark being about two orders of magnitude heavier than the
bottom quark. Hence, the isospin symmetry in the SM is broken, with the
largest violation in the top-bottom doublet.

Likewise, in the LW SM the largest one-loop contribution to the Higgs
mass comes from an isospin violating sector of the theory: the top
Yukawa coupling. There are two heavy partners of the top quark in the
LW SM, one associated with the left-handed top-bottom doublet, with mass
@xmath , and the other with the right-handed top, with mass @xmath . The
contributions to the Higgs mass involving a single LW top are opposite
in sign to those from a single SM top, so they cancel the quadratic
divergence associated with the Higgs mass renormalization, @xmath . The
net contribution is still logarithmically divergent, and for degenerate
LW top quarks, @xmath , is of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the cutoff, i.e. the highest energy scale marking the
limit of the validity of the theory. In the limit @xmath the ordinary
quadratic divergence reappears, with @xmath acting as a cutoff.
Therefore, as already pointed out in Ref. [ 65 ] , in order to avoid
fine-tuning the value of @xmath cannot be too large.

Because the dominant correction to the Higgs mass is associated with an
isospin violating sector of the theory, it is important to check whether
the LW tops cause a large contribution to the electroweak observables,
which are usually protected by the so-called custodial symmetry : @xmath
, and, for theories with heavy replicas of the top quark, the @xmath
coupling [ 66 , 67 ] . Large contributions to these quantities would
lead to a stringent lower bound on @xmath , which would result in large
corrections to @xmath and thus the necessity of fine-tuning the scalar
sector of the theory. ⁹ ⁹ 9 The electroweak gauge structure @xmath may
also be realized from a more general approximate global symmetry
structure @xmath , in which only @xmath , and @xmath subgroup of @xmath
are gauged (i.e. are local symmetries) and are identified with the
electroweak theory. The latter @xmath approximate global symmetry is
called the custodial symmetry, and protects the electroweak observables,
such as the @xmath - @xmath mass ratio and the isospin, from large
quantum corrections.

In this chapter ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 Throughout this chapter, the timeline for the
depicted Feynman diagrams is from left to right. we analyze the
potential conflict between naturalness and isospin violation, by
computing the contribution of the top quark sector to the @xmath
parameter and to the @xmath coupling. Furthermore, we compute the
Barbieri et al. [ 59 , 60 ] post-LEP electroweak parameters ( @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ) to check for additional constraints. In
terms of the post-LEP parameters, we find a simple picture for the
constraints on the LW SM. The dominant contributions to @xmath come from
the fermion sector at one-loop, and limits on this parameter provide the
strongest constraints on the top quark sector. ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 The dominant
contributions to @xmath , likewise, come from the fermion sector at
one-loop, but they are too small to provide strong constraints on the
top quark sector. In contrast, the dominant contributions to @xmath and
@xmath arise from the gauge sector at tree-level, and limits on these
parameters, therefore, provide the strongest constraints on the gauge
sector. These results imply that the bounds on the LW fermions, coming
almost entirely from @xmath , are essentially independent of the
LW gauge masses.

Our results differ from those in Refs. [ 65 , 68 ] because their
one-loop analysis of the effects of LW top quarks on electroweak
observables rests on the incorrect assumption that the corrections are
purely oblique [ 56 ] - [ 58 ] . As discussed in Ref. [ 69 ] important
non-oblique corrections arise at tree-level in the LW SM, in the form of
non-zero values for @xmath and @xmath . Therefore, one must use the
Barbieri et al. parameters to compare the LW SM with experiment.

In Sec. 2.2 we review the structure of the LW SM [ 42 ] and establish
notation. In Sec. 2.3 we present an effective field theory analysis of
the LW corrections to @xmath and to the @xmath coupling. In Sec. 2.4 we
present our analysis of the post-LEP electroweak parameters and the
resulting constraints on the LW SM, while the constraints from the
@xmath coupling are analyzed in Sec. 2.5 . The leading logarithmic
contributions to the electroweak observables in the full theory and the
effective theory have to match; thus the results of Sec. 2.3 provide an
important check for those of Sec. 2.4 and 2.5 .

Global symmetries and renormalizability of LW theories will be discussed
in detail in Chapter 3, while questions concerning unitarity [ 70 ] ,
causality [ 71 ] , and Lorentz invariance in LW theories, although
potentially important, will not be considered in this analysis. A
complete analysis of the one-loop renormalization of the LW SM can be
found in [ 72 ] .

### 2.2 The Lee-Wick Standard Model

It is straightforward to write a higher-derivative extension of the SM
electroweak Lagrangian [ 42 ] . Adopting a non-canonical normalization
for the gauge fields, the gauge Lagrangian reads

  -- -- -- -------
           (2.2)
  -- -- -- -------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath , and @xmath the @xmath generators (Pauli matrices). The
“hat” notation indicates that the field’s propagator contains not only
the ordinary SM poles but also the LW poles. For example, in the limit
of unbroken electroweak phase the @xmath propagator has a massless pole,
corresponding to the ordinary @xmath gauge field, and a mass- @xmath
pole, corresponding to its LW counterpart. Notice also that additional
dimension-six operators could, in principle, be added to this
Lagrangian. However, these would lead to scattering amplitudes for the
longitudinally polarized gauge bosons growing like @xmath , where @xmath
is the center-of-mass energy, and thus to a rather early violation of
unitarity [ 73 ] . We, therefore, do not include them in this analysis.
Notice also that we only include one higher-derivative term per SM
field, which introduces a single corresponding LW pole. This is
certainly fine for our purposes, since in this analysis we focus on the
low momentum regime, where additional higher-derivative terms are
negligible. However, at large momenta additional poles in the propagator
can have important implications [ 74 , 75 ] .

The higher-derivative extension of the Higgs sector is

  -- -- -- -------
           (2.3)
  -- -- -- -------

where as usual the Higgs doublet may be written in component form as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here and in Eq. ( 2.2 ) the covariant derivative written with a hat is
built with the hatted gauge fields. We will find it convenient to have a
compact way of denoting @xmath as we build operators that couple the
Higgs to the right-handed top quark. Hence, we make the definition

  -- -- -- -------
           (2.5)
  -- -- -- -------

The field @xmath contains both the ordinary Higgs doublet and a massive
doublet with mass @xmath . ¹² ¹² 12 If @xmath is smaller than all other
LW mass parameters, in a certain energy regime the model behaves like a
two-Higgs doublet model, although one doublet is of LW type. This
scenario was analyzed in [ 76 ] .

In the fermion sector we focus only on the third quark generation, since
this is the dominant source of isospin violation and gives the largest
correction to the Higgs mass. ¹³ ¹³ 13 Inclusion of the remaining
flavors would introduce new mixing matrices, and, without the assumption
of minimal flavor violation, potential sources of flavor changing
neutral currents (FCNC). However, in Ref. [ 77 ] it was shown that for
LW fermion masses in the TeV range the FCNC are sufficiently small to
satisfy experimental constraints. The higher-derivative extension of the
fermion Lagrangian is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . Notice that the right handed fields have been primed
because, for example, @xmath and @xmath are not left and right component
of the same Dirac spinor. In the unbroken electroweak phase @xmath (
@xmath ) contains the ordinary massless SM left-handed (right-handed)
top as well as a massive Dirac fermion of mass @xmath ( @xmath ).

Finally we consider the Yukawa Lagrangian, which in the SM has no
derivatives. Therefore, we write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the bottom Yukawa coupling has been ignored, since @xmath .

As explained in the introduction, this “higher-derivative” formulation
of the theory, in which both the ordinary pole and the LW pole are
contained in the same field, is equivalent to an “ordinary formulation”
in which, as follows: (i) the two poles belong to two different fields,
and (ii) the kinetic and mass terms for the LW fields have the wrong
sign. This alternative formulation is especially useful for calculating
loop diagrams. In this chapter we will compute loop diagrams with the
top and bottom quarks in the loop. Thus we will find it helpful to
replace the higher-derivative fermion and Yukawa Lagrangians with the
ordinary formulation Lagrangians

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and where the fields with (without) a tilde are LW (SM) fields. The
equivalence between the higher-derivative formulation, Eqs. ( 2.6 ) and
( 2.7 ), and the ordinary formulation, Eqs. ( 2.8 ) and ( 2.9 ), can be
easily proved; see, for example, [ 42 ] . Notice that the wrong sign in
front of the kinetic and mass terms makes the LW (tilde) fields act like
Pauli-Villars regulators, with the difference that they also participate
nontrivially in gauge and Yukawa interactions.

### 2.3 Effective Field Theory for @xmath and @xmath

The appearance of the LW fields in the Yukawa interactions, Eq. ( 2.9 ),
suggest the presence of non-standard sources of custodial isospin
violation at energies below the LW scale. Dimension-six custodial
violating operators can potentially arise from tree-level exchanges, and
from loop diagrams with one or more LW fermions in the loop. The leading
contribution to these operators, in inverse powers of the LW fermion
masses, can be found by integrating out the LW fermions at tree-level
and computing loops in the resulting effective field theory. For
LW fermion masses much larger than both the Higgs vacuum expectation
value (VEV) and the external momenta, the effective Lagrangian can be
computed in powers of @xmath and @xmath . Including the leading
non-standard corrections, this leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that the primes have been removed from the right-handed fermion
fields, because now left-handed and right-handed components are Dirac
partners. Notice also that this Lagrangian assumes @xmath and @xmath to
be of the same order, with no hierarchy between them. The leading
logarithmic correction to observables will, therefore, be proportional
to @xmath . In what follows, we compute these leading-log corrections by
constructing the operators which arise in the effective theory
appropriate for energy scales below @xmath , in which the LW partners
have been “integrated out” but the top quark remains in the spectrum.

After electroweak symmetry breaking, the higher-derivative operators
lead to a renormalization of the fermion kinetic terms. An alternative
approach consists of redefining @xmath and @xmath to make their kinetic
terms canonically normalized in both the broken and the unbroken
electroweak phase. This is achieved by the replacements

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

which leads to a new Lagrangian, equivalent to @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.13)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

As expected, there are custodial symmetry violating dimension-six
operators. However, at tree-level there is no non-standard contribution
to @xmath or the @xmath coupling.

@xmath features terms coupling one, two, or three @xmath fields to a
pair of fermions. Therefore, dimension-six four- @xmath operators arise
both from vacuum polarization amplitudes and triangle diagrams, as shown
in Fig. 2.1 . The log-divergent parts of these diagrams (which yield the
@xmath contributions) can be computed in the unbroken electroweak phase,
with fermions in the loop. The logarithmically divergent part of the
amplitude is reproduced by the operators ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 There are also
quadratic divergences which are completely absorbed by a counterterm of
the form @xmath , with no derivatives.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where as usual @xmath in dimensional regularization. The first operator
respects custodial symmetry, but the second operator does not, since it
contributes only to the @xmath boson mass. The second operator gives the
dominant contribution to @xmath , which is, therefore, of the order

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath is replaced by the large @xmath which arises in the
effective theory scaling from the scale @xmath to the weak scale @xmath
. For LW fermions lighter than 1 TeV this is a large negative isospin
violating effect. For example, taking @xmath GeV gives @xmath .
Furthermore, since @xmath is always negative, a heavy Higgs is strongly
disfavored in the LW SM.

The diagrams contributing to the left-handed fermionic gauge couplings
up to one-loop order are shown in Fig. 2.2 . The tree-level diagram
(corrected by the field strength renormalizations) corresponds to the
custodial violating operator proportional to @xmath , in Eq. ( 2.13 ).
This operator contributes to the @xmath coupling, not to @xmath . ¹⁵ ¹⁵
15 Including the bottom Yukawa coupling would lead to a tree-level
operator contributing to @xmath . However, the top loop contribution is
dominant, since @xmath . The remaining diagrams contain non-standard
logarithmic divergences which are reproduced by the operators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this expression the first (custodially symmetric) operator amounts to
a renormalization of the standard gauge interactions, and does not
contribute to non-standard fermionic gauge couplings. The second
operator violates custodial symmetry, and is only due to the triangle
diagrams in Fig. 2.2 . This contributes both to the @xmath coupling and
the @xmath coupling. Expressing the latter in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath includes all higher order SM corrections, and replacing the
@xmath poles with the large log arising from scaling in the theory, we
find that the second operator of Eq. ( 2.16 ) gives the dominant
non-universal LW contribution to @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The SM prediction is already 1.96 @xmath below the observed central
value. Hence, the additional negative correction in the LW theory goes
in the direction opposite to what is favored by experiment.

In the next two sections we compute perturbatively (in @xmath and @xmath
) and numerically the values of @xmath and the @xmath coupling in the
full LW theory. Our effective field theory results, Eq. ( 2.15 ) and
Eq. ( 2.18 ), provide a check of these full calculations, since the
leading logarithmic contributions have to match. More generally, below
we compute the top sector one-loop contribution to all Barbieri et al. [
59 , 60 ] electroweak parameters, and provide lower bounds on @xmath and
@xmath from comparison with experiment.

### 2.4 Constraints from Post-LEP Parameters

In the language of Barbieri et al. [ 59 , 60 ] , the observables @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath parametrize the flavor-universal
deviations from the SM at low energies. We now analyze the tree-level
and the fermionic one-loop contributions to these parameters and use
them to obtain constraints on the masses of the LW states.

#### 2.4.1 Tree-Level Contributions

At tree-level, it is straightforward to read from Eq. ( 2.2 ) the vacuum
polarization amplitudes ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 The full Lorentz structure of a gauge
boson’s VPA contains a term proportional to @xmath and another term
proportional to the external momentum @xmath . For a massless gauge
boson, these two coefficients are the same, and lead to a transverse VPA
Lorentz structure. This is, however, generally not the case for a
massive gauge boson, such as @xmath and @xmath , where the two
coefficients are different. In ( 2.19 ), @xmath represents the
coefficient of @xmath in the @xmath VPA, since only this piece is
relevant for our calculation. @xmath and @xmath are @xmath and the third
component of @xmath group generators, respectively; within the context
of the electroweak theory, they mix to produce massive @xmath and
massless photon.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Following [ 59 ] , we see that there is no tree-level correction to the
Fermi constant

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Barbieri et al. define the approximate electroweak gauge couplings

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.21)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which in the LW SM gives @xmath and @xmath . We then compute the
tree-level electroweak parameters [ 69 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.23)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.24)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.25)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where in each equation the first equality is the definition of the
corresponding post-LEP parameter [ 59 ] . The VPAs ( @xmath ) are
defined as inverse of the full @xmath propagator (Fig. 2.3 ).

#### 2.4.2 Fermionic One-Loop Contributions

The gauge current correlators receive important loop corrections from
the top-bottom sector, through the diagrams shown in Fig. 2.4 . These
vacuum polarization amplitudes contain two infinities, which are
absorbed in the definitions of @xmath and @xmath given in Eqs. ( 2.21 )
and ( 2.22 ), respectively. As a consequence the non-canonical
normalization adopted in Eq. ( 2.2 ) forces us to define renormalized
LW gauge masses. A convenient scheme consists of defining @xmath and
@xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

which simplify the one-loop calculations below. At tree-level, from
Eq. ( 2.19 ), we see that @xmath and @xmath , and both are related to
the masses of the LW partners of the gauge bosons. Because of the power
counting properties of LW theories, after the usual ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 Notice that
the vacuum polarization diagrams involving only one LW fermion carry an
overall negative sign. In fact this happens to make all zero-derivative
functions, at @xmath , finite. For this reason there is actually one
less infinity compared to the ordinary SM, and the bare @xmath is finite
[ 42 ] . coupling-constant and mass renormalizations, all physical
quantities remain finite [ 42 ] . Hence, @xmath and @xmath remain finite
at one-loop (and beyond). However, since they are defined by the
zero-momentum properties of the gauge boson two-point functions, their
values only approximately equal the masses of the LW partners of the
gauge bosons. This suffices for our purposes, since we are interested in
low-energy observables; if we were studying quantities measured at
higher energies, we would want to define @xmath and @xmath based on
propagators renormalized at high @xmath instead.

The propagators in the loops of Fig. 2.4 correspond to mass eigenstates,
where the masses are obtained by diagonalizing the mass matrices by
means of symplectic rotations: in this way the LW fields maintain the
“wrong-sign” kinetic and mass terms. A perturbative diagonalization in
@xmath and @xmath [ 65 ] requires considering two different scenarios:
non-degenerate LW masses, @xmath , and (near) degenerate LW masses,
@xmath . For non-degenerate LW top quarks the contributions to the
electroweak parameters are quite lengthy. To leading order we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The electroweak parameters in the (near) degenerate case cannot simply
be obtained by taking the @xmath limit in Eqs. ( 2.28 ), since the
corresponding expressions diverge. Instead, we must diagonalize the mass
matrices perturbatively in @xmath (or @xmath ) and @xmath , and then
compute the electroweak parameters. For exact degeneracy, @xmath , this
gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the absence of fermionic one-loop corrections to the
tree-level value of @xmath is a direct consequence of the second
definition in Eq. ( 2.27 ): a different scheme choice would lead to an
additional contribution. In the same way, changing the definition of
@xmath would lead to a different fermionic one-loop expression for
@xmath ; in any case, the second term ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 Note that the first
definition in Eq. ( 2.27 ) pertains to @xmath , whereas @xmath is
defined in terms of @xmath . in @xmath is numerically very small and can
be neglected. We, therefore, conclude that the leading contributions to
@xmath and @xmath are those arising from the LW gauge-sector at
tree-level, Eqs. ( 2.25 , 2.26 ).

Since the tree-level values of @xmath and @xmath vanish, the leading
LW contributions to both @xmath and @xmath arise from the top quark
sector at one-loop. In the case of @xmath this is not surprising since
the dominant locus of isospin violation in the model is the splitting
between the top and bottom quark masses. Because @xmath is the same as
@xmath [ 60 ] , we may compare the leading logarithmic correction in
Eq. ( 2.28 ) with the result obtained in the effective theory, Eq. (
2.15 ); we see that they agree. In the case of @xmath , the situation is
more subtle. The LW gauge-eigenstate fermion partners, being massive,
are not chiral and therefore, in the absence of electroweak
contributions to the masses that mix them with the light chiral
gauge-eigenstates, their contribution to @xmath vanishes. Hence, the
dominant LW contributions to @xmath also arise predominantly from the
top sector of the theory.

Therefore, at tree-level plus one fermion loop we obtain a very simple
conclusion: the fermion sector contributes to @xmath and @xmath only,
while the gauge sector contributes to @xmath and @xmath only. It is true
that when gauge loops are included, there will be additional
contributions. However, the gauge loop contributions are generally
sub-dominant compared to the quantities we have already calculated. The
only potential exception is @xmath , for which the fermionic one-loop
contribution is small. However, in Ref. [ 74 ] a numerical computation
shows that the gauge loop contribution to @xmath is suppressed (see also
[ 65 ] ), since @xmath . Using the results of Ref. [ 60 ] , this allows
us to estimate the gauge loop contribution to @xmath to be @xmath ,
which is negligibly small. Thus, our existing results suffice for
extracting constraints on the LW fermions from the experimental data.

#### 2.4.3 Comparison with Data

We begin with constraints on the masses of the LW partners of the gauge
bosons. The previous subsection found that the only post-LEP parameters
affected by the LW gauge boson masses are @xmath and @xmath , and also
that the tree-level expressions for @xmath and @xmath , Eqs. ( 2.25 ,
2.26 ), suffice for comparison with data. The experimental constraints
on @xmath and @xmath are rather tight and almost independent of the
value of the Higgs mass [ 59 ] . These translate into the 95% C.L. lower
bounds on @xmath and @xmath shown ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 These bounds are derived
using the errors and correlation matrix given in Ref. [ 59 ] . in Figs.
2.5 and 2.6 . Fig. 2.5 shows the bounds for arbitrary values of @xmath
and @xmath : for @xmath GeV the striped region is excluded, while for
@xmath GeV the additional narrow yellow region is excluded as well. Fig.
2.6 shows the 95% C.L. ellipses in the @xmath plane from the global fit
to data [ 59 ] , for @xmath and @xmath , as well as the LW prediction
for degenerate LW masses, @xmath . All this is in agreement with the
results of Ref. [ 69 ] and gives the constraints @xmath , @xmath TeV.

Next, we seek constraints on the masses of the LW partners of the top
quark. The previous subsection found that the post-LEP parameters
sensitive to the LW fermion masses are @xmath and @xmath , which do not
depend on the LW gauge masses at the one-loop level. We should also note
that, for a light Higgs, the LW prediction of @xmath is very close to
its central value, @xmath . Furthermore, from the global fit to the
experimental data in Ref. [ 59 ] , we conclude that @xmath is only
mildly correlated to @xmath and @xmath , the parameters that are most
sensitive to the LW gauge boson masses in the LW SM. This confirms that
the bounds on the LW fermions should be essentially independent of the
LW gauge masses, and should come almost entirely from @xmath .

In Fig. 2.7 we show the experimental mean value for @xmath (thick red
line), the @xmath allowed region, the all-order (in @xmath )
LW prediction (solid blue curve), the leading order LW prediction from
Eq. ( 2.30 ) (dashed blue curve), and the leading-log approximation
(dotted blue curve), as functions of @xmath , in the degenerate case.
This figure reveals the bound @xmath TeV on the LW fermion masses in the
degenerate case. Note that although Eq. ( 2.30 ) appears to predict a
positive @xmath for small @xmath (dashed blue curve), the complete
numerical evaluation (solid blue curve) shows that @xmath is always
negative, as Fig. 2.7 shows explicitly; below @xmath TeV the
perturbative diagonalization of the mass matrix is no longer valid,
rendering the leading order LW prediction unreliable in that mass
regime.

If we relax the requirement of degenerate LW fermion masses, we obtain
the 95% C.L. bounds on @xmath and @xmath shown in Fig. 2.8 . For a light
Higgs the striped region in Fig. 2.8 is excluded, while for a heavy
Higgs the whole (yellow) region is excluded. Note from Figs. 2.5 and 2.8
that the mildest constraints on the LW masses are obtained in the fully
degenerate case, @xmath and @xmath .

Returning to the case of degenerate LW fermion masses, we show in Fig.
2.9 the values of @xmath and @xmath as a function of @xmath for @xmath ;
the dots representing different values of @xmath are placed at regular
intervals. The 95% C.L. ellipses from the global fit to the data [ 59 ]
confirm the constraint @xmath TeV for a light Higgs, while a heavy Higgs
scenario is disfavored for any LW fermion mass. In fact, for a heavy
Higgs the @xmath parameter is expected to be positive, while the LW SM
predicts a negative @xmath . This is a direct consequence of the
negative sign in the LW fermion propagators, which results in an overall
negative sign from the (dominant) diagrams involving a single LW fermion
in the loop.

Our results disagree with those of [ 65 , 68 ] in two ways: their bounds
on the LW fermion masses appear more stringent for a light Higgs and
their limits appear to depend on the masses of the LW gauge boson
partners. The disagreement arises because their study of one-loop
electroweak corrections in the LW SM assumes the corrections to be
purely oblique and derives constraints by comparing the Peskin-Takeuchi
@xmath and @xmath [ 56 ] parameters to data. However, as clearly
discussed in Ref. [ 69 ] , and confirmed above in Eqs. ( 2.25 ) and (
2.26 ), the LW SM features large non-oblique corrections, in the form of
non-zero values for @xmath and @xmath at tree-level. Hence, one must use
the Barbieri et al. parameters to compare the LW SM with experiment, as
we have done.

### 2.5 Constraints from the @xmath Coupling

The leading contribution to the @xmath coupling (in the gauge coupling
expansion) can be obtained in the gaugeless limit from the @xmath
coupling [ 78 ] - [ 81 ] , where @xmath is the Nambu-Goldstone boson
eaten by the @xmath . The loop diagram giving the largest correction
involves the SM and LW top quarks ²⁰ ²⁰ 20 In the gaugeless limit of the
LW SM, as in the SM itself, all external @xmath -quark wavefunction
renormalization corrections are proportional to @xmath and are,
therefore, negligible. This should be contrasted with the situation in
the three-site Higgsless model [ 81 ] . and is shown in Fig. 2.10 . A
detailed computation of the loop integral, valid for arbitrary models
with heavy replicas of the top quark, is given in Appendix A . At zero
external momentum the amplitude corresponding to the diagram has the
form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the left-handed projector, @xmath is the incoming @xmath
momentum, and the external fermion wavefunctions have been omitted. Then
to leading order in @xmath the correction to the @xmath coupling is [ 78
] - [ 81 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Expanding the amplitude in powers of @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

for non-degenerate LW fermion masses, and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

for degenerate LW masses. Both of these expressions agree with the
dominant contribution found in the effective theory, Eq. ( 2.18 ).

The experimental value of @xmath is derived from measurements of @xmath
, the ratio of the @xmath width to the width of the hadronic decays, and
@xmath , the forward-backward asymmetry for @xmath decays into @xmath [
82 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

The SM value was computed using ZFITTER [ 83 , 84 ] in Ref. [ 67 ] ,
leading to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the LW prediction is given by Eq. ( 2.33 ) and Eq. ( 2.34 ). In
Fig. 2.11 we show the experimental mean value (thick horizontal red
line), the 2 @xmath allowed region below the mean value, the SM
prediction (solid horizontal black line), the all-order (in @xmath )
LW prediction (solid blue curve), the leading order LW prediction, Eq. (
2.34 ) (dashed blue curve), and the leading-log approximation (dotted
blue curve), as functions of @xmath , in the degenerate case. Note that
the dashed curve and Eq. ( 2.34 ) are not reliable for @xmath TeV,
because the perturbative diagonalization of the mass matrix is not valid
in that mass regime.

As anticipated by the effective field theory calculation, the
LW correction is always negative: this is essentially due to the
negative sign in front of the dominant non-standard triangle diagrams
with one LW top and one SM top. It is large (for small values of @xmath
) because of the explicit breaking of custodial isospin symmetry. Since
the SM value is already @xmath below the experimental mean value, this
correction goes in the direction opposite to what is needed. Agreement
at the 2 @xmath level requires @xmath TeV; at @xmath this bound relaxes
to @xmath GeV.

### 2.6 Conclusion & Discussion

There is significant tension between naturalness and isospin violation
in the LW SM. While corrections to the Higgs mass are smallest when the
LW partners of the gauge bosons and fermions are light, isospin
violation that must be present in the top sector to account for the
large splitting between @xmath and @xmath tends to constrain the
LW partners to have masses over a TeV. We have performed an effective
field theory analysis of the corrections to @xmath and the @xmath
coupling in the LW SM, and used it to confirm our full calculation of
the LW effects on @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ,
including tree-level and fermionic one-loop contributions. The post-LEP
parameters yield a simple picture in the LW SM: the gauge sector
contributes to @xmath and @xmath only, with leading contributions
arising at tree-level, while the fermion sector contributes to @xmath
and @xmath only, with leading corrections arising at one-loop.

In agreement with [ 69 ] , we find that experimental limits on @xmath
and @xmath jointly constrain the masses of the LW gauge bosons to
satisfy @xmath TeV at 95% C.L., with relatively little sensitivity to
the Higgs mass.

We also conclude that the experimental limits on @xmath require the
masses of the LW fermions to satisfy @xmath TeV at 95% C.L. if the Higgs
mass is light and tend to exclude the LW SM for any LW fermion masses if
the Higgs mass is heavy. This is because a model containing a heavy
Higgs can be rendered consistent with the data only if some other sector
of the model provides a large positive correction to @xmath . However,
in the LW SM, the fermionic loops that provide the dominant contribution
to @xmath always make @xmath more negative, due to the negative sign in
the LW fermion propagators. The LW fermions simply cannot compensate for
the presence of a heavy Higgs. Our results differ from those in Refs. [
65 , 68 ] because their analysis incorrectly assumes that the
electroweak corrections due to LW states are purely oblique. As
explained in Ref. [ 69 ] the LW states actually induce important
non-oblique corrections, and one must, therefore, use the Barbieri et
al. [ 59 , 60 ] post-LEP parameters to compare the LW SM with
experiment, as we have done.

Weak isospin violation in the top quark sector also manifests itself
through corrections to the @xmath coupling. The SM prediction for @xmath
lies at the lower end of the range allowed by experiment at 95% C.L., so
that new physics making negative contributions to the value of @xmath
would decrease the agreement with the data. As in the case of @xmath ,
however, we find that the negative sign in the LW fermion propagators
translates into a negative contribution to @xmath ; the lighter the
LW fermions, the greater the disagreement between prediction and data.
We find that the @xmath coupling places a lower bound of 4 TeV on the
LW fermion masses at 95% C.L.

On this note, we conclude our phenomenological analysis of the LW SM,
reflecting various constraints from the current experimental data.
Having completed our phenomenological study of the LW SM, we are going
to focus, in the next chapter, on some of the theoretical aspects
concerning the global symmetries and renormalizability of LW theories,
since they are in general poorly understood. Understanding
renormalizability of this class of theories, in particular, is of great
importance in order for them to be considered as reliable beyond the
Standard Model (BSM) candidates with accurate all-order predictions for
the experiments. We will examine these issues in both the
higher-derivative and auxiliary-field formulations of the theory by
means of a relatively simple Abelian example.

## Chapter 3 Global Symmetries and Renormalizability of Lee-Wick
Theories111This chapter is based on the paper first published in [2].

  “ Science is a way of trying not to fool yourself. The first principle
  is that you must not fool yourself — and you are the easiest person to
  fool! ”

  —Richard Feynman (1918 – 1988)

### 3.1 Introduction \lettrine

[lines=1]Renormalizabilty of Lee-Wick theories (LW) is an important
theoretical aspect which needs to be well-stablished, in order for them
to be considered as reliable beyond the Standard Model (BSM) candidates.
In Chapters 1 and 2, we explained how the LW theory may be formulated in
terms of two separate but equivalent formal descriptions. Depending on
the problem at hand, one may choose to utilize either of the two
formulations, in order to facilitate the calculations and make certain
formal aspects of the theory more transparent. Renormalizability has
been previously explored in the higher-derivative formulation of the
theory (see below), but its precise theoretical description in the
auxiliary-field formulation remained unknown. In this chapter, we
address this nontrivial issue along with global symmetries possessed by
LW theories in the auxiliary-field formulation.

To summarize our discussion so far, we saw that in the higher-derivative
formulation, the higher-derivative kinetic term gave rise to propagators
that fall off with momentum more rapidly than the ordinary Standard
Model (SM) field propagators, thereby reducing the degree of divergence
of loop diagrams. On the other hand, higher covariant derivatives also
introduce new momentum-dependent interactions, which raise the degree of
divergence of quantum fluctuations. Power counting arguments [ 42 ] show
that these two competing effects conspire to make all loop diagrams at
most logarithmically divergent. If the scale associated with the
higher-derivative terms is of the order of the electroweak scale, then
the latter becomes stable against radiative corrections: no quadratic
divergences are present at any order in perturbation theory, and no
unnatural fine-tuning of parameters is required. In addition, power
counting arguments [ 42 ] show that this higher-derivative formulation
of the theory is renormalizable.

The higher-derivative kinetic terms in the Lee-Wick Standard
Model (LW SM) result in propagators with more than one pole. In minimal
(so-called @xmath ) LW theories ³ ³ 3 We will focus on @xmath theories
throughout this Thesis, though our results can be potentially
generalized to arbitrary- @xmath LW theories, with @xmath
higher-derivative kinetic terms associated with each field. [ 75 ] ,
there is only one higher-derivative kinetic term for each field,
corresponding to two-pole propagators. In the @xmath LW SM, the lighter
pole can be identified as a SM-like state already seen in experiment,
while the heavier pole corresponds to a new LW ghost state with the same
quantum numbers and negative norm. As explained in Chapter 1, this is
dangerous, since it would lead to a violation of unitarity. In order to
avoid this scenario, the LW ghosts must appear only as virtual states [
39 ] . Furthermore, the integration contour in momentum integrals
involving ghost propagators must be modified so as to preserve unitarity
[ 70 ] . The price to be paid for these modifications is the presence of
unobservable acausal effects in scattering processes [ 39 , 71 ] .

Alternatively, in the auxiliary-field form of the theory, in addition to
the SM fields there are “LW fields” with kinetic energy terms with the
opposite sign from their SM counterparts. The opposite sign for the
kinetic energy terms enforces the cancellations that soften the
divergences in the theory. The main advantage of the auxiliary-field
approach lies in the computation of loop diagrams, since aside from the
overall sign the propagators are just ordinary propagators. There are,
however, a number of open field-theoretic issues with this formulation,
which require clarification.

In this chapter ⁴ ⁴ 4 Throughout this chapter, the timeline for the
depicted Feynman diagrams is from left to right. we clarify two issues
in the auxiliary-field description of the theory in the context of a
simple but nontrivial theory — LW scalar quantum electrodynamics (QED).
⁵ ⁵ 5 Our analysis extends immediately to LW QED with an arbitrary
number of matter fields, either scalars or fermions. First, the
interaction terms involving the LW fields have a very particular form,
which is not the most general one allowed by gauge invariance. For
example, the couplings of the LW vector fields are identical to the
gauge couplings of the corresponding SM gauge fields. This equality and
others are essential if the cancellations softening or removing the
infinities are to hold. On the one hand, it is not clear why, a priori ,
this special form of the interactions should be preserved to all orders
in perturbation theory. On the other hand, we know that it must be
preserved since power counting shows that the equivalent
higher-derivative theory is free of quadratic divergences. ⁶ ⁶ 6 In the
auxiliary-field formulation power counting is more difficult because of
the cancellations involved between different diagrams. Here we identify
approximate @xmath global symmetries of the auxiliary-field description
of the theory that allow us to understand its structure.

Second, we clarify the renormalizability of LW scalar QED in the
presence of the massive ghost LW vector field. Because of the @xmath
term in a heavy vector boson propagator (where @xmath is the heavy
vector mass), power counting in the auxiliary-field formalism is
difficult. We will identify two @xmath symmetric gauge-fixing conditions
that simplify the auxiliary-field LW analysis. In one case (ordinary),
the gauge-fixing forces the @xmath terms to appear with canceling signs
in the gauge-LW propagator matrix. In the other case (“no-mixing”), the
gauge-fixing eliminates the @xmath term in the vector field propagators.
Working in the no-mixing gauge allows us to show that the number of
superficially divergent amplitudes in an Abelian gauge theory is finite,
and the theory is, therefore, renormalizable.

Finally, to illustrate the renormalizability of LW scalar QED, we
explicitly carry out the one-loop renormalization program and
demonstrate how the counterterms required are constrained by the joint
conditions of gauge and @xmath invariance. As a by-product of these
discussions, we compute the one-loop beta functions in LW scalar QED and
contrast them with those of ordinary scalar QED.

In Sec. 3.2 we introduce and illustrate the @xmath symmetries of a
LW theory in the context of @xmath theory. In Sec. 3.3 we consider
LW scalar QED and derive the equivalent auxiliary-field description. We
then analyze the global symmetries of the theory and explain how these
protect the form of the Lagrangian against radiative corrections. In
Sec. 3.4 we show how gauge-fixing can be implemented in an @xmath
invariant fashion and derive the corresponding propagators. In Sec. 3.5
we show that the number of superficially divergent amplitudes is finite,
and the theory is, therefore, renormalizable. Then we illustrate these
results at one-loop by carrying out the renormalization program and
computing the beta functions. Finally, in Sec. 3.6 we offer our
conclusions and we sketch why a modified approach is needed for the case
of non-Abelian gauge theories.

### 3.2 Lee-Wick @xmath Theory

We first consider LW @xmath theory for a complex scalar field in order
to introduce the auxiliary-field formalism and the @xmath global
symmetry of the model, as well as to set our notational conventions. ⁷ ⁷
7 In this chapter we follow closely the conventions of Ref. [ 42 ] .
Lee-Wick @xmath theory is defined by the higher-derivative (hd)
Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a complex scalar field, and the Lee-Wick scale @xmath
parameterizes the energy at which the model deviates substantially from
the standard @xmath model. As we will see, @xmath also characterizes the
mass scale of the LW ghosts, so long as @xmath . This Lagrangian is
equivalent to one in which we introduce an “auxiliary” complex scalar
field @xmath (the reason for the “prime” will become clear in what
follows)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Making the change of variable

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

we find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The symplectic rotation ⁸ ⁸ 8 Note the contrast with an orthogonal
rotation, @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

diagonalizes the scalar field mass terms while preserving the symplectic
structure of the kinetic terms [ 42 ] . Hence, we arrive at the
auxiliary-field description of the LW @xmath theory

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that the kinetic term of the @xmath field has the opposite sign to
the usual one, and, hence, the corresponding particle has negative norm
and is the LW ghost field. Furthermore, the mass of the LW ghost @xmath
is, in the limit @xmath , approximately the LW scale @xmath introduced
in Eq. ( 3.1 ).

This theory has an exact global @xmath symmetry, but is not the most
general @xmath symmetric renormalizable Lagrangian that can be built out
of the ordinary field @xmath and the ghost field @xmath charged under
the @xmath symmetry. In particular, the six interaction terms in the
second line can in principle have six independent couplings. However,
the dimension-four terms in Eq. ( 3.7 ) do have an additional @xmath
symmetry, under which the fields transform as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

so long as we also promote @xmath to a spurion field ⁹ ⁹ 9 A spurion is
a (fictitious) field that parametrizes the symmetry breaking. Its
initial symmetry invariant transformation can be used to construct the
invariant operators of the theory. Setting this field equal to its
actual constant value will, subsequently, capture all of the
symmetry-breaking operators. that transforms as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, the Lagrangian of Eq. ( 3.7 ) is the most general
renormalizable and @xmath -symmetric Lagrangian with @xmath -symmetric
dimension-four terms. The different mass terms for @xmath and @xmath
break the @xmath symmetry, but do so only softly. They are also the only
@xmath -preserving soft terms that break @xmath . Thus in the LW @xmath
theory, the global @xmath symmetry of the dimension-four terms implies
that loop corrections can only modify the structure of the mass terms,
introducing a mixing term between @xmath and @xmath with infinite
coefficient. This can always be diagonalized via a symplectic rotation
(of the form given in Eq. ( 3.5 )), which leaves the rest of the
Lagrangian unchanged, except for a redefinition of the coupling. Hence,
Lee-Wick @xmath theory is renormalizable by power-counting.

LW @xmath theory is rather simple, because aside from mass
renormalization the theory is finite. The LW scenario is, however, much
less trivial in LW gauge theories, because of the new momentum-dependent
interactions in the higher-derivative formulation. In this case global
symmetries are important to understand the full structure of the theory.
In the following we will show that Abelian @xmath LW theories have a
softly broken @xmath symmetry, where @xmath is the number of matter
fields, and the remaining @xmath transformation acts on the vector
fields. Since the @xmath breaking is soft, the special relation between
the LW couplings and the ordinary couplings is protected against
radiative corrections.

### 3.3 Global Symmetries of Lee-Wick Scalar QED

Let us now study an @xmath LW theory of scalar electrodynamics. In the
higher-derivative formulation, the Lagrangian is ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 In non-Abelian
theories there can be additional dimension-six higher-derivative
operators, which lead to heavy vector scattering amplitudes growing like
@xmath , where @xmath is the center-of-mass energy [ 73 ] . For @xmath
LW theories see, for example, Ref. [ 74 ] .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The scalar sector is simply that of @xmath theory as shown in Eq. ( 3.1
), and, hence, our analysis of this Lagrangian will parallel the
discussion of Sec. 3.2 . Introducing auxiliary fields, now for both the
vector and the scalar and using the notation described above, we see
that the Lagrangian of Eq. ( 3.11 ) is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

to all orders in perturbation theory. Changing variables from @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath to @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , where

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.14)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and substituting in Eqs. ( 3.12 ) and ( 3.13 ), gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where now the covariant derivative is in terms of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The symplectic rotation of Eq. ( 3.5 ) again diagonalizes the scalar
field mass terms while preserving the symplectic structure of the
kinetic terms [ 42 ] . Since the gauge interactions stem from kinetic
terms, and the @xmath -interaction has a symplectic structure as well,
it follows that Eq. ( 3.5 ) only diagonalizes the mass terms leaving the
rest of the Lagrangian invariant in form. In terms of @xmath and @xmath
the Lagrangian now reads

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.18)
  -- -- -- --------

where we redefine parameters as in Eq. ( 3.8 ).

The Lagrangian of Eq. ( 3.18 ) has an exact @xmath gauge symmetry. In
the limit @xmath the global symmetry is promoted to @xmath , because the
@xmath and @xmath fields can now rotate independently, and only the
diagonal @xmath subgroup is gauged. Thus, we expect loop corrections to
generate @xmath -symmetric terms — some with infinite coefficients —
that will be @xmath -symmetric in the @xmath limit. Eq. ( 3.18 ) is not
the most general renormalizable Lagrangian with this symmetry structure;
for example, the coefficients of the interactions involving @xmath could
be arbitrary. Notice, however, that this Lagrangian can be re-arranged
in the form

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In the limit @xmath , and treating the gauge coupling as a spurion
field, the Lagrangian respects a global @xmath symmetry under which

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

As mentioned in Sec. 3.2 , an additional @xmath global symmetry for the
scalar field arises in the limit @xmath , when @xmath is treated as a
spurion field

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Sec. 3.5 we will argue that this theory is renormalizable, because
the number of superficially divergent amplitudes is finite, and no
operators of dimension greater than four are present in the
auxiliary-field formulation. We may wonder whether radiative corrections
require introducing dimension-four @xmath -breaking counterterms.
However, as in the LW @xmath theory described above, the answer is no:
since @xmath is only softly broken by mass terms, ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 The
renormalizability of massive Abelian gauge theory [ 85 ] — arising from
the coupling of the Abelian gauge boson to a conserved current — insures
that the gauge boson mass term is “soft”. the @xmath -breaking
corrections to the renormalizable terms are finite. Furthermore, Eq. (
3.19 ) is the most general @xmath gauge Lagrangian with dimension-four
@xmath -symmetric terms. Since renormalizability prevents higher
dimensional operators from being generated, we conclude that the form of
the Lagrangian is protected to all orders against radiative corrections,
with the exception of the scalar field mass terms. However, as we have
already seen, these can be diagonalized with a symplectic rotation,
without affecting the rest of the Lagrangian. In the simple example we
have shown there is only one matter field: for an arbitrary number
@xmath of matter fields the global symmetry is promoted to @xmath ,
since each field is acted upon with a different @xmath symmetry
transformation, and the conclusions about renormalizability persist,
mutatis mutandis .

### 3.4 Gauge-Fixing

In order to quantize the electromagnetic field, one must introduce a
gauge-fixing term. To facilitate our subsequent analyses of divergences
and renormalizability, we will find it most convenient to employ
gauge-fixing functions that respect the @xmath symmetry; otherwise it
can be unnecessarily difficult to recognize when significant
cancellations occur. For example, Ref. [ 42 ] employs an @xmath
violating gauge-fixing term @xmath which leads to diagonal propagators
of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Because the @xmath term is only present in the LW photon propagator,
there is no simple cancellation of the badly-behaved terms and the
theory appears to suffer from quadratic divergences and
non-renormalizability at one-loop. The reason that Ref. [ 42 ] found no
quadratic divergences when computing the self-energy amplitudes for a
massless scalar field at zero momentum is that the quadratic divergence
vanishes in the limit @xmath and @xmath , since it is necessarily of the
form @xmath or @xmath . These quadratic divergences are “gauge
artifacts” [ 72 ] in the sense that they contribute to both scalar
wavefunction and mass renormalization in such a way that the pole mass
of the scalar is not quadratically sensitive to the cutoff.

To ensure that the symmetry will be preserved, it is sufficient to write
the gauge-fixing term in terms of @xmath , where @xmath is the
gauge-fixing parameter. If one treats @xmath as a spurion field, the
@xmath transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

clearly leaves @xmath invariant. We will consider two different @xmath
symmetric gauge-fixing scenarios that are each convenient in different
circumstances, and will denote them as ordinary and “no-mixing”
gauge-fixing.

#### 3.4.1 Ordinary Gauge-Fixing

First, let us consider a gauge-fixing function of the typical form
@xmath . In @xmath gauge, this amounts to adding to the Lagrangian the
@xmath symmetric gauge-fixing term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Eq. ( 3.14 ) to rewrite this in terms of @xmath and @xmath , one
obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

With the gauge-fixing included, and after integrating by parts, the
gauge field Lagrangian reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can invert the diagonal terms, in momentum space, to find the partial
propagators

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.26)
  -- -- -- --------

Then the full tree-level photon and LW photon propagators, as well as
the mixed-propagators, can be computed by resumming the Dyson series to
obtain

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.27)
  -- -- -- --------

Notice that only the photon propagator depends on the gauge-fixing
parameter @xmath , since the photon is the only true gauge field in this
theory.

Up to an overall sign, the @xmath propagator is identical to the
unitary-gauge propagator of a massive gauge boson, in a spontaneously
broken gauge theory. In particular, it contains the @xmath term which
would apparently render the theory non-renormalizable and reintroduce
quadratic divergences. However, the photon propagator and the
mixed-propagators contain the same term; when the @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath propagators are all included in loop integrals, the badly behaved
terms cancel, and quadratic divergences are avoided. This can be seen
even more clearly from the form of the @xmath propagator. Recalling that
all gauge interactions depend on @xmath and working in Feynman gauge (
@xmath ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

which decays like @xmath for large values of the momentum.

#### 3.4.2 No-Mixing Gauge-Fixing

Next, we consider the alternative ¹² ¹² 12 In non-Abelian theories this
introduces a @xmath expansion in the gauge-ghost interaction, which
renders it less interesting. In Abelian gauge theories, however, the
ghosts are decoupled. gauge-fixing function @xmath . The resulting
@xmath -symmetric gauge-fixing Lagrangian is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Adding this to the original higher-derivative gauge Lagrangian gives,
after integration by parts,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the sense that solving the equations of motion for @xmath and
inserting the solution in ( 3.31 ) recovers the form of ( 3.30 ).

At this point we can eliminate the @xmath field from Eq. ( 3.31 ) via
Eq. ( 3.14 ); the Lagrangian will include both diagonal and mixing terms
in @xmath and @xmath , and the full tree-level propagators can again be
computed by summing the Dyson series. However, for @xmath the mixing
term vanishes, ¹³ ¹³ 13 As an alternative to the @xmath gauge, one could
replace Eq. ( 3.14 ) with

@xmath

in momentum space. This cancels the off-diagonal terms for any value of
@xmath , at the price of introducing non-local interactions in
coordinate space for @xmath . and we obtain the simpler diagonal
Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

The corresponding propagators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

have no @xmath terms so they are well-behaved at high energies. This is
equally clear if we construct the @xmath propagator,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

which falls off like @xmath in the ultraviolet.

We will now use the two convenient gauges introduced in this section to
explore LW scalar QED at one-loop.

### 3.5 One-Loop Renormalization

We will start by establishing an upper bound on the superficial degree
of divergence of Feynman diagrams in @xmath LW scalar QED. For
specificity, we work in the auxiliary-field formulation and employ the
no-mixing @xmath gauge. Recalling that each loop integral introduces
four powers of momentum in the numerator, each trilinear
gauge-scalar-scalar vertex introduces one power of momentum in the
numerator, and the propagator has two powers of momentum in the
denominator, we arrive at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number of loops, @xmath is the number of propagators
of the @xmath field, and @xmath is the number of trilinear
gauge-scalar-scalar vertices. The number of loop integrals is, in turn,
given by the total number of propagators (each carrying its own
momentum-space integral) minus the total number of vertices (each
carrying a momentum-space delta function) plus one, since an overall
delta function ensures momentum conservation for the external fields.
Therefore, denoting the number of quartic gauge-gauge-scalar-scalar
vertices by @xmath and the number of four-point scalar vertices by
@xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally we can relate the number of lines attached to a vertex to the
number of propagators (each connecting two vertices) and the number of
external lines @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the first relation deals with gauge lines and the second with
scalar lines. Inserting Eqs. ( 3.36 ) and ( 3.37 ) in Eq. ( 3.35 )
yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation tells us that the number of superficially divergent
amplitudes is finite; since no operators of dimension greater than four
are present in the auxiliary-field Lagrangian, we conclude that the
theory is renormalizable.

In order to confirm renormalizability explicitly and to verify how the
@xmath structure of the theory is protected against radiative
corrections, we will now compute the infinite ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 If we were to
compute the finite part as well, we would need to employ the
Cutkosky-Landshoff-Olive-Polkinghorne prescription in order to avoid
unitarity violation [ 70 ] . However, the infinite part is not affected
by this subtlety [ 72 ] . part of the divergent one-particle irreducible
(1PI) diagrams at one-loop. As a way of checking our results and
exploring the detailed symmetry structure, we will compute the diagrams
in both the ordinary and no-mixing gauges, with @xmath . As we shall
see, in the no-mixing gauge only the vacuum polarization and self-energy
amplitudes are infinite, while in the ordinary gauge infinities also
arise in the vertex corrections. Therefore, the way the counterterms
preserve the symplectic structure of the theory is different in the two
gauges.

#### 3.5.1 Counterterms

Radiative corrections renormalize the fields and mix the ordinary fields
with the LW partners. This not only preserves the @xmath gauge symmetry,
but also does not generate any hard breaking of the global @xmath
symmetry. Let us derive the most general relation between bare and
renormalized fields satisfying these requirements. We will employ the
standard QED nomenclature for the counterterms by using the subscript
“3” for the photon wavefunction renormalization, “2” for the matter
field wavefunction renormalization, and “1” for gauge vertex
renormalization.

For the vector fields we have in general

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Gauge invariance requires @xmath , lest a photon mass term be generated.
Preserving the form of the symplectic combination @xmath demands

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally, substituting in the kinetic term Lagrangian and imposing the
@xmath symmetry on the counterterms gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, the relation between bare and renormalized vector fields
consistent with the symmetries of the theory is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly, in order to preserve the @xmath symmetry on the scalar
fields, the relation between bare and renormalized scalar fields must be
a symplectic rotation times a wavefunction renormalization

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting Eqs. ( 3.39 ) and ( 3.40 ) in the Lagrangian, Eq. ( 3.19 ),
and denoting the gauge-scalar-scalar vertex and
gauge-gauge-scalar-scalar vertex renormalizations, respectively, by
@xmath and @xmath leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the counterterm (ct) Lagrangian is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

The renormalized trilinear and quartic gauge-scalar couplings are
related to the bare couplings by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where gauge invariance guarantees

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

to all orders in perturbation theory. The renormalized mass parameters
are related to the bare masses by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

whereas the renormalized and bare four-scalar couplings are related by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

The vector field kinetic terms in the counterterm Lagrangian are now
mixed. However, it can be easily shown that these are still invariant
under an @xmath transformation, provided that @xmath is promoted to a
spurion field.

We shall now prove that this set of counterterms is sufficient to absorb
all infinities at one-loop. In the process, the @xmath global symmetry
leads to cancellation of the quadratic divergences in the scalar field
self-energy amplitudes. In order to simplify our notation we will drop
the subscript @xmath everywhere, but it should be kept in mind that all
fields and parameters involved in the calculations below are the
renormalized ones.

#### 3.5.2 Vacuum Polarization Amplitudes

We begin our examination of the infinite part of the divergent 1PI
diagrams of LW scalar QED by computing the one-loop contributions to the
vacuum polarization amplitudes for the vector fields. The relevant
diagrams are illustrated in Fig. 3.1 , where each external field is
either a photon or a LW photon. Since no gauge field propagators are
involved in the one-loop diagrams, the results are manifestly gauge
independent. We find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, in dimensional regularization,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath as usual. The explicit factor of two arises from the
presence of the LW scalar loops, and the remaining factor is the
ordinary scalar QED contribution. Since @xmath contains no mass term, we
have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

The relevant counterterm contributions from the field-strength terms in
Eq. ( 3.42 ) are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

which are precisely of the form required to cancel the infinities in
Eq. ( 3.47 ). In the minimal subtraction scheme we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 3.5.3 Self-Energy Amplitudes

We will calculate the one-loop contribution to the self-energy amplitude
@xmath for a scalar field in the no-mixing @xmath gauge and then will
repeat the calculation in the ordinary @xmath gauge as a check. The
relevant diagrams for the @xmath field, in the no-mixing gauge, are
shown in Fig. 3.2 . Those for the @xmath field are obtained by replacing
@xmath with @xmath ; given the form of the Lagrangian ( 3.19 ), we
expect that the contributions of the diagrams involving internal gauge
bosons will change sign. The mixed self-energy amplitude @xmath
explicitly breaks the @xmath symmetry to diagonal @xmath , and must
vanish in the limit @xmath ; therefore, only the diagrams with scalar
loops will contribute to @xmath .

We begin our calculation of @xmath in the no-mixing @xmath gauge by
considering potential quadratic divergences. First, we examine the
gauge-scalar diagrams on the top and middle lines of Fig. 3.2 . The
first two diagrams correspond to the gauge-sector contribution in
ordinary scalar QED, which is quadratically divergent. That quadratic
divergence is canceled by the @xmath diagrams, as we now demonstrate.
The @xmath symmetry acting on the vector fields guarantees that: (i) the
gauge-gauge-scalar and gauge-gauge-scalar-scalar couplings involving the
photon and LW photon are identical (up to an unphysical minus sign in
the gauge-gauge-scalar coupling ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 This minus sign comes from the
@xmath dependence. However, we can always redefine @xmath to @xmath ,
which turns @xmath into @xmath . This, for example, is the convention
adopted in Ref. [ 42 ] . ), and (ii) the LW photon propagator has a
minus sign, relative to the photon propagator. As a result, each diagram
with an internal LW photon is opposite in sign to its counterpart with
an ordinary photon, and in the UV (where the LW photon mass becomes
irrelevant), there is an exact cancellation of the quadratic
divergences. Likewise, moving to the diagrams in the bottom row of Fig.
3.2 , we recognize that the first diagram is familiar from the ordinary
@xmath theory, and is of course quadratically divergent. The second
diagram exactly cancels the quadratic divergence, as the @xmath symmetry
acting on the scalar fields guarantees the equality of the @xmath and
@xmath couplings, as well as the negative sign in the @xmath propagator.

Having established that @xmath is free from quadratic divergences, we
may proceed to complete the one-loop calculation in no-mixing @xmath
gauge. In dimensional regularization, near @xmath , the result is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that there is mass renormalization but not wavefunction
renormalization, as the @xmath coefficients are @xmath independent in
this gauge. Moreover, in the limit of exact @xmath symmetry (where
@xmath and @xmath ) the self-energy amplitudes vanish exactly in the
no-mixing @xmath gauge, because the LW and ordinary propagators are then
of equal magnitude and opposite sign. The theory is still not finite,
because, for example, the vacuum polarization amplitudes do not vanish.

From Eq. ( 3.42 ) we find that the relevant counterterm contributions
are of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

and in the minimal subtraction scheme, we conclude

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting these results into Eq. ( 3.45 ) yields the following
expression for the mixing angle

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that this vanishes in the @xmath limit, as expected: for @xmath the
theory acquires a global @xmath symmetry (with the diagonal @xmath
gauged) under which @xmath and @xmath rotate independently. This
prevents @xmath - @xmath mixing terms from being radiatively generated.

The calculation in the ordinary @xmath gauge proceeds somewhat
differently because mixed gauge propagators ( @xmath ) are present. Once
their effects are included, the quadratic divergences still cancel among
the diagrams involving internal gauge propagators. A direct computation
of the self-energy functions then yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this gauge, both mass renormalization and wavefunction
renormalization are present. The counterterm contributions are, of
course, still given by Eq. ( 3.53 ), which have the right form to cancel
both the @xmath -dependent and @xmath -independent infinities in Eq. (
3.57 ). In minimal subtraction scheme, one obtains the relationships

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

which lead to the same expression for the mixing angle as in the
no-mixing @xmath gauge, Eq. ( 3.56 ). However, this time the
wavefunction renormalization counterterm is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

which differs from the result in the other gauge.

Since universality of the @xmath gauge coupling insures that the scalar
field wavefunction renormalizations are always exactly compensated by
the vertex corrections, as Eq. ( 3.44 ) shows explicitly, all that
remains to show at one-loop, is the cancellation of all @xmath breaking
amplitudes in the @xmath sector.

#### 3.5.4 @xmath Vertex

There are many diagrams contributing to the 1PI amplitudes with four
external scalar fields. As with the self-energy amplitudes, there are
significant @xmath cancellations involved. However, now that these are
well understood, we can reduce the number of diagrams by using the
hat-field propagators on all internal lines: the @xmath propagator of
Eq. ( 3.28 ) when working in the ordinary @xmath gauge, the @xmath
propagator of Eq. ( 3.34 ) when employing the no-mixing @xmath gauge,
and the gauge-independent @xmath propagator which is constructed by
summing the simple propagators of the @xmath and @xmath fields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

When we use the hat-field propagators, the expected cancellations occur
within single diagrams, and are due to denominators with higher powers
of loop momenta.

Let us denote by @xmath the one-loop contribution to the 1PI amplitude
with external scalar fields @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath and
start by working within the no-mixing @xmath gauge. As a concrete
example, we will consider @xmath , for which the relevant diagrams are
those shown in Fig. 3.3 . The first two diagrams are entirely due to the
@xmath interaction, and involve only internal @xmath fields. These
diagrams are, thus, finite by power counting, since the @xmath
propagator decays like @xmath , at large momenta, and the vertices are
momentum independent. The remaining two diagrams of the first row, as
well as the diagrams of the second and third row, are entirely due to
the gauge-scalar interactions, which depend on @xmath . Although the
trilinear gauge-scalar-scalar vertices are momentum-dependent, in the
no-mixing gauge all these diagrams are finite by power counting.
Finally, there are the diagrams in the last two rows, which involve both
@xmath and gauge vertices. Once again these are finite by power counting
in the no-mixing gauge. The same reasoning holds for all of the @xmath
symmetric amplitudes; for the @xmath violating amplitudes @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath , the only difference is that the diagrams involving
only gauge-scalar vertices do not contribute. We conclude that the
amplitudes are purely finite in the no-mixing gauge and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

The situation is different in the ordinary @xmath gauge. If we, again,
start by considering @xmath , we still conclude that the first two
diagrams, which involve only the @xmath interaction, and involve only
internal @xmath fields are finite. The ten diagrams involving only
gauge-scalar interactions are another story. Power counting now predicts
a logarithmic divergence for each of these diagrams, because of the
@xmath term in the @xmath propagator. However, we expect that these
divergences must cancel against one another for symmetry reasons. Recall
that the @xmath violating amplitudes @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
receive no contribution at all from the diagrams with only gauge
vertices. Then those diagrams cannot make an infinite contribution to
the @xmath -symmetric amplitudes like @xmath either, since this would
correspond to a hard breaking of the @xmath symmetry acting on the
scalar fields. Explicit calculation confirms that the infinities arising
from the diagrams with an even number of gauge vertices (last two
diagrams of the first row, and diagrams of the third row) are precisely
cancelled by the infinities from the diagrams with an odd number of
gauge vertices (diagrams of the second row). Therefore, the only
possible infinite contribution to @xmath and the other 1PI amplitudes in
this gauge must arise from the diagrams in the last two rows, which
involve both @xmath and gauge-scalar vertices. Note that this implies
that in the @xmath limit all amplitudes with four external scalar fields
are finite.

Computing the @xmath vertex correction diagrams from the last two rows
of Fig. 3.3 in ordinary @xmath gauge yields the following infinite
contributions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

At the same time, Eq. ( 3.42 ) provides the counterterm contributions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

which are precisely of the form required to cancel the infinities in
Eq. ( 3.62 ). In the minimal subtraction scheme we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 3.5.5 Running of @xmath and @xmath

We will now determine the @xmath functions of the LW theory and compare
them with the results for ordinary scalar QED. To lowest order, the
@xmath functions for the electromagnetic and @xmath couplings in the
LW theory are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the scale we must introduce in dimensional
regularization to make the log arguments dimensionless, and @xmath in
the counterterms is interpreted as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since we are employing a mass-independent renormalization scheme, below
the LW mass scale ( @xmath ) we must impose the decoupling theorem and
integrate out the LW fields. Since what remains is identical to ordinary
scalar QED, the counterterms are

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.68)
  -- -- -- --------

These, in turn, yield the low-energy leading order @xmath functions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

that are characteristic of ordinary scalar QED.

Above the LW mass scale, the appropriate counterterms are those we have
derived for the full LW theory. For the vector coupling, the counterterm
value in Eq. ( 3.51 ) leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is twice the ordinary scalar QED @xmath function. In other words,
the contribution from loops of the LW scalar is identical to that from
loops of the ordinary scalar; since there are no internal gauge fields,
the calculation is manifestly gauge invariant.

For the @xmath function above the LW scale we consider the no-mixing and
ordinary gauges separately. If we employ the no-mixing @xmath gauge,
then Eqs. ( 3.54 ) and ( 3.61 ) tell us that @xmath and @xmath are each
separately zero. In this gauge the LW scalar and vector fields make
contributions to the counterterms that are equal and opposite to those
of the ordinary scalar and vector fields. As a result, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the ordinary @xmath gauge, the values of @xmath are @xmath are
non-zero, as shown, respectively, by Eqs. ( 3.59 ) and ( 3.65 );
however, the final result for @xmath is the same, which provides a
useful check of our calculations.

### 3.6 Conclusion & Discussion

In this chapter we have discussed the global symmetries and the
renormalizability of Lee-Wick scalar QED. The combination of @xmath
global symmetry, @xmath gauge invariance, and an @xmath invariant
gauge-fixing condition allows us to show directly in the auxiliary-field
formalism that the number of superficially divergent amplitudes in a
LW Abelian gauge theory is finite. To illustrate the renormalizability
of the theory, we have explicitly carried out the one-loop
renormalization program in LW scalar QED and demonstrated how the
counterterms are constrained by the joint conditions of gauge and @xmath
invariance. We have also computed the one-loop beta functions in
LW scalar QED.

It would be interesting to generalize the discussion presented here to
the case of non-Abelian gauge theories. However, this is not immediately
possible. Notice that the @xmath transformation of Eq. ( 3.20 ) mixes a
gauge field, @xmath , with a non-gauge vector field, @xmath . In an
Abelian theory, we have the freedom to promote @xmath to a gauge field
for two reasons. First, the requirement that @xmath transform like a
gauge field gives us the freedom to choose which field should bear the
transformation. Second, all gauge interactions depend solely on @xmath ,
which is an @xmath invariant. That these conditions are satisfied in
Abelian gauge theory is perhaps not surprising, given that a massive
Abelian gauge theory is renormalizable [ 85 ] .

In a non-Abelian gauge theory, however, interactions do not depend
solely on @xmath , and the @xmath symmetry is violated by the gauge
interactions themselves. To see this consider the generalization of the
gauge kinetic energy terms of Eq. ( 3.13 ) to non-Abelian interactions,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

An @xmath transformation on the hat and tilde fields, and the gauge
coupling, reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

Applying this to @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus the @xmath symmetry associated to the vector fields is explicitly
broken by dimension-four gauge boson self-interactions.

In principle we would, therefore, expect the @xmath breaking to
propagate to other sectors of the theory, and spoil the special
relations between couplings that guarantee the cancellation of quadratic
divergences. However, both power counting in the higher-derivative
formulation [ 42 ] and the high energy behavior of massive vector meson
scattering in Lee-Wick gauge theory [ 73 ] suggest that the number of
superficially divergent diagrams remains finite and that non-Abelian
LW gauge theory may be renormalizable. A more thorough understanding of
non-Abelian LW gauge theories is, therefore, necessary in order to
extend the results demonstrated here for Abelian theories.

As we have seen, Part I of this Thesis has focused on an extension of
the electroweak sector of the SM in which new (heavy) fermions, among
other degrees of freedom, are introduced in order to tackle and resolve
the Hierarchy Problem, canceling the quadratic divergences associated
with the SM Higgs boson’s mass. We investigated in detail some of the
interesting and important theoretical aspects of this BSM theory, and
analyzed how current experimental data constrains the new heavy degrees
of freedom. In Part II of this Thesis, we proceed to discuss a different
type of BSM theory and some of its thought-provoking field theoretical
issues. This type of BSM theory would form an extension to the strong
sector of the SM, one in which new (heavy) colored gauge bosons (rather
than new fermions) appear. Once more, we will carefully explore both the
formal and phenomenological aspects of this BSM theory in detail.

PART II

## Chapter 4 Production of Massive Color-Octet Vector Bosons at
Next-to-Leading Order111This chapter is based on the paper first
published in [3].

  “ Everything should be made as simple as possible, but no simpler! ”

  —Albert Einstein (1879 – 1955)

### 4.1 Introduction \lettrine

[lines=1]Massive color-octet vector bosons are present in theories which
constitute an extension of the QCD sector of the Standard Model (SM). As
explained in Chapter 1, since late 1980s it has been of theoretical and
phenomenological interest to extend the SM strong sector in order to
accommodate, among others, theories in which the electroweak symmetry
breaking is induced by strong dynamics, where a new type of
strongly-coupled gauge interaction forms composite Higgs out of colored
fermions. Just as in the case of ordinary QCD, one may apply
perturbation theory to study this class of theories at high energies.
This may be again achieved through an asymptotic expansion of the theory
in terms of the strong coupling, @xmath , ³ ³ 3 In previous chapters, we
defined @xmath to indicate the strong coupling. In this chapter,
however, we employ the more conventional term @xmath . Both conventions
are interchangeably used in the literature. since the coupling decreases
in strength as a function of increasing energy, reflecting the
asymptotically free nature of the theory.

The analyses of the production of the massive colored gauge bosons to
date, however, capture only the leading order (LO) in perturbation
theory. In this chapter, we extend the production analysis to the
next-to-leading order (NLO) in perturbation theory, thereby, improving
dramatically upon the previous LO studies, in addition to predicting new
kinematic variables important for comparison with experiments.

Massive color-octet vector bosons are predicted in a variety of models,
including axigluon models [ 5 , 44 ] , topcolor models [ 45 ] - [ 48 ] ,
technicolor models with colored technifermions [ 86 , p. 352-382] ,
flavor-universal [ 49 , 50 ] and chiral [ 51 ] coloron models, and
extra-dimensional models with KK gluons [ 7 , 52 ] . These states have
also recently been considered as a potential source [ 87 , 88 ] of the
top quark forward-backward asymmetry observed by the CDF collaboration [
89 , 90 ] . ⁴ ⁴ 4 Note, however, that the observation of a top quark
forward-backward asymmetry is not confirmed by results of the D0
collaboration [ 91 , 92 ] . Furthermore, if the observed top quark
forward-backward asymmetry is confirmed, explaining this using
color-octet vector bosons is problematic given the tight constraints on
flavor-changing neutral-currents [ 93 ] . Recent searches for resonances
in the dijet mass spectrum at the LHC imply that the lower bound on such
a boson is now 2-3 TeV [ 4 ] , [ 94 ] - [ 96 ] . ⁵ ⁵ 5 At least for the
fermion charge assignments considered, and in the case where the
resonance is narrow compared to the djiet mass resolution of the
detector. If there are color-octet vector bosons associated with the
electroweak symmetry breaking sector, as suggested by several of the
models discussed above, their presence should be uncovered by the LHC in
the future.

In this chapter ⁶ ⁶ 6 Throughout this chapter, the timeline for the
depicted Feynman diagrams is from bottom to top, with exception of the
fermion self-energy (Fig. 4.3 ) and the gauge boson VPA (Figs. 4.8 -
4.10 ) diagrams where it is from left to right. we report the first
complete calculation ⁷ ⁷ 7 As this work was being completed, a
computation of the NLO virtual corrections of top quark pair production
via a heavy color-octet vector boson has been reported in [ 97 ] . That
work is complementary to ours in that it does not employ the narrow
width approximation for the color-octet boson, but neither does it
include real gluon or quark emission. After this work was submitted for
publication, real emission has also been considered by those authors [
98 ] . of QCD corrections to the production of a massive color-octet
vector boson. We will refer to these massive color-octet vector states
generically as “colorons”. We treat the coloron as an asymptotic state
in our calculations, employing the narrow width approximation. Our
next-to-leading order (NLO) calculation includes both virtual
corrections, as well as corrections arising from the emission of gluons
and light quarks, and we demonstrate the reduction in
factorization-scale dependence relative to the leading order (LO)
approximation used in previous hadron collider studies.

The QCD NLO calculation of coloron production reported here differs
substantially from the classic computation of the QCD NLO corrections to
Drell-Yan production [ 99 ] , because the final state is colored. In
particular, Drell-Yan production involves the coupling of the light
quarks to a conserved (or, in the case of @xmath - or @xmath -mediated
processes, conserved up to quark masses) current. Hence, in computing
the NLO corrections to Drell-Yan processes, the current conservation
Ward identity insures a cancellation between the UV divergences arising
from virtual quark wavefunction and vertex corrections. These
cancellations do not occur in the calculation of the NLO corrections to
coloron production, because of vertex corrections involving the
three-point non-Abelian colored-boson vertices. As we describe in
Section 4.4 , we use the “pinch technique” [ 100 ] to divide the
problematic non-Abelian vertex corrections into two pieces — a “pinched”
piece whose UV divergence contributes to the renormalization of the
coloron wavefunction (and, ultimately, a renormalization of the coloron
coupling) and an “unpinched” part whose UV divergence (when combined
with an Abelian vertex correction) cancels against the UV divergences in
quark wavefunction renormalization. As we show, once the UV divergences
are properly accounted for, the IR divergences cancel in the usual way:
the IR divergences arising from real quark or gluon emission cancel
against the IR divergences in the virtual corrections, and the IR
divergences arising from collinear quarks or gluons in the initial state
are absorbed in the properly defined parton distribution functions
(PDFs).

We compute the gauge-, quark-, and self-couplings of the coloron from a
theory with an extended @xmath gauge structure, where @xmath is
identified with QCD. The calculation yields the minimal coupling of
gluons to colorons, and allows for the most general couplings of quarks
to colorons. The cancellation of UV divergences described above,
however, occurs only when the three-coloron coupling has the strength
that arises from the dimension-four gauge-kinetic energy terms of the
extended @xmath gauge structure. Our computation applies directly to any
theory with this structure, i.e. to massive color-octet vector bosons in
axigluon, topcolor, and coloron models. In general, the triple coupling
of KK gluons in extra-dimensional models, or of colored technivector
mesons in technicolor models, will not follow this pattern. However, our
results apply approximately to these cases as well, to the extent that
the @xmath model is a good low-energy effective theory for the
extra-dimensional model (a “two-site” approximation in the language of
deconstruction [ 101 , 102 ] ) or for the technicolor theory (a hidden
local symmetry approximation for the effective technivector meson sector
[ 103 , 104 ] ). ⁸ ⁸ 8 Arbitary three- and four-point coloron
self-couplings can be incorporated in the @xmath by adding @xmath terms
in the effective chiral Lagrangian of Eq. ( 4.1 ), and deviations in
these couplings are, therefore, of @xmath , where @xmath is the cutoff
of the effective coloron theory. The three- and four-point
self-couplings, however, are neither relevant to the leading order
@xmath , nor to the IR divergent NLO coloron production contributions,
and, therefore, are numerically insignificant.

This chapter is structured as follows: in Sec. 4.2 we introduce the
formalism of a minimal vector coloron theory, deriving all the Feynman
rules, and setting the stage for the subsequent calculations. In Sec.
4.3 we review the leading order computations of the amplitude and cross
section for coloron production due to @xmath pair annihilation. Sec. 4.4
describes in detail the one-loop virtual corrections to the @xmath pair
annihilation process, elaborating on the contributions from the quark
self-energy, coloron-coloron and gluon-coloron mixed vacuum polarization
amplitudes, and the vertex corrections. We employ the pinch technique [
100 ] , described above, in order to consistently treat the UV
divergences, and obtain a gauge-invariant, mutually independent set of
counterterms. The one-loop cross section is constructed, and the IR
singularities of the virtual correction properly extracted. In Sec. 4.5
we consider the real emission processes, consisting of real (soft and
collinear) gluon and (collinear) quark emission. In Sec. 4.6 we put all
the pieces together, exhibiting the explicit cancellation of the IR
divergences among the real and virtual corrections, and demonstrate the
renormalization of the quark and gluon PDFs. We give a finite expression
for the NLO-corrected production cross section. Finally, in Sec. 4.7 we
plot the cross section, demonstrate that the QCD NLO corrections are as
large as 30%, and show that the residual factorization-scale dependence
is at the 2% level. We also calculate the @xmath -factor and the @xmath
spectrum for coloron production, since these are valuable for comparison
with experiment. Appendix B contains all the Feynman rules of the
coloron theory.

### 4.2 A Minimal Theory for Spin-One Colorons

In this section, we introduce colorons ⁹ ⁹ 9 Colorons can, in principle,
be introduced as matter fields in the adjoint of @xmath . This approach,
however, would lead to an early violation of tree-level unitarity, as
the scattering amplitude of longitudinally polarized massive spin-one
bosons can grow, by power counting, like @xmath , where @xmath is the
center-of-mass (CM) energy. The only way to avoid this is to “promote”
the coloron to the status of gauge field of a spontaneously broken gauge
theory: then the special relation between trilinear and quartic gauge
couplings will lead to an exact cancellation of the terms growing like
@xmath , as happens in the standard electroweak theory. as the massive
color-octet bosons arising when an extended @xmath gauge symmetry is
spontaneously broken by a non-linear sigma model field to its diagonal
subgroup, @xmath , which we identify with QCD. The symmetry breaking
results in a low-energy spectrum that includes both a massless spin-one
color-octet of gauge bosons, the gluons, and a massive spin-one
color-octet of gauge bosons, the colorons.

In detail, we replace the QCD Lagrangian with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is the non-linear sigma field breaking @xmath to @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the Nambu-Goldstone bosons “eaten” by the coloron,
@xmath is corresponding “decay-constant”, and @xmath are the Gell-Mann
matrices, normalized as @xmath . The @xmath field transforms as the
bi-fundamental of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath are the parameters of the @xmath transformations. This
leads to the covariant derivative

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the gauge coupling of the @xmath gauge group. Up to a
total divergence, the quadratic terms in the Lagrangian are

  -- -- -- -------
           (4.5)
  -- -- -- -------

where a sum over @xmath in the gauge kinetic terms is implied.

The gauge-Goldstone mixing term can be removed, up to a total
divergence, by choosing the gauge-fixing Lagrangian to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the gauge-fixing functions are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Faddeev-Popov ghost Lagrangian is obtained by taking the functional
determinant of @xmath . This leads to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the @xmath structure constants, and a sum over @xmath
is implied. Notice that we have included only the inhomogeneous terms in
the transformation of the eaten Goldstone boson, whence, the unspecified
@xmath term in the ghost Lagrangian which are unnecessary for our
computation. Up to a total divergence, the quadratic Lagrangian now
reads

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.9)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Aside from a factor of the gauge-fixing parameter @xmath , the gauge and
ghost fields share the same mass matrix, as expected. This is
diagonalized by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Eq. ( 4.10 ) @xmath is the gluon field and @xmath is the coloron
field, whereas @xmath and @xmath are the corresponding ghost fields.
Inserting these expressions in Eq. ( 4.9 ) gives, for the coloron mass,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the @xmath coupling,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The gluon ghost is massless, whereas both the coloron ghost and the
eaten Goldstone boson have mass @xmath . The interaction vertices and
the corresponding Feynman rules can be found in Appendix B .

We will leave the quark charge assignments under @xmath arbitrary, for
greater generality. In the mass eigenstate basis we write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the helicity projection operators,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is a flavor index. ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 Here we work in the broken
electroweak phase, and only employ fermion mass eigenstates. The
coupling to the gluon is dictated by charge universality, whereas the
@xmath and @xmath couplings to the coloron depend on the original charge
assignments of the quarks. For example, if both left-handed and
right-handed quarks are only charged under @xmath , then @xmath , while
the axigluon [ 5 , 44 ] corresponds to @xmath (i.e. @xmath ). In
general, @xmath and @xmath can each take on the values @xmath or @xmath
in any specific model, ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 It is possible to generalize this setup
to non-universal charge assignments: in this case flavor-diagonal chiral
couplings to the coloron would depend on a generation index.
Flavor-changing couplings are strongly constrained [ 93 ] .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 4.3 LO Coloron Production

The dominant channel for coloron production at a hadron collider is
given by the tree-level diagram of Fig. 4.1 , in which a @xmath pair
annihilates into a coloron. The tree-level diagram with gluon-gluon
fusion into a coloron does not exist in the Lagrangian of Eq. ( 4.1 ):
in general there are no dimension-four terms with two gauge bosons of an
unbroken symmetry and a spin-one field charged under the same symmetry.
We use the narrow width approximation for the coloron, take the quarks
to be on-shell, and set their masses to zero: ¹² ¹² 12 Note that the
Yukawa couplings of quarks to the eaten Goldstone bosons are
proportional to the quark masses, and hence vanish in the zero-mass
limit. this is certainly a good approximation, as current experimental
bounds [ 4 ] , [ 94 ] - [ 96 ] constrain the coloron mass to be in the
TeV range.

The leading order (LO) amplitude corresponding to the diagram of Fig.
4.1 is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the superscripts @xmath and @xmath denote quark spin projections,
@xmath is the coloron polarization, and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

In @xmath dimensions, the squared amplitude averaged over initial spins
and colors, and summed over final polarization states, is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are respectively the dimension and Casimir of
the fundamental representation of @xmath , and @xmath is the partonic
center-of-mass (CM) energy. This gives the LO cross section [ 44 ] for
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The full LO cross section for @xmath is given by the convolution of the
LO partonic cross section @xmath with the parton distribution functions
(PDFs) for the quarks within the protons, and a sum over all quark
flavors,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the PDF of parton @xmath , and @xmath the momentum
fraction of the corresponding parton. Taking the collision axis to be
the 3-axis, the four-momenta of the partons are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the CM energy of the colliding hadrons. This gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 4.4 NLO Coloron Production: Virtual Corrections

In this section we compute the next-to-leading order (NLO) virtual QCD
corrections to the @xmath amplitude. These include one-loop wavefunction
and vertex corrections, which we choose to compute in ’t Hooft-Feynman
gauge, @xmath . The non-Abelian vertex corrections are computed by
employing the pinch technique : this allows us to obtain QED-like Ward
identities, and absorb all UV infinities in the renormalization of the
gauge field propagators. After inclusion of the counterterms, the
virtual corrections are UV-finite, yet IR infinite. In Sec. 4.6 we show
that the IR divergences cancel once the real corrections, corresponding
to the emission of soft and collinear gluons and quarks, are included in
the calculation of the inclusive production cross section. Our loop
integrals are computed in dimensional regularization, with @xmath
dimensions. We first regulate the IR divergences by giving the gluon a
small mass ( @xmath ): in this way all infinities are in the UV, and
regularization requires @xmath . After all of the UV infinities are
removed, by cancellation and inclusion of the counterterms, we let the
gluon mass approach zero. This will make the virtual corrections IR
divergent, with the infinities being regulated by taking @xmath .

Since the quark couplings to the coloron are chiral, in general, we need
a prescription for treating @xmath in @xmath . Here we take @xmath to
always anticommute with @xmath . Choosing an alternative prescription,
such as ’t Hooft-Veltman in which @xmath anticommutes with @xmath for
@xmath and commutes for other values of @xmath , would lead to a cross
section for @xmath which differs from ours by only a finite
renormalization of the coupling(s).

The general structure of the @xmath amplitude, illustrated in Fig. 4.2 ,
is

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.26)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath ( @xmath ) is the one-particle irreducible (1PI)
quark-quark-coloron (quark-quark-gluon) vertex and @xmath is the
coefficient of @xmath in the gluon-coloron vacuum polarization mixing
amplitude (VPA). The factors @xmath and @xmath are, respectively, the
residues of the full quark and coloron propagators at the mass pole;
they are obtained from the quark self-energy amplitude, @xmath , and the
coefficient of @xmath in the coloron-coloron VPA, @xmath , as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the prime denotes a derivative with respect to the argument, and
@xmath is the coloron’s physical mass. To lowest order, @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , and @xmath ; inserting these expressions in Eq. ( 4.26 )
recovers the tree-level amplitude of Eq. ( 4.17 ).

#### 4.4.1 Quark Self-Energy

The NLO quark self-energy correction to the @xmath amplitude is found,
from Eqs. ( 4.26 ) and ( 4.27 ), to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

At one-loop, the @xmath amplitude is given by the diagrams of Fig. 4.3 .
These lead to the expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Euler Gamma-function evaluated at infinitesimal
@xmath , and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The parameter @xmath is the mass scale introduced by the loop integral
in @xmath dimensions, and @xmath is the positive infinitesimal parameter
giving the appropriate prescription for computing the integral in
momentum space. As previously anticipated, we have introduced a small
gluon mass, @xmath , in order to regulate the IR divergences and isolate
the UV infinities: with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath contain only UV
divergences. Inserting Eq. ( 4.30 ) in Eq. ( 4.29 ) gives

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.32)
  -- -- -- --------

The amplitude of Eq. ( 4.28 ) becomes

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.33)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath is given by Eq. ( 4.17 ), and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

For later convenience we have traded the @xmath factor, in Eq. ( 4.32 ),
for an integral over @xmath : this will allow us to directly add the
self-energy correction to the vertex correction and explicitly show the
cancellation of the UV divergences.

#### 4.4.2 Abelian Vertex Corrections

The one-loop Abelian vertex correction to the @xmath amplitude is given
by the diagrams of Fig. 4.4 . These lead to the amplitude

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.35)
                          
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Casimir of the adjoint representation, and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Once again, we have included a small gluon mass @xmath in order to
regulate the IR divergences.

#### 4.4.3 Non-Abelian Vertex Corrections a la Pinch-Technique:
Unpinched Diagrams

The non-Abelian vertex corrections are given by the diagrams of Fig. 4.5
. When added to the overall Abelian vertex correction, Eq. ( 4.35 ),
these give the one-loop total vertex correction to @xmath . Unlike in
QED, the UV divergences in the vertex correction do not cancel the UV
divergences arising from the self-energy amplitudes. The reason for this
is that the QED Ward identity @xmath is now replaced by its non-Abelian
counterpart @xmath , which does not imply the equality of vertex and
quark-wavefunction renormalization constants. It is possible, though, to
recover QED-like Ward identities for the currents @xmath by employing
the pinch technique. This consists of breaking up the gauge boson
internal momenta of a Feynman diagram into “pinching” and “non-pinching”
pieces. The pinching momenta are those which cancel some internal
propagators, leading to a simpler diagram with the external-momentum
structure of a propagator. The non-pinching momenta will instead give
overall amplitudes satisfying QED-like Ward identities. A formal proof
of these statements, for an arbitrary non-Abelian gauge theory, can be
found in the review of Ref. [ 100 ] (and references therein).

In our vertex computation the pinch technique works as follows. The
non-Abelian vertex structure in each of the diagrams in Fig. 4.5 is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can break this into two parts,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.39)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Unlike @xmath , the @xmath vertex satisfies a QED-like Ward identity for
the @xmath and @xmath amplitudes,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

As shown below, when @xmath is used to compute the integral in momentum
space (instead of @xmath ), its UV divergences, added to the UV
divergences of the Abelian vertex corrections, exactly cancel the UV
divergences of the quark self-energy amplitudes. As mentioned above,
this occurs because a QED-like Ward identity for @xmath holds, as one
can prove by using the QED-like Ward identity for the @xmath and @xmath
amplitudes given in Eq. ( 4.41 ). The three diagrams which correspond to
using @xmath instead of @xmath are symbolically denoted with a black
disk over the non-Abelian vertex, and are shown in Fig. 4.6 . These lead
to the following contribution to the @xmath amplitude

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.42)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to obtain Eq. ( 4.42 ) we have used the equations of motion for
the external spinors, together with the relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

which are true for any charge assignment of the quarks. As anticipated,
@xmath is free of UV divergences, as manifestly shown by adding together
Eqs. ( 4.33 ), ( 4.35 ) and ( 4.42 ). This part of the amplitude is,
however, IR divergent in the limit of zero gluon mass. Setting @xmath
and @xmath gives

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.45)
  -- -- -- --------

Of course we still need to include the contribution from @xmath (of
Eq. ( 4.40 )) in the full non-Abelian vertex correction. This contains
the pinching momenta: the action of @xmath and @xmath on the external
spinors gives zero, and the remaining piece cancels the internal fermion
propagator in the diagram. Thus, the internal fermion line in each
diagram is pinched away, leaving an effective diagram with a four-point
coupling between fermions and gauge bosons as shown in Fig. 4.7 . The UV
divergences of the pinched diagrams have the same group- and
momentum-structure as those of the VPAs, and can be absorbed in the
counterterms for the gauge field propagators. In order to see this
clearly, we will now consider the form of the “true” propagator
corrections to the @xmath amplitude in the following subsection.

#### 4.4.4 Form of the Vacuum Polarization Amplitudes

The NLO corrections to the @xmath amplitude due to the VPAs are found,
from Eqs. ( 4.26 ) and ( 4.27 ), to have the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to obtain the second term of Eq. ( 4.46 ), we have replaced
@xmath with its LO component @xmath . Notice also that at this order we
can swap @xmath for @xmath .

At one-loop, @xmath is given by the diagrams of Figs. 4.8 and 4.10 , in
which the gluon ghost is represented by dotted lines, the coloron ghost
by a sequence of filled circles, and the eaten Goldstone bosons are
represented by dashed lines. There are poles at @xmath proportional to
both @xmath and @xmath . The latter correspond to quadratic divergences
(renormalizing the coloron mass scale @xmath ), whereas the former can
only be logarithmic by dimensional analysis (renormalizing the coloron
field). ¹³ ¹³ 13 This situation parallels the renormalization of the
electroweak chiral lagrangian [ 105 , 106 ] . The momentum-dependent
part of the full coloron-coloron VPA is not transverse, as the
coefficients of the @xmath and @xmath terms are different. However, we
have explicitly verified that the infinite part is transverse: this is
necessary, because the corresponding Lagrangian counterterms are
transverse. For small values of @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.49)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

where our results depend only on the coefficient of @xmath , the
quantity @xmath is the number of quark flavors in the loop (see Fig.
4.10 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the Euler-Mascheroni constant. The @xmath functions in
Eq. ( 4.49 ) are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that the coloron-coloron VPA of Eq. ( 4.49 ) is not IR divergent
in the limit @xmath , since there are no contributions with only
massless (gluon) states. However, what enters in Eq. ( 4.46 ) is the
derivative of @xmath (see Eq. ( 4.47 )), which is IR divergent in the
limit @xmath .

The momentum-dependent part of the gluon-coloron mixing amplitude (Figs.
4.9 and 4.10 ) is found to be transverse, both in the infinite and the
finite parts. For small values of @xmath we find

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.52)
  -- -- -- --------

There are no potential IR divergences hidden in @xmath .

#### 4.4.5 Non-Abelian Vertex Corrections a la Pinch-Technique: Pinched
Diagrams

The pinched diagrams of Fig. 4.7 are obtained from the diagrams of Fig.
4.5 by replacing the full non-Abelian vertex momentum structure @xmath
from Eq. ( 4.37 ), with @xmath from Eq. ( 4.40 ). This leads to the
amplitude

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.53)
  -- -- -- --------

where we have used Eq. ( 4.44 ) to rewrite the fermion couplings in
terms of @xmath . This contribution to the amplitude has the form of a
VPA correction, like that in Eq. ( 4.46 ). In fact, we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 4.4.6 Full Propagator Correction

We have just seen that, due to the pinch technique, the coloron-coloron
and gluon-coloron VPAs receive an additional contribution from the
pinched non-Abelian vertex corrections. Combining the VPAs, the UV
divergences can be removed by two wavefunction renormalization
counterterms (which arise from renormalizing the gauge eigenstates
@xmath and @xmath ) and one mass counterterm (which arises from
renormalizing the vacuum expectation value @xmath ), in the usual way.
In the @xmath scheme we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.57)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

The overall UV-finite propagator correction to the @xmath amplitude can
be found by insering these expressions in

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

Letting @xmath , we find that @xmath becomes IR divergent, with the
divergence arising from @xmath . Setting @xmath and @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have seen that the pinched diagrams contribute to the full
propagators of the gluon-coloron system. This might seem in conflict
with the expectation that the mass poles should be a property of freely
propagating particles, and should not depend on any initial and/or final
state. However, when we sum the Dyson series to obtain the full
propagator, the pinched diagrams always appear as an overall prefactor,
as pictorially shown in Fig. 4.11 . This has an overall effect on the
full propagators, which depend on the initial and final states, but has
no effect on the propagator poles. Thus when we compute physical masses,
we can do so by employing the true propagators in the computation,
without the contribution from the pinched diagrams.

#### 4.4.7 Cross Section at One-Loop

Adding up the tree-level contribution and the NLO contributions from
@xmath , and @xmath , gives a @xmath amplitude of the form

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath               (4.61)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where expressions for the real parts of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are
given below. Averaging the squared amplitude over initial spins and
colors, summing over final polarization states, and integrating over the
phase space, gives the NLO result of the form

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.62)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

At @xmath it is possible to integrate over the Feynman parameter space
in the expressions for @xmath , and @xmath . As we have seen, the UV
infinities cancel in @xmath and are absorbed by propagator conterterms
in @xmath . Thus for @xmath the overall amplitude is finite. Taking the
@xmath limit leads to IR divergences in @xmath , which are parametrized
by taking @xmath . For small and negative values of @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.63)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

In the next section we will compute the corrections to the tree-level
cross section due to the emission of soft and collinear gluons. We will
show that the real emission cross section has IR divergences which
exactly cancel the IR divergences contained in @xmath (Eq. ( 4.62 )),
leading to a total cross section free of both UV and IR divergences.

### 4.5 NLO Coloron Production: Real Corrections

The real emission corrections, at NLO, are given by the diagrams of Fig
4.12 . We first consider the diagrams with real emission of a gluon,
shown in Fig 4.12 (a). The squared amplitude, averaged over initial
colors and spins, and summed over final colors and polarizations, is
found to be, in @xmath dimensions,

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.64)
  -- -- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath was defined in Eq. ( 4.22 ), and @xmath is the angle between the
emitted gluon and the colliding quarks. The cross section for the real
gluon emission is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the integral is over the two-body Lorentz-invariant phase space in
parton CM. In @xmath dimensions,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

This leads to the partonic cross section

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.68)
  -- -- -- --------

Now @xmath is no longer constrained to be equal to one. Instead we must
have @xmath , or else no on-shell coloron can be produced. The term
proportional to @xmath features a collinear singularity, parametrized by
@xmath , and a soft singularity, parametrized by @xmath . The term
proportional to @xmath only features a soft singularity. The integral
over @xmath in Eq. ( 4.68 ) is finite for @xmath , in spite of the
singularity of the integrands. For small and negative values of @xmath
we can rewrite the @xmath -dependence as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, as conventional, the “+” distributions are defined by

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.70)
  -- -- -- --------

The coefficients of the delta functions are found by integrating both
sides of the equations. The partonic cross section becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, using Eq. ( 4.50 ), and expanding for small values of @xmath ,

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.72)
  -- -- -- --------

In the second equation @xmath is the Altarelli-Parisi splitting function
for an on-shell quark to evolve into a virtual quark and a real gluon

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

Adding together @xmath , given by Eqs. ( 4.62 ) and ( 4.63 ), and @xmath
, given by Eqs. ( 4.71 ) and ( 4.72 ), shows that the IR divergences
proportional to @xmath cancel. There is still a collinear singularity in
@xmath , proportional to the Altarelli-Parisi evolution @xmath . This
singularity arises from integrating over all collinear initial-state
gluons. As we will see in the next section, these collinear IR
divergences will be absorbed through renormalization of the PDFs.

The real quark and antiquark emission diagrams are shown in Figs. 4.12
(b) and 4.12 (c), respectively. The corresponding summed-averaged
squared amplitudes in @xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the dimension of the adjoint representation. Note that
the amplitudes for quark and antiquark emission are related by crossing,
i.e. @xmath . The integration over the two-body Lorentz-invariant phase
space proceeds as in the gluon emission case, yielding

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.77)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the Altarelli-Parisi splitting function for an on-shell
gluon to evolve to a virtual-real quark pair,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . There is no soft singularity in @xmath , only a collinear
singularity proportional to the Altarelli-Parisi evolution @xmath . As
noted above regarding @xmath , this singularity will be canceled by
renormalization of the PDFs when we compute the total hadronic cross
section.

### 4.6 NLO Cross Section

Our calculations in the previous sections have produced all of the
relevant partonic cross sections at NLO and demonstrated them to be both
UV and IR finite. ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 Note that the @xmath process vanishes at
tree-level [ 107 ] and the one-loop contributions are small, less than
of order 0.1% of the @xmath -initiated leading order contribution [ 108
] ; we, therefore, do not include this process in this work.

The full NLO cross section for coloron production at the LHC is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.79)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

where the partonic cross sections @xmath are given in Eqs. ( 4.20 ), (
4.62 ), ( 4.71 ), and ( 4.76 ), and where the superscript “0” in the
PDFs will be clear in a moment. We saw that all IR divergences contained
in @xmath cancel, except for a couple of collinear singularities
proportional to Altarelli-Parisi evolutions. Such singularities arise
because we integrated over all collinear quarks and gluons, even those
which we should have included in the PDFs. Therefore, the corresponding
IR singularities are absorbed by renormalizing the bare PDFs in Eq. (
4.79 ). In the @xmath scheme,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , and @xmath is the factorization scale. Exchanging the
bare PDFs for the renormalized ones replaces @xmath with @xmath in
Eqs. ( 4.72 ) and ( 4.77 ). The hadronic cross section becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.81)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

where the function @xmath is defined below, in Eq. ( 4.85 ), @xmath is
defined in Eq. ( 4.21 ), and the partonic CM energy @xmath has been
traded for the hadronic one, as in Eq. ( 4.25 ). Notice that since the
integrand is now finite, we can ignore the @xmath factor in @xmath . The
functions @xmath and @xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.84)
              @xmath      
                          
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The functions @xmath are determined by the chiral couplings of the
quarks to the colorons (which depend on the charges of the quarks under
the full @xmath symmetry)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

At NLO the @xmath dependence is removed by trading the @xmath couplings
@xmath and @xmath , or @xmath and @xmath , for the corresponding running
couplings. Since @xmath is a free parameter, we simply set @xmath , and
express the cross section as a function of the @xmath couplings. At the
same time, the NLO @xmath dependence weakens once the renormalized PDFs
are employed, as @xmath in Eq. ( 4.79 ) is independent of @xmath to this
order in perturbation theory. From these results we may also compute the
transverse momentum distribution of the produced coloron, which is given
by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath               
              @xmath      (4.86)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.87)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.88)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and @xmath (Eq. ( 4.65 )) is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that this is the leading order prediction for @xmath , and,
therefore, this distribution is strongly @xmath -dependent.

### 4.7 Conclusion & Discussion

We now illustrate ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 For the purposes of illustration we use the
Mathematica package for CTEQ5 [ 109 ] to evaluate the relevant parton
distribution functions. our results for the NLO coloron production cross
section in Figs. 4.13 - 4.16 . In each figure we consider the three
possible flavor-universal scenarios for quark charge assignment: @xmath
, @xmath , and @xmath . All of the plots refer to coloron production at
the LHC with @xmath TeV.

Notice that the perturbative expansion is only meaningful as long as
@xmath is neither too close to zero (where @xmath ) nor too close to one
(where @xmath ). This is clear from Fig. 4.13 , in which we plot the
quantity @xmath defined in Eq. ( 4.84 ), for @xmath : the contribution
from the virtual corrections to the NLO cross section. The upper curve
is for the @xmath scenario, whereas the almost identical lower curves
are for @xmath , and @xmath . For @xmath and @xmath the virtual
corrections become large, and the perturbative expansion in @xmath
breaks down. Since @xmath at the @xmath pole, these boundaries
correspond to @xmath and @xmath , respectively.

In Fig. 4.14 we plot the @xmath dependence of the LO and NLO production
cross sections of a 2.0 TeV coloron (with @xmath =0.25). The
scale-dependence of the LO cross section is of order 30% while, as
expected, the NLO cross section has a much weaker scale-dependence, only
of the order of 2%.

In Fig. 4.15 we plot the cross section times branching ratio to quark
jets as a function of @xmath , allowing @xmath to vary from @xmath to
@xmath . Here, in order to compare to the experimental results of [ 4 ]
(shown as the solid line in the figures), we correct for the acceptance
of the detector by multiplying our partonic-level NLO production cross
section by the factor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this expression, @xmath is the CMS (LO) prediction for axigluon
production cross section, times dijet branching ratio, times acceptance
¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 The CMS acceptance for isotropic decays is of order 0.6,
independent of resonance mass [ 4 ] . reported in [ 4 ] , and @xmath is
the leading order cross section in Eq. ( 4.23 ) in the case of an
axigluon (i.e. @xmath ), assuming the branching ratio to quarks @xmath .
¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 It is worth noting that there are examples of models with
colorons which do not decay primarily to dijets, e.g. [ 110 ] . The
three sets of thin bands correspond to @xmath 0.05 (dashed), 0.25
(dot-dashed), and 0.5 (dotted). Here, the weak residual @xmath
dependence is shown by the narrowness of the bands. To give a sense of
current experimental reach, we also show the 1 fb @xmath CMS upper
bounds on the cross section times dijet branching ratio for a narrow
resonance [ 4 ] . Note that the bound on the axigluon [ 5 ] corresponds
to the @xmath plot with @xmath — and, hence, a narrow axigluon resonance
is constrained to have a mass of order 2.6 TeV or higher. The
enhancement of the axigluon cross section at NLO is responsible for the
increase in the bound from of order 2.5 TeV as reported in [ 4 ] .

Next, we compute the “ @xmath -factor” for coloron production,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

shown in Fig. 4.16 for @xmath = 0.05 (dashed), 0.25 (dot-dashed) and
0.50 (dotted). Again, we see that the NLO corrections are of order 30%.
In Appendix C we report the numerical values of the @xmath -factors
corresponding to Fig. 4.16 , as well as those corresponding to the ATLAS
KK-gluon search reported in [ 6 ] .

At leading order, the coloron is produced with zero transverse momentum.
We may use our results to compute the @xmath spectrum in coloron
production to leading nontrivial order from Eq. ( 4.86 ). Using these
formulae, we may compute the fraction of colorons produced above a
momentum @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the kinematic maximum transverse momentum (which depends
on the coloron mass). For illustration, we plot this fraction for
vectorial colorons ( @xmath , with @xmath ) with masses of 1.2, 2.0, and
3.0 TeV in Fig. 4.17 . Note that of order 30% of the colorons in this
model and mass range are produced with @xmath GeV. Below a @xmath of 200
GeV the corrections become larger than 30%, terms proportional to @xmath
become large, and this fixed-order calculation becomes unreliable.

In conclusion, we have reported the first complete calculation of QCD
corrections to the production of a massive color-octet vector boson. Our
next-to-leading order calculation includes both virtual corrections as
well as corrections arising from the emission of gluons and light
quarks, and we have demonstrated the reduction in factorization
scale-dependence relative to the leading order approximation used in
previous hadron collider studies. In particular, we have shown that the
QCD NLO corrections to coloron production are as large as 30%, and that
the residual factorization scale-dependence is reduced to of order 2%.
We have also calculated the @xmath -factor and the @xmath spectrum for
coloron production, since these are valuable for comparison with
experiment. Our computation applies directly to the production of the
massive color-octet vector bosons in axigluon, topcolor, and coloron
models, and approximately to the production of KK gluons in
extra-dimensional models or colored technivector mesons in technicolor
models. We look forward to future results from the LHC, and the possible
discovery of colorons.

## Chapter 5 Conclusion & Discussion

  “ Physics is like sex: sure, it may give some practical results, but
  that’s not why we do it! ”

  —Richard Feynman (1918 – 1988)

\lettrine

[lines=1]In the present Thesis, we have analyzed two separate extensions
of the Standard Model of particle physics (SM). As explained in
Chapter 1, the SM rests on the foundations of an @xmath gauge group,
accounting for all three microscopically relevant interactions; namely,
the electromagnetism, the strong and the weak forces. On one hand, the
field theoretical descriptions of the electromagnetic and the weak
interactions are interconnected, forming the electroweak sector of the
SM, and are described by the @xmath subgroup. On the other hand, the
strong force is contained within the quantum chromodynamics (QCD) @xmath
subgroup.

We have seen that the @xmath subgroup is spontaneously broken to @xmath
by means of the Higgs mechanism, which in the SM is facilitated by
employing a fundamental scalar doublet. This is the mechanism by which
the weak gauge bosons and the fermions acquire mass. Introduction of
this scalar doublet predicts the existence of a real degree of freedom,
called the Higgs boson, the mass of which appears to be highly sensitive
to the high energy behavior of the theory through quadratically
divergent quantum corrections. While the actual mass of the Higgs boson,
if it exists, needs to lie naturally around the electroweak symmetry
breaking energy scale, its sensitivity to ultra high energies
necessitates a fine-tuning and causes the Hierarchy problem. Various
beyond the Standard Model theories (BSM) have been proposed in order to
cancel the quadratic divergences of the Higgs mass in a natural way and
to solve the Hierarchy problem.

In Part I of the Thesis, we explored various formal and phenomenological
aspects of one of the proposed solutions to the Hierarchy problem, the
Lee-Wick Standard Model (LW SM). In this BSM theory, inspired by the
Pauli-Villars regulatory scheme, a set of (heavy) auxiliary fields are
introduced, which form the Lee-Wick (LW) partners of the usual SM
particles. Unlike the SM fields, however, these LW partners carry an
overall negative sign as part of their description. It is this extra
negative sign which induces a cancellation of the quadratically
divergent quantum corrections among the contributions originating from
the SM particles and their LW partners. Therefore the LW SM provides a
natural and economical solution to the Hierarchy problem.

We have seen that the SM, as a renormalizable theory, employs a few
experimentally determined observables as input in order to make robust
predictions regarding the outcome of many other experiments. In the
electroweak sector, the SM predictions have been tested to an impressive
accuracy through the electroweak precision data. In order to facilitate
this comparison between theory and experiment, convenient
parametrizations have been introduced. The relatively small deviations
of the experimental values of these parameters from their SM predictions
can then be utilized as a powerful tool to place tight constraints on
the BSM variables possibly influencing those parameters.

Since the LW particles have not been observed so far in colliders, they
must, if they exist, be heavy with masses presumably beyond the previous
colliders’ production threshold. In Chapter 2 we analyzed the
phenomenological consequences of the LW SM, using the available
electroweak precision data in order to set lower bounds on the masses of
the LW particles. We found a lower bound of several TeV at 95% C.L. for
the masses of these hypothetical LW particles to be consistent with
experimental data.

The LW SM with the auxiliary partners may, equivalently, be expressed in
a higher-derivative formulation, in which, instead of introducing new
LW degrees of freedom, one adds higher-derivative terms to various
sectors of the original SM Lagrangian. Addition of these
higher-derivative terms might raise concerns about the overall
renormalizability of the LW theories and their consideration as reliable
BSM alternatives with an arbitrary accuracy in predictions. Previous
power counting arguments have exhibited the renormalizability of the
LW theories in the higher-derivative formulation; however, exact
translation of this property to the auxiliary-field formulation remained
unexplored. In Chapter 3 we investigated the global symmetries and
renormalizability of the auxiliary-field formalism, by considering a
LW scalar QED theory as an Abelian toy model. We were able to identify a
global @xmath symmetry, which, together with the @xmath gauge invariance
and an @xmath invariant gauge-fixing condition, allowed us to prove the
renormalizability of this class of theories and to clarify the physics
involved.

Part II of the Thesis was dedicated to a separate class of BSM theories,
forming an extension to the strong sector of the SM. These strong sector
extensions arise naturally, for example as an integral feature of
theories in which the Higgs boson is a composite scalar rather than a
fundamental degree of freedom, with its constituents held together by a
new strong interaction. The SM strong sector gauge group is extended to
an @xmath structure, which is spontaneously broken to the ordinary QCD’s
@xmath group. This introduces, in addition to the usual massless
gluon-octet, a massive vector color-octet of states, called colorons.

As is the case in ordinary QCD, a perturbative expansion of the theory
in terms of the strong coupling, @xmath , is appropriate at high
energies, given its asymptotically free nature. To date, colorons have
been studied only to leading order (LO) in perturbation theory, as the
colored nature of this final state massive vector boson makes its
higher-order non-Abelian analysis rather nontrivial. In Chapter 4 the
first complete and consistent calculation of coloron production at
next-to-leading order (NLO) in perturbation theory was presented. We
provided a finite expression for the production cross section at the
LHC, and demonstrated that the NLO effect is as large as 30%; thereby,
dramatically improving upon previous LO results. In addition, we
constructed coloron kinematic variables, such as its transverse-momentum
distribution, which make a direct comparison with experiment possible.

The research outlined in the present Thesis can be summarized as formal
and phenomenological explorations of extensions to two separate sectors
of the SM: the electroweak sector and the strong sector. Motivations for
going beyond the SM in these sectors, as explained above, are different
as they address different issues within the SM. The presented analyses,
however, by no means mark an end of theoretical investigations of
Lee-Wick and coloron theories, and there is much room left for extending
the research in these areas in future studies. Establishing the
renormalizability of the non-Abelian LW theories in the auxiliary-field
formalism remains, for example, unexplored and poorly understood, mainly
since the discussed @xmath symmetry is violated by the gauge
interactions. A thorough non-Abelian investigation of LW theories in
this formulation promises to be a formidable task, but remains necessary
in order to extend the demonstrated Abelian results. The coloron NLO
analysis may also be enhanced by taking into account the coloron’s
finite lifetime and its subsequent decay into quarks and gluons through
various channels. This allows for achieving an even higher theoretical
accuracy in order to compare with future experimental results.
Furthermore, using the NLO results, one may exploit the available
experimental data to improve the previously determined theoretical LO
lower bounds on coloron masses.

As one might appreciate, we are currently progressing through a
particularly exciting era in particle physics research, specifically due
to the experiments conducted at the LHC. These experiments might
discover the existence of the elusive SM Higgs boson, in which case the
SM and its symmetry breaking mechanism would be confirmed, with its last
missing piece finally in place. Moreover, in light of a solution to the
Hierarchy problem, the LHC may find distinctive signals related to any
of the proposed BSM theories, including the LW SM; thereby, defining the
direction of the future theoretical research. A more exciting scenario,
however, would involve a physical exclusion of the SM Higgs boson by the
LHC data. In that case, theoretical focus will be shifted towards
alternative electroweak symmetry breaking mechanisms, such as the strong
interaction theories, including the coloron theory. Additionally, one
might imagine the discovery of signals not anticipated previously by the
proposed BSM theories, which would pave the way for fresh ideas and more
advanced theoretical developments. In any case, the LHC findings promise
to open the gates to a wealth of knowledge concerning the mysteries of
the microscopic world — a world whose precise small-scale exploration
might, perhaps not so surprisingly, be connected to the large-scale
properties of the macroscopic universe, answering some of the big
questions regarding its future, present, and past!

[]

## Appendix A Evaluation of the @xmath Amplitude

The triangle diagram of Fig. 2.10 can be easily evaluated once the mass
matrix has been diagonalized and the Yukawa couplings have been
computed. For an arbitrary theory with heavy replicas of the third
generation quarks, and neglecting the bottom Yukawa sector, the
interactions with the Nambu-Goldstone bosons eaten by the @xmath and
@xmath boson read

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the SM top and bottom, respectively, and
where the remaining ones are heavy replicas. From this expression one
may extract the Feynman rules. Shifting the momentum of the @xmath to
zero, and omitting the external fermion wavefunctions, the amplitude
reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the number of LW fermions in the @xmath pair. Combining
the denominators into a single one, and shifting the loop momentum in
the usual way, leads to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Evaluating the integrals in the @xmath limit gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Comparing this expression with Eqs. ( 2.31 ) and ( 2.32 ) gives to
leading order in the coupling

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

## Appendix B Feynman Rules of the Coloron Theory

The Feynman rules ¹ ¹ 1 The Feynman rules discussed here are equivalent
to those in [ 97 ] , aside from those for the triple-coloron vertex
which is not specified in that reference. for the trilinear and quartic
vertices are shown in Figs. B.1 - B.4 . The coloron is represented by a
zigzag line, the coloron ghost by a sequence of small circles, and the
eaten Goldstone bosons by dashed lines. All other particles are denoted
as in QCD standard notation. Note that a coupling between the eaten
Goldstone boson and quarks is absent in the zero quark mass limit.

## Appendix C Numerical Values of the Coloron @xmath-Factor

The numerical values of the @xmath -factors for various values of the
coloron mass and the three patterns of coloron coupling are shown in
Tabs. C.1 - C.3 . Finally, the values of the @xmath -factor
corresponding to the KK-gluons of [ 7 ] , corresponding to the
experimental search reported in [ 6 ] , are shown in Tab. C.4 .