### 1.2.2 Qualitative mean field theory of the glass transition

The RFOT theory aims at repeating the same steps discussed above for
standard phase transitions in the case of the liquid-glass transition.
The first step is then to identify a qualitative, Landau-like theory
that reproduces the basic facts discussed in Sec. 1.1 . Next, one would
like to construct quantitative approximate theories in finite
dimensions, and finally understand non–mean-field corrections related to
both critical fluctuations and nucleation – as it will turn out that
both corrections simultaneously contribute in glasses. Before
proceeding, it is worth to stress that of course nothing guarantees that
the same program that is successful for standard phase transitions
should work for the glass transition. Maybe the latter is a completely
different phenomenon that requires an entirely new theoretical approach.
Therefore, the predictions of the RFOT theory must be, as usual in
physics, tested a posteriori against experiment and numerical
simulations. The result of such tests is encouraging as discussed e.g.
in [ 41 , 43 , 1 , 56 ] and in Sec. 2.2 . Of course this does not mean
that alternative –and often complementary– approaches to the glass
transition are less interesting, see e.g. [ 42 , 4 ] for a review.

##### The @xmath-spin universality class

The qualitative mean field theory of the glass transition was
constructed by Kirkpatrick, Thirumalai and Wolynes (KTW) in a series of
pioneering papers appeared from 1987 to 1989 [ 57 , 58 , 59 , 60 , 61 ,
62 , 63 ] . Building on the concept of replica symmetry breaking
developed by Parisi in the solution of the mean field
Sherrington-Kirkpatrick (SK) model of a spin glass [ 64 ] , KTW realized
that a simple generalization of the SK model has the desired
phenomenology. This is the so-called @xmath -spin glass, whose
Hamiltonian is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are either real variables subject to a spherical constraint
@xmath , or Ising variables, @xmath , and @xmath are independent
quenched random Gaussian variables with zero mean and variance @xmath .
The sum is over all the ordered @xmath -uples of indices @xmath . It is
a mean field model because each degree of freedom interact with all the
others with a strength that vanishes in the thermodynamic limit, in
order to have an extensive average energy.

This system shows (Fig. 1.7 ) an equilibrium Kauzmann transition at a
finite temperature @xmath , where the configurational entropy vanishes,
the specific heat jumps downward and the order parameter discontinuously
jumps to a finite value. Its dynamics is very similar to the one of
glass forming liquids in the region of temperature @xmath , but the VFT
behavior of the relaxation time is not reproduced by these models:
instead, a power law divergence of the relaxation time is found at a
temperature @xmath . Although this scaling is due to the mean field
nature of this model, it is not completely unrelated to what is observed
in glass forming liquids, where the behavior of @xmath at temperature
@xmath not too close to @xmath can also be described by a power law.
Indeed, the equations that describe the dynamics of the @xmath -spin
glass model are formally very similar to the so-called Mode–Coupling
equations [ 56 ] that describe well the dynamics of supercooled liquids
in a range of temperature below @xmath but not too close to @xmath [ 67
] . The dynamics displays aging if the system is prepared at equilibrium
above @xmath and quenched below this temperature [ 68 ] . This model
also displays dynamical heterogeneities: one can define a dynamical
susceptibility of the form of Eq. ( 1.10 ), which diverges on
approaching @xmath [ 59 , 69 ] .

The study of the @xmath -spin model provided a crucial connections
between statics and dynamics, because the dynamical transition is found
to be related to the emergence of metastable states of the system below
@xmath , separated by infinite barriers [ 59 , 60 , 62 ] . These
metastable states have infinite life time in the mean field framework,
and they are responsible for the divergence of the relaxation time at
@xmath . It is important at this point to anticipate that in finite
dimension, it is reasonable to expect that the life time of the
metastable states will be finite. Activated processes of
barrier-crossing will restore the ergodicity below @xmath , and the
relaxation time will only diverge at @xmath . A relatively simple
nucleation theory shows that the relaxation time should diverge in a
VFT-like way at @xmath [ 61 ] , and predicts the existence of a static
divergent correlation [ 23 , 25 ] .

Although @xmath -spin models seem quite abstract and very different from
structural glasses, one can construct mean field models that belong to
the same universality class and are formulated in terms of interacting
particles [ 65 , 66 ] . This is interesting because these particle
models also display a jamming transition with a phase diagram identical
to the one in Fig. 1.6 . Moreover, these models do not display any
quenched disorder, like structural glasses, hence suggesting that the
presence of quenched disorder in the @xmath -spin Hamiltonian is not an
essential ingredient to produce a glassy phenomenology.

The Landau theory that describes the glass transition of the @xmath
-spin universality class is formulated, by using the replica trick, in
terms of an overlap matrix @xmath , which is the order parameter of the
transition. It is the self-overlap between two different identical
copies (replicas) of the system, labeled @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

and plays the role, in the context of spin glass theory, of the
nonergodicity factor ( 1.5 ). If @xmath is a local version of the
overlap in point @xmath , the Landau free energy has the form [ 70 , 71
, 72 , 73 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the moment the number of replicas is left unspecified, this point
will be discussed below.

In summary, the basic facts listed in Sec. 1.1.6 are reproduced by this
mean field theory. Moreover, the theory is predictive: the existence of
dynamical heterogeneities [ 59 , 69 ] and of a static correlation length
[ 23 , 25 ] were first predicted based on the analysis of @xmath
-spin–like models, and later observed numerically. Excellent reviews on
the properties of the @xmath -spin–like models have been recently
published [ 74 , 75 , 67 ] ; in the following only the main results will
be reviewed, referring to these works for all the details.

##### The TAP free energy

To better understand what is going on in these models one has to
investigate the structure of their phase space. In particular, one
wishes to characterize the equilibrium states in order to understand the
nature of the thermodynamical transition at @xmath , as well as the
structure of the metastable states that trap the system at @xmath and
are responsible for the existence of a dynamical transition.

It turns out that at the mean field level a pure state @xmath
(equilibrium or metastable) is completely determined by the set of local
magnetizations @xmath , @xmath . The local magnetizations are minima of
the Thouless–Anderson–Palmer (TAP) free energy [ 76 , 77 ] which is
defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the auxiliary fields @xmath are introduced to fix the local
magnetizations and are determined by the condition @xmath at fixed
@xmath . Its explicit calculation relies on high temperature or large
dimension expansions [ 78 , 79 ] . The weight @xmath of state @xmath is
proportional to @xmath , where @xmath . Local minima of @xmath having a
free energy density @xmath for @xmath are metastable states. The TAP
free energy @xmath depends, in general, explicitly on the temperature,
so the whole structure of the states may depend strongly on temperature.

In mean field @xmath -spin models, at low enough temperature, the number
of states of given free energy density @xmath is @xmath . The function
@xmath is a decreasing function of @xmath , that vanishes continuously
at @xmath and jumps discontinuously to zero above @xmath . A similar
behavior is found in all models belonging to the @xmath -spin
universality class. The main peculiarity of @xmath -spin models is that
an exponential number of metastable states is present at low enough
temperature.

One can write the partition function @xmath , at low enough temperature
and for @xmath , in the following way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is such that @xmath is minimum, i.e. it is the solution of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

provided that it belongs to the interval @xmath . Starting from high
temperature, one encounters three temperature regions (Fig. 1.7 ):

-   For @xmath , the free energy density of the paramagnetic state is
    smaller than @xmath for any @xmath , so the paramagnetic state
    dominates and coincides with the Gibbs state (in this region the
    decomposition ( 1.16 ) is meaningless).

-   For @xmath , a value @xmath is found, such that @xmath is equal to
    @xmath . This means that the paramagnetic state is obtained from the
    superposition of an exponential number of pure states of higher
    individual free energy density @xmath . The Gibbs measure is split
    on this exponential number of contributions: however, no phase
    transition happens at @xmath because of the equality @xmath which
    guarantees that the free energy is analytic on crossing @xmath .

-   For @xmath , the partition function is dominated by the lowest free
    energy states, @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath . At @xmath a phase
    transition occurs, corresponding to the 1-step replica symmetry
    breaking transition found in the replica computation. The order
    parameter @xmath jumps discontinuously at the transition.

In the range of temperatures @xmath , the phase space of the model is
disconnected in an exponentially large number of states, giving a
contribution @xmath to the total entropy of the system. This means that
the entropy @xmath for @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath being the individual entropy of a state of free energy @xmath .
From the latter relation it turns out that the complexity @xmath is the
@xmath -spin analogue of the configurational entropy @xmath of
supercooled liquids ¹ ¹ 1 In the interpretation of experimental data one
should remember that in experiments @xmath can be estimated only by the
entropy of the crystal. However, the vibrational properties of the
crystal can be different from the vibrational properties of an amorphous
glass, see [ 80 ] for a review. Corrections due to this fact must be
taken into account: in some cases it has been claimed that the
difference is reduced to a proportionality factor between @xmath and
@xmath [ 81 , 82 ] . On the contrary, in numerical simulations @xmath
and @xmath can be measured directly [ 83 , 84 , 85 , 86 ] . .

The TAP approach provides also a pictorial explanation of the presence
of a dynamical transition at @xmath . If the system is equilibrated at
high temperature in the paramagnetic phase, and suddenly quenched below
@xmath , the energy density start to decrease toward its equilibrium
value. This relaxation process can be represented as a descent in the
free energy landscape at fixed temperature starting from high values of
@xmath . When the system reaches the value @xmath it becomes trapped in
the highest metastable state and is unable to relax to the equilibrium
states of free energy @xmath , as the free energy barriers between
different states cannot be crossed in mean field [ 75 , 67 ] . For this
reason below @xmath the system is unable to equilibrate.

##### Real replica method

For systems that belong to the @xmath -spin universality class, two very
powerful and general methods to compute the complexity as a function of
the free energy of the states without directly solving the TAP equations
exist; they have been developed in [ 60 , 87 , 88 , 89 , 90 , 91 , 92 ,
93 ] . They go under the name of the real replica method [ 89 ] and the
potential method [ 88 ] . Both methods consider a number of copies of
the system coupled by a small field conjugated to the order parameter
@xmath . Here, only a very short account of the real replica method will
be presented.

The idea of [ 60 , 89 , 87 ] is to consider @xmath copies of the
original system, coupled by a small attractive term added to the
Hamiltonian. The coupling is then switched off after the thermodynamic
limit has been taken. For @xmath , the small attractive coupling is
enough to constrain the @xmath copies to be in the same TAP state. At
low temperatures, the partition function of the replicated system is
then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where now @xmath is such that @xmath is minimum and satisfies the
equation @xmath . If @xmath is allowed to assume real values by an
analytical continuation, the complexity can be computed from the
knowledge of the function @xmath . Indeed, it is easy to show that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The function @xmath can be reconstructed from the parametric plot of
@xmath and @xmath by varying @xmath at fixed temperature. In other
words, @xmath is the Legendre transform of the function @xmath . Its
knowledge allows one to obtain the function @xmath and from it
reconstruct all the thermodynamic properties of the system, including
those of metastable states and the dynamical transition @xmath . In [ 92
] this method was applied to the spherical @xmath -spin system and it
was shown that the method reproduces all the results obtained from the
explicit TAP computation. Note that replicas are introduced here to take
into account the existence of multiple equilibrium states, without any
reference to quenched disorder.

##### Dynamics

The Langevin dynamics of the model can also be solved exactly [ 59 , 68
, 67 ] . The Martin-Siggia-Rose formalism [ 94 , 95 ] allows one to
write it in terms of a closed equation for the time-dependent spin-spin
correlation function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the latter measures the overlap between the configuration at
time 0 and that at time @xmath . The self-consistent equation for @xmath
reads [ 67 , 74 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this equation, one can show that a dynamical transition is found at
the same temperature @xmath that comes from the TAP computation. Upon
approaching @xmath , @xmath has the same form as in Fig. 1.2 . It shows
a two-step relaxation, with well separated time scales and a structural
relaxation time that shows a power-law divergence for @xmath , @xmath .
A dynamical order parameter can be defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

it is the analogue of the dynamical nonergodicity factor defined in (
1.5 ) and jumps to a finite value at @xmath . Below @xmath the system is
no more able to equilibrate with the thermal bath and enters a
nonequilibrium regime. This result confirms that metastable states are
responsible for the slowing down of the dynamics and for the dynamical
transition at @xmath .

As already mentioned, a four-point dynamical susceptibility associated
to @xmath can be defined, and one can show that it diverges at @xmath [
59 , 69 ] .

#### 1.2.3 Quantitative mean field theory (theories) of the glass
transition

Even before the coherent RFOT theory was formulated by KTW, several
independent attempts to construct quantitative approximate theories, in
the same spirit of the HNC or PY theory of liquids, had been formulated.
Here a short review of these theories will be given, focusing in
particular on their connection with the broader RFOT picture.

##### Density functional theory

A density functional theory (DFT) of glassy states was first proposed in
[ 96 , 97 ] and later improved by several authors [ 59 , 60 , 98 , 99 ,
100 , 101 ] . DFT is the analog of the TAP approach for particle
systems. One writes the free energy of the system as a functional of the
density field. A commonly used approximate form is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the direct correlation function of the liquid [ 6 ] .
The density profile is determined by minimization of the free energy.
Because in general this is a too difficult task, one looks for a
parametrization of the density field as a sum of Gaussian terms:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now the parameters @xmath (the “cage radius”) and @xmath (the
“equilibrium positions” in the glass) have to be determined by inserting
this parametrization of the density in Eq. ( 1.24 ) and minimizing the
result, which has the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the structure factor of the equilibrium positions.

At this point one can either choose to approximate @xmath with the
liquid structure factor, @xmath , and determine only @xmath by
minimization [ 96 , 97 ] or try to perform a full minimization including
the @xmath for a finite system size @xmath [ 98 , 99 , 100 , 101 ] . In
both cases, amorphous solutions with a finite @xmath are found at high
enough density or low enough temperature. However, DFT has several
problems:

-   The approximations that are made, starting from the definition of
    the density functional in Eq. ( 1.24 ), are quite crude and for this
    reason the quantitative accuracy of DFT is very poor. Of course one
    could improve these approximations, but a satisfactory quantitative
    DFT has not been obtained for the moment.

-   Even if some amorphous solutions can be found numerically at finite
    @xmath , counting their number and its scaling with @xmath is a
    formidable task, hence a proper thermodynamic characterization of
    the glassy states and their configurational entropy @xmath is
    impossible.

For these reasons, DFT remains for the moment only useful to illustrate
the basic mechanism of the glass transition in the RFOT framework: the
discontinuous appearance of amorphous free energy minima [ 96 , 97 , 59
, 60 ] . A satisfactory quantitative description of this phenomenon in
@xmath requires considerable improvement of DFT.

##### Mode-coupling theory

Mode-coupling theory (MCT) has been initially developed to describe the
critical slowing down at a second order phase transition [ 102 ] , and
later generalized to describe the glass transition [ 103 , 56 ] . MCT
equations are closed equations for the coherent scattering function
defined in Eq. ( 1.4 ). If @xmath is the normalized correlator such that
@xmath , the MCT equations read [ 104 , 56 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the @xmath -dimensional solid angle and @xmath is a
@xmath -dependent microscopic relaxation rate related to @xmath . The
kernel @xmath is a function of the static liquid correlation functions
@xmath and @xmath [ 104 ] .

The analogy between MCT equations ( 1.27 ) and the exact equations that
describe the Langevin dynamics of @xmath -spin models, Eq. ( 1.22 ), is
striking. In particular choosing @xmath one sees that the only
difference is the fact that the MCT equations are complicated by the
@xmath -dependence of all correlation functions, that is clearly due to
the finite dimensional nature of MCT. This similarity has led many to
conjecture that MCT is the finite-dimensional formulation of the dynamic
theory of RFOT [ 62 , 59 , 60 , 75 , 67 ] . However, for the moment, the
MCT equations have always been derived by performing some “uncontrolled”
approximations, in the sense that no systematic improvement of the
derivation can be obtained. A derivation of MCT in terms of a systematic
expansion (possibly a low-density or high-dimensional expansion) [ 105 ,
106 , 107 ] would help clarify its relation with the general RFOT
scenario. It has been shown that the basic phenomenology of MCT is
insensitive to the detailed form of the kernel, suggesting that indeed
MCT can be seen as a Landau theory of the dynamics at a glass transition
[ 108 ] .

Despite the fact that the direct connection between MCT and the RFOT
picture remains partially unclear, the MCT equations can be solved both
numerically and analytically in some asymptotic regimes and their
predictions are identical to those obtained from the mean field Eq. (
1.22 ): they predict a sharp discontinuous transition at a temperature
@xmath , where the relaxation time of @xmath diverges as a power-law.
Below @xmath , the non-ergodic parameter @xmath and the cage radius
@xmath are both non-zero as in Eq. ( 1.5 ). MCT gives quantitative
predictions for @xmath and @xmath . Moreover on approaching @xmath from
above, it predicts a number of scaling laws. Detailed tests of these
predictions have been made both numerically [ 10 , 11 ] and
experimentally [ 109 , 110 , 111 ] . There is quite general consensus
that MCT predictions work very well in a range of temperatures slightly
above the glass transition @xmath , while on approaching @xmath
deviations from MCT behavior become more pronounced.

An important point is that MCT did not limit itself to provide
quantitative results for already known quantities. It also provides new
predictions for previously unknown phenomena, that were later confirmed
by numerical simulations and experiments. The most impressive one is
probably the prediction of a re-entrant glass transition line and the
existence of a glass-liquid-glass and a direct glass-glass transition in
attractive colloids [ 112 ] .

##### Replica theory

Despite early attempts [ 59 ] , a quantitative replica theory (RT) of
finite dimensional glasses has been developed much later than DFT and
MCT, mainly thanks to the work of Mézard and Parisi [ 113 , 114 ] who
found a suitable formulation of the real replica method of Monasson [ 89
] for particle systems.

The dynamical transition can be described in a static framework by
introducing a replicated version of the system [ 89 , 113 ] : for every
particle one introduces @xmath additional particles identical to the
first one. In this way one obtains @xmath copies of the original system,
labeled by @xmath . The interaction potential between two particles
belonging to replicas @xmath is @xmath , where @xmath , the original
potential, and @xmath for @xmath is an attractive potential that
constrains the replicas to be in the same metastable state. The basic
fields are the one and two point density functions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

To detect the dynamical transition one has to study the two point
correlation functions when @xmath for @xmath , and in the limit @xmath
which reproduces the original model [ 89 , 113 ] . In this limit, the
two-replica correlation function is, for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because of the limit @xmath , the two replicas fall in the same state
but are otherwise uncorrelated inside the state, therefore @xmath which
provides the crucial identification between replicas and dynamics [ 73 ,
1 ] . Similar mappings can be obtained for four-point correlations.

One can introduce for convenience an external field @xmath (that is
derived from a space-dependent chemical potential), in such a way that
the density correlation functions can be obtained by taking the
derivative of the free-energy with respect to it [ 6 ] . The free energy
is defined as the logarithm of the partition function, and its double
Legendre transform defines the Gibbs free energy @xmath [ 6 , 115 ] :

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.30)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is the sum of 2-line irreducible diagrams [ 115
] . The average values of the fields in Eq. ( 1.28 ), namely @xmath and
@xmath , can be obtained by solving the saddle point equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

and similarly for @xmath .

The crucial advantage of replica theory with respect to DFT is that the
whole system of @xmath replicas is in its liquid phase, hence it is
homogeneous . In fact, introducing replicas allows one to sum over all
amorphous metastable glasses, thus recovering translational invariance.
Therefore, one can restrict the considered solutions to those where
@xmath , a choice that allows one to greatly simplify the computation
with respect to DFT, where instead one has to work with the full
amorphous density profile @xmath .

A concrete implementation of this procedure amounts to neglecting the
2PI diagrams, therefore obtaining a replicated version of the HNC
equations [ 113 ] . In this way one obtains predictions for @xmath ,
@xmath , the complexity function, and the non-ergodic parameter @xmath [
113 ] . The results for @xmath and @xmath are reasonably good, however
the prediction for @xmath is much worse than the MCT one. Moreover, the
complexity is found to be quite a bit smaller than the numerical
estimate, and this scheme gives inconsistent predictions in the glass
phase below @xmath [ 113 ] .

A better approximation scheme in replica theory is obtained by
considering a slightly different formulation, in which the basic degrees
of freedom are molecules built of an atom from each replica. The
physical reason for this is that replicas are assumed to be in the same
state, hence the density profile of the different replicas is assumed to
be similar, and this can be described by assuming that atom 1 in replica
1 is very close to atom 1 in replica 2, and so on. Furthermore, the
average distance between atoms in the molecule, which is related to the
cage radius @xmath , is assumed to be small and one performs a
systematic expansion in powers of @xmath starting from the standard
formulation of molecular liquid theory (e.g. in the HNC approximation) [
87 , 114 ] . This formulation is much more effective for treating the
glass phase at @xmath and below, where the cages are well formed.
Indeed, this approach gives good quantitative predictions for the
configurational entropy above @xmath , and for the specific heat and the
energy of the glass phase below @xmath [ 87 , 84 ] . Moreover, this
approach allows one to obtain a very detailed theory of the jamming
transition that happens deep in the glass phase. This will be the
subject of Sec. 2.2 . The main drawback of this approach is that because
molecules are assumed to be stable and have small radius, the process of
“molecule dissociation” that in replica language leads to the
disappearance of metastable states at @xmath is not very well described
by this approach. Depending on the details, either @xmath is not found,
or it is largely overestimated.

The construction of a “mixed” replica approach, capable of describing
both the region around and below @xmath where cages are well formed, and
the region around @xmath where cages are unstable, would be an important
achievement, that could be obtained by mixing the diagrams of the
replicated HNC with those of the molecular liquid formulation.

##### Towards a consistent finite dimensional implementation of RFOT
theory

The different aspects of the RFOT scenario for mean-field @xmath -spin
glasses all find a counterpart in the study of the liquid-glass
transition in finite dimension. The equivalent of the TAP approach is
DFT: in both cases one tries to find the metastable states by minimizing
a suitable free energy functional. The dynamics of @xmath -spin models
is described by an equation that corresponds to the so-called
“schematic” limit of MCT, i.e. the limit where the wavevector dependence
is neglected. Finally, replica theory can be formulated for @xmath -spin
models and liquids along the same lines.

Yet, the important difference is that in mean field @xmath -spin models,
it can be shown exactly that the TAP, dynamic and replica approaches
give completely equivalent descriptions of the same phenomenon, which is
the emergence of glassy metastable states [ 74 ] . While in finite
dimensions, DFT, MCT and RT are necessarily approximate theories that
use different approximations and lead to quite different quantitative
predictions, with marked discrepancies e.g. on the value of @xmath , on
the shape of the non-ergodic parameter, and so on. This is not
particularly worrying as far as @xmath is concerned, because already in
liquid theory different approximations schemes (e.g. HNC and PY)
obviously lead to different predictions [ 6 ] .

However, for the RFOT scenario to be consistent, one would like to show
that in the limit @xmath , the static and dynamic descriptions of the
transition become equivalent, exactly in the same way as the HNC and PY
equations both converge to the Van der Waals equation of state. This
consistency check was attempted in one of the earliest works on RFOT
theory [ 62 ] . There it was shown that under a Gaussian approximation
for the non-ergodic parameter, DFT and MCT lead to equivalent
predictions for the dynamical transition point of hard spheres. Another
interesting attempt in this direction is the work of Szamel who derived
the MCT equations from a static replica approach [ 116 ] . However,
despite these apparent successes, the limit @xmath turns out to be much
more complicated: the solution of full MCT (without the Gaussian
approximation) [ 104 , 117 ] leads to a strong discrepancy with RT [ 1 ]
and DFT [ 62 ] . Therefore despite these results, the problem of
obtaining a consistent RFOT theory of the glass transition in @xmath
remains open. This will be discussed in Sec. 2.1 .

#### 1.2.4 Corrections around mean field theory

After a consistent mean field theory of the glass transition has been
obtained, in finite dimensions one would like to compute the corrections
due to fluctuations around the mean field approximation. When this
program is carried out, one finds that (according to the mean field
theory itself) there are two important sources of corrections to the
mean field scenario. The first corrections originate from critical
fluctuations (the dynamical heterogeneities) that become important
around the dynamical transition @xmath below the upper critical
dimension, as in any standard critical phenomenon [ 118 , 73 ] . The
second corrections are non-perturbative phenomena related to activated
processes, that are important below @xmath , close to the experimental
glass transition @xmath and down to @xmath . They can be taken into
account by a phenomenological approach, leading to a number of
predictions that are in good agreement with experiment [ 41 ] . This
approach can be partially justified via a renormalization group analysis
[ 119 , 72 ] : however, this part of the theory remains the most
controversial [ 120 ] .

One big source of controversy is the very existence of the Kauzmann
temperature @xmath , which relies on a dubious extrapolation of the
relaxation time below @xmath . In fact, many other functional forms that
do not display a singularity at finite temperature are compatible with
the data, see e.g. [ 17 ] . Many theoretical arguments have indeed been
proposed against its existence in finite dimensions [ 121 , 122 ] . None
of them is however completely convincing, leaving the question open to
debate. The disappearance of the Kauzmann transition in any finite
dimensions (or possibly below some lower critical dimension larger than
3) could be due to a non-perturbative process that is not taken into
account in the mean field theory. For this reason, the present approach
(start from MFT and then consider corrections around it) seems unable to
capture such hypothetical processes. In any case, although the existence
or not of @xmath is certainly an important question from the theoretical
point of view, it is not so important for the theory of everyday
glasses. In these systems, one is always quite far from @xmath , and the
static and dynamic length scales never reach too large values (actually,
they typically are of the order of a few interparticle distances at
@xmath ). Therefore, the really important question for the theory of
glasses is not whether MFT retains its validity at all length scales,
down to the transition point. The important question is whether MFT
(plus corrections) retains its validity down to @xmath , and whether it
can explain the phenomenology of the glasses we observe in nature. It
might well be that MFT provides a good description in a region where the
relevant length scales are smaller than, say, 100 interparticle
distances, and for larger length scales some unknown process completely
washes away the mean field phenomenology. If this is the case, MFT would
be an excellent theory of real glasses, because one never observes such
large length scales and deviations from mean field would remain
unobserved. Such a situation would be somehow similar to the BCS theory
of superconductivity, which is a mean field theory but yet provides
excellent qualitative and quantitative predictions. This is due to the
fact that the pairing length @xmath is so large that each Cooper pair
effectively interact with a large number of other pairs. Hence the
Cooper pair correlation length @xmath is much smaller than @xmath ,
@xmath , making MFT a very good description. Indeed, the associated
Ginzburg criterion tells that one has to be extremely close to the
transition to observe deviations from BCS theory. The aim of the rest of
this discussion will be therefore to give criteria of validity of MFT
self-consistently within MFT itself.

##### Critical fluctuations around MCT

Within the static formulation of RFOT theory, the dynamical transition
at @xmath is a spinodal point at which the metastable states become
unstable and disappear [ 73 , 123 ] . Associated with the instability
one finds a diverging correlation length (akin to the diverging length
that is found at a spinodal point) that gives rise to dynamical
heterogeneity [ 69 ] . As for a standard spinodal point, in its vicinity
one can reformulate the field theory in Eq. ( 1.14 ) as a cubic theory.
It has been shown in [ 73 ] that the relevant theory is a @xmath theory
in a random field. Performing a systematic loop expansion around the
mean field saddle point in such a theory, one can obtain a Ginzburg
criterion and compute the upper critical dimension @xmath . This allows
one to establish that @xmath (for the @xmath theory @xmath , but the
random field provides dimensional reduction) [ 73 ] . Using the HNC
replicated free energy given in Eq. ( 1.30 ), a quantitative estimate of
the Ginzburg criterion has been given in [ 124 ] for @xmath . The result
of this analysis is that in @xmath , one needs a dynamical correlation
length of order 1 (in units of interparticle distance) to observe
deviation from the mean field behavior. A comparison with numerical data
obtained in [ 125 ] shows that the dynamical correlation becomes of
order 1 only slightly below @xmath . Hence in the full range where the
MCT phenomenology is observed, the Ginzburg criterion indicates that
non–mean-field corrections remain small. Below @xmath , these
corrections might become important, however at that point activated
processes start to dominate over the MCT phenomenology. One concludes
that in @xmath critical fluctuations around the dynamical transition do
not play any observable role.

Such critical fluctuations have been also described within MCT [ 126 ,
118 , 127 , 128 ] , leading to a very detailed characterization of the
dynamical heterogeneity and to similar results for what concerns the
range of validity of mean field theory. In particular, in [ 120 ] a
phenomenological Ginzburg criterion for MCT has been proposed, that
leads to the same conclusion as the analysis of [ 124 ] .

These results seem to indicate that developing a systematic RG theory to
discuss critical fluctuations around the dynamic transition might not be
worth the effort, because deviations from mean field should be very
difficult to observe at least in @xmath . The situation might be
different in higher dimensions where nucleation is suppressed and the
MCT regime is more clearly observed [ 129 ] .

##### Activated processes and nucleation theory at low temperatures

The last, and actually most important, ingredient of the RFOT scenario
is a phenomenological treatment of the activated processes that restore
ergodicity between @xmath and @xmath . These processes are at the origin
of the slowing down at @xmath and in particular they are responsible for
the exponential divergence of the relaxation time, Eq. ( 1.1 ). In the
MFT, the transition at @xmath has a mixed nature. It is a first order
transition from the point of view of the order parameter: in fact, at
@xmath the free energy of two phases –the one where replicas are
uncorrelated and the one where replicas are in the same state– cross.
However, it is a second order transition from the thermodynamic point of
view. This mixed character makes the Kauzmann transition a very peculiar
one. Indeed, its description requires setting up a nucleation theory [
61 , 41 , 43 , 23 , 120 ] –due to the first order nature of the mean
field transition– but at the same time it predicts the existence of a
diverging correlation length as in second order transitions, with
associated critical exponents. In the following a short account of this
theory will be presented.

As usual, in mean field theory nucleation processes –where a nucleus of
a phase forms inside another phase, paying a surface tension cost but
gaining in bulk free energy– are not taken into account, because in
infinite dimensions the surface and volume terms have the same scaling (
@xmath is the same as @xmath when @xmath ). Hence, in mean field theory
metastable states with an intensive free energy higher than the free
energy of the ground states, @xmath , still have an infinite life time.
These states are responsible for the existence of a finite complexity.
Their lifetime is infinite, so they are able to trap the system below
@xmath . This is the reason why the dynamical transition, i.e. the
divergence of the structural relaxation time, happens at a temperature
@xmath . On the contrary, in a model with short range interactions,
metastable states have a finite lifetime due to the nucleation of
bubbles of the stable phase inside the metastable one, so they are not
thermodynamically stable. One should expect the existence of well
defined states with @xmath to be impossible; but the analogy between
mean field models and real glasses is based on the analogy between the
complexity @xmath and the configurational entropy @xmath . How can one
explain the existence of a finite configurational entropy, related to
well defined metastable states, in a short range system?

Moreover, the observed crossover of the relaxation time from a power–law
behavior to a Vogel–Fulcher–Tamman law ( 1.1 ), that happens around
@xmath , is not explained by the mean field theory, which predicts a
strict power–law divergence of @xmath for @xmath . The observation of a
finite relaxation time below @xmath is again related to the finite
lifetime of metastable states. The system, instead of being trapped
forever into a state, is able to escape, due to nucleation processes; it
is then trapped by another state, and so on. These processes of jump
between metastable states are activated processes: the system has to
cross some free energy barrier in order to jump from one state to
another. The relaxation time is then expected to scale as @xmath ,
@xmath being the typical free energy barrier that the system has to
cross at temperature @xmath . The VFT law and the observation that
@xmath suggest that the barrier should diverge at @xmath , @xmath ; more
generally, the Adam–Gibbs formula [ 13 ] relates this divergence to the
vanishing configurational entropy, @xmath . It is then essential to
understand what is really the meaning of @xmath in finite dimension and
why it is related to the free energy barrier for nucleation.

A crucial observation (actually, a theorem [ 24 ] ) is that the
divergence of the relaxation time at @xmath , in short range systems, is
possible only if the cooperative processes of structural rearrangement
involve atoms that are correlated on a typical length scale @xmath ,
which diverges at @xmath . If no divergent length scale is present in
the system, it is always possible to divide it in finite subsystems,
each one relaxing independently of the others: and the relaxation of a
finite system is bound to happen in finite time, if the interactions are
finite and have short range. A simple idea that follows from the above
observation and can explain how the mean field picture is modified in
short range systems is the following [ 61 , 130 , 41 , 23 , 70 , 71 ] .
There exists a typical length scale @xmath over which structural
relaxation processes happen. If one looks at smaller length scales, the
system behaves as if it were mean field: metastable states are stable
for @xmath , yielding a finite local complexity. However, for large
scales @xmath , metastability is destroyed and only the lowest free
energy states are stable. For @xmath , @xmath , so below @xmath a stable
ideal glass phase is possible. This idea leads naturally to the
identification of the configurational entropy @xmath with the local
complexity @xmath , and to a derivation of an Adam-Gibbs–like relation
between the relaxation time @xmath and @xmath .

These considerations have been formalized in [ 23 ] where a concrete
procedure to define and measure @xmath has been proposed, and later
generalized to improved geometries [ 30 ] . Following this work,
numerical measurements of @xmath have been performed and have revealed a
good agreement with the theoretical predictions [ 27 , 28 , 131 , 29 ] .
Analytic calculations in simplified models with Kac–like long range
interactions [ 70 , 71 , 25 ] and renormalization group calculations [
119 , 72 ] have been performed confirming this scenario.

#### 1.2.5 Summary

To summarize, the RFOT theory of the glass transition is constructed by
following closely the path that led to the standard theory of critical
phenomena, as sketched in Tab. 1.1 . The theory was started by the
pioneering works of Parisi in 1979 [ 64 ] , who developed the concept of
spontaneous replica symmetry breaking and identified its consequences in
terms of proliferation of metastable states [ 76 ] , and of
Kirkpatrick-Thirumalai-Wolynes [ 57 , 58 , 59 , 60 , 61 , 62 , 63 ] ,
who identified a concrete class of simple mean field models that
reproduced many basic facts of the phenomenology of glasses. At the same
time, early attempts to construct approximate quantitative theories of
the glass transition, such as density functional theory [ 96 ] ,
mode-coupling theory [ 103 ] , and replica theory [ 113 ] , fit well
under the RFOT umbrella, and can be thought as different implementations
of RFOT. Early consistency checks [ 62 ] corroborated this
interpretation, even if many details of it remain open and a complete
RFOT theory of infinite dimensional liquid is still lacking (Sec. 2.1 ).
Finally, RFOT provides the framework to construct a mean field theory of
the jamming transition that happens inside the glass phase (Sec. 1.1.5 )
[ 65 , 132 , 66 , 1 , 2 ] . This will be the subject of Sec. 2.2 .

Nowadays, most of the research on RFOT theory is focused on a detailed
understanding of the corrections around mean field theory. There are at
least two different sources of corrections. Around @xmath , corrections
are due to standard critical fluctuations and can be treated via loop
expansions both in the statics and in the dynamics, leading to a
Ginzburg criterion that states that the upper critical dimension is
@xmath , and that in @xmath non–mean-field effects (of this kind) should
be barely observable [ 118 , 120 , 73 , 124 ] . Mean field theory
predicts in this region the existence of large dynamical heterogeneities
and an increasing dynamical correlation length, that are indeed observed
[ 18 ] . The associated critical exponents should be the mean field ones
for @xmath [ 126 , 118 , 127 , 128 ] and close to the mean-field ones
for @xmath , but this for the moment remains controversial [ 125 , 133 ,
134 ] . Below @xmath and in low dimensions, activation is the main
source of corrections around mean field, and a nucleation theory has to
be developed to take it into account [ 61 ] . Doing this results in a
number of predictions about the existence of a static correlation length
[ 130 , 23 , 70 , 71 , 24 , 41 , 30 ] that are being extensively tested
in simulation [ 27 , 28 , 131 , 29 ] .

A crucial issue is of course how much of the mean field picture survives
in physical dimensions @xmath . It is very likely that the glass
transition does not exist in two dimensions [ 135 , 122 ] , suggesting a
lower critical dimension @xmath . Whether @xmath or not, and what is the
important physical mechanism that determines @xmath , remain a largely
open problem. Preliminary renormalization group investigations [ 72 ,
119 , 136 , 137 ] give contradictory results. The crucial difficulty,
which has been extensively discussed in [ 138 ] , is the following.
There are many simple lattice models that display a RFOT at the
fully-connected mean field level. However, for most of those, the
transition either disappears or becomes a continuous spin glass
transition as soon as some spatial fluctuations are included, e.g. by
considering the model on a Bethe lattice. This is a well known effect:
the inclusion of fluctuations lowers the barriers between states (for
example, it lowers considerably the critical temperature in the
ferromagnetic Ising model), in such a way that models that display the
transition at the mean field level can become paramagnetic once
fluctuations are included. Of course, there are also lattice models that
have a robust RFOT, such as the lattice glass model of [ 65 ] , however
they are more complicated to study using renormalization group methods.
Hence, the problem of finding a simple enough model for which the RFOT
is robust enough has not been solved for the moment [ 138 ] .

It is important to stress, however, that even if the lower critical
dimension is bigger than @xmath , still the non-mean-field physics might
only be visible close enough to the critical point (or more precisely,
when the correlation length is large enough). In that case, mean field
theory would still provide a rather good description of experimental and
numerical systems, whose correlation lengths are never very large. The
fact that many predictions of mean field theory compare well with
numerical simulations, as will be shown in Chap. 2 , seems to support
this point of view.

## Chapter 2 Glass and jamming transitions of hard spheres

Here the application of the RFOT theory to the glass and jamming
transition of hard spheres will be presented. This line of research
started in 2005 with the paper [ 132 ] , where the small cage expansion
within replica theory previously developed in [ 87 ] was adapted to hard
spheres. Technically, this was a non-trivial task because the small cage
expansion of [ 87 ] is based on a harmonic expansion and therefore fails
badly for singular potentials. After this extension was achieved, the
work evolved in two main directions. The first is the study of the glass
transition of hard spheres in dimension larger than 3, motivated by the
desire to achieve a better understanding of how the mean field limit
@xmath is approached. The second is the study of the jamming transition
that happens deep in the glass phase. As discussed in Sec. 1.1.5 , the
jamming transition is characterized by marked structural changes, that
are clearly detected in simulation and experiments, and therefore
–besides being an interesting phenomenon in itself– it provides a unique
opportunity to test any theory of the glass state.

All the technical details of this work are contained in [ 1 , 2 ] . Here
only the main results will be discussed. Note that, in the following,
@xmath is the harmonic sphere potential, using the same notations as in
Sec. 1.1.5 .

### 2.1 The glass transition of hard spheres in high dimension

Hard spheres in the limit of large spatial dimensions provide an
excellent opportunity for an analytic solution covering many aspects of
the liquid and glass physics [ 139 , 62 , 140 , 141 ] . The reason why
this limit is solvable is geometric: consider three spheres A, B and C,
with AB and BC in contact. What are the chances that A and C will
themselves also be in contact? In high dimensions, vanishingly small.
This led to the realization [ 139 ] that all terms in the virial
expansion above the second could be neglected in high dimensions, as
they involve geometrically heavily suppressed “coincidences”, leaving
one with only the two first terms of the series for the entropy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the Mayer function for @xmath , i.e. for hard spheres, to
which we restrict in this section. For the liquid phase, one has @xmath
, a constant, and the above expression gives the liquid entropy and
coincides with the Van der Waals equation. Non-uniform phases are
described by solutions of the stationarity equation @xmath that are not
constant. Indeed, Eq. ( 2.1 ) provides the exact expression of the
density functional for hard spheres when @xmath , which has basically
the form of Eq. ( 1.24 ). Actually, at very high densities Eq. ( 2.1 )
would have corrections, however these corrections are exponentially
small in the density region that will be relevant in the following [ 141
] . The liquid phase stays metastable at higher densities, where one
expects the thermodynamics to be dominated by a modulated, crystalline
phase, which is however only known in small dimensions [ 142 ] . Despite
these simplifications, the problem remains much more difficult than the
study of simple mean-field models such as the @xmath -spin model. The
key difficulty is that, while for spin glass models the order parameter
for the glass transition is the local Edwards-Anderson overlap, for
particle systems the caging order parameter is a non-trivial function of
space, the non-ergodic parameter defined in Eq. ( 1.5 ), or its Fourier
transform, the long time limit of the van Hove function @xmath [ 56 ] .

#### 2.1.1 Early theoretical results

An early attempt to solve the amorphous DFT equations based on Eq. ( 2.1
) was performed in [ 62 ] . First, a Gaussian density profile as in
Eq. ( 1.25 ) was assumed. Next, it was assumed that the equilibrium
positions have the structure of a typical liquid configuration, hence
@xmath where @xmath is the Fourier transform of the Mayer function.
Finally, a small @xmath development was made to obtain @xmath . Under
these assumptions, a closed equation for the cage radius @xmath was
obtained. This equation has a finite solution when @xmath , which
defines the dynamical transition. In the same paper [ 62 ] , the
behavior of the MCT equations ( 1.27 ) in large @xmath was considered.
Under a Gaussian assumption for the non-ergodic parameter, @xmath , it
was shown that the MCT equations lead to the same equations for @xmath
of DFT. Hence, it was concluded that static and dynamical treatments
lead to consistent results for @xmath like in the @xmath -spin model,
and consistently with the RFOT theory.

After the replica theory of [ 132 ] was developed, it was natural to
apply it in larger dimension [ 143 ] . It was realized that a replicated
version of Eq. ( 2.1 ), in which the coordinate @xmath describing a
single atom is replaced by a “molecular” coordinate @xmath , provides an
exact description of the molecular liquid, for the same reasons why
Eq. ( 2.1 ) provides an exact description for @xmath . The geometrical
argument carries over to the molecules because when @xmath the molecules
become extremely compact, with a cage radius @xmath . Hence @xmath is
replaced by @xmath , with the advantage that the system of molecules is
translationally invariant. A Gaussian assumption for @xmath , of the
form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

allows one to obtain an exact expression of the replicated entropy as a
function of @xmath . This procedure leads however to an equation for
@xmath that is different from the ones derived in [ 62 ] from DFT and
MCT. In particular, it is found that @xmath . A comparison of these
equations seems to indicate that the RT equation contains more
“diagrams” than the DFT and MCT ones. Indeed, an expansion of the RT
equation in powers of @xmath gives back the DFT–MCT equation of [ 62 ]
at the lowest order.

A few years later, two groups independently found an asymptotically
exact solution of the MCT equations ( 1.27 ) when @xmath [ 104 , 117 ] .
The main features of this solution are that the @xmath is markedly
non-Gaussian and it remains so when @xmath , and the dynamical
transition is found to scale as @xmath , which is much larger than the
previous results obtained from the Gaussian assumption. An inconsistency
was pointed out in [ 117 ] , namely that MCT gives a negative Van Hove
function @xmath when @xmath is large enough.

At this point, one is faced with an unexpected puzzle: why in the limit
@xmath , where mean field theory should be exact, the three theories
that are thought to be different facets of the unified RFOT theory give
such different predictions? Looking carefully at the three theories, it
is important to keep in mind that:

-   The DFT result is based –besides the Gaussian assumption– on a
    strong assumption, that @xmath . This is far from being obvious. In
    fact, when the pressure of the glass goes to infinity and @xmath ,
    the particles are stuck in their equilibrium positions @xmath . But
    these have then to be strongly correlated, because of the
    requirement of mechanical stability of the packing. This will be
    further discussed in Sec. 2.2 . In any case it is possible that the
    assumption @xmath is too strong.

-   MCT has not yet been derived from a systematic large @xmath
    expansion, therefore it is hard to tell whether the corrections to
    Eq. ( 1.27 ) become small when @xmath . One could add terms to the
    MCT equations that preserve the “universal” MCT phenomenology (i.e.
    the power-law scalings and the associated critical exponents), but
    would change the “non-universal” predictions for the form of @xmath
    and the value of @xmath [ 108 ] . At present, there is no reason to
    believe that the MCT equations ( 1.27 ) should be exact when @xmath
    .

-   The RT results are obtained under one single assumption, that of the
    Gaussian form of the molecule distribution. They could therefore
    only fail if the Gaussian assumption were not verified.

#### 2.1.2 Numerical simulations

In absence of any other theoretical indication of a way to resolve this
inconsistency, one needs some numerical results to identify the correct
path to follow. This was the main motivation to start a series of
simulations trying to reach the largest possible dimensions in order to
obtain indications on the scaling of the transition density and the
shape of the non-ergodic parameter [ 144 , 129 ] . Previous
investigations had shown that crystallization is strongly suppressed
when dimension is increased above @xmath and is basically impossible to
observe on simulation time scales for any @xmath [ 145 , 146 ] . Hence,
for these studies one can safely use monodisperse systems without having
to worry about crystallization. Moreover, there was indication that the
MCT predictions are very accurate in @xmath [ 147 ] .

##### Compression at constant rate [144]

In a first set of simulations [ 144 ] , we performed event-driven
molecular dynamics simulations [ 148 ] of @xmath identical hard spheres
of diameter @xmath , enclosed in a periodic box of volume @xmath . A
modified Lubachevsky-Stillinger algorithm was employed, which starts
from a low-density gas (small @xmath ) and densify it by growing
uniformly the particles at a constant rate @xmath , reported here in
standard reduced units such that the particle mass is @xmath , the
temperature is @xmath , and @xmath . Time evolution stops when the
system reaches a high reduced pressure @xmath . Systems with @xmath are
simulated for @xmath and larger ones for @xmath – @xmath . These sizes
ensure that even when the system is in its densest state the box edge
remains larger than @xmath , which prevents a particle from ever having
two direct contacts with another one. There are strong reasons to
believe that although relatively small these sizes nonetheless provide a
reliable approximation of bulk behavior. First, with increasing @xmath
the box edge becomes less representative of the overall box size. The
largest diagonals are @xmath larger and there are many more diagonals
than edges. Second, by analogy to spin systems, mean-field arguments
indicate that for @xmath , a hypercube of side two is sufficient to
capture the full thermodynamic behavior. Even at the critical point,
finite-size corrections are proportional to @xmath , where the exponent
@xmath is model dependent (e.g. 1/2 at the ferromagnetic transition),
and do not directly involve the edge length @xmath [ 50 ] . Similar
results hold for dimensions greater than the upper critical dimension,
where the exponents coincide with the mean field ones. Third, the fluid
structure is expected to become uniform at ever smaller distances with
increasing @xmath [ 140 , 141 , 145 ] . Nearest-neighbor ordering should
thus mainly be influenced by particles in contact or nearly so, with the
rest of the fluid acting as a continuum. Indeed, in the fluid phase,
finite volume corrections are proportional to the pair correlation
@xmath , and at fixed @xmath , @xmath goes to zero exponentially with
@xmath [ 141 ] . The validity of these rationalizations has been
satisfactorily tested by simulations in @xmath , where no finite size
effect has been detected [ 144 ] .

The compression results for @xmath shown in Fig. 2.1 are representative
of the behavior observed for all @xmath . The system first follows the
equilibrium fluid equation of state (EOS) at low density and falls out
of equilibrium at high density. Beyond this point, the pressure
increases faster than in the equilibrium fluid and ultimately diverges
at packing fraction @xmath . A Carnahan-Starling form @xmath captures
well the pressure growth with @xmath in the fluid regime (Fig. 2.1 ),
provided, for each @xmath , that one fits @xmath to the data from the
slowest compression rate available. Note that the contribution of the
@xmath term is found to decrease with increasing @xmath , consistently
with the asymptotic result of Eq. ( 2.1 ). In the high-density
non-equilibrium regime, compaction runs with different @xmath follow
separate branches along which the pressure evolution is dominated by the
expulsion of free volume [ 38 ] . Upon approaching jamming, the pressure
is well approximated by the free volume form in which @xmath is linear
in @xmath : @xmath . Both @xmath and @xmath are extracted from fitting
the simulation data for @xmath .

These numerical results qualitatively agree with the RFOT scenario [ 1 ]
. According to the theory, the compression curves for moderately small
@xmath should converge as a power law @xmath to a “threshold” glass. The
dynamical transition density @xmath separates the equilibrium fluid from
this glass. Equilibrating the liquid at @xmath requires much slower
compaction rates, @xmath , such that activated events allow the system
to remain in equilibrium. In this regime one would expect a crossover to
a logarithmic dependence of the glass EOS on @xmath , e.g., of the form
@xmath , but it turns out that this regime is out of reach of present
time numerical simulations. Indeed, the inset of left panel of Fig. 2.1
shows that the reported @xmath and @xmath are both linear as functions
of @xmath with @xmath . The exponent is expected to weakly depend on
dimensionality, especially at low @xmath , but this value is within the
numerically reasonable range for all systems studied. Because the
subsequent analysis is rather insensitive to the precise value of @xmath
, for simplicity it is kept constant. Extrapolating the results to
@xmath gives the parameters @xmath and @xmath for the threshold glass
free volume EOS, also reported in Fig. 2.1 . Its intersection with the
fluid EOS then provides a numerical estimate for @xmath . These values
are very close to previous numerical estimates in @xmath [ 149 ] and
@xmath [ 147 ] , which demonstrates the coherence of this analysis in
low dimensions. The results for @xmath reported in Fig. 2.1 show that
its dimensional evolution is smooth. Interestingly, dimensions where the
crystal structure is singularly dense, such as @xmath and @xmath [ 142 ]
, do not present any echo of that singularity, which illustrates the
smooth @xmath dependence of the fluid structure and its independence
from the crystal.

##### Equilibrium dynamics in the liquid phase [129]

Having obtained an estimate of @xmath as a function of dimension, one
can proceed to investigate the equilibrium dynamics in the liquid phase
on approaching @xmath . This has been done with the same algorithm as
before, but stopping the compression at the desired @xmath , letting the
system equilibrate, and then performing equilibrium measurements of
dynamical quantities. In particular, the average mean-square
displacement (MSD) defined in Eq. ( 1.3 ) was obtained. At times shorter
than the collision time, MSD displays a ballistic regime @xmath , and at
long times it has a diffusive regime @xmath . Fitting these numerically
determined @xmath to the MCT power-law form @xmath is reasonably good
for @xmath , and improves with increasing @xmath . The resulting values
of @xmath and @xmath are reported in Fig. 2.1 . For @xmath , the full
accessible dynamical range studied is used, spanning up to three @xmath
decades. The values of @xmath obtained in this way up to @xmath are
consistent with the ones obtained from the constant compression data.
The values of @xmath are reported in Fig. 2.1 .

The cage form is described by the self part of the van Hove function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

which in the ballistic and diffusive regimes is well-approximated by a
pure Gaussian. The logarithmic mid-point of the caging plateau @xmath is
chosen at the mid-time on a logarithmic scale, intermediate between the
ballistic and the diffusive extrapolations of the MSD, and provides an
estimate of the plateau regime discussed in Fig. 1.2 (see [ 129 ] for
details). The results close to @xmath , reported in Fig. 2.2 , clearly
shows that the cage is not Gaussian, with a fat tail at large @xmath
that does not shrink upon increasing dimension. By contrast, a
comparison with the D5 crystal in @xmath and the E8 crystal in @xmath
(unpublished) shows that the cage is there very well described by a
Gaussian form.

##### Discussion

In summary, numerical results indicate that:

-   The MCT qualitative predictions are very well obeyed by the data, as
    previously observed in @xmath [ 147 ] . The diffusion constant
    vanishes as @xmath . The vanishing of the diffusion is accompanied
    by a growing caging plateau. It remains to be checked whether the
    approach and departure from the plateau define power-law regimes in
    time with exponents @xmath and @xmath , and whether the relation
    between @xmath is consistent with MCT predictions.

-   Dynamical heterogeneity is reduced with increasing dimension [ 129 ]
    . Together with the previous observation, this suggests that indeed
    when @xmath increases the system approaches a mean field regime well
    described by the RFOT scenario.

-   Yet, the quantitative MCT predictions for @xmath , @xmath and the
    cage radius become increasingly poor with increasing @xmath . This
    is not a problem for the RFOT scenario: it is reasonable to expect
    that a different theory with a similar structure to MCT but a
    different kernel exist. Such a theory would provide the same
    qualitative predictions as MCT [ 108 ] , and exact quantitative
    results for @xmath , @xmath and the cage structure. But this theory
    has yet to be found.

-   The Gaussian assumption for the cage form done by RT and DFT is
    invalidated by the data, calling for a revision of these theories.
    Unfortunately, the predictions for @xmath of RT in low @xmath are
    not reliable because of the inaccuracy of the small cage expansion
    (the replicated HNC calculation has not been performed yet).
    However, the result of RT for @xmath should provide an upper bound
    for @xmath , and this is consistent with the data. Also the
    predictions of RT for the ideal glass EOS (Fig. 2.1 ) are consistent
    with the data, as the ideal glass EOS should be similar to the
    threshold glass EOS but shifted in density.

#### 2.1.3 New theoretical results

The numerical results obtained in [ 144 , 129 ] give enough suggestions
on how to proceed to improve the theory.

On the side of replica theory, a first step has been obtained in [ 150 ]
, where the exact description of the molecular liquid in the
high-dimensional limit, without further assumptions, was found. The
strategy is the following: a generic replica problem is written in terms
of the order parameter @xmath . The @xmath are vectors in @xmath
-dimensional space, and one is looking for a solution that is
statistically translationally invariant and isotropic. The only
possibility with these properties is that @xmath depends exclusively on
the @xmath , where @xmath . All @xmath -dimensional integrals may be
expressed as low dimensional integrals in terms of the @xmath , with
volume factors, a simple generalization of spherical coordinates. Then,
the dimension @xmath appears explicitly, and the limit of large @xmath
may be taken in a straightforward way, by saddle point evaluation of the
integrals. The result is that the Gaussian ansatz turns out to be, in a
sense, exact: it gives for large dimensions the exact values for the
thermodynamic quantities. The reason is that in the large @xmath limit
all the saddle points are dominated by a typical distance between atoms
in a molecule, and therefore the exact shape of the cage function is
irrelevant. Any reasonable ansatz would give the same results. This
explains why the Gaussian results for the glass EOS, as well as the
transition densities, are consistent with the numerical data, as shown
in Fig. 2.1 . The next step in this direction is to work out the
prediction of RT for the cage shape and compare it with the results in
Fig. 2.2 . This work is currently in progress.

On the side of dynamics, it might be possible to obtain an exact
solution starting from the approach of [ 151 ] and following the same
lines of the replica calculation. Also this work is currently in
progress.

In summary, although the physics in large @xmath seems quite well
understood, its mathematical description is surprisingly complex. Yet a
lot of progress has been made and it seems that we are on the right path
towards a complete RFOT theory in this limit.

### 2.2 Mean field theory of the jamming transition

The main features of the jamming transition have been introduced in Sec.
1.1.5 . Consider the simple model of harmonic spheres described by Eq. (
1.11 ). The two control parameters are the packing fraction @xmath and
the ratio of thermal energy to potential energy @xmath (we always use
@xmath ). As discussed in Sec. 1.1.5 , the jamming transition happens
out of equilibrium at a packing fraction @xmath , when the system is
inside its glassy phase. At this transition, the origin of the rigidity
of the glass changes in nature [ 40 ] : below @xmath , particles do not
overlap and rigidity is entropic in nature, in such a way that pressure
and elastic moduli are proportional to @xmath ; above @xmath , particles
overlap and rigidity is mechanical in nature, hence pressure and elastic
moduli have a finite limit at @xmath . Hard spheres have @xmath , hence
@xmath , and they lie on the horizontal axis in the phase diagram of
Fig. 1.6 , but they exist only for @xmath . At @xmath , the reduced
pressure of hard spheres, defined by @xmath , diverges, see Fig. 2.1 .
This can be understood in two equivalent ways. From the hard sphere
perspective, @xmath is the point where the spheres get in contact with
their neighbors. The cage radius goes to zero, and collisions with the
neighbors become infinitely frequent. If @xmath is fixed, the momentum
transfer per unit time between neighbors, which is proportional to
@xmath , diverges. From the soft sphere perspective (i.e. at finite
@xmath ), the pressure becomes non-zero at @xmath even at @xmath , hence
@xmath in the whole region above @xmath . In other words, @xmath is
identified with the close packing point [ 152 , 153 ] , the maximal
density at which the spheres can be packed avoiding overlaps. This has
been called random close packing , @xmath , in the literature. In
present notations, @xmath and @xmath coincide.

Independently from these motivations originating in the physics of
amorphous materials, the problem of packing spheres in @xmath dimensions
is intimately related to several important mathematical problems,
notably in the context of signal digitalization and of error correcting
codes, especially when @xmath is large [ 142 ] . Although the densest
packings are known (either rigorously or at the level of good
conjectures) in low dimensions, as soon as @xmath becomes large, almost
no results are available, see [ 142 ] and the very nice review paper [
154 ] . Providing a “physical” estimate of the closest packing density
in large dimensions would be very interesting for the mathematical
community. Attempts in this direction have been performed, and even if
intuition suggests that lattice structures should fill space better than
amorphous ones, some have suggested that for large @xmath disordered
packings may be at least as efficient as lattice-based versions [ 155 ]
. Although the density of lattice geometries is strongly @xmath
dependent [ 142 ] , the fluid structure and its properties are much less
sensitive to @xmath , once @xmath [ 146 , 144 , 129 ] . A general
understanding of the jamming transition in arbitrary @xmath would thus
also clarify the density scaling of amorphous packings and their
potential mathematical role.

In summary, the jamming transition is interesting for wildly different
problems, ranging from the physics of foams, pastes, emulsions, powders
and other granulars, to the physics of thermal glasses in the limit of
low temperature, and to mathematics and information theory [ 1 , 156 ] .
Despite all this interest, and despite the fact that the random close
packing concept has been proposed long ago [ 152 , 153 ] , a first
principle theory of jamming has not been developed. “First principle”
here means a theory that is able to predict the existence of the
transition, its location in density, and the associated structural
changes, from the sole knowledge of the particles’ interaction
potential. A first step in this direction was obtained –unexpectedly– as
a side product of the replica theory of hard sphere glasses in [ 132 ] .
Subsequent improvements have been made in [ 1 , 2 ] . This theory will
be reviewed in the rest of this section, highlighting its successes and
the many problems that are still unresolved.

#### 2.2.1 Is random close packing well defined?

##### Predictions of replica theory

How does the jamming transition appear in the replica theory? Recall
from the discussion of Sec. 1.2.2 that one has to introduce @xmath
replicas as a tool to take into account the existence of multiple
amorphous glassy states. @xmath is a free parameter and in the end one
has to optimize the free energy with respect to it, the optimal value
for a given state point @xmath being called @xmath . It is expected that
@xmath in the liquid phase, and @xmath continuously becomes smaller than
1 at the glass transition [ 87 ] . What came as a surprise in [ 132 ] is
that, for the hard sphere system, @xmath continuously decreases starting
from 1 at @xmath , and eventually vanishes linearly at some “(ideal)
glass close packing” (GCP) density @xmath , @xmath . This is crucial,
because within replica theory the reduced pressure @xmath of the (ideal)
glass is proportional to @xmath , hence the vanishing of @xmath drives a
divergence of @xmath and signals the jamming transition! Note that this
result was not put by hand in the theory: the calculation of the
replicated free energy can be done starting from the interaction
potential, as a function of @xmath and @xmath , and it is the process of
optimization with respect to @xmath and the vanishing of @xmath that is
behind the appearance of the transition. A posteriori, the fact that the
jamming transition is related to the vanishing of @xmath is obvious
thanks to the connection with combinatorial optimization problems where
a similar transition happens (and is called the SAT–UNSAT transition in
that context [ 157 ] ). This connection was explored in details in [ 158
, 159 ] . Note also that the lattice glass model of [ 65 , 160 ] is a
perfect example of this connection.

However, what is the relation between @xmath and the random close
packing of Bernal [ 152 , 153 ] ? The GCP is the point where the
pressure of the ideal glass diverges. However, as discussed in Sec.
1.1.1 , even if one accepts the mean field prediction that such ideal
glass really exists, producing it in a reasonable amount of time is
impossible both in numerical simulations and experiments. The liquid
will always fall out of equilibrium much before @xmath is reached, and a
non-equilibrium glass of lower density will be obtained. This is well
illustrated in Fig. 2.1 . Hence, in real-life experiments and numerical
simulation, one will be stuck in out of equilibrium states, and in
general the random close packing point obtained in a given experiment
will be at lower density, @xmath , corresponding to a system falling out
of equilibrium at some @xmath .

It might seem that the replica description of the GCP is therefore
useless. Fortunately, this is not the case. Indeed, as discussed in Sec.
1.2.2 , RFOT theory predicts the existence of (exponentially) many
metastable states, each corresponding to a different glass, with
different free energies. And replica theory allows one to compute their
properties. Performing the computation [ 1 ] , one discovers that each
different glass will jam at a different @xmath . Therefore, replica
theory predicts the existence of a range of densities @xmath in which
amorphous jammed packings exist. Each of them corresponds to jamming of
a different non-equilibrium glass. Therefore, replica theory predicts
that the jamming (or RCP) point is not well defined: it depends on the
protocol that one uses in the experiment. Actually, the whole phase
diagram in Fig. 1.6 (i.e. the transition line @xmath and the jamming
point @xmath ) depends on the particular metastable state (as
parametrized for instance by the equilibrium positions @xmath ) that is
selected in the experiment under consideration. So what is left of the
predictive power of replica theory, besides setting upper and lower
bounds for @xmath ? Here comes another crucial observation: replica
theory predicts that all amorphous packings that correspond to jamming
of a metastable glass have equivalent structural properties [ 1 ] . This
means that even if the jamming density @xmath is protocol-dependent, the
structural signatures of jamming are universal.

This prediction of replica theory should not be confused with the idea
that RCP is not well defined because one can construct packings with
arbitrary degree of crystallization [ 161 , 162 ] . Although this is
certainly true, the presence of such microcrystallites is detectable
using structural measures (so-called order metrics [ 161 ] ). The
prediction of RT is that there is an interval of perfectly amorphous
packings. Of course those can be mixed with crystalline regions to
produce any intermediate density up to the crystal close packing.

##### Numerical tests

This prediction has been successfully tested in a number of independent
studies [ 35 , 164 , 165 ] . However, these studies were limited to
@xmath , hence subject to the criticism that crystallization might play
a hidden role in the density variation [ 161 ] . Moreover, the density
range of amorphous packings in @xmath is quite small [ 164 ] . Hence,
more recently [ 163 ] , a systematic study as a function of dimension
was performed, as part of the previously mentioned effort towards a
systematic understanding of the RFOT theory in large @xmath [ 144 , 129
] . Amorphous packings were prepared using two different numerical
protocols.

-   Approaching jamming from densities below it by
    Lubachevsky-Stillinger (LS) compressions of hard spheres undergoing
    Newtonian dynamics while @xmath grows at a fixed rate @xmath , as
    previously discussed. The compression stops when particles are in
    contact, defining the packing fraction @xmath , at which the reduced
    hard spheres pressure becomes infinite.

-   Approaching jamming from densities above or below it by minimizing
    the energy @xmath of a soft sphere system with interaction potential
    @xmath in Eq. ( 1.11 ) [ 31 ] . One starts from random sphere
    configurations @xmath and uses @xmath and @xmath that bracket the
    jamming point, in such a way that @xmath at @xmath , while @xmath at
    @xmath . The onset of non-zero energy is found using an iterative
    bisection method. At each iteration, an intermediate value @xmath is
    chosen, and the energy at @xmath is minimized starting from either
    @xmath or @xmath . This choice defines the procedure to approach
    jamming from above or from below , respectively. Calling @xmath the
    configuration obtained after minimization, one substitutes @xmath
    and @xmath if @xmath , while @xmath and @xmath if @xmath . The
    procedure stops when @xmath is below a given threshold (of the order
    of numerical accuracy), and we call the final density @xmath in the
    procedure from above, and @xmath in the procedure from below. From
    above, the energy vanishes with @xmath and the static pressure
    @xmath , where @xmath is the distance from jamming [ 31 ]

For protocol (ii) , both @xmath have no measurable effect on @xmath .
One can formally define @xmath , but any reasonable @xmath results in
the same final density. By contrast, @xmath strongly depends on @xmath
(Fig. 2.3 ), but is also independent of @xmath . One can therefore
define @xmath . A practical way of constructing both @xmath and @xmath
is to run the energy minimization (respectively from below and from
above) starting from @xmath and a @xmath large enough that @xmath
saturates to its maximum; intermediate packing fractions can then be
obtained by reducing @xmath (Fig. 2.3 ). It is found that @xmath roughly
corresponds to @xmath with @xmath and @xmath , and that large @xmath
generate mechanically unstable packings. In other words, although the
jamming density sensitively depends on the protocol’s specific
parameters, the jamming density range is much less sensitive to the
protocol’s class. The resulting density range is found to grow steadily
from about @xmath in @xmath to nearly @xmath in @xmath . Therefore, the
similar observations made for @xmath binary mixtures [ 35 , 164 , 165 ]
are confirmed, but in larger dimension the effect is much larger and
leaves no room for ambiguity, also because crystallization is totally
absent as soon as @xmath [ 146 ] .

The value of @xmath are both lower than @xmath predicted by replica
theory (Fig. 2.3 ). This is expected because, according to the analysis
of the glass problem (Sec. 1.1.1 ) and of analogous combinatorial
optimization problems [ 159 , 158 ] , achieving a packing density of
@xmath requires at least to equilibrate the liquid close to @xmath ,
which can only happen through activated processes and can be expected to
require a time increasing exponentially with @xmath (or with @xmath in
mean field models), hence being out of reach of numerical simulations.
Unfortunately, a reliable prediction from RT for the minimal value of
the jamming density cannot be obtained, for similar reasons as for
@xmath .

#### 2.2.2 Finite temperature scaling relations

As shown in Fig. 1.6 , the jamming transition exists only at strictly
zero temperature (here we consider soft spheres with a finite @xmath ).
In fact, as soon as temperature is non-zero, overlaps between particles
are allowed by thermal fluctuations, and a strict distinction between
zero energy non-overlapping configurations and positive energy
overlapping configurations is not possible. However, if temperature is
low enough, the proximity of the jamming transition induces scaling
relations for all thermodynamic quantities. Here these scaling relations
are discussed. For this discussion, one can restrict to a given
non-equilibrium glass with given jamming density @xmath (for instance,
the ideal glass with jamming density @xmath ) because the results are
independent of the choice of glass state and the corresponding @xmath .

It turns out from the solution of the replica equations [ 2 ] that all
the thermodynamic quantities are singular at @xmath and @xmath ; for
instance @xmath is finite below @xmath while it vanishes proportionally
to @xmath above @xmath . The reduced pressure is also finite below
@xmath , while it diverges at @xmath and is formally infinite above
@xmath . Both the energy and the pressure vanish below @xmath while they
are finite above @xmath . From this observation, and because all
quantities are analytic at finite @xmath , it follows that all these
quantities must satisfy scaling relations if @xmath is small enough and
@xmath is close enough to @xmath [ 166 , 34 , 35 ] . In the replica
theory, all the scalings are driven by the one of @xmath , for which one
finds

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

This ensures that in the hard sphere limit @xmath and @xmath , one
recovers @xmath , while for @xmath , one finds that @xmath . Note that
@xmath and @xmath can be computed explicitly from the theory and they
slightly depend on @xmath [ 2 ] . This scaling is shown in Fig. 2.4 .

Qualitatively similar scaling forms (in some cases with different
exponents) apply to thermodynamic quantities such as the energy, the
pressure, or the complexity. Although the corresponding scaling plots
are not shown explicitly, the energy and the pressure of the glass are
plotted and compared with numerical data in Fig. 2.5 . The latter have
been obtained by preparing an amorphous packing through the energy
minimization protocol discussed above, and then performing standard
Monte Carlo simulations at finite temperature in the vicinity of @xmath
, and checking carefully that no structural changes are observed,
because in the simulation one is always in the regime @xmath [ 2 ] . The
agreement between theory and numerical data, with a rescaling of @xmath
discussed in [ 2 ] that is needed to correct for a thermodynamic
inconsistency of the theory, is nearly perfect. The scaling around
jamming is clearly visible in the figures. For instance, the average
energy @xmath tends to a finite value for @xmath , while for @xmath it
goes to zero as a power law, because in this case the system becomes a
hard sphere glass. Similarly, the reduced pressure is finite for @xmath
, while it diverges proportionally to @xmath for @xmath , because in
this case the pressure is finite at zero temperature. At finite
temperature, the curves interpolate between the two regimes. Similar
scalings have been discussed in [ 167 ] .

#### 2.2.3 Scaling relation for the structure

At the jamming transition, a marked structural change happens, as
illustrated in Fig. 1.6 . Particles are not in contact below @xmath ,
they just touch at @xmath , and they overlap above @xmath . This is
clearly revealed in the pair correlation function @xmath –the Fourier
transform of the structure factor @xmath –, and in the cumulative
structure function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the @xmath -dimensional solid angle. The function @xmath
is proportional to the average number of particles at distance @xmath
from a given particle, while @xmath counts the average number of
particle centers in a shell of radius @xmath around a given particle.

##### Number of contacts

In fact, @xmath develops a delta peak in @xmath when @xmath and @xmath ,
corresponding to the touching neighbors. The coefficient of the delta
peak, which is also equal to @xmath , gives the average number of
neighbors. The maximum of @xmath as well as @xmath are reported in Fig.
2.6 as a function of @xmath [ 2 ] . It is indeed observed in the theory
that @xmath diverges on both sides of the transition at @xmath as @xmath
, while this divergence becomes a smooth maximum at finite @xmath near
the transition, whose position shifts with temperature. This behavior
compares very well with numerical [ 38 , 39 ] and experimental [ 36 ,
168 ] observations.

Similarly, @xmath is a smooth function of density at @xmath , but it
develops a jump at @xmath and @xmath . The limit @xmath corresponds to
the so-called isostatic condition. This is a crucial property of jammed
amorphous packings [ 31 , 169 , 33 , 32 ] . Indeed, it is known since
the work of Maxwell that isostatic systems are at the verge of
mechanical instability: removing one contact creates one “soft” mode
that allows particles to slide without paying any energy cost. This is
believed to be the origin of all the peculiar mechanical properties of
nearly jammed systems [ 31 , 170 , 33 , 32 ] . It is therefore quite
surprising that a mean field theory, that is a priori completely
unrelated to the detailed mechanical structure of the system, is able to
predict that @xmath at the transition. However, an important discrepancy
between theory and numerical data is revealed in Fig. 2.6 . In fact,
while the theory predicts @xmath for @xmath and @xmath , numerical data
show that @xmath (we will discuss this point later).

##### Scaling of the pair correlation around the delta peak

The shape of @xmath is deeply modified around jamming with respect to
the liquid phase, due to the development of the contact structure. The
most spectacular feature is the emergence of the delta peak at @xmath
and @xmath . Replica theory gives a prediction for the shape of the
delta peak in the whole region for @xmath and @xmath , which is tested
against numerical data in Fig. 2.7 and is shown to work quite well [ 2 ]
.

A more detailed investigation can be performed at @xmath , approaching
@xmath from above and from below using protocols (i) and (ii) described
in Sec. 2.2.1 [ 163 ] . For both protocols, at fixed @xmath and @xmath
with @xmath , it is found that @xmath jumps from 0 to the isostatic
average number of contacts @xmath around @xmath , on a scale @xmath .
This regime corresponds to the contact delta peak of @xmath . The
plateau is extended by a second power-law regime that corresponds to
particles in “quasi-contact”, carrying no force at jamming. In this
regime the scaling is the same for both protocols and @xmath displays
the same growth until it reaches the trivial large @xmath regime. A
third intermediate regime is required to match the first two around the
plateau, as illustrated in Fig. 2.8 .

Consistency sets clear scaling requirements for the different regimes.
When approaching jamming with protocol (i) , @xmath for @xmath , and for
@xmath , the pressure @xmath parametrizes the scaling function for
@xmath . A first scaling regime @xmath sees @xmath grow from 0 to the
average number of “contacts” @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath when @xmath for a constant @xmath [ 38 ] . Force-bearing
contacts are only observed at jamming proper, but their signature
develops asymptotically. A second regime for finite @xmath has

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a constant. At jamming, these nearly touching
“quasi-contacts” carry no force. For large @xmath , a trivial regime
develops independently of @xmath . Matching the first two scaling
regimes implies the existence of an additional intermediate regime for
@xmath where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath and @xmath (Fig. 2.8 ). Consistency then requires that
@xmath and @xmath with scaling relations @xmath and @xmath .

When approaching jamming with protocol (ii) from above, the remaining
overlaps provide a scaling variable @xmath [ 2 ] . In spite of the very
different preparation protocol, similar structural regimes are
identified. In the @xmath contact regime, @xmath grows from 0 to @xmath
by a universal scaling function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath when @xmath for a constant @xmath . For @xmath , here again

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

hence the two regimes must be matched by an intermediate scaling
function @xmath for @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath (Fig. 2.8 ). Consistency here requires that
@xmath and @xmath with @xmath and @xmath .

These scalings are verified using numerical data from [ 163 ] in Fig.
2.9 . The Gaussian replica theory provides precise and simple
predictions for the contact regime scaling function @xmath [ 1 , 2 , 163
] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

These predictions are found to be extremely accurate when @xmath is of
order 1, but they fail to capture the power-law tails at large or small
@xmath (Fig. 2.9 ). Gaussian RT indeed predicts an exponent @xmath for
both protocols, and completely misses the power-law divergence related
to @xmath , predicting @xmath . Note that, although the exponent @xmath
plays an important role as it will be shown below, the deviation between
the RT prediction and numerical data is barely visible in Fig. 2.9 , and
it is not visible at all in Fig. 2.7 because it is hidden in the tails
of the delta peak, which are also smoothed by thermal fluctuations.

The origin of these discrepancies is not clear yet. One possibility is
that they are due to the Gaussian assumption for the cage form, which
was found to be erroneous as detailed in Sec. 2.1.2 and in [ 129 ] . It
is possible that the non-Gaussian replica theory of [ 150 ] will lead to
an improved prediction, however this has still to be worked out. The
other possibility is that these discrepancies have their origin in the
physics of the low frequency vibrational modes (often called “soft
modes”) that appear at the jamming transition due to the approaching
mechanical instability [ 31 , 170 , 33 , 32 ] . It is worth stressing
that the analysis of Fig. 2.9 has been repeated in [ 129 ] in dimensions
@xmath and no difference has been found. The fact that these scalings
persist up to high dimensions strongly suggest that the mean field
theory should be able to capture them. However, how to include the soft
modes physics in the replica theory is not clear yet.

##### Force distributions and mechanical stability

The scaling functions @xmath characterize the contact regime and are
related to corresponding scaling functions for the probability
distribution of inter-particle forces @xmath . Here again, it is
convenient to consider the cumulative distribution @xmath rather than
the distribution itself.

For hard spheres approaching jamming from below, the average force
@xmath and the cumulative force distribution @xmath approaches a scaling
function defined by @xmath . In the contact regime the force and
distance distributions are also related through a Laplace transform

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

as suggested in [ 38 ] and tested in Fig. 2.10 . It follows that if
@xmath for @xmath , then @xmath for @xmath . The low-force distribution
is indeed consistent with @xmath and @xmath (Fig. 2.10 ). For soft
spheres approaching jamming from above, the pair potential sets the
relation between the force and the pair distributions: it gives @xmath
for @xmath and zero otherwise, so @xmath . In the jamming limit @xmath ,
and therefore @xmath , as in the previous case. Indeed, here again, the
low-force tail is consistent with @xmath (Fig. 2.10 ). For both
protocols, however, the regime intermediate between contacts and
quasi-contacts results in deviations from this power-law decay at very
weak forces away from jamming.

The exponents @xmath and @xmath defined above might have an important
role in the mechanical stability of the amorphous packings. In fact, it
has been proposed by Wyart [ 171 ] that @xmath is required for
mechanical stability. Both the soft spheres values ( @xmath , @xmath )
and the hard sphere ones ( @xmath , @xmath ), however, indicate a slight
violation of this condition. A generalized stability condition of the
form @xmath [ 171 ] is consistent with the numerical findings for @xmath
, but a direct test of this extended relation goes beyond the scope of
the current analysis because the measurement of the value of @xmath
requires a completely different numerical procedure.

#### 2.2.4 Binary mixtures

The replica theory can be extended to binary mixtures [ 172 ] . This is
important because in these systems crystallization can be easily avoided
also in @xmath ; this allows one to study their glass transition in
great detail, see e.g. [ 173 , 174 , 175 , 122 , 135 , 34 , 35 , 165 ] .
Jamming of binary mixtures has also been extensively investigated, see
e.g. [ 176 , 177 , 178 , 31 ] . Their investigation allows one to test
the prediction of the theory concerning the variation with composition
of packing density, structure, etc. Here results are reported for a
binary mixture of two types of three-dimensional spheres @xmath in a
volume @xmath , with different diameter @xmath and density @xmath .
Define @xmath the diameter ratio and @xmath the concentration ratio;
@xmath the packing fraction; @xmath the volume fraction of the small (
@xmath ) component. The equation of state used in [ 172 ] to describe
the liquid is a generalization of the Carnahan-Starling equation. The
theoretical results were compared with numerical results obtained from
the Lubachevsky-Stillinger algorithm discussed in section 2.1.2 .

In Fig. 2.11 , the jamming density @xmath is reported for different
mixtures, putting together numerical results [ 172 ] , experimental data
[ 179 ] , and the theoretical results. The latter have been obtained by
fixing the complexity to a single value for all mixtures, such that for
the monodisperse system @xmath . Note that a single “fitting” parameter
allows one to describe different sets of independent numerical and
experimental data. The prediction of the theory are qualitatively
similar to previous ones [ 177 , 178 ] , but the quantitative agreement
is much better. Interestingly, a similar qualitative behavior for @xmath
has been predicted by Mode-Coupling theory [ 173 , 174 ] ; although
there is no a priori reason why the variation with mixture composition
of @xmath and @xmath should be related, it is reasonable to expect that
they show similar trends [ 174 ] .

The average coordination numbers at @xmath are denoted @xmath , and it
was checked in [ 172 ] that their variations with @xmath are negligible.
They are reported in figure 2.12 for different mixtures. The numerical
values have been obtained in [ 172 ] . Experimental data from [ 180 ]
are also reported in the right panel of figure 2.12 . The total
coordination is close to the isostatic value @xmath , which is the value
predicted by the theory also for binary mixtures [ 172 ] . As it can be
seen from figure 2.12 , the computed values agree very well with the
outcome of the numerical simulation, at least for @xmath not too large,
while some discrepancies are observed in the contacts of the large
particles for large @xmath .

#### 2.2.5 Discussion

In summary, replica theory provides a quite satisfactory mean field
theory of the jamming transition. First of all, the very fact that the
theory predicts the existence of the transition from first principles is
non trivial. Furthermore, the basic phenomenology of the transition,
with the associated diverging peak of @xmath and jump of the number of
contacts to the isostatic value, are reproduced. And finally, quite
accurate predictions for the scaling functions @xmath can be obtained,
and compare quite well with numerical data.

Despite these successes, the level of accuracy of numerical simulations
around the jamming transition is so high that very detailed measurements
can be made, and these reveal several discrepancies with the theory. In
fact, the exponents @xmath and @xmath are predicted by the theory to be
@xmath which is wrong. Furthermore, the growth of the number of contacts
above the isostatic limit is predicted to be linear, while numerics
indicate a power-law growth with exponent close to @xmath . These
discrepancies are crucial, because these non-trivial exponents have been
related to the mechanical stability of the packings [ 170 , 171 ] , and
to the proliferation of soft modes that is connected to the isostatic
nature of the force network.

The results of [ 163 ] indicate that all the non-trivial exponents are
independent of dimension, therefore the nature of the jamming transition
in @xmath is exactly the same as in @xmath . This strongly suggests a
mean field description and indeed it has been suggested [ 181 ] that the
“upper critical dimension” for the jamming transition is @xmath
(although an equilibrium glass transition probably does not exist in
@xmath [ 135 , 122 ] ). Moreover, it has been shown [ 66 ] that a model
of hard spheres on the Bethe lattice, which is therefore rigorously mean
field in nature, reproduces all the phenomenology of the jamming
transition, including the soft modes physics. It seems therefore that
one can construct a refined mean field theory, capable of predicting the
non-trivial exponents and the associated peculiar mechanical features of
nearly jammed packings.

How can one do this in practice? Some different paths can be devised.
The first one is to include the effect of non-Gaussianity of the cage
shape in the theory. A first step has been performed in [ 150 ] , but
the detailed predictions of the non-Gaussian theory around jamming have
not been worked out yet. Besides this, there are reasons to suspect that
the exact description of the jamming transition within the replica
theory requires an infinite number of replica symmetry breakings [ 76 ]
. First of all, the generic situation with systems which have a glass
transition to a one-step replica symmetry breaking (1RSB) solution
describing the glass is to have a further transition to a phase with
more – eventually infinite – levels of replica symmetry breaking. In
mean field @xmath -spin glasses, 1RSB equilibrium states have a spectrum
with no soft modes – and this is true of all but the very highest
metastable states. A full replica symmetry breaking scheme would instead
naturally bring in soft modes, as happens for example in the case of the
Sherrington-Kirkpatrick model (the analogy between the physics of soft
modes and those of the SK model has been already noted in [ 171 ] ).
Performing an infinite replica symmetry breaking calculation in the
context of particle systems seems a difficult task: however, the
calculation might be doable in the limit of @xmath along the lines of [
150 ] . A detailed analysis of the Bethe lattice model of [ 66 ] should
help to shed light on this difficult problem. Also, setting up a field
theory description of the jamming transition, using the replica method,
along the lines of [ 124 ] , might be possible.

## Acknowledgments

Because these thesis covers work done in the last eight years, a
complete list of acknowledgements would be extremely long. In an effort
to keep it short, I am forced to refrain from mentioning many people to
which I am indebted for different reasons. I hope that they will not
feel offended.

I would like to warmly thank all my collaborators on these works: of
course without them none of what I presented would have been done. Among
them, I would like to particularly thank Giorgio Parisi and Jorge
Kurchan, who have been continuous sources of inspiration during all this
time; Ludovic Berthier and Patrick Charbonneau, who provided most of the
numerical data, were infinitely helpful in interpreting them, and gave
new ideas and motivations to push the theory forward; and my former
(often co-supervised) students Indaco Biazzo, Francesco Caltagirone,
Laura Foini, Hugo Jacquin and Pierfrancesco Urbani, who accepted
enthusiastically to work on these topics providing new energies to solve
difficult problems on which I had been stuck for long. I would also like
to thank all the colleagues that provided feedback on this work and
patiently pointed out problems and limits of the theory.

In addition, I would like to thank Guilhem Semerjian for being a
fantastic office mate during most of these years, extremely patient
despite the amount of noise that my collaborators and I produced, and
always available for interesting discussion; and Marco Tarzia for
continuous support and many extremely useful discussions. I am
particularly indebted to both of them, not only for being precious
collaborators in related projects, but also for a stimulating
conversation that gave me the main inspiration on how to write this
thesis.

Last but not least, I would like to thank all the members of the
committee for accepting to be part of it, for the time they devoted to
reading this thesis and discussing it with me, and for their very useful
comments on the manuscript.