# Introduction

Mathematicians are interested — among other things — in classifying all
elements/structures with specific properties. Often the classification
is achieved by relating them to elements/structures of a different kind.

In certain cases, this is a hopeless task. For example, a useful
“classification” of all prime numbers is out of reach, and we are, for
example, happy with an asymptotic description (the Prime Number
Theorem).

Before diving into technicalities, let us high-light two related
“classification” problems:

-   The first problem under consideration originates from spectral
    theory and geometric analysis. Let @xmath be a closed Riemannian
    manifold. What are the eigenvalues and the eigenfunctions of the
    Laplace operator?

-   The second problem is that of determining how many holomorphic
    functions live on a compact Riemann surface?

We will consider a finite-volume, locally symmetric space with
singulatities, and study a hybrid version of the above problems. That
is, we analyze certain functions, which are holomorphic in some of the
variables, and real-analytic only in other variables.

The underlying group structure of a locally symmetric space allows us to
appeal to the machinery of representation theory. We can derive so
called trace formulas - an identity between geometric data (conjugacy
classes) and spectral data (eigenvalues).

The aim of this thesis is to refine tools — the trace formulas — for a
classification of the joint eigenfunctions of certain families of
commuting operators, namely, a classification of all @xmath -automorphic
forms over a global field.

A final classicification in general is unachievable with current
technology. Some partial results exist. In the function field case, a
useful classification of @xmath -automorphic forms in terms of
Galois-representations was achieved by Drinfeld. In the number field
setting, we expect such a correspondence only for a proper subset of all
@xmath -automorphic forms. Special cases are known. But in general, the
situation is similar to that of the prime numbers. We can only count
@xmath -automorphic forms asymptotically (Weyl laws).

I extent, refine and generalize some of the presently known Weyl laws
for @xmath in this PhD thesis. The techniques lie at the interface of
arithmetic, harmonic analysis and representation theory, and are mostly
long computations.

The reader unfamiliar with Weyl laws might start with the surveys of
Iwaniec [ Iwaniec:Spectra ] , Müller [ Mueller:Weyllaw ] , and Sarnak [
Sarnak:Spectra ] . For example, Müller [ Mueller:Weyllaw ] adresses the
spectral analysis of compact Riemannian manifolds. I will motivate as
well the subject historically by starting with the classical example of
Maass cusp forms.

### Spectral analysis of Hecke Maass cusp forms

#### Hecke Maass cusp forms and their @xmath-functions

A Hecke Maass cusp form of weight zero and @xmath is a smooth,
complex-valued function @xmath on

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath is

1.  a modular form; for all elements @xmath , we have that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.  square integrable;

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.  a cusp form; for all @xmath , we have that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

4.  a Maass form; an eigenfunction of @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

5.  a Hecke form; an eigenfunction of the Hecke operators

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where the Hecke operator is defined for every integer @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Let @xmath denote the collection of (suitably normalized) Hecke Maass
cusp forms, and let @xmath be the @xmath -completion of the vector space
generated by the Hecke Maass functions. The set @xmath is an orthonormal
basis of @xmath , and @xmath is the space of measurable functions @xmath
with @xmath and satisfying the cuspidality condition, because the Hecke
and Laplace operators commute. These operators also commute with the
involution @xmath . We say that a Maass cusp form @xmath is even [odd]
if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Set @xmath [ @xmath ] if @xmath is even [odd]. The modularity and the
cuspidality condition (1) and (2) ensure that the Mellin transform of
@xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which we refer to as @xmath -function of @xmath , has an analytic
continuation with a functional equation [ Bump:Auto ] *Proposition
1.9.1, pg.107

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Conditions @xmath and @xmath ensure that @xmath has an Euler product
factorization

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The values @xmath and @xmath thus uniquely determine the factors in the
Euler product, and are therefore very important arithmetic quantities,
about which we know very little. For example, it remains an open
conjecture whether the Laplace eigenvalues occur with single
multiplicity (see Luo [ Luo:Weyl ] ).

#### Spectral analysis

Hecke Maass cusp forms can be defined for certain finite index subgroups
@xmath of @xmath , but the definitions @xmath – @xmath become more
involved [ Hejhal2 ] . In 1949, Maass realized that the Artin- @xmath
-function of certain Galois representations is identical to the @xmath
-function of a Hecke Maass cusp of weight zero and level

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with Laplace eigenvalue @xmath [ Bump:Auto ] *Theorem 1.9.1, pg.112. In
1956, Selberg [ Selbergtrace ] answered the question as to whether there
exist other examples of Hecke Maass cusp forms by providing an explicit
formula for

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Fourier transform of a compactly supported function.
The explicit formula consists of distributions associated to conjugacy
classes in @xmath , Eisenstein series, their residues, and
one-dimensional representations.

Because @xmath is an entire function, we cannot determine the location
of single Laplace eigenvalues, but we can prove an asymptotic formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be a congruence subgroup of @xmath , i.e., containing

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and let @xmath be the set of normalized Hecke Maass cusp forms of weight
zero and level @xmath . One purpose of this thesis is to provide the
following folklore asymptotic law for the Laplace eigenvalues:

###### Theorem (Uniform Weyl law 3.2.3).

For @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The constant @xmath depends upon @xmath and is bounded by the index
@xmath . The implied constant in the error term is absolute.

Although there are slightly sharper bounds in the @xmath -aspect of
@xmath (see Randol [ Randol ] ), no uniform bound (with proof) in the
level aspect seems to be available in the literature. In particular
cases, the proof is an exercise in bookkeeping if one applies
Hörmander’s method (as interpreted by Lapid/Müller [ LapidMueller:SLN ]
) and Huxley’s computation of the scattering matrix [ Huxley:Scatt ] .

A similar uniform bound over an arbitrary number field with the same
precision is achieved in this thesis. Indeed, the main application is a
uniform, mixed Weyl law. Mixed Weyl laws are asymptotic formulas for
automorphic forms with preassigned discrete series at some archimedean
places. The proof is fairly standard as soon as an explicit @xmath trace
formula is found, which generalizes the Selberg trace formula.

#### Trace formulas

Although this problem in spectral analysis was the motivating problem to
develop general, explicit @xmath -trace formulas, the main emphasis of
my thesis is the derivation of such formulas. The Weyl law is merely a
standard consequence.

Let us shortly review the literature available. In the topic of explicit
@xmath or @xmath trace formulas, the treatments of special questions are
scattered throughout the literature.

For expository simplicity, I have only stated the definition of an
automorphic function for weight zero. In general, one can allow
arbitrary real weight and also introduce unitary, finite dimensional
representations of @xmath . Trace formulas under these modifications
have been derived by both Hejhal [ Hejhal1 ] , [ Hejhal2 ] and Venkov [
Venkov ] . The formulas are often not as explicit as one would
ultimately like. For example, the distribution associated to the
Eisenstein series depends on the computation of a scattering matrix.
Both Hejhal [ Hejhal:Scatt ] and Huxley [ Huxley:Scatt ] have provided
these for the most interesting congruence subgroups.

From a representation theoretic point of view, it becomes clear that one
can isolate the holomorphic modular forms of weight @xmath . Selberg
derived formulas for the traces of Hecke operators acting on the family
of holomorphic modular functions of weight @xmath . Eichler [ Eichler ]
was able to treat @xmath . Hijikata [ Hijikata ] and Oesterlé [
Oesterle:Thesis ] have generalized these formulas for holomorphic
automorphic functions of weight @xmath .

The above theory is related to @xmath as we will soon see; the field
@xmath can be replaced by an arbitrary global field. The trace formula
for Laplace operators has only been derived for totally real fields by
Efrat [ Efrat ] , and for quadratic imaginary fields by Tanigawa [
Tanigawa ] , Szmidt [ Szmidt ] , Bauer [ Bauer1 ] , [ Bauer2 ] ,
Elstrodt, Grunewald and Mennicke [ Elstrodt ] . In this generality, the
scattering matrices have been computed for @xmath , where @xmath is the
ring of integers of a general number field @xmath , by Sarnak and Efrat
[ EfratSarnak:Scatt ] , Sorensen [ Sorensen ] , and Masri [ Masri:Scatt
] . The trace formula for the Hecke eigenvalue has been obtained by
Shimizu for holomorphic automorphic forms in several variables over a
totally real field [ Shimizu:Hecke ] . Bruggeman and Miatello [
BruggemanMiatello ] provide a closely related trace formula - the
Bruggeman-Kuznetsov formula - in the general number field setting.

### Spectral analysis of adèlic automorphic forms

#### Features of the adèlic setting

The computations in this thesis aim to derive similar formulas for a
global field, i.e., for either a general algebraic number field or a
global function field. I have chosen to compute in an adèlic framework
which has several advantages:

-   the trace formula already exists; the non-invariant Arthur trace
    formula only needs to be specialized

-   the relation to the group and its representation theory is more
    transparent

-   the fudge factors in the trace formula and the determinant of the
    scattering matrices are computable by exploiting the product
    structure of the adèles

-   the definition of the Hecke operators becomes more directly related
    to representation theory

-   the computations are largely independent of the specific global
    field under consideration

-   we can argue with @xmath instead of @xmath , where we have a better
    description of the conjugacy classes

The Arthur trace formula can only handle the analysis related to
congruence subgroups @xmath and treat integer weights.

Tamagawa [ Tamagawa:Trace ] , [ Tamagawa:Zeta ] studied the trace
formula in an adèlic setting for a division algebra. Jacquet and
Langlands [ JacquetLanglands ] derived a similar, but more complicated
formula for @xmath (see also the exposé of Jacquet and Gelbart [
GelbartJacquet ] ). Arthur generalized this theory to a general
reductive group in the number field setting [ Arthur:Rank1 ] , [
Arthur:Notes ] . Laumon [ Laumon1 ] , [ Laumon2 ] and Lafforgue [
Lafforgue ] developed the trace formula for @xmath in the function field
setting.

The coarse Arthur trace formula is only useful to mathematicians with
extensive training in the representation theory and harmonic analysis of
reductive groups. Various authors have succeeded in making the Arthur
trace formula more directly applicable. Duflo/Labesse [ DufloLabesse ]
and Knightly/Li [ KnightlyLi ] have shown how to derive Selberg’s trace
formula for the Hecke eigenvalue from the Arthur trace formula,
reproving trace formulas for the Hecke operator for @xmath -holomorphic
forms over @xmath under various restrictions on weight and level. More
general formulas for Hecke eigenvalues in this spirit were obtained by
Arthur [ Arthur:Hecke ] , who derived them from his invariant trace
formula [ Arthur:Invariant ] . For the analysis of Maass wave forms,
Reznikov [ Reznikov:Scatt ] has studied the Laplace eigenvalues via the
non-invariant trace formula and indicated a possible way to calculate
the determinant of the scattering matrix. The non-invariant trace
formula for @xmath over @xmath has been used by Lapid and Müller [
LapidMueller:SLN ] for the same purpose in higher rank. Both parties are
allowed to remain fairly vague, because their only purpose is to find a
Weyl law. No specialization of the Arthur trace formula to the Selberg
trace formula for the Laplace eigenvalues has been carried out
thoroughly in the literature.

My thesis provides a more flexible approach than in [ DufloLabesse ] , [
KnightlyLi ] , [ Reznikov:Scatt ] . Similar to these expositions, I will
derive explicit formulas from the coarse trace formula in the context of
@xmath . My approach is more closely related to the local representation
theory at each place, requires restrictions on neither weight nor level,
works in the context of a general global field, and can simultaneously
treat Maass cusp and holomorphic modular forms. This requires an
explicit construction of the test function largely motivated by the
theory of types at the non-archimedean places. This theory of types is
due to Bushnell and Kutzko [ BushnellKutzko:GLNopen ] , and is a
representation theoretic refinement of Atkin-Lehner theory [ AtkinLehner
] , or rather Casselman’s representation-theoretic interpretation [
Casselman:Restr ] . The article [ Reznikov:Scatt ] suggests appealing
quite heavily to the representation theory of groups like @xmath , and
relies conceptually on the induction-by-steps procedure(see Venkov and
Zograf [ VenkovZograf ] ). Bushnell and Kutzko’s theory asserts that
only a few representations of @xmath are actually necessary to
understand the cuspidal automorphic spectrum in general. An efficient
management of the congruence subgroups/congruence representation theory
is one of the main computational difficulties in the theory of
automorphic forms. As opposed to abelian class field theory, the
two-dimensional Galois representations are not directly related to
representation of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Only certain subsets of each category are related (see Paskunas [
Vytas:Unicity ] for a mathematical statement).

The representation theory of @xmath is well-understood, evidenced by
Stasinski’s efficient treatment [ Stasinski:Smooth ] . However, the
approach proposed here is more likely to generalize to @xmath because
the unitary dual of @xmath has not been classified.

#### From classical automorphic functions to adèlic automorphic
functions

Before shifting to the number field setting, let us briefly review how
classical automorphic functions are related to adèlic automorphic
functions. I follow Reznikov [ Reznikov:Scatt ] .

A function @xmath of weight zero lifts to a function @xmath on @xmath
via the homeomorphism @xmath . This lift depends on a fixed point @xmath
. We choose @xmath , and then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have obtained a function on a Lie group. If @xmath satisfies (1),
then @xmath is a function on @xmath .

In order to switch to an adèlic group, we must assume that @xmath is a
congruence subgroup, say, containing @xmath . In the process, we will
apply strong approximation, that is, for every compact, open subgroup
@xmath , we have a surjection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consider @xmath as a subgroup of @xmath . We obtain by the Chinese
remainder theorem and the representability of the varieties (over @xmath
) an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Denote by @xmath the projection onto one component @xmath , and define
@xmath as its pullback along

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the ring of adèles of @xmath . Set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then we have both @xmath and a homeomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This provides the lift to a function on @xmath . Weights can now be
easily introduced via a one-dimensional representation of @xmath . For
any integer @xmath , define

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The reader who wishes to see this worked out in the number field
setting, possibly allowing finite-dimensional representations of
congruence subgroups, may refer to [ Reznikov:Scatt ] .

#### Definition of adèlic automorphic functions

A cuspidal automorphic function on @xmath over @xmath of level @xmath
and integer weight @xmath is a smooth function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath is

1.  modular; for all elements @xmath and @xmath , we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.  cuspidal; for all @xmath , we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.  an eigenfunction of the Casimir operator, or alternatively, an
    eigenvector of the commutative @xmath -algebra

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    which acts as

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

4.  an eigenfunction of the Hecke operators, that is, an eigenvector of

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for all @xmath .

For expository simplicity, we have restricted ourselves to cuspidal
automorphic functions of level @xmath so far, because the Hecke
operators are fairly complicated to define for open subgroups of @xmath
.

#### Relation between automorphic functions and automorphic
representations

Consider @xmath as the vector space of measurable functions @xmath ,
such that both

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and condition (II) hold. With the right translation by elements of
@xmath , the space @xmath becomes a unitary representation of @xmath .
The irreducible subrepresentations of @xmath are called irreducible,
cuspidal automorphic representations.

Conditions (III) and (IV) ensure that a cuspidal automorphic function
@xmath is a matrix coefficient of a unique irreducible, supercuspidal
automorphic representation @xmath by the converse of Schur’s lemma.

Let @xmath be an open subgroup. An irreducible, cuspidal automorphic
representation has a matrix coefficient, which is an automorphic
cuspidal representation of weight @xmath and level @xmath if and only if
the restriction of @xmath to @xmath contains @xmath , where @xmath is
the trivial representation of @xmath .

#### The Arthur trace formula

According to Flath [ Flath ] , irreducible, supercuspidal automorphic
representations factor into a tensor product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of irreducible, infinite-dimensional, unitary representations @xmath of
@xmath for all primes @xmath and @xmath of @xmath . We refer to them as
(local) factors of @xmath . The automorphic @xmath -function essentially
depends only on @xmath , its Euler factors on the local factors @xmath
and @xmath .

We choose a finite set @xmath of prime numbers, containing all the
primes @xmath with @xmath . Choose compactly supported, smooth functions
@xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To an irreducible, unitary representation @xmath of @xmath or @xmath ,
we can associate a functional

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

because the operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is trace class. The functional depends in an obvious manner upon the
choice of Haar measure @xmath on @xmath .

The Arthur trace formula provides in this context a formula for

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath runs through the irreducible, cuspidal automorphic forms
whose restriction to @xmath contains @xmath . The formula is given in
terms of conjugacy classes of @xmath , Eisenstein series, their
residues, and one-dimensional representations.

#### @xmath-automorphic representations

In this thesis, I prefer to work with @xmath instead of @xmath . This is
for technical convenience only. Some of the reasons for this are:

-   the representation theory of @xmath is easier to describe

-   the conjugacy classes in @xmath are described by the theory of the
    rational canonical form

-   the Arthur trace formula is much better covered for @xmath in the
    literature

Bushnell and Kutzko explain the differences between @xmath and @xmath
for non-archimedean fields in [ BushnellKutzko:SLN1 ] and [
BushnellKutzko:SLN2 ] . Labesse and Langlands [ LabesseLanglands ] have
addressed the differences between @xmath and @xmath on the global level.

Studying @xmath comes with an inconvenient feature, namely, a large
center. This is technically annoying, but innocent. Every irreducible
representation always has a central character by Schur’s lemma.

Let @xmath be a global field with ring of adèles @xmath and set of
valuations @xmath . We fix a unitary Hecke character @xmath , consider
it as character of the center @xmath of @xmath , and choose a right
invariant quotient measure @xmath on @xmath .

An irreducible, cuspidal automorphic representation is an irreducible
subrepresentation of the right regular representation @xmath on the
space

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
                       
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

#### Similarity classes of @xmath-automorphic representations and
spectral parameters

In order to explicate the Arthur trace formula, we partition the
irreducible, cuspidal automorphic representations in the smallest
entities, disjointly analyzable by purely local methods. For this, we
define an equivalence relation whose equivalence classes will be called
similarity classes for lack of a better name. The local @xmath -factors
and the root numbers of a similarity class look almost identical.

Let us formulate the equivalence relation in explicit language. Let
@xmath be a local field, and let @xmath be a maximal compact subgroup of
@xmath , such that @xmath . For every local character @xmath of @xmath
and every complex value @xmath , define the principal series
representation or parabolic induction as the right regular
representation

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Two irreducible, cuspidal automorphic representations @xmath for @xmath
with factorization @xmath are similar if for all places @xmath either

-   @xmath and @xmath have square integrable matrix coefficients, and
    @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath , or

-   there exist two (possibly distinct) complex values @xmath , such
    that @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath , and @xmath is isomorphic to
    @xmath .

#### The Hecke operator on a similarity class

The first advantage of considering similarity classes are the easily
definable Hecke operators.

Let @xmath be a one-dimensional representation of @xmath with conductor
@xmath , then the Hecke operators are defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These operators build a family of commutative operators, which follows
from a multiplicity-one-property given by the analysis of Bushnell and
Kutzko’s types [ BushnellKutzko:GLNopen ] , the Godement’s principle [
Godement:Spherical ] , and a rephrasing of Casselman’s interpretation [
Casselman:Restr ] of Atkin-Lehner theory [ AtkinLehner ] . These
operators vanish on all but the similarity classes with elements @xmath
such that @xmath for some @xmath .

For the square integrable representations, the convolution operators
with
pseudo matrix coefficients have similar properties.

### The main result: An explicit trace formula

#### Spectral parameters

Let @xmath be a similarity class of irreducible, cuspidal automorphic
representations. We write @xmath or @xmath for the places at which the
factor of elements from @xmath are principal series representation or
square integrable representations. Similarly, we define @xmath as the
set of archimedean, real, complex, non-archimedean places in @xmath .
Because at almost all places @xmath , a cuspidal automorphic
representation has a factor isomorphic to @xmath , we know that @xmath
is cofinite, that is, @xmath is finite. All other sets are allowed to be
empty. A square integrable representation of @xmath does not exist,
hence @xmath .

For every element @xmath and every valuation @xmath , define @xmath ,
such that @xmath for two one-dimensional representations @xmath of
@xmath . The complex number @xmath is called the spectral parameter of
@xmath at @xmath . From them, one can directly compute the eigenvalues
of the Hecke operators, the eigenvalues of the Laplace operators, and
the Euler factors of the associated automorphic @xmath -function.

#### Relation to Laplace and Hecke eigenvalues

In the context of @xmath , the relations between spectral parameters and
the Laplace or Hecke eigenvalues of the Hecke Maass cusp @xmath forms
are

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

#### The constructed test function and the cuspidal spectrum

Let @xmath be a similarity class of automorphic representations. For
every @xmath , choose an arbitrary even function @xmath , which is the
Fourier transform of a compactly supported function.

We fix an arbitrary finite (possibly empty) subset @xmath of @xmath , at
which we want to examine the spectral parameters or equivalently the
Hecke eigenvalues.

I will construct an explicit test function @xmath depending on the above
data, such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath being the residue characteristic of @xmath . The first
product is to be interpreted as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

if @xmath is the empty set, for example, in the global function field
setting.

This is the content of Section 1.3.2 . The above construction is shown
in full generality. For the remaining parts, I restrict myself to the
analysis of equivalence classes, which are unramified at the complex
places only. The reader might excuse this, as the classical references
restrict to this case as well. The coarse Arthur trace formula provides
an identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

I wish to indicate in some examples how to express @xmath only in terms
of @xmath , of course depending on the similarity class @xmath and the
set @xmath .

#### Example 1: The identity distribution

The identity distribution vanishes if @xmath is chosen to be non-empty.
Otherwise, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The numbers @xmath are positive scalars depending only on the factor of
@xmath at @xmath , for example, @xmath is one if @xmath . This is
Theorem 1.5.2 .

#### Example 2: The Eisenstein distribution and the scattering matrix

The notion of a scattering matrix only makes sense if automorphic
representations in @xmath have no square integrable factors. This is
related to the Jacquet-Langlands correspondence [ JacquetLanglands ] ,
Weyl’s observation that the Laplace operators of compact Riemannian
manifolds admit discrete spectrum, and the existence of so-called simple
trace formulas by Flicker and Kazhdan [ FlickerKazhdan ] .

If we assume that @xmath has no square integrable factor, we can define
a Hecke operator @xmath with @xmath , such that @xmath (possibly only
after twisting by a one-dimensional representation). In this case, we
define for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which differs from the zeta function of @xmath only by a finite number
of factors, thus admitting a meromorphic continuation and some sort of
functional equation. In the function field setting, we again interpret
the product over the empty sets as being one. The role of @xmath is
parallel to that of the scattering matrix in classical treatments. The
reader observes that @xmath only depends on the characters at the
archimedean places, and all non-archimedean Euler factors at which
@xmath is ramified are skipped.

The distribution of the Eisenstein series evaluates in the number field
setting as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for a function field with field of constants @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

With the exception of the full modular group, the comparison with the
classical formulas for the scattering matrix as given by Hejhal [
Hejhal:Scatt ] and Huxley [ Huxley:Scatt ] is difficult. For example,
for @xmath we obtain precisely what Selberg does (see Iwaniec [
Iwaniec:Spectral ] *Theorem 10.2).

The Eisenstein distribution vanishes if the elements in @xmath have at
least one supercuspidal factor or at least two square integrable
factors. If there is only one square integrable, non-supercuspidal
factor, the Eisenstein distribution is explicitly computed. More precise
statements can be found in Theorem 1.10.5 .

### Application of the trace formulas

The Arthur, Eichler-Selberg, and Selberg trace formulas have many
applications. I focus here on only one standard application, namely, how
to use the trace formula to count automorphic representations. This
requires the choice @xmath .

#### Dimension formulas

For @xmath to be empty, @xmath must either be a global function field or
a totally real number field. The number of isomorphism classes in @xmath
is finite, but can become arbitrarily large. The trace formula provides
the dimension in terms of elliptic elements. I remain at this stage
fairly vague, but further investigations are planned.

#### Mixed, uniform Weyl laws

If @xmath is non-empty, then @xmath is an algebraic number field. Let
@xmath [ @xmath ] be the number of real [complex] places inside @xmath .
We prove three Weyl laws.

###### Theorem (See Theorem 3.2.1).

-    If @xmath , and all factors in @xmath are principal series
    representations, the following asymptotic holds for @xmath :

      -- -- -------- --
                     
            @xmath   
                     
            @xmath   
      -- -- -------- --

-    If @xmath is an algebraic number field, and every element in @xmath
    has a square integrable local factor, the following asymptotic holds
    for @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- --
                           
         @xmath   @xmath   
                           
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

-    If @xmath is an algebraic number field, the following asymptotic
    holds for @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- --
                           
         @xmath   @xmath   
                           
                  @xmath   
                           
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

The constant @xmath depends upon the number field and the similarity
class @xmath . The implied constant in @xmath depend on @xmath
explicitly.

The constant @xmath is explicitly provided in dependence upon @xmath .
The first and second asymptotic have partial intersections. The last
bound is more general than the previous bounds, but also comes with a
larger error term. It comes as a surprise that one cannot easily isolate
@xmath -terms as soon as the number field has two archimedean places. In
the complex case, these terms are absorbed into the error term @xmath .
All provided bounds are absolute for fixed @xmath .

This is the first explicit Weyl law with a sharp bound for @xmath beyond
the case @xmath (see [ Elstrodt ] for a discussion). The vanishing of
the intermediate terms has also been obtained over @xmath by Risager [
Risager ] in the more difficult, classical, congruence-subgroup-setting.
This is not unexpected, since the Jacquet-Langlands correspondence [
JacquetLanglands ] asserts that the Weyl law should be that of a compact
surface. For fields with complex places, the @xmath -terms get absorbed
by the error term @xmath . The bounds are close to optimal in the sense
that the Weyl law is almost as sharp as in the easier case of a closed
Riemannian manifold, where the Weyl law was given by Avakumović [
Avakumovic ] :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This bound is sharp for spheres (see Müller [ Mueller:Weyllaw ] for an
overview). Slightly sharper bounds with an error term @xmath in the
@xmath -aspect exist in our setting over @xmath , but one has to appeal
to the Selberg Zeta function. I do not know of any serious consequence
of this sharper saving. Over compact, hyperbolic, arithmetic Riemannian
surfaces, lower bounds exist as well @xmath by Hejhal [ Hejhal1 ]
*pg.303, and a slightly sharper lower bound has been recently proven for
@xmath by Li and Sarnak [ LiSarnak ] , but these are the best bounds
available over @xmath .

No error terms have been obtained in the literature for any algebraic
number field other than @xmath . Reznikov [ Reznikov:Scatt ] has
provided the main term in the special case @xmath for @xmath over a
general number field. His methods are also certainly capable of deriving
sharp bounds in this particular case.

I also want to mention that an upper bound is known in great generality
due to work of Donnelly [ Donnelly ] , and the main term by work of
Lindenstrauss and Venkatesh [ LindenstraussVenkatesh:Weyl ] for split
adjoint semisimple groups over @xmath , and with a similar non-uniform
error term for @xmath over @xmath by work of Lapid and Müller [
LapidMueller:SLN ] .

The above asymptotic is the first instance of a mixed Weyl law with
discrete series representations at some archimedean places and principal
series representations at others. Even the main terms were unknown in
this case. In principle, by appealing to simple trace formulas, one
could argue that this does not come unexpected in many (but certainly
not all) cases.

My bound is uniform in the @xmath -aspect and only implicitly depends
upon the number field @xmath . I could not find even a single bound of
this form for @xmath or a compact surface in the literature, that is, a
bound which is uniform in the level aspect. The same bound can be
obtained for a compact hyperbolic Riemann surface @xmath in families of
coverings by appealing to the classical Selberg trace formula and the
Hörmander’s method (see section two in Lapid and Müller [
LapidMueller:SLN ] ). In the congruence subgroup setting over @xmath ,
the same method works with explicit knowledge of the scattering matrix.
A uniform bound @xmath seems possible in this particular case, when one
appeals to Jorgenson and Kramer’s uniform prime geodesic theorem [
JorgensonKramer ] and applies a contour integration of the Selberg Zeta
function.

Sharper local bounds in the level aspect have been obtained by Duke [
Duke:Dimension ] and Michel/Venkatesh [ MichelVenkatesh:Weight1 ] in
some cases for

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One should also compare the uniformity with the uniform
Riemann-van-Mangoldt estimates for @xmath -functions (see
Iwaniec/Kowalski [ IwaniecKowalski ] Theorem 5.8, pg.104). By using the
analogy between @xmath -functions and Selberg zeta functions, it is
suggested that the uniform bound is hard to beat. Perhaps slightly
improved bounds are possible by appealing to Littlewood’s work on the
Riemann hypothesis, but no significant savings can be obtained along
these lines.

### Outline and organization of the material

#### Chapter 1:

I have elected to prove the trace formula in the first chapter modulo
the local harmonic analysis, which is provided only in the last three
chapters. Without it, the computations in those chapters would seem
meaningless. After a short mentioning of standard facts about cuspidal
automorphic representations, I construct the required test functions
explicitly in dependence of the functions @xmath , the similarity class
@xmath , and the set @xmath (Section 1.3). I introduce the Arthur trace
formula merely as an identity of distributions in Section 1.4:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

I provide explicit formulas for the @xmath in Sections 1.5–1.11 by
factoring them into local distributions. The local distributions are
computed in chapter seven, eight, and nine, depending on whether local
means real, complex, or non-archimedean.

#### Chapter 2:

I derive the Selberg trace formula for @xmath , and briefly indicate the
general situation. This should be sufficient to indicate the translation
between the similarity class setting and the congruence subgroup setting
in general, especially because I have already stressed this in the
transfer between classical and adèlic @xmath automorphic functions
mentioned above.

#### Chapter 3:

I address the counting problem and, in particular, prove the Weyl law.

#### Chapters 4–6:

I reprove some general results about locally compact groups, which seem
to be available only either in the Lie or totally disconnected group
setting. With the theory provided, I give an algebraic formalism to
compute the trace distribution of an admissible representation, which
consists of either parabolic inductions (Theorem 6.3.4 ), subquotients
of parabolic inductions (Corollary 6.1.6 ), or compactly induced
representations from a subgroup compact modulo the center (Theorem 6.4.9
). This motivates the construction of the test functions.

#### Chapters 7–9:

I provide the local harmonic analysis which was required for the trace
formula. This relies heavily on chapters four through six. All of this
is ground work, but the devil is in the details. For the chapters
dealing with @xmath and @xmath , I refer mainly to the monographs of
Hejhal [ Hejhal1 ] , [ Hejhal2 ] and Elstrodt, Grunewald, and Mennicke [
Elstrodt ] , despite the fact that these do not address representation
theory. For the non-archimedean case, I sketch the theory of types via
Clifford theory and develop the computations from there. A particular
eye-catcher is the formula for the elliptic orbital integral 9.11.4 ,
which begs for a generalization to higher rank.

### Potential further investigations and applications

#### Unramified factors at complex places

The analysis of automorphic forms with ramified principal series
representations as complex factors remains almost unaddressed. The
non-spherical situation is not studied in the literature to the extent
needed to generalize my analysis in this case, mostly because the Abel
inversion formula becomes very complicated (see Brummelhuis and
Koornwinder [ Koornwinder:SL2C ] ). In particular, my construction of
the corresponding test functions suggest that new and interesting
phenomena occur. The construction is parallel to that for the discrete
series representation at the real places, and the trace formula should
thus become very simple.

#### Non-square-free Hecke operators

The above trace formula only addresses traces of square-free Hecke
operators. Although this restriction can be justified by the fact that
these operators generate all Hecke operators and completely determine
the local representation theory, amplification methods in analytic
number theory require a trace formula for all Hecke operators. The
omitted computations do not appear very difficult in this particular
case.

#### Equidistribution of Hecke operators

I have not addressed the distribution of the Hecke eigenvalues at all.
In Knightly and Li [ KnightlyLi ] *Chapter 29, following
Conrey-Duke-Farmer [ Conrey:Hecke ] and Serre [ Serre:Hecke ] , it is
demonstrated how one can prove the Sato-Tate conjecture for unramified
Hecke operators via the Eichler-Selberg trace formula for weight @xmath
. Sarnak has addressed the question for Maass functions [ Sarnak:Hecke ]
. A natural question is whether the Sato-Tate conjecture holds for
similarity classes as well.

#### Generalization to higher rank

As mentioned, much of my computations generalize to higher rank, in
particular, the construction of the test functions. At the very least,
explicit formulas for @xmath are desirable. Some formulas have been
obtained by Venkov [ Venkov:SL3 ] and Wallace [ Wallace:SL3 ] , but the
approach via the Arthur trace formula seems more profitable in a
congruence setting. The computational difficulties will involve
sophisticated integral calculus at the archimedean places and counting
problems at the non-archimedean places. Both of these difficulties
should be addressed via the use of root systems, infinitesimal methods,
and the Bruhat-Tits building. These methods have been avoided in the
present treatment of @xmath , since I was interested in an elementary
presentation close to the classical references. This luxury is too
expensive in higher rank.

### Acknowledgements

I would like to express my gratitude to both my advisors, Prof. Valentin
Blomer and Prof. Ralf Meyer. Without their knowledge, advice, time, and
patience, this thesis would not have been possible.

I am indebted to many of my colleagues at the Mathematical Institute
Göttingen and the Internet community around Mathoverflow for interesting
and fruitful mathematical discussions.

I am thankful to my family and friends for their continuing support.

During the preparation of this thesis, I was supported by the Research
Training Group 1493 “Mathematical Structures in Modern Quantum Physic”,
and indirectly by the Volkswagenstiftung and the European Research
Council via grants of Prof. Blomer.

## Part I — The @xmath trace formula

In this chapter, we will state and derive the explicit trace formula
from the Arthur trace formula. The local analysis will be postponed to
later chapters, and for the time being, we will take the local results
for granted. Because the Arthur trace formula has been treated in
various notes by Jacquet and Langlands [ JacquetLanglands ] , Gelbart
and Jacquet [ GelbartJacquet ] , Gelbart [ Gelbart ] , Laumon [ Laumon2
] , Shokranian [ Shokranian ] , Laumon [ Laumon2 ] , Arthur [
Arthur:Notes ] , and Knightly and Li [ KnightlyLi ] , it is introduced
merely as a cumbersome identity of distributions and treated as a
black-box tool. In this thesis, we apply the Arthur trace formula with a
fixed central character as given [ JacquetLanglands ] , [ GelbartJacquet
] , and [ Gelbart ] .

The reader who wants to get the basic idea is encouraged to read
chapters nine and eleven in Deitmar and Echterhoff’s textbook [ DeEc ] .
The book explains the trace formula of Tamagawa [ Tamagawa:Trace ] ,
Gangolli and Warner [ Gangolli:Trace ] , and Wallach [ Wallach:Trace ] ,
which is valid for a cocompact lattice in a locally compact group and
derives the Selberg trace formula for a compact Riemann surface from
there. Despite the fact that the non-compact, adèlic and non-spherical
situation is more delicate, I derive explicit trace formulas from the
Arthur trace formula via the same principle.

## Chapter 1 The explicit @xmath trace formula

### 1.1. Notation

#### 1.1.1. Global fields and local fields

Let @xmath be a global field, which is by definition either

-   an algebraic number field, that is, a finite field extension of the
    rational numbers @xmath , or

-   an algebraic function field, that is, a finite field extension of
    the rational polynomials @xmath over the finite field of constants
    of cardinality @xmath .

Consider [ ArtinWhaples ] for an axiomatic approach. Let @xmath be the
ring of integers of @xmath .

Valuations of @xmath are denoted by @xmath and, if non-archimedean, are
always normalized, such that they surject onto @xmath . Let @xmath be
the set of valuations of @xmath . We define subsets of @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Let @xmath be the completion of @xmath at @xmath and let @xmath denote
its norm.

If @xmath is a non-archimedean field, we denote by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Let @xmath be any completion of @xmath , then define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Any one-dimensional representation @xmath decomposes according to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for a unique character @xmath of @xmath , such that the image of @xmath
and @xmath coincide, and for a complex value @xmath . The value @xmath
is unique if @xmath is archimedean, and unique modulo @xmath if @xmath
is non-archimedean with residue characteristic @xmath . We say that
@xmath is algebraic if @xmath can be chosen as zero.

#### 1.1.2. Adèles and Idèles

The ring @xmath of adèles is defined as the set

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

With the restricted product topology (see Example 5.1.5 ) the ring
@xmath becomes a locally compact commutative ring. Let @xmath denote the
group of invertible elements in @xmath , sometimes referred to as the
group of idèles. We have

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The field @xmath embeds diagonally into @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will drop @xmath from the notation, and consider @xmath as a subring
of @xmath and @xmath as subgroup of @xmath .

###### Theorem 1.1.1 ([Tate:Thesis]).

The group @xmath is compact.

We define an adèlic norm map on @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem 1.1.2 (Product Formula [Tate:Thesis]).

For @xmath , we have that @xmath .

The group @xmath is a cocompact lattice in

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem 1.1.3 ([Tate:Thesis]).

The group @xmath is compact.

A Hecke quasi character is a one-dimensional representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There exists a complex value @xmath and a unique one-dimensional
representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

seen as character of @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is an algebraic number field, the value @xmath is unique. If
@xmath is a global function field, whose field of constants has
cardinality @xmath , then the value @xmath is unique modulo @xmath We
say that @xmath is an algebraic Hecke character if @xmath can be chosen
as zero.

###### Theorem 1.1.4 ([Tate:Thesis]).

An algebraic Hecke character @xmath factors into a tensor product @xmath
of algebraic one-dimensional representations @xmath of @xmath , of which
all but finitely many are trivial.

#### 1.1.3. Additive Haar measures on @xmath and @xmath

We fix an additive character @xmath of @xmath , and choose the additive
Haar measure @xmath of @xmath such that it is self-dual with respect to
@xmath , i.e., for all places @xmath and for all functions @xmath , we
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Haar measure @xmath on @xmath is the product measure @xmath . This
measure is self-dual with regards to @xmath , i.e., for all function
@xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We choose an additive character @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . In this
manner, the compact subgroup @xmath has unit measure.

#### 1.1.4. Multiplicative Haar measures on @xmath and @xmath

Given the additive Haar measure for every local field, we define the
Haar measure @xmath on @xmath via the local zeta function [ Tate:Thesis
] *pages 316--322

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For each function @xmath , we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have for real and complex valuations @xmath . Let @xmath be the
completed zeta function of the global field @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The zeta function has a meromorphic extension the whole complex plane
with a simple pole at @xmath . We define @xmath and @xmath as the
coefficients in the Laurent expansion at @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Haar measure @xmath of @xmath is given as the normalized product
measure

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 1.1.5. The group @xmath and its subgroups

For any unital ring @xmath , we define the groups

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and for any valuation, we define the compact group

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Compact groups conventionally carry a probability Haar measure. This
convention differs from [ GelbartJacquet ] (see Equation 7.6 and 7.7 on
page 242). ¹ ¹ 1 The normalization is absolutely convergent, since the
root numbers @xmath at all non-archimedean places [ Bump:Auto ]
*Proposition 3.1.9, page 274. The Haar measure on @xmath and @xmath are
normalized, such that we have integral identities for @xmath , and
@xmath

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath            
     @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- --

We normalize the Haar measures on @xmath and @xmath [ DeEc ]
*Propsosition 1.5.5, page 25, in such a way to produce integral
identities for @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We normalize the Haar measure on @xmath , such that for @xmath

  --------- -- -------- -------- --
  (1.1.1)      @xmath   @xmath   
  (1.1.2)                        
  --------- -- -------- -------- --

### 1.2. Cuspidal automorphic representations

#### 1.2.1. Unitary representations

###### Definition 1.2.1.

For an algebraic Hecke character @xmath , we define the Hilbert space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as the space of measurable functions @xmath such that

1.  for all @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and

2.  for a @xmath -right invariant measure @xmath on @xmath , we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Definition 1.2.2.

We define the subspace

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of functions, which additionally satisfy:

(3) for any invariant measure @xmath on @xmath and all element @xmath ,
we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark.

The group @xmath acts via right translations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

on @xmath and @xmath . We obtain two unitary representations, @xmath and
@xmath .

###### Definition 1.2.3.

The @xmath -algebra @xmath is defined as the finite linear combinations
of products

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where each function @xmath is smooth, compactly supported, and at almost
all non-archimedean places the function @xmath is the characteristic
function of the set @xmath .

The product is given as the convolution product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the involution as the usual

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 1.2.2. The definition of the cuspidal distribution

###### Theorem 1.2.4 ([GelbartJacquet]*Corollary 2.4, page 218).

The representation @xmath is admissible and the operator

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

is trace class for all elements @xmath

###### Corollary 1.2.5 ([DeEc]*Lemma 9.2.7, page 178).

The representation @xmath discretely decomposes into irreducible,
unitary subrepresentations. Each of these unitary subrepresentations
@xmath is trace class, that is, the operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a trace class operator for all @xmath We obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark.

The analogous statements for @xmath are false.

###### Definition 1.2.6.

Introduce the @xmath -algebra

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as the space of finite linear combination of products @xmath , where
@xmath is a smooth function, compactly supported modulo the center, and
satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with the convolution product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the involution

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Corollary 1.2.7.

The @xmath -algebra representation of @xmath , associated to @xmath or
any unitary representation @xmath with central character @xmath ,
factors through the surjection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

that is, the @xmath -algebra representation

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

That the map is surjective is a basic fact [ DeEc ] *Lemma 1.5.1, page
21. Let @xmath be a unitary, trace class representation with central
character @xmath of a locally compact group. The quotient integral
formula [ DeEc ] *Theorem 1.5.2, page gives a unique Haar measure @xmath
on @xmath with

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We will only work with @xmath -algebra representations of @xmath , since
every irreducible, unitary representation has a unitary central
character.

###### Definition 1.2.8 (The cuspidal distribution).

We define the ( @xmath -)cuspidal distribution as the distribution

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Corollary 1.2.9.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 1.2.3. Factorization of the cuspidal automorphic representations

It is a natural goal to construct functions @xmath , such that @xmath
vanishes for many, but not all, of the representations.

###### Definition 1.2.10.

An irreducible subrepresentation of @xmath is called a cuspidal
automorphic representation.

We want to describe a partition of @xmath into smaller subspaces.

###### Theorem 1.2.11 ([Flath]).

Let @xmath be an irreducible, cuspidal automorphic representation of
@xmath with algebraic central character. It admits a factorization

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

into irreducible, unitary, infinite-dimensional representations @xmath
of @xmath , such that for all but finitely many @xmath the
representation @xmath is isomorphic to an unramified parabolic induction

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 1.2.12.

If @xmath is an irreducible, cuspidal automorphic form with @xmath ,
then we say @xmath is a factor of @xmath .

###### Theorem 1.2.13 ([Dixmier:Cstar-algebres]).

Every irreducible, unitary representation of @xmath is trace class.

###### Corollary 1.2.14.

Let @xmath be a tensor product of functions @xmath on @xmath . We have a
factorization

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 1.2.4. The local factors of automorphic representations

Now, we see that it is sufficient to construct functions @xmath , such
that @xmath vanishes for many, but not all, of the representations
@xmath . Let us examine the unitary representation theory of @xmath .

###### Definition 1.2.15.

Let @xmath be an irreducible, unitary representation of @xmath .

-   The representation @xmath is supercuspidal if for each vector @xmath
    the function

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    is compactly supported modulo @xmath .

-   The representation @xmath is square-integrable if for each vector
    @xmath the following integral converges:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   The representation @xmath is tempered if for each vector @xmath the
    following integral converges for all @xmath :

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Theorem 1.2.16 (Coarse classification of irreducible, unitary
representations of @xmath, [Bump:Auto], [BushnellHenniart:GL2],
[JacquetLanglands]).

An irreducible, unitary representation with algebraic central character
@xmath is isomorphic to one and only one of the following:

1.   a one-dimensional representation @xmath for a unitary
    one-dimensional representation @xmath of @xmath with @xmath ;

2.   a principal series representation @xmath associated to two
    algebraic characters @xmath of @xmath with @xmath , and a complex
    number @xmath , i.e., the right regular representation

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    on the space of functions

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

    only the complex values @xmath or, if @xmath , additionally @xmath
    can occur;

3.   if @xmath is non-archimedean, to a supercuspidal representation,
    which can be realized as the compact induction from an maximal open
    subgroup which is compact modulo @xmath ;

4.   if @xmath is non-archimedean, to the Steinberg/special
    representation, which is denoted by @xmath and defined as a
    subquotient @xmath for @xmath ;

5.   if @xmath is real, to a discrete series representation (denoted by
    @xmath ), one isomorphism class for each even/odd integer @xmath in
    the case @xmath / @xmath .

We have an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For more precise statements refer to Sections 7.3 , 8.3 , and 9.3 . The
one-dimensional representations cannot occur as local factors of
cuspidal automorphic forms. The limits of discrete series
representations for @xmath are included in case (2) as @xmath and @xmath
, because they are not proper subquotients in the case @xmath opposed to
the situation in @xmath .

###### Theorem 1.2.17 ([Bump:Auto], [BushnellHenniart:GL2], [Wallach1]).

-    The supercuspidal, the Steinberg, and the discrete series
    representations are square-integrable.

-    The principal series representations with @xmath are tempered.

-    The principal series representations for @xmath with @xmath are not
    tempered.

-    The one-dimensional representations are not tempered.

###### Theorem 1.2.18 (Kazhdan, Clozel, Delorme [ClozelDelorme],
[Kazhdan:Pseudo]).

Every square-integrable, irreducible representation @xmath of @xmath
with central character @xmath has a pseudo (matrix)coefficient @xmath ,
i.e., for every unitary, infinite-dimensional representation @xmath of
@xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

I will explicitly construct the pseudo coefficient for all
square-integrable representations of @xmath (Corollary 7.5.4 , Theorems
9.4.9 and 9.4.10 ) and also prove a general result for locally profinite
groups (Corollary 6.4.12 ). Among other things, this allows us to extend
the computations of Knightly and Li to weight two modular forms (see the
remark on page 214 in [ KnightlyLi ] ). This construction has been
previously discussed in different terms by Hejhal [ Hejhal1 ] *page 459.

###### Corollary 1.2.19 (First spectral refinement).

Fix:

-    a finite subset @xmath of places

-    one irreducible, square-integrable representation @xmath with
    central character @xmath for every place @xmath

For each element @xmath with @xmath for all @xmath , we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark (No pseudo coefficient for principal series).

An irreducible principal series representation of @xmath does not have
pseudo coefficients. In fact, if there exists a complex value @xmath and
an element @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is discrete.

###### Example 1.2.20.

Let @xmath be a non-archimedean field and @xmath be the characteristic
function of @xmath . For every irreducible, unitary representation
@xmath of @xmath , we compute

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The next theorem is a consequence of the Propositions 7.5.1 , 8.5.1 ,
Theorems 9.4.12 , 9.4.14 , and 9.4.17 .

###### Theorem 1.2.21.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two algebraic one-dimensional representations
of @xmath . There exists a commutative subalgebra @xmath of @xmath ,
such that

1.   for all unitary, irreducible representations @xmath of @xmath
    either @xmath for all elements of @xmath or @xmath is isomorphic to
    a unitary principal series @xmath , and

2.   for any two non-isomorphic irreducible principal series
    representations @xmath and @xmath , there exists an element @xmath
    with

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Corollary 1.2.22 (Second spectral refinement).

Fix two disjoint finite subsets of @xmath and @xmath of @xmath with
@xmath . Choose for every element @xmath one irreducible,
square-integrable representation @xmath with central character @xmath ,
and for every @xmath two (possibly trivial) algebraic characters @xmath
of @xmath .

Choose @xmath for @xmath , @xmath for @xmath , and @xmath for all
remaining (non-archimedean) places. Define @xmath . We obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark.

In the special case where all archimedean places @xmath are contained in
@xmath , the sum is finite. If we assume that the factor at one
archimedean place is not square-integrable, we will observe that the sum
is infinite. See [ Reznikov:Scatt ] and [ Harish:Auto ] for similar
results in this direction.

#### 1.2.5. Classes of cuspidal automorphic representations

The last corollary indicates the need for a more specialized notation.

###### Definition 1.2.23 (The similarity class of automorphic
representations).

Two irreducible, cuspidal automorphic representations @xmath and @xmath
with the same algebraic central character are similar if for all @xmath

-   either the representations @xmath and @xmath are isomorphic
    square-integrable representations of @xmath , or

-   the representations @xmath and @xmath satisfy @xmath for possibly
    distinct complex values @xmath and the same algebraic character
    @xmath of @xmath .

In this case, we write @xmath for the similarity relation, and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for the equivalence class of @xmath .

###### Definition 1.2.24.

Let @xmath be a similarity class of automorphic representations. Fix
@xmath . Define the sets

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Definition 1.2.25 (The character @xmath).

Define an infinite family of algebraic characters

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 1.2.26 (The spectral parameter of @xmath).

The spectral parameter is a family of complex parameters

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Remark.

The set @xmath and the collection of characters @xmath depends only on
the equivalence class of a cuspidal automorphic representation, whereas
the family of complex numbers @xmath determines @xmath up to
isomorphism.

#### 1.2.6. Twists by one-dimensional representations

Twisting by a one-dimensional representation is an automorphism of the
cuspidal automorphic spectrum.

###### Lemma 1.2.27.

Let @xmath and @xmath be algebraic Hecke characters. The following
statements are equivalent for any unitary representation of @xmath :

1.   the representation @xmath is a cuspidal automorphic representation
    with central character @xmath

2.   the representation @xmath is a cuspidal automorphic representation
    with central character @xmath

###### Proof.

This is a well-known property of the Mackey induction functor

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Additionally, the cuspidality is preserved by tensoring with
one-dimensional representations. ∎

###### Definition 1.2.28 (Minimal automorphic representations).

An irreducible, cuspidal automorphic representation @xmath with central
algebraic character is called minimal automorphic representation if
@xmath is isomorphic to either

-   @xmath ,

-   a minimal supercuspidal representation, ² ² 2 see 9.2.5 and 9.2.8
    for a definition or

-   an irreducible proper subquotient of @xmath , i.e., to either the
    Steinberg representation @xmath or a discrete series representation
    @xmath .

We need only concern ourselves with minimal automorphic representations.

###### Lemma 1.2.29.

Every irreducible, cuspidal automorphic representation @xmath is
isomorphic to the tensor product of a minimal automorphic representation
and @xmath for an algebraic Hecke character @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be an irreducible, cuspidal automorphic representation @xmath
, then Theorem 1.2.11 applies. Let @xmath be the set of valuations
@xmath , such that @xmath is not an unramified principal series
representation. If @xmath is a supercuspidal representation, then there
exists by definition an algebraic character @xmath of @xmath , such that
@xmath is minimal. The remaining @xmath ’s are isomorphic to a principal
series representation / to an irreducible subquotient @xmath . Note that
@xmath is isomorphic to a principal series representation / to an
irreducible subquotient @xmath . Define the algebraic Hecke character
@xmath via strong approximation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The automorphic cuspidal representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is minimal. ∎

#### 1.2.7. Classification of supercuspidal representations

Let @xmath be non-archimedean. Thus, there exist two conjugacy classes
of open, maximal subgroups in @xmath , both of which are compact modulo
the center. The group @xmath and the normalizer of the Iwahori subgroup
@xmath are representatives of these conjugacy classes.

###### Theorem 1.2.30 ([Kutzko:SuperGL2]).

Every irreducible, unitary, supercuspidal representation is isomorphic
to a compact induction of a finite-dimensional, irreducible, unitary
representation from either @xmath or the normalizer of the Iwahori
subgroup.

###### Definition 1.2.31.

We say that an irreducible, unitary, supercuspidal representation is
unramified [ramified] if it compactly induced from @xmath [from the
normalizer of the Iwahori subgroup]. We write @xmath for the
corresponding irreducible, unitary representation of the group @xmath
[of the normalizer of the Iwahori subgroup].

The use of the term “(un)ramified” originates from a correspondence with
local characters of (un)ramified quadratic extensions, and has a very
different meaning in the context of principal series representation.

### 1.3. The final spectral refinement

#### 1.3.1. The result

We fix for the construction of the similarity class

-   a finite subset @xmath ,

-   for each @xmath , we fix one algebraic non-trivial character @xmath
    of @xmath ,

-   a finite subset @xmath , which is disjoint from @xmath ,

-   a finite subset @xmath , which is disjoint from all previous
    subsets,

-   for every @xmath , one irreducible, minimal supercuspidal
    representation @xmath of @xmath ,

-   a finite subset @xmath ,

-   and for each @xmath an integer @xmath .

We define @xmath as the set of minimal cuspidal automorphic
representations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that

-   @xmath for each @xmath ,

-   @xmath for each @xmath ,

-   @xmath for each @xmath ,

-   @xmath for each @xmath ,

-   @xmath for each @xmath for @xmath .

For the construction of the test function, we choose

-   a finite subset @xmath of valuations (possibly intersecting with
    @xmath ), at those places where we intend to analyze the trace of
    the Hecke operator of elements, and

-   for every place @xmath a smooth, compactly supported function @xmath
    .

-   for @xmath , a smooth, compactly supported function @xmath with

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Set @xmath , and define the Fourier transform

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Functions @xmath for @xmath satisfy @xmath and are eliminated from the
final expressions.

We define @xmath , such that

  -- -- -------- --
                 
        @xmath   
                 
        @xmath   
  -- -- -------- --

We decide to normalize @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Remark (Some special cases).

1.  Dimension formula: if both @xmath and @xmath are empty sets, the
    value @xmath is a non-negative integer.

2.  Trace formula for Hecke operators: if @xmath is non-empty, and
    @xmath , the analysis boils down to a derivation of an
    Eichler-Selberg type trace formula [ Selbergtrace ] , [ Eichler ] ,
    [ Oesterle:Thesis ] from the non-invariant Arthur trace formula [
    JacquetLanglands ] , [ GelbartJacquet ] , [ Arthur:Rank1 ] . This is
    obtained in [ KnightlyLi ] over @xmath for @xmath . The approach
    differs from the alternative method of Arthur [ Arthur:Hecke ] via
    his invariant trace formula [ Arthur:Invariant ] . The approach of
    Arthur does not require the explicit construction of test functions.

3.  Weyl laws: if @xmath is empty, we obtain an analogue of the Selberg
    trace formula for the eigenvalues of the Laplace-Beltrami operator
    from the non-invariant Arthur trace formula.

#### 1.3.2. The definition of the test functions and its spectral
properties

From this point forward, we fix a unique similarity class @xmath of
minimal automorphic representations. We choose as well a finite
(possibly empty) subset @xmath .

The function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is defined in dependence on the finite (possible empty) family of
functions @xmath , the equivalence class @xmath , and the finite
(possibly empty) set @xmath as a tensor product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of elements @xmath .

In what follows, we will carefully define @xmath in all possible cases
and explain its spectral properties.

##### Outline of the construction

We will refer to later chapters for the proofs, but let us briefly
outline the method.

1.  The Factorization Theorem 1.2.11 reduces the global problem to a
    local one. The one-dimensional representations do not occur as
    factors of cuspidal @xmath automorphic representation, and they can
    be ignored in this context.

2.  All similarity classes can be determined (up to a twist by @xmath at
    the real places) by the restriction of their elements to all maximal
    subgroups @xmath , which are compact modulo the center.

3.  Twisting by algebraic Hecke character @xmath with @xmath is an
    automorphism of @xmath (see Lemma 1.2.29 ). The imprecision at the
    real places is not annoying, but will be exploited to our advantage.

4.  The algebra @xmath decomposes as @xmath bi-module, and only the
    sub-algebras associated to an irreducible representation @xmath of
    @xmath are important

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

    (see Proposition 5.4.7 ).

5.  Decompose @xmath for all unitary, infinite-dimensional
    representations of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (see Theorems 7.3.3 ,
    8.3.6 , and Propositions 9.3.8 and 9.3.10 ). The notion of
    similarity class makes also sense for local representations. Two
    cases occur.

    -   The similarity class is determined by one irreducible
        representation @xmath of a maximal compact-mod-center subgroup
        of @xmath (at the real place possibly only modulo twisting by
        @xmath ):

        -   complex unramified principal series representations

        -   real principal series representations

        -   supercuspidal representations

        -   non-archimedean principal series representations

        A representation @xmath is in the similarity class (modulo
        twists) if @xmath lies in the restriction of @xmath .

    -   The similarity class is determined by two irreducible
        representations @xmath and @xmath of a maximal
        compact-mod-center subgroup of @xmath (at the real place
        possibly only modulo twisting by @xmath ):

        -   complex ramified principal series representations

        -   discrete series representations

        -   Steinberg representations

        A representation @xmath is in the similarity class (modulo
        twists) if @xmath lies in the restriction of @xmath , but @xmath
        does not.

6.  The distribution @xmath vanishes on @xmath if the contragedient
    @xmath is not contained in @xmath (see Corollary 6.1.6 ). Linear
    combinations of elements from @xmath for different @xmath serve for
    our purposes.

It should also be noted that an additional feature is implicitly
imposed. Each element @xmath of @xmath satisfies for all @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The non-invariant Arthur trace formula is equivariant with respect to
@xmath . The truncation operator is a @xmath -intertwiner by definition
(see [ GelbartJacquet ] *page 229).

##### Case: @xmath non-archimedean, @xmath supercuspidal

If @xmath is non-archimedean, and @xmath is supercuspidal, the
representation @xmath is isomorphic to the compact induction of an
irreducible, finite-dimensional representation of an open subgroup
@xmath of @xmath , which is compact modulo the center of @xmath and
contains the Iwahori subgroup @xmath [ Kutzko:SuperGL2 ] . Set @xmath if
@xmath , and @xmath if @xmath is the normalizer of the Iwahori subgroup.
We define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have for all irreducible, smooth, admissible representations @xmath
of @xmath the following formula (see Defn-Thm. 9.4.9 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

##### Case: @xmath non-archimedean, @xmath Steinberg

If @xmath is non-archimedean, and @xmath is a Steinberg representation
@xmath , the function @xmath is defined as pseudo coefficient of @xmath
(see Definition-Theorem 9.4.10 ). We have for all irreducible, smooth,
admissible representations @xmath of @xmath the following formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

##### Case: @xmath non-archimedean, @xmath principal series without
interest in the Hecke eigenvalue

If @xmath is non-archimedean, and @xmath is a principal series
representation @xmath where @xmath is an algebraic character of @xmath ,
we fix the function @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, we set @xmath if @xmath and @xmath otherwise. The group @xmath is
@xmath for @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . Next, define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and compute

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have for all irreducible, smooth, admissible representations @xmath
of @xmath the following formula (Defn.-Thm. 9.4.12 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

##### Case: @xmath non-archimedean, @xmath principal series with
interest in the Hecke eigenvalue

If @xmath is non-archimedean, and @xmath is a principal series
representation @xmath with @xmath as above, we fix the function @xmath
supported on

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next, define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and compute

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

We set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have for all irreducible, smooth, admissible representations @xmath
of @xmath the following formula (see Defn.-Thm. 9.4.14 / 9.4.17 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

##### Case: @xmath real, @xmath prinicpal series representation

If @xmath is a real place, and @xmath a principal series representation,
then

1.  if @xmath , set

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and choose

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

    such that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    We have for all irreducible, smooth, admissible representations
    @xmath of @xmath the following formula (see Prop. 7.5.1 and 7.6.1 ):

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.  if @xmath , set

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and choose

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

    such that

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

    We have for all irreducible, smooth, admissible representations
    @xmath of @xmath the following formula (see Prop. 7.5.1 ):

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

The normalization @xmath is used because we combine @xmath and its twist
by @xmath . It has computational advantages not to separate them.

##### Case: @xmath real, @xmath discrete series representation

If @xmath is a real place, and @xmath is a discrete series
representation @xmath of weight @xmath , the function @xmath is defined
as in Corollary 7.5.4 . Let us briefly explain the construction here:

1.  Define @xmath by @xmath .

2.  Define @xmath .

3.  Choose for @xmath and @xmath a function @xmath , with

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

4.  Define for @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

We have for all irreducible, smooth, admissible representations @xmath
of @xmath the following formula (see Corollary 7.5.4 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The normalization @xmath is used because we combine @xmath and its twist
by @xmath . This has computational advantages.

##### Case: @xmath complex

If @xmath is a complex valuation, then @xmath is isomorphic to a
principal series representation @xmath with @xmath . We may require
@xmath , and @xmath is uniquely determined.

1.  If @xmath , then we choose @xmath , such that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.  If @xmath , let @xmath denote the representation of @xmath on @xmath
    . We choose @xmath , such that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.  If @xmath , define the irreducible representation @xmath of @xmath
    for @xmath and @xmath as the symmetric tensor of the natural
    representation @xmath on @xmath . We can paste @xmath and the
    trivial representation of @xmath to a representation of @xmath ,
    which we also call @xmath . Choose functions @xmath with

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Define

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

We have for all irreducible, smooth, admissible representations @xmath
of @xmath the following formula (see Prop. 8.5.1 and 8.6.1 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

##### Conclusion

No finite-dimensional representation can occur as a factor of an
automorphic representation. Note that at the real places @xmath , one
actually counts the similarity class @xmath and @xmath , and therefore
we have normalized by @xmath .

Because @xmath is defined as a tensor product of local functions, the
character distribution of every cuspidal automorphic representation
@xmath factors according to Theorem 1.2.11

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We conclude:

###### Theorem 1.3.1 (The spectral refinement).

The function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

satisfies

  --------- -- -------- -------- --
  (1.3.1)      @xmath   @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- -------- --

###### Remark.

-   The explicit construction is important, since we will appeal to the
    non-invariant Arthur trace formula.

-   If the set @xmath is empty, for example, if @xmath is a global
    function field, Equation 1.3.1 should be read as

      --------- -- -------- -------- --
      (1.3.2)      @xmath   @xmath   
      --------- -- -------- -------- --

-   Let @xmath be the number of real places of @xmath . We actually
    count all @xmath -equivalence classes of cuspidal representations,
    which are related by twisting via an algebraic character of @xmath .
    This has the particular advantage that all hyperbolic distributions
    associated to all @xmath , which are negative for at least one real
    embedding, vanish. Twisting with @xmath with @xmath for an algebraic
    Hecke character has a nontrivial effect on the trace formula.

### 1.4. The coarse Arthur trace formula

The coarse (non-invariant) Arthur trace will give us an alternative
expression for @xmath in terms of (weighted) orbital integrals and the
remaining irreducible subrepresentations in the orthogonal difference
@xmath . In this section, we provide it merely as an abstract identity
of distributions. We subdivide the distribution occurring in the the
Arthur trace formula in subfamilies. Each subfamily will require a
somewhat different approach.

We introduce an equivalence relation on @xmath , whose equivalence
classes are in one-to-one correspondence with conjugacy classes of
@xmath .

###### Definition 1.4.1.

Two elements @xmath of @xmath are equivalent if there exists @xmath and
@xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath , we denote the equivalence class of @xmath by @xmath .

The Arthur trace formula now provides us with an alternative formula for
@xmath in terms of distributions associated to equivalence classes
@xmath , Eisenstein series, residues of Eisenstein series, and
one-dimensional representations. The coarse Arthur trace formula takes
the following form:

  --------- -------- -------- -------- --
            @xmath   @xmath            
  (1.4.1)                     @xmath   
  --------- -------- -------- -------- --

In the subsequent sections, we will define and study the distributions
on the right-hand side. In particular, we will try to evaluate them for
the function @xmath and express the value in terms of @xmath and @xmath
.

The distributions associated to equivalence classes in @xmath need to be
subdivided in to several classes. To this end, let us classify the
equivalence classes in @xmath . The theory of the Rational Canonical
Form implies that the conjugacy class of an element in @xmath is
uniquely determined by its characteristic and minimal polynomial
together. An element @xmath has characteristic polynomial

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is conjugated to

-   a scalar multiple of the identity, i.e., @xmath for @xmath if the
    minimal polynomial has degree one: @xmath ,

-   a hyperbolic element, i.e., @xmath for @xmath with @xmath if the
    minimal polynomial factors into two distinct linear factors @xmath ,

-   a parabolic element, i.e., @xmath for @xmath if the minimal
    polynomial factors into @xmath ,

-   an elliptic element, i.e., @xmath if the characteristic polynomial
    is irreducible.

This results in a partition of the discrete group @xmath into
equivalence classes:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This partition in turn yields a partition of the distributions:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

In coming sections, we rigorously define these distributions, explain
their factorizations into local distributions, and compute them for the
test function constructed in Section 1.3.2 .

### 1.5. The identity distribution

The identity distribution is the distribution associated to the
equivalence class of the identity in @xmath (see [ GelbartJacquet ]
*page 235(6.13), [ JacquetLanglands ] *page 271(i)).

Let @xmath denote the subset of places in @xmath , at which the factor
of @xmath is a un-/ramified principal series representations.

###### Definition 1.5.1 (The global identity distribution).

The identity distribution on @xmath is given as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem 1.5.2 (The identity distribution at @xmath).

-    If @xmath is non-empty, the identity distribution vanishes

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    If @xmath is empty and @xmath is a global number field, the
    identity distribution evaluates to

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

-    If @xmath is empty and @xmath is a global function field, the
    identity distribution evaluates to

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

The constant @xmath is given as a product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with all but finitely many factors being one. The local factors are
computed for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 1.5.3.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

By definition, we have a factorization

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The local distributions @xmath are explicitly computed in the subsequent
chapters. The computation at the non-archimedean places follows directly
from of the definitions (see Proposition 9.7.1 ). The computations at
the archimedean places are more subtle (see Corollary 7.7.2 for @xmath ,
Proposition 7.7.1 for @xmath , and Proposition 8.7.1 for @xmath ). ∎

### 1.6. The distributions of the one-dimensional representations

Restriction: If not specified otherwise, we will assume that the factors
at complex places are unramified, i.e., isomorphic to @xmath .

###### Definition 1.6.1 (Global one-dimensional character
distributions).

Let @xmath be a global algebraic Hecke character. The global
one-dimensional distribution is the character distribution of @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem 1.6.2 (The one-dimensional distribution at @xmath).

-    The global one-dimensional distribution vanishes if one of the
    following factors occurs for @xmath at one place @xmath :

    1.   a supercuspidal representation

    2.   a discrete series representation of weight @xmath

    3.   a ramified principal series representation

-    If the global one-dimensional distribution does not vanish, then
    @xmath and it evaluates in the number field case to

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

-    and in the function field case to

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Appeal to the integral identity 1.1.1

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The relevant local computations are Propositions 7.6.1 , 8.6.1 and 9.6.1
. ∎

### 1.7. The parabolic distributions

This distribution can be found in [ JacquetLanglands ] *page 271(v) and
[ GelbartJacquet ] *page 235(6.13), page 244(7.14+7.17).

###### Definition 1.7.1 (The global parabolic distribution).

The parabolic distribution

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the finite part at @xmath of the zeta-type integral

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath depends upon @xmath in the following way:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall that the compact group @xmath was defined as a product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 1.7.2 (Factorization).

Let @xmath be the global zeta function of @xmath . Consider the Laurent
expansion at @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and assume that @xmath . We then obtain a factorization into local
distributions

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
  -- -------- -------- --

for

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

with @xmath being the compact group @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath if
@xmath is non-archimedean, complex, or real.

###### Proof.

See [ Gelbart ] *Proposition 1.2, page 47. We use l’Hôpital’s rule and
compute the finite part at @xmath of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as the value

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The sum and products are finite, since we have for the characteristic
function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of the set @xmath that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We are able to factor

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The next theorem has numerous special cases. This is inconvenient but
inevitable.

###### Theorem 1.7.3 (The parabolic distribution at @xmath).

1.   Let @xmath be either a global function field or an algebraic number
    field. If the set @xmath is non-empty, or @xmath has at least two
    square-integrable factors, the parabolic distribution vanishes

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.   Let @xmath be an algebraic number field. If @xmath contains no
    square-integrable places and @xmath , the parabolic distribution
    evaluates to ³ ³ 3 See remark below for more concrete expressions of
    @xmath .

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
                  
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.   Let @xmath be a global function field. If @xmath contains no
    square-integrable places and @xmath , the parabolic distribution
    evaluates to

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

4.   Let @xmath be an algebraic number field and @xmath . If exactly one
    factor @xmath is a discrete series representation (say at @xmath ),
    and all remaining factors are principal series representations, the
    parabolic distribution evaluates to

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

5.   Let @xmath be an algebraic number field and @xmath . If exactly one
    factor @xmath is a Steinberg representation (say at @xmath ), and
    all remaining factors are principal series representations, the
    parabolic distribution evaluates to

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

6.   Let @xmath be an algebraic number field and @xmath . If exactly one
    factor @xmath is a supercuspidal representation (say at @xmath ),
    and all remaining factors are principal series representations, the
    parabolic distribution evaluates to

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

7.   Let @xmath be a global function field and @xmath . If exactly one
    factor @xmath is a Steinberg representation (say at @xmath ), and
    all remaining factors are principal series representations, the
    parabolic distribution evaluates to

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

8.   Let @xmath be a global function field and @xmath . If exactly one
    factor @xmath is a supercuspidal representation (say at @xmath ),
    and all remaining factors are principal series representations, the
    parabolic distribution evaluates to

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where the constant @xmath was introduced above.

###### Proof.

This follows immediately from the factorization in Lemma 1.7.2 and the
local computations in the real/complex/non-archimedean case by
Proposition 7.8.1 and Corollary 7.8.2 /Proposition 8.8.1 /Proposition
9.8.1 . ∎

###### Remark.

Particularly in the instances indicated by point (2) in Theorem 1.7.3 ,
it is often convenient to have more explicit formulas for @xmath as
given by Propositions 8.8.1 and 8.8.1 .

-   If @xmath is a real place with an unramified principal series
    representation, the derivative is

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

-   If @xmath is a real place with a ramified principal series
    representation, the derivative is

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

-   If @xmath is a complex place place with a ramified principal series
    representation, the derivative is

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

-   If @xmath is a complex place place with an unramified principal
    series representation, I have not provided a formula.

-   We know for supercuspidal @xmath as @xmath :

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

### 1.8. The hyperbolic distributions

References are [ JacquetLanglands ] *page 272(iv), [ GelbartJacquet ]
*page 244(7.15+7.19), [ Gelbart ] *Prop.1.1, page 46. We choose the
compact groups @xmath . By definition of @xmath as a restricted product
of the groups @xmath , the Iwasawa decomposition carries over

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the modular character of @xmath . We define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 1.8.1 (A global hyperbolic distribution).

Let @xmath . The global hyperbolic distribution of @xmath is defined as
the integral

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 1.8.2 (Factorization).

Let @xmath be a tensor product, then the distribution factors into local
integrals

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Proof.

Note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consequently, we obtain the decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem 1.8.3.

If the set @xmath is non-empty, or @xmath contains at least two places,
all hyperbolic distributions vanish

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

This follows from the factorization in Lemma 1.8.2 and Proposition 9.9.1
. ∎

###### Definition-Theorem 1.8.4.

Assume @xmath . Define

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We have that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Proof.

The restriction follows from both Proposition 9.9.1 and the fact that
@xmath at real places is supported on elements with positive determinant
only. ∎

Now let us prove a particularly useful theorem for spectral estimates.

###### Definition-Theorem 1.8.5.

Let @xmath be an algebraic number field and @xmath .

-    Consider an archimedean place @xmath , and define the constant

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    The function @xmath has small hyperbolic support at @xmath if
    @xmath is supported in

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    If @xmath has small hyperbolic support at one real place, all
    hyperbolic distributions vanish

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    If @xmath has no real places, and @xmath has small hyperbolic
    support at all complex places, all but a finite number of hyperbolic
    distributions vanish:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Proof.

These support considerations follow directly from Proposition 7.9.1 and
Proposition 8.9.1 . Note that @xmath for all places @xmath forces @xmath
to be a root of unity. An algebraic number field with real places has
only @xmath as roots of unity. Both the local hyperbolic and weighted
hyperbolic integrals vanish for @xmath at a real place @xmath because
@xmath is supported on matrices of positive determinant. ∎

###### Theorem 1.8.6.

The sum of hyperbolic distributions vanishes if the elements in @xmath
have at least one square-integrable factor.

###### Proof.

For discrete series representations, it will shortly be seen that @xmath
does not depend upon @xmath for @xmath . Additionally, we can choose the
support sufficiently small as suggested in Definition-Theorem 1.8.5 , so
that the sum of hyperbolic distributions must vanish for this particular
choice, hence for all choices @xmath . ∎

###### Remark.

The choices by Knightly and Li [ KnightlyLi ] *Section 24.5, page 286
differ from mine and so do their computations. Knightly and Li choose
the factors at the archimedean primes to be a matrix coefficient whereas
I choose them to be pseudo matrix coefficients.

###### Theorem 1.8.7.

If @xmath is a global function field and all factors are principal
series representations, the hyperbolic distribution evaluates to

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

### 1.9. The elliptic distributions

References are [ JacquetLanglands ] *page 272(ii+iii), [ GelbartJacquet
] *page 244(*).

We say that an elliptic element in @xmath is separable/inseparable if
the characteristic polynomial is separable/inseparable. Algebraic number
fields do not have inseparable elliptic elements, since every field of
characteristic zero is a perfect field.

We say that an elliptic element is split/elliptic at a place @xmath if
the characteristic polynomial is reducible/irreducible over @xmath . If
@xmath is finite, we say that an elliptic element is unramified/ramified
elliptic at non-archimedean @xmath if @xmath is elliptic at @xmath and
@xmath is even/odd.

###### Definition 1.9.1.

Let @xmath be an elliptic element in @xmath , then the global elliptic
distribution associated to @xmath is defined as

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Lemma 1.9.2.

If the function @xmath factors, so does the elliptic distribution:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The local factor at @xmath is

-    an elliptic orbital integral if @xmath is elliptic at @xmath ,

-    a hyperbolic orbital integrals if @xmath is separable and splits at
    @xmath ,

-    a parabolic orbital integral if @xmath is inseparable and splits at
    @xmath (this only happens if @xmath is a global function field).

###### Remark.

The elliptic global integral factors in elliptic, hyperbolic, or
parabolic local integrals. I have expressed these distributions
explicitly via the results in 7.9.1 , 7.11.2 , 7.11.3 , 8.9.1 , 8.9.1 ,
9.9.1 , 9.8.1 , and 9.11.3 . I confine myself with weaker explicit
estimates because I cannot possibly organize explicit statements in an
efficient manner.

###### Theorem 1.9.3.

Let @xmath be an algebraic number field. If @xmath is empty, then there
exists a constant @xmath such that if all functions @xmath are supported
in @xmath , we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There exists a uniform upper bound, such that all functions @xmath with
support in @xmath satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the implicit constant depends only upon @xmath .

###### Proof.

Assume first that no factor is unramified supercuspidal. Then @xmath has
to lie in @xmath for all non-archimedean places, and thus is an element
of @xmath (see Propositions 9.9.1 and 9.11.3 ). Let @xmath be the
complex conjugate of a matrix in @xmath or @xmath . Pick representatives
from each equivalence class in @xmath . Certainly

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a positive constant for all archimedean places @xmath by the
discreteness of @xmath . If @xmath is supported in @xmath for all
archimedean places, all elliptic and hyperbolic distribution vanish,
except for those who are elliptic at real places, or whose eigenvalues
are roots of unity at complex places. Again, by discreteness there are
finitely many of these elements, since representatives have to lie
discretely in

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The number of elements

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is therefore finite. The bounds are easily obtained by bounding each
factor

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We estimate trivially

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and obtain accordingly an admittedly coarse estimate

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the square-free ideal of @xmath , such that for each prime
ideal @xmath diving @xmath , the factors of elements in @xmath are
ramified supercuspidal representations at the corresponding @xmath . By
the construction of @xmath and Proposition 9.11.3 , the element @xmath
must be a ramified elliptic element at those @xmath ’s. Indeed, @xmath
is an element of the normalizer @xmath of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in @xmath . This is a discrete subgroup of @xmath as well, so we can
similarly define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The constant is positive for all archimedean places @xmath . Choose all
@xmath supported in @xmath , then all elliptic and hyperbolic
distributions vanish, except for those that are elliptic at real places
or whose eigenvalues are roots of unity at complex places. Now appeal to
the rational canonical form, and the invariance of @xmath in @xmath ,
i.e., @xmath is conjugated to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Modulo @xmath , we can assume that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath . We apply the product formula 1.1.2 . It implies that an
unramified elliptic element of the above form splits at least at one
archimedean place. For the integral not to vanish, the place at which it
splits needs to be complex and the value a root of unity. There are at
most finitely many roots of unity in an algebraic number field. We have
obtained the estimate

  --------- -- -------- --
  (1.9.1)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

### 1.10. The Eisenstein distributions

References are [ JacquetLanglands ] *page 272(vii+viii), [
GelbartJacquet ] *page 243(7.13), page 244(7.19), [ Gelbart ] *Prop.1.3,
page 48

Let @xmath be algebraic Hecke characters, and @xmath a complex number.

###### Definition 1.10.1 (The global parabolic induction and the
intertwiner).

Define the global parabolic induction as the right regular
representation of @xmath on

  -- -- -------- --
        @xmath   
        @xmath   
  -- -- -------- --

We write @xmath for the integrated representation. We define the
intertwiner for @xmath

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- --

We say that @xmath is a section of @xmath if the function satisfies
@xmath for all @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath is holomorphic as a
function for @xmath for all @xmath

Factorize

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 1.10.2 (The local parabolic induction and the
intertwiner).

Define the local parabolic induction as the right regular representation
of @xmath on

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We write @xmath for the integrated representation. We define the
intertwiner for @xmath

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Theorem 1.10.3 (Meromorphic continuation of the intertwiner
[GelbartJacquet]*Theorem 4.19, page 227).

The operator-valued function @xmath admits a meromorphic continuation to
all @xmath with the functional equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It admits a factorization for @xmath into local intertwiners

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This factorization is not applicable to @xmath . This is unfortunate
beause the Eisenstein distribution is defined as the following integral
[ JacquetLanglands ] *page 271(vi), [ GelbartJacquet ] *page 240(6.37),
[ Gelbart ] *page 48(1.4):

###### Definition 1.10.4 (Eisenstein distributions).

If @xmath is an algebraic number field, the Eisenstein distribution
associated to @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

if @xmath is a global function field whose field of constants has
cardinality @xmath , the Eisenstein distribution is defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath denote the subset of places in @xmath , at which the factor
of @xmath is a un-/ramified principal series representations.

###### Theorem 1.10.5 (Explicit computation of the Eisenstein
distribution).

1.   If @xmath contains a supercuspidal integrable representation, then
    all Eisenstein distributions vanish.

2.   If @xmath contains at least two square-integrable representations,
    then all Eisenstein distributions vanish.

3.   If @xmath contains exactly one Steinberg representation, the
    Eisenstein distribution evaluates to

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

    in the number field case, and to

      -- -------- -- --
         @xmath      
      -- -------- -- --

    in the function field case.

4.   If @xmath contains exactly one discrete series representation of
    weight @xmath , the Eisenstein distribution evaluates to

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

5.   If @xmath contains only principal series representations, define
    for @xmath

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

    We define for @xmath the function

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    which admits a meromorphic continuation to the whole complex plane.
    In the number field case, the Eisenstein distribution evaluates to

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

    In the function field case, the Eisenstein distribution evaluates to

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

We will require the following lemma:

###### Lemma 1.10.6 (Factorization and @xmath-invariance).

1.   If @xmath factors as a tensor, then the character distribution of
    the Eisenstein series factors as well

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.   The intertwiner @xmath acts on every irreducible @xmath -isotype
    @xmath of @xmath by a scalar @xmath . The function

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    is a meromorphic function with a functional equation

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    For @xmath , factorizing @xmath for @xmath and @xmath , we obtain a
    factorization of the scalar

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.   Assume furthermore that for all places @xmath , the element @xmath
    lies in @xmath for an irreducible representation of @xmath of @xmath
    . We have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Proof of the lemma.

1.  All except a finite number of the factors are one (see Theorem
    9.4.12 ).

2.  The operator @xmath is not a @xmath -intertwiner, but a @xmath
    -intertwiner. Since @xmath and @xmath are irreducible for @xmath as
    an exterior tensor product of irreducible representations @xmath ,
    the operator acts by scalar @xmath on every @xmath -isotype. Since
    all @xmath -isotypes have single multiplicity, the scalar depends
    only on the isomorphism class of @xmath . The functional equation in
    Theorem 1.10.3

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    yields that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and finally

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Additionally, the factorization follows from Theorem 1.10.3 .

3.  If @xmath for @xmath , then @xmath projects onto the @xmath -isotype
    of @xmath according to the last point of Theorem 6.1.3 .∎

###### Proof of the theorem.

Before beginning, we observe that only @xmath has only certain isotype.
For the remaining isotypes, we will argue for @xmath , and the results
extend by uniqueness of analytic continuation.

1.  Because the local parabolic inductions do not contain a @xmath
    -isotype @xmath such that the representation @xmath is
    supercuspidal, the operator @xmath is zero for @xmath .

2.  For a square-integrable representation @xmath , which is not
    supercuspidal, we have constructed the pseudo coefficient from two
    irreducible representations @xmath for @xmath and functions

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Because @xmath is a pseudo coefficient of a square-integrable
    representation

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    The constructed test function is consequently of the form

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

    Here, @xmath is the cardinality of @xmath . We obtain according to
    Lemma 1.10.6

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

    If @xmath , the sum cancels.

3.  If @xmath , and a Steinberg representation occurs as factor, then
    @xmath is @xmath the trivial representation and @xmath is the
    trivial representation

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
         @xmath   
         @xmath   
         @xmath   
         @xmath   
         @xmath   
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    The poles are at @xmath . By residue calculus, we obtain in the
    number field case

      -- -------- --
                  
         @xmath   
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    The proof in the function field case is essentially the same. We
    only have to move the finite contour. Here the integral along the
    line @xmath cancels with that along @xmath , and the same argument
    works.

4.  If @xmath , and a discrete series representation of weight @xmath
    occurs as factor, then @xmath . In this case, we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
         @xmath   
         @xmath   
         @xmath   
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    The poles are at @xmath . Residue calculus yields

      -- -------- --
                  
         @xmath   
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

5.  The last statement follows immediately from Lemma 1.10.6 and the
    computations in Propositions 7.10.1 , 8.10.1 , and 9.10.1 .∎

###### Remark.

-   If @xmath contains a square-integrable representation, then the
    trace formula is of the same form as the trace formula of a compact
    locally symmetric space, i.e., the Casimir operators have only
    discrete spectrum. This is related to the Jacquet-Langlands
    functoriality [ JacquetLanglands ] . The vanishing of the Eisenstein
    distributions has also been verified in the classical setting by
    Risager [ Risager ] , building mainly on work of Huxley [
    Huxley:Scatt ] and Strömbergsson [ Stroembergsson:JL ] .

-   If @xmath contains at least two square-integrable representations,
    we have for @xmath that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for at least two places. This yields a simple trace formula [
    Gelbart ] *Section V.2.

### 1.11. The residual distributions

References are [ JacquetLanglands ] *page 271(vi), [ GelbartJacquet ]
*page 240(6.37), [ Gelbart ] *page 48(1.4).

###### Definition 1.11.1 (The residual distribution).

If @xmath is an algebraic number field, the residual distribution is
defined for each algebraic Hecke character @xmath with @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is a global function field whose field of constants has
cardinality @xmath , the residual distribution is defined for each
algebraic Hecke character @xmath with @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
  -- -------- -------- --

where the sum runs through the Hecke characters of @xmath .

###### Theorem 1.11.2 (Explicit residual distributions).

The residual distribution vanishes if at least the factor at one place
is either

-    a discrete series representation of odd weight,

-    an unramified principal series representation,

-    a supercuspidal representation.

In all other cases, we define for @xmath , the function

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where each factor is defined

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This function admits a meromorphic continuation. We obtain for a number
field

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for a function field

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

All claims follow more or less directly from the @xmath -type
classification in the last three chapters, Corollary 6.1.6 , the
construction of the test functions and the computations of the local
intertwiner in Propositions 7.10.1 , 8.10.1 and 9.10.1 .

Every test function factors as tensor product @xmath , and either @xmath
is in @xmath , or

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . Now the corresponding local operators @xmath project onto
isotypes, where we have computed the action of the local intertwiners in
Propositions 7.10.1 , 8.10.1 and 9.10.1 . Unfortunately at @xmath , we
have no factorization. The operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an intertwiner, meromorphic in @xmath . It acts by a scalar, after
restriction to @xmath (Schur’s lemma). Its value is computed for @xmath
as an Euler product. The conclusion follows by uniqueness of analytic
continuation. ∎

## Chapter 2 The relation to classical trace formulas

Although I advocate the use of the similarity classes, some readers may
prefer to see the formalism in classical language.

### 2.1. Maass wave forms of weight zero and full level

Let us consider the situation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By strong approximation [ Bump:Auto ] *Proposition 3.3.1, page 294, we
obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The only similarity class which admits an @xmath -invariant vector is
the one where all factors are unramified principal series
representations.

Let @xmath be a compactly supported, smooth, even function on @xmath ,
and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be its Fourier transform.

Let us focus on the case @xmath . The cuspidal distribution (Theorem
1.3.1 )

  --------- -- -------- --
  (2.1.1)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

equals the sum of the identity distribution (Theorem 1.5.2 )

  --------- -- -------- --
  (2.1.2)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

of the parabolic distribution (Theorem 1.7.3 )

  --------- -- -------- --
  (2.1.3)      @xmath   
  (2.1.4)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

of no hyperbolic terms (because @xmath ), of the elliptic equivalence
classes split at the real place (Lemma 1.9.2 and Proposition 7.9.1 ) )

  --------- -- -------- -------- --
  (2.1.5)      @xmath   @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- -------- --

the elliptic equivalence classes elliptic at the real place (Lemma 1.9.2
and Proposition 7.11.2 )

  --------- -------- -------- -------- --
            @xmath   @xmath            
  (2.1.6)                     @xmath   
  --------- -------- -------- -------- --

the Eisenstein distribution ( @xmath Riemann zeta function, Theorem
1.10.5 )

  --------- -- -------- --
  (2.1.7)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

the one-dimensional distribution (Theorem 1.6.2 ) ¹ ¹ 1 The reader might
be surprised to see this distribution. It corresponds to the Laplace
eigenvalue zero for the constant function, which is usually “counted” on
the spectral side.

  --------- -- -------- --
  (2.1.8)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

and the residual distribution (Theorem 1.11.2 )

  --------- -- -------- --
  (2.1.9)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

Some fudge factors are explicitly expressed as special values of the
Riemann zeta function

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The above formula is precisely what Hejhal [ Hejhal2 ] *page 209 and
Iwaniec [ Iwaniec:Spectral ] *Theorem 10.2, page 167 obtained via
classical methods. The classical formulas hold for a more general set of
test functions. The extension works here as well.

### 2.2. The general situation

If one wants to work in a situation close to the classical setting, but
in the generality of global functions, I suggest working with isotypes
of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Given a finite set @xmath of non-archimedean places, and an open
(possibly non-proper) subgroup @xmath for each @xmath , and an
irreducible, finite-dimensional, unitary representation @xmath of @xmath
, we denote

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

What follows is a recipe to obtain a trace formula for the @xmath
-isotype of @xmath .

We can define an integer for each similarity class of @xmath
-automorphic representations over @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The definition does not directly depend upon @xmath , but rather upon
@xmath . If @xmath is the trivial representation of @xmath , this
corresponds to the set of invariant vectors. For at most finitely many
similarity classes, the integer @xmath can be nonzero.

For all @xmath , let @xmath be a compactly supported, smooth, even
function on @xmath , and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be its Fourier transform.

The cuspidal distribution in our setting then gives

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Similarly, the remaining distributions have to be summed up with
multiplicity @xmath . My formulas hold only for minimal similarity
classes, so a twist by one-dimensional characters will generally be
necessary.

###### Example 2.2.1.

For the choice

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath for all but the similarity classes with only unramified
principal series representations at all places @xmath and at @xmath
there can be either

-   an unramified principal series representation,

-   a Steinberg representation, or

-   their twists by @xmath for a one-dimensional representation @xmath ,
    with @xmath .

For these representations @xmath . Note that the number @xmath is the
index of @xmath , and may vary with @xmath , yet another reason to
prefer similarity classes.

All the above corresponds to the case where all archimedean
representations are unramified principal series and the central
character is trivial. One can alternatively fix a discrete series
representation at some of the real places, change the central character,
allow weight one at a real place, and so on.

However, it is not true that the representation theory of @xmath and its
subgroups can separate all similarity classes, i.e., it is false that
there exists, for every similarity class @xmath , a pair @xmath , such
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is why we need to argue in terms of the normalizer of the Iwahori
subgroup in some cases. This is only necessary for similarity classes
with unramified supercuspidal representations.

## Chapter 3 Counting automorphic representations

### 3.1. Dimension formulas

###### Theorem 3.1.1.

If @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a finite number. The number can become arbitrarily large if @xmath
varies.

###### Proof.

This is an immediate corollary of the prior computations with the
choices @xmath and @xmath . The cuspidal distributions then gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Given a global field @xmath , we choose a finite place and a sequence of
similarity classes @xmath such that at least one factor of elements
@xmath is supercuspidal, all remaining non-archimedean ones are
unramified principal series representations, and @xmath for @xmath with
conductor @xmath . Recall the definition of @xmath . We have by Theorem
1.5.2 that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The elliptic terms associated to @xmath give zero for @xmath , if @xmath
is elliptic at @xmath (Proposition 9.11.3 ), or are bounded absolutely
if @xmath is hyperbolic at @xmath (Proposition 9.9.1 ), or if @xmath is
parabolic at @xmath (Proposition 9.8.1 ). All the remaining geometric
distributions vanish. ∎

###### Remark.

The explicit trace formulas with the choices @xmath and @xmath give an
explicit correspondence between elliptic elements and automorphic
representations.

### 3.2. Weyl laws

In this section the asymptotic formulas for the eigenvalues of Casimir
operators are stated.

###### Theorem 3.2.1.

-    If @xmath and all factors in @xmath are prinicpal series
    representations, the following asymptotic holds for @xmath :

      -- -- -------- --
                     
            @xmath   
                     
            @xmath   
      -- -- -------- --

-    If @xmath is an algebraic number field, and every element in @xmath
    has a square integrable local factor, the following asymptotic holds
    for @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- --
                           
         @xmath   @xmath   
                           
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

-    If @xmath is an algebraic number field, the following asymptotic
    holds for @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- --
                           
         @xmath   @xmath   
                           
                  @xmath   
                           
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

The constant

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is defined as a finite product (most factors are one)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The proof of this theorem is the content of the last two sections in
this chapter. We start with a discussion of this theorem. To translate
the statement into classical language, we require a definition.

###### Definition 3.2.2.

Let @xmath be a congruence subgroup of @xmath , and @xmath the unique
open subgroup with @xmath (as constructed in the introduction for @xmath
), then we define for a similarity class of @xmath -automorphic
representations over @xmath , the integer

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as the dimension of the @xmath -invariant vectors of @xmath , where
@xmath .

The independence from the element @xmath chosen follows from the
classification of @xmath -types. For all but a finite number of
similarity classes, the number is zero.

We show now how to translate this back in a congruence setting:

###### Corollary 3.2.3.

Let @xmath be a congruence subgroup of @xmath , which contains the
element @xmath , and @xmath a orthonormal basis of Hecke Maass cusp
forms of level @xmath and weight zero or one. Then we obtain the
asymptotic formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Use strong approximation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We add all Weyl laws with multiplicity @xmath accordingly. The main term
is well-known, so by matching them we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the standard congruence subgroups some information is provided in
chapter nine to compute @xmath for all @xmath whose elements do not have
square integrable factors.

No results uniform in the level aspect seem to be known, although they
follow fairly straightforwardly from Section 2 of Lapid and Müller’s
article [ LapidMueller:SLN ] in conjunction with Huxley’s computation of
the scattering matrix [ Huxley:Scatt ] . Risager [ Risager ] , relying
on work of Strömbergsson [ Stroembergsson:JL ] and Huxley [ Huxley:Scatt
] , have shown already that the intermediate terms vanish if the Maass
forms of weight zero to be counted come from a Jacquet-Langlands lift,
i.e., the Weyl law is that of a compact surface in this case. The main
term was proven in the above generality by Reznikov [ Reznikov:Scatt ]
only in the case where all archimedean factors are principal series
representation. Even in the special case of imaginary quadratic number
fields, nothing seems to be known beyond the main term [ Elstrodt ] .
The above theorem gives the first instance of a Weyl law where one
allows principal series and discrete series to occur at the archimedean
primes. I believe that some mild saving can be obtained in the @xmath
-aspect. See for example Randol [ Randol ] or Venkov [ Venkov ] , which
appeal to the Selberg zeta function for a saving in the @xmath -aspect.

The proof method for the Weyl law is due to Hörmander, and we will
follow closely [ LapidMueller:SLN ] . With only this method, no better
bounds are achievable in the @xmath - and @xmath -aspects.

###### Corollary 3.2.4.

@xmath

Duke [ Duke:Dimension ] and Michel/Venkatesh [ MichelVenkatesh:Weight1 ]
have gone beyond the trivial bound in this special case. Michel and
Venkatesh rely on the Kuznetsov-Bruggeman formula as provided by
Bruggeman and Miatello [ BruggemanMiatello ] . The @xmath trace formula
should in principle be able to yield the same, local bound, but the
hyperbolic terms must be analyzed more carefully than in Theorem 1.9.3 .

### 3.3. A local bound

Since our proof is an exact rephrasing of Section 2 in [
LapidMueller:SLN ] , I advise the reader to read this proof first. The
strategy is to prove a local bound first, and derive the asymptotic law
therefrom.

###### Definition 3.3.1.

For every tuple @xmath of positive number @xmath , define the integers

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition 3.3.2 (Local bound).

We have a local bound for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The proof of this proposition will take up the rest of this section.
Compare with [ Duistermaat:Weyl ] *Lemma 2.3 and [ Mueller:Weyllaw ]
*Lemma 2.2.

###### Lemma 3.3.3 (Existence of test functions).

For every positive constant @xmath , there exists a smooth, even
function @xmath , such that

-    the function @xmath is supported on @xmath and

-    its Fourier transform

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    is a real-valued, non-negative function on @xmath , with positive
    values on @xmath and @xmath , and with @xmath .

Choose @xmath as suggested in Theorem 1.9.3 , but also such that @xmath
for all residue characteristics @xmath of non-archimedean completions of
@xmath .

###### Proof of the lemma.

We omit the subscript @xmath in the proof. Let @xmath be a smooth, even,
non-negative function on @xmath supported and positive on @xmath , which
is strictly decaying for @xmath . Then @xmath is supported on @xmath and
non-negative. The Fourier transform @xmath of @xmath is the square of
the Fourier transforms of @xmath , hence non-negative on @xmath and
even. We have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is an entire function, we have that @xmath on @xmath for
@xmath . Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Fourier transform of @xmath is supported on @xmath . The function
@xmath is a suitable candidate. ∎

For every @xmath choose @xmath as proposed by the above lemma.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Define @xmath such that @xmath is the function with @xmath for all
@xmath , and the rest chosen according to Section 1.3.2 .

We will use the Arthur trace formula

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and estimate the values on the right hand side separately. We will use
the explicit formulas from the first chapter.

As an immediate consequence of Theorem 1.9.3 , we obtain:

###### Corollary 3.3.4 (Bound for elliptic and hyperbolic estimates).

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 3.3.5 (Estimate for the identity distribution).

We have an estimate for the global parabolic distribution

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which depends upon @xmath .

###### Proof.

Appeal to Theorem 1.7.3 . Let @xmath , then we estimate

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath , then we find the upper bound

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The estimate at @xmath is similar. ∎

For the next estimate, we need to recall Stirling’s formula

###### Theorem 3.3.6 (Stirling’s formula [IwaniecKowalski]*Section
5.A.4, page 151).

For @xmath , we have the following equality for the Euler gamma
function:

  --------- -- -------- --
  (3.3.1)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

Differentiating gives the next corollary.

###### Corollary 3.3.7.

For @xmath , we have the following estimate for the digamma function:

  --------- -- -------- -------- --
  (3.3.2)      @xmath   @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- -------- --

###### Proposition 3.3.8.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The fudge factors of the parabolic distribution are always bounded by
@xmath . This can be checked by a case-by-case comparison between
Theorem 1.5.2 and Theorem 1.7.3 . Moreover, by Corollary 3.3.7 and
according to Remark 1.7 , the bound

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

yields the estimate. ∎

###### Lemma 3.3.9 (Bound for the one-dimensional and the residual
distribution).

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

This is straightforward in that it only does not vanish when only
unramified principal series, Steinberg, or weight-2-discrete series
representations occur. ∎

###### Lemma 3.3.10 (Bound for the continuous spectrum).

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

If @xmath contains at least one local square-integrable representation
as factor, then we have immediately @xmath . If @xmath contains only
principal series representations, then the function @xmath differs from
the function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

only by a finite number of factors, where @xmath is the completed
Dedekind zeta function of @xmath . We will compute the contribution with
@xmath first, and then show that the finite number of factors contribute
zero because of the support considerations.

For @xmath , we have the standard estimate [ IwaniecKowalski ]
*Proposition 5.7, page 102 on @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Select any place @xmath and approximate trivially:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Note that the case with real ramified principal series essentially
yields the same bound. By substracting a finite number of factors, we
obtain the bound.

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

since the Fourier transforms of a product of the functions @xmath can be
expressed in terms of convolution product of the functions @xmath , and
then vanishes by support considerations @xmath . ∎

All estimates for the local bound (Proposition 3.3.2 ) have now been
established.

### 3.4. The proof of the asymptotic formula

We use short-hand @xmath . We exploit that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consequently, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Set @xmath and @xmath [ @xmath ] if @xmath is real [complex]. As a
consequence of the local bound, we arrive at

###### Lemma 3.4.1.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Compare with [ Mueller:Weyllaw ] *Lemma 2.3. We write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and prove the estimate for each summand separately. We partition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Every function @xmath is a Schwartz function, and therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consider for example the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and estimate

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the remaining sets, we obtain similar bounds along the same lines.
We only partition the set @xmath and interchange the role played by the
integral and the series. ∎

This is within the error term. We must find an asymptotic formula for

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Again, we appeal to the coarse Arthur trace formula, and the above
expression is equal to the sum of the integrals

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 3.4.2 ([Mueller:Weyllaw]*Equation (2.10)).

Let @xmath be an even function with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then we have an asymptotic formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every Schwartz function @xmath even with @xmath -norm

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We rely heavily on the formulas provided in the first chapter. The
elliptic, hyperbolic, residual and one-dimensional distribution remain
within the error term @xmath , in fact, the bounds from the previous
section are sufficient in these cases.

The main contribution comes from the identity (Theorem 1.5.2 )

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The estimate obtained from Lemma 3.4.2 is

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
  -- -------- -------- --

Note that Lemma 3.4.2 applies for all but the complex places, where the
integral kernel is very easy to handle.

The Eisenstein distribution and the parabolic distribution contribute
also to the error term @xmath if every element from @xmath has one
square integral representations (see Theorems 1.7.3 and 1.10.5 ). This
proves the second Weyl law.

If all factors of elements in @xmath are principal series
representations, we refer for the parabolic contributions to Theorem
1.7.3 , the consecutive remark, and Lemma 3.4.2 . The next estimate is a
consequence

  --------- -- -------- -------- --
  (3.4.1)      @xmath   @xmath   
  (3.4.2)               @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- -------- --

We have used without mentioning explicitly that the fudge factors in
Theorem 1.7.3 are far smaller than the factor @xmath . If @xmath , we
can obtain an asymptotic formula via Lemma 3.4.2 :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

In the particular case @xmath , the residue of the Riemann zeta function
is @xmath . So the parabolic contributions are in this case

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If all factors of elements in @xmath are principal series
representations, we refer for the Eisenstein distribution to Theorem
1.10.5 . If there is more than one archimedean place, we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Fix @xmath . For a general number field, we estimate trivially

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

With Lemma 3.4.2 , we obtain with the local estimate 3.3.10

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This proves the last Weyl law. Note that @xmath -error terms can be
absorbed in the @xmath -error term for complex places.

For @xmath , we can be more precise. Because of the support conditions,
we can remove without harm local factors (see the end of the proof of
Lemma 3.3.10 ). Also whether we use the formula for weight zero or
weight one does not matter. Let @xmath be the completed Riemann zeta
function

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This expression counts the number of zeros up to height @xmath with a
negative sign for the orientation of the contour:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

See [ IwaniecKowalski ] *Theorem 5.8, page 104 for the argument. This
provides us also with an argument for the first sharper asymptotic law,
because the parabolic terms and the Eisenstein terms give together

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

## Part II — Abstract harmonic analysis on groups

Part two of this thesis contains abstract results about locally compact
groups, and can be read independently of the rest of this thesis.
Variants of some of the statements and more can be found in [
Meyer:Smooth ] , but we require results which are equivariant with
respect to a compact subgroup. I have elected to include a general
discussion of harmonic analysis on a locally compact group in order to
justify and conceptualize later considerations and choices. The reader
who is only interested in the trace formula, its related computations
and constructions for @xmath , is recommended to skip Part two upon the
first reading.

The representation theory of a reductive group over a local field
depends largely upon the representation of the maximal compact
subgroups, or more accurately, upon the representation theory of the
maximal subgroups which are compact modulo the center. This concept goes
by various names. In the case of Lie groups, the concept is related to
the theory of weights. In the locally profinite case, this concept is
the theory of types. In the theory of automorphic forms, modular forms,
and Maass wave forms, this concept is directly related to the notion of
level and weight.

Let @xmath be a local field. The smooth, admissible representations of
@xmath can be distinguished into two categories:

1.  The supercuspidal representations occur only if @xmath is not
    isomorphic to @xmath or @xmath . These can be exhausted as compact
    induction from maximal, open subgroups which are compact modulo the
    center.

2.  The parabolic inductions, their subrepresentation, and their
    subquotients can be realized as subspaces/subquotients of the
    normalized induction from a parabolic subgroup. The Abel transform
    plays a central role in this analysis.

Although I focus only on @xmath in this thesis, I have chosen to work
here in the context of locally compact groups and treat them locally as
projective limits of Lie groups. In doing so, we avoid giving separate
proofs for Lie and totally disconnected groups. I found it more
efficient to reduce theorems about locally compact groups to their
counterparts in Lie theory. In the special case of totally disconnected
groups, most proof are moderate exercises only, since we can work
locally with projective limits of finite groups instead of projective
limits of general Lie groups.

In the fourth chapter, we explain some of the structure results for
locally compact groups, in particular the solution to Hilbert’s fifth
problem. We state in the main result how to approximate a locally
compact group locally by projective systems of Lie groups.

In the fifth chapter, we will translate classical results for both the
Hecke algebra of a Lie group and a totally disconnected group to the
setting of a locally compact group. We will work equivariantly with
respect to a compact subgroup. We conclude by briefly introducing the
Abel transform, which can be defined in the presence of an Iwasawa-type
decomposition of the group. The Abel transform will play a central role
in the representation theory of reductive algebraic groups over local
fields.

In the sixth chapter, we relate the Abel transform to the analysis of
the parabolic inductions and their subquotient. We briefly review the
main results of the representation theory of a locally compact group. We
relate the representation theory to the invariant harmonic analysis of a
locally compact group, and discuss traces of representations, Gelfand
pairs, Plancherel theorems, orbital integrals, and parabolic inductions.

We emphasize that the main features of this part are:

-   Let @xmath be a locally compact group, and let @xmath be a compact
    subgroup. We introduce @xmath and decompose it as @xmath -bi-module.

-   We give a trace computation for the compact induction from
    subgroups, which are compact modulo the center.

-   We introduce a fairly general notion of a parabolic induction
    including all the standard cases, and compute its trace as a
    functional via the Abel transform.

These statements become trivial in the case of a discrete group. The
toolbox introduced here has more value if the irreducible, unitary or
the smooth, admissible representations of the group in question are
classified, and if the decomposition of their restrictions to a compact
subgroup are known a priori.

## Chapter 4 Structure theory of locally compact groups

### 4.1. Topological and locally compact groups

###### Definition 4.1.1.

A group is a topological group if it is a topological space and the
multiplication and the inversion maps are continuous. A topological
group is a locally compact group if it is a Hausdorff space with a
relative open, compact set.

The Hausdorffness condition can be removed from the definition of a
locally compact group. Analysis on Hausdorff spaces factors then through
a quotient group, which is Hausdorff.

###### Proposition 4.1.2 ([DeEc]*Proposition 1.1.6).

Let @xmath be a topological group. A continuous map from @xmath to a
@xmath -space factors through the quotient group @xmath , where @xmath
is the closure of the set, which contains only the identity element and
is a closed, normal subgroup. The quotient group @xmath is a Hausdorff
topological group.

The assumption that @xmath is locally compact is crucial. This property
is essentially equivalent to the existence of quasi-invariant Radon
measures on a group. A Radon measure is a functional on the space @xmath
of continuous, compactly supported functions @xmath . In a case where
the group does not admit a compact, relatively open set, the space
@xmath contains no non-zero element.

### 4.2. The identity component

###### Definition-Theorem 4.2.1 ([DeEc]*Proposition 4.1.2).

The path-connected component of the unit element in a topological group
is a closed, normal subgroup. If @xmath is a locally compact group, we
denote this component by @xmath .

Since @xmath is normal, we can consider the group extension

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This extension provides us with a good starting point for understanding
the local structure of a locally compact group. It also allows us to
introduce the following standard definitions:

###### Definition 4.2.2.

Let @xmath be a locally compact group.

-   The group @xmath is (path-)connected if @xmath .

-   The group @xmath is almost connected if the quotient group @xmath is
    compact.

-   The group @xmath is locally pro-finite if the group @xmath .

It follows that for each topological group @xmath , the quotient group
@xmath is a totally disconnected group. We want to have a sufficiently
flexible definition of a Lie group, to the extent that discrete groups
are Lie group. We also want to remove the condition of being
para-compact. We consider a singleton, i.e., a point with the discrete
topology, as the zero-dimensional Euclidean space.

###### Definition 4.2.3.

A smooth manifold is a topological space which is locally homeomorphic
to the Euclidean space, possibly of dimension zero, and whose transition
maps are smooth. A Lie group is a smooth manifold whose group operations
are smooth.

We will see shortly that almost connected groups are projective limits
of such Lie groups.

### 4.3. Van Dantzig’s Theorem and its consequences

###### Theorem 4.3.1 (Van Dantzig’s Theorem).

-    Van Dantzig’s Theorem: Every locally profinite group contains a
    neighborhood base at the identity of open, compact subgroups.

-    In a locally pro-finite group, every compact subgroup is contained
    in an open, compact subgroup.

###### Proof.

Van Dantzig’s Theorem is well-known. See e.g. [ MontgomeryZippin ]
*Theorem 2.3, page 54 or [ DeEc ] *Theorem 4.1.6, page 95 for a proof.
The second point is a conclusion of van Dantzig’s Theorem; let @xmath be
a totally disconnected group, and let @xmath be a compact subgroup. Pick
an open compact subgroup @xmath of @xmath . Consider

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There exists a finite set @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hence @xmath is a compact, open subgroup as a closed subset of @xmath
and commutes with any element of @xmath . The group generated by @xmath
and @xmath equals @xmath and is an open compact group, which contains
@xmath . ∎

###### Corollary 4.3.2 (Every compact subgroup is contained in an almost
connected, open subgroup).

Let @xmath be a locally compact group with a compact subgroup @xmath ,
then it contains a closed subgroup @xmath

1.   which is open,

2.   almost connected,

3.   and which contains @xmath .

###### Proof.

Consider the surjection @xmath . Consider an open, compact group @xmath
with @xmath , which exists by Theorem 4.3.1 . The pullback @xmath is an
open, closed and almost connected subgroup, which contains @xmath . ∎

### 4.4. Approximation by Lie groups

The following results are often referred to as the solution of Hilbert’s
fifth problem.

###### Theorem 4.4.1 (Gleason-Yamabe Theorem).

Let @xmath be a locally compact, almost connected group, then it admits
a net ¹ ¹ 1 It is sufficient to consider sequences if and only if @xmath
is metrizable. of normal compact subgroups @xmath , which is partially
ordered by inclusion, and satisfies

1.  @xmath , or equivalently @xmath ,

2.  @xmath is isomorphic to a Lie group.

Proofs can be found in [ Yamabe ] *Theorem 5, page 364 and [
MontgomeryZippin ] *Theorem 4.6, page 175. We have introduced Lie groups
in a way that they include discrete groups. We give two special cases as
examples:

###### Example 4.4.2.

-   Let @xmath be a compact group, thus every irreducible representation
    of @xmath is unitarizable and finite-dimensional by the Peter-Weyl
    Theorem. Let @xmath be the set of finite subsets of the irreducible
    representations, which is partially ordered by inclusion, and for
    @xmath define @xmath . It is true that @xmath is the projective
    limit of the images of @xmath :

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    The image of every @xmath is certainly closed as @xmath is compact
    and is a subset of the compact Lie group @xmath . Every closed
    subgroup of a Lie group is a Lie group. So every compact group is
    homeomorphic to a projective limit of compact Lie groups. In
    particular, every compact, totally disconnected group is a
    projective limit of finite groups, i.e., a pro-finite group.

-   Let @xmath be a locally compact abelian group. Every neighborhood of
    the identity contains a compact open normal subgroup @xmath such
    that @xmath for some discrete abelian group @xmath , so it is a Lie
    group by definition. See [ HofmannMorris:Compact ] *Corollary 7.54.

###### Corollary 4.4.3.

Let @xmath be a locally compact group, let @xmath be a compact subgroup.
Then there exists an open, closed subgroup @xmath and a net of compact
subgroups @xmath , which is partially ordered by inclusion, and
satisfies

1.  @xmath contains @xmath ,

2.  @xmath , or equivalently @xmath ,

3.  @xmath is isomorphic to a Lie group.

###### Example 4.4.4 (Lie group and locally pro-finite groups).

-   If @xmath is a Lie group, then we can pick @xmath and the family of
    normal, compact subgroups @xmath .

-   If @xmath is a locally pro-finite group, then every almost connected
    subgroup @xmath is compact, i.e., pro-finite. Let @xmath be the
    family of normal, finite-index subgroups, which becomes a net under
    the partial ordering of inclusion.

## Chapter 5 Hecke algebras

### 5.1. Smooth functions on locally compact groups

I would like to introduce a fairly general definition of a smooth
function on a locally compact group, which is due to Bruhat [
Bruhat:Distributions ] . This is our motivation behind the introduction
of projective systems of Lie groups.

###### Definition 5.1.1 (Smooth functions on a locally compact group).

Let @xmath be a locally compact group. A function @xmath is smooth if
for all @xmath and every almost connected, closed, and open subgroup
@xmath , there exists a normal, compact subgroup @xmath of @xmath such
that

1.  the group @xmath is a Lie group,

2.  the function @xmath is bi- @xmath -invariant,

3.  and yields a smooth function @xmath between smooth manifolds.

###### Example 5.1.2.

Let us compare the notion of smooth functions on a general locally
compact group with that on Lie groups and locally pro-finite groups.

-   If @xmath is a Lie group, then the notion of a smooth function is
    equivalent to the usual one.

-   If @xmath is a totally disconnected group, then a function is smooth
    if and only if it is locally constant.

Let @xmath be a locally compact group always considered to be endowed
with a right invariant Haar measure @xmath . Fix an open, relative
compact subset @xmath of @xmath . Define the modular character

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The modular character is independent of the Haar measure and the open
compact set @xmath . We usually write @xmath . For any @xmath
-integrable function @xmath on @xmath and any element @xmath , we
provide the following integral identity

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The last identity asserts that @xmath is a left invariant Haar measure.

###### Definition 5.1.3.

The space @xmath of smooth, compactly supported functions on @xmath is
given a @xmath -algebra structure via the following operations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 5.1.4.

Let @xmath be a locally compact group. For any almost connected, closed,
and open subgroup @xmath of @xmath and every net @xmath of compact
normal subgroups

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath .

###### Proof.

Since @xmath is open, the quotient space @xmath is discrete, and we can
write @xmath in a unique fashion as a sum

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is supported on @xmath . Since any @xmath is compactly
supported, only a finite number is non-zero and the sum is a finite sum.
Now the rest follows by the definition of smoothness. ∎

If @xmath is Lie group, then @xmath carries the locally uniform
topology. If @xmath is an almost connected group, seen as the projective
limit of a net Lie groups @xmath , then @xmath carries the inductive
limit topology of the @xmath . A locally compact group is as topological
space the disjoint union of translates of almost connected groups. It is
sufficient to define the topology on @xmath as the inductive limit
topology.

The definition of a restricted product has been already used in the
previous chapters, when using adèlic groups. Let us confirm that the
above definitions coincide in this case with the usual notions as well.

###### Example 5.1.5 (Restricted products).

Let @xmath be a family (indexed by a set @xmath ) of locally compact
groups @xmath and some distinct compact, open subgroups. We can define
the restricted product

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where the topology is given on @xmath by the usual product topology, and
the topology on @xmath is the projective limit topology: a nonempty,
open subset is given precisely by a finite subset @xmath , and finitely
many @xmath open, non-empty:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The group @xmath is metrizable if and only if @xmath is countable and
every group @xmath is metrizable. Furthermore, the algebra

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

can be described as the span of tensors @xmath of functions @xmath ,
such that almost all @xmath are the characteristic functions of the open
group @xmath . This discussion addresses, for example, the situation,
where the group in question is the group of the finite adèlic points of
a group scheme defined over a global function field. For the number
field case, one can add a finite number of copies of real reductive Lie
groups.

### 5.2. Dixmier-Malliavin factorization

Every smooth function is the convolution product of smooth functions,
briefly denoted by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The algebra @xmath will act by endomorphisms on vector spaces, and the
above decomposition allows us to work with positive elements only.

Again, the statement is a moderate exercise when @xmath is discrete or
even if @xmath is a locally pro-finite group [ DeEc ] *Section 9.4.

###### Theorem 5.2.1 (Dixmier-Malliavin Theorem).

Every smooth function @xmath on a locally compact group @xmath can be
written as a finite sum of convolution products

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for a finite collection of elements @xmath .

###### Proof.

This follows immediately from the results of Lie theory. This is given
as Theorem 3.1 in [ DixMa ] . ∎

### 5.3. Existence of a Dirac net

If @xmath is not discrete, then the algebra @xmath has no unit element.

###### Definition 5.3.1 (Dirac net).

Let @xmath be a locally compact group. A net @xmath of elements in
@xmath is a Dirac net if

1.  every element @xmath is non-negative, i.e., @xmath ,

2.  every element @xmath is normalized, i.e., @xmath ,

3.  and the net is concentrated near the identity, i.e., for any
    neighborhood @xmath , there exists an index @xmath such that the
    support of @xmath for @xmath is contained in @xmath .

###### Lemma 5.3.2 (Dirac nets exist).

Let @xmath be a locally compact group, then @xmath admits a Dirac net.

###### Proof.

Dirac nets certainly exist in Euclidean space, e.g. consider the
sequence @xmath for

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By definition of a smooth manifold via smooth atlases, this remains true
for smooth manifolds as well. In the case of an almost connected group
@xmath , consider a net of normal compact subgroups @xmath such that
@xmath is a Lie group and @xmath . Consider a Dirac net @xmath , then
@xmath will do, where we define @xmath with the partial ordering @xmath
if and only if @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath be a general locally
compact group, then there exists an open, closed, almost connected
subgroup @xmath . The Dirac net of @xmath is also a Dirac net of @xmath
. ∎

###### Definition 5.3.3.

A net @xmath of elements in a topological @xmath -algebra @xmath is an
approximate identity if for all @xmath , we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can topologize @xmath via Lemma 5.1.4 as an inductive limit of
projective limits.

###### Lemma 5.3.4 (Dirac nets are approximate identities).

Let @xmath be a locally compact group, and let @xmath be a Dirac net.
The Dirac net is an approximate identity for @xmath , i.e., for all
@xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

This holds for Lie groups [ Harish:DiscreteII ] *Lemma 3, page 7. Hence,
it holds for almost connected, locally compact groups. To obtain the
general statement, we rely on the fact that every locally compact group
admits an open, closed, almost connected subgroup. Since translates of
functions supported by such a subgroup generate the space, the result
follows for arbitrary functions. The right (left) convolution commutes
with left (right) translation. ∎

The above lemma allows us to realize the right translation as
convolutions with a Dirac net @xmath

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The left translation can be realized similarly:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 5.3.5 (@xmath-invariant Dirac nets).

Let @xmath be a locally compact group, and let @xmath be a compact
subgroup, then there exists a Dirac net @xmath with @xmath for all
@xmath and @xmath . The Dirac net @xmath is said to be @xmath
-invariant.

###### Proof.

Pick any Dirac net @xmath , fix the probability Haar measure @xmath on
@xmath and define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Certainly @xmath remains non-negative, normalized and satisfies @xmath
for all @xmath and @xmath . It remains to be shown that there exists a
@xmath -conjugation-invariant base of neighborhoods. This is the content
of the next lemma. ∎

###### Lemma 5.3.6.

Let @xmath be a locally compact and @xmath be a compact subgroup, for
every open, relatively compact neighborhood @xmath of the identity,
there exists an open neighborhood @xmath of the identity which is
contained in @xmath , and satisfies @xmath for all elements @xmath .

###### Proof.

Set @xmath as the closure of @xmath . The map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is continuous, has compact image, and the image contains @xmath . So the
set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is compact and there exists a finite subset @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since the open kernel of @xmath is @xmath , we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The set @xmath is open, relatively compact and contains @xmath . It is
invariant under conjugation by @xmath . ∎

### 5.4. The decomposition into Hecke algebras

#### 5.4.1. Useful conventions on Haar measure and representations of
compact groups

The Haar measure on a compact group is finite. We will hence assume that
it is normalized to a probability measure, that is to say, the group has
unit measure.

The Peter-Weyl Theorem asserts that every continuous, irreducible
representation of a compact group is finite-dimensional and admits an
invariant sesqui-linear product. ¹ ¹ 1 Our convention is that a
sesqui-linear product @xmath is linear in the second argument. Most
statements in this section rely on the Schur orthogonality relations [
Knapp:Semi ] *Corollary 1.10, pg.15.

###### Theorem 5.4.1 (The Schur orthogonality relations).

Let @xmath be a compact group, let @xmath and @xmath be two unitary,
finite-dimensional, irreducible representations.

For all @xmath and @xmath , the following identities hold

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

#### 5.4.2. Projections on @xmath and their relations

###### Definition 5.4.2 (@xmath-expansion).

Let @xmath be a locally compact group, let @xmath be a closed subgroup.
Let @xmath and @xmath be finite-dimensional, unitary representations of
@xmath . We define the projections

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We define furthermore for each finite-dimensional, unitary
representation @xmath of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us collect some obvious invariance properties:

###### Lemma 5.4.3.

In the notation of Definition 5.4.2 , we have for all elements @xmath
the following relations

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Proof.

A compact group is unimodular. By the invariance of the Haar measure, we
observe the invariance:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Lemma 5.4.4.

In the notation of Definition 5.4.2 , we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

For two irreducible representation @xmath of @xmath , we decompose the
integral

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Schur orthogonality relations for matrix coefficients 5.4.1 yield
for an orthonormal basis @xmath of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , we may safely assume that @xmath Rewriting yields the result

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 5.4.5 (Relations).

In the notation of definition 5.4.2 , the operators @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are @xmath -algebra homomorphisms and projections. Additionally, all of
the above operators commute and the following relations are given ² ² 2
The Kronecker delta function @xmath is zero (one) if @xmath ( @xmath ).

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Also for all @xmath , we have following formula for the convolution
product:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

This follows from the Schur orthogonality relations 5.4.1 for characters
of compact groups. The relation @xmath has been verified in Lemma 5.4.4
. The other relations follow with similar computations. ∎

###### Definition 5.4.6.

We denote the image of @xmath by @xmath , of @xmath as @xmath and of
@xmath as @xmath .

The above definition only depends on the isomorphism classes of the
irreducible representation. The Dixmier-Malliavin Theorem reveals

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The convolution product on @xmath is zero if @xmath and @xmath are not
isomorphic.

From the above lemma, we get a decomposition of the Hilbert space @xmath
as unitary @xmath -bi-module. The following proposition provides the
same decomposition on the @xmath -level, which is more difficult to
achieve. We deduce this decomposition from the Lie group case.

###### Proposition 5.4.7.

Let @xmath be a locally compact group and let @xmath be a compact
subgroup. Every smooth function @xmath or @xmath satisfies the following
identities:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where the sums run through all irreducible, unitary representations of
@xmath , and converges absolutely.

###### Proof.

The second equality follows from the first by the Lemma 5.4.4 .

The first equality is proven in [ Harish:DiscreteII ] for a unimodular
Lie group. The statement for a general locally compact group follows.

As we have seen, a locally compact group @xmath has an open, closed,
almost connected subgroup, which contains @xmath . It is sufficient to
prove the result for smooth functions which are supported on @xmath ,
since @xmath is a discrete space.

Let @xmath be a smooth function on @xmath , then there exists a normal,
compact subgroup @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath is bi- @xmath
-invariant and such that @xmath is a Lie group. We consider @xmath as a
smooth function on the Lie group @xmath . Since @xmath is normal in
@xmath , the group @xmath commutes with all elements @xmath . Thus
@xmath acts from the right and from the left on @xmath , and the action
factors through @xmath . The isomorphism between @xmath and @xmath goes
by the term second isomorphism theorem.

Now if @xmath is not unimodular ³ ³ 3 I am not aware of any interesting
compact subgroup in non-unimodular groups, but to be thorough, I include
the argument for the general case. , the modular character of @xmath
gives rise to a group extension

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have an isomorphism of @xmath -manifolds

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and this map is @xmath -invariant, since @xmath for all @xmath , in
particular @xmath . We identify @xmath , and assume that @xmath for
@xmath and @xmath .

The first identity holds now for @xmath by lemma 9 in [
Harish:DiscreteII ] *pg.14 respectively [ Harish-Chandra:Collected_III ]
*pg.551. ∎

###### Lemma 5.4.8.

Let @xmath be a locally compact group with a compact subgroup @xmath .
Let @xmath be bi- @xmath -invariant.

The following identities hold:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

In particular, if @xmath is a locally pro-finite group, then the above
sums are finite.

###### Proof.

This follows from the Schur orthogonality relations for matrix
coefficients 5.4.1 :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since they imply @xmath if @xmath . This implies the first identity and
the second follows by lemma 5.4.4 . ∎

#### 5.4.3. The decomposition of @xmath into Hecke algebras

###### Definition 5.4.9 (Hecke algebras).

Let @xmath be a locally compact group and @xmath be a compact subgroup.
Let @xmath be unitary, irreducible representations of @xmath . We define
the vector spaces

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The space @xmath is closely related to the algebra @xmath , and the
space @xmath is closely related to @xmath . We have vector space
isomorphisms

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We define a @xmath -algebra structure on @xmath only. Let @xmath and
@xmath be elements in @xmath . The convolution product is defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the * involution is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the adjoint of the element @xmath .

###### Proposition 5.4.10 (@xmath and @xmath as @xmath bi-module).

Let @xmath be a locally compact group and @xmath a compact subgroup. Let
@xmath be unitary, irreducible representations of @xmath . For elements
@xmath and @xmath for @xmath , we have projections

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There exists a dense embedding of vector spaces

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where the sum runs through one orthonormal system. The isomorphism
@xmath restricts to an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A proof for a locally compact, totally disconnected group can be found
in [ BushnellKutzko:GLNopen ] *Proposition 4.2.4, pg.148.

###### Proof.

We decompose by Proposition 5.4.7 :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The representation @xmath only acts on @xmath and the representation
@xmath only acts on @xmath . This proves that @xmath is an isomorphism
of vector spaces. ∎

###### Corollary 5.4.11.

The algebra @xmath is Morita equivalent to the topological closure of
the algebra @xmath .

###### Proof.

This follows directly from Proposition 5.4.10 . ∎

###### Corollary 5.4.12.

The @xmath -algebra @xmath admits an approximate identity. In particular
@xmath contains an approximate identity who is a @xmath -invariant Dirac
net in @xmath .

###### Proof.

Pick any Dirac net @xmath in @xmath , and consider @xmath . This is an
approximate identity for the @xmath -algebra @xmath according to
Proposition 5.4.10 and Lemma 5.3.4 . ∎

###### Example 5.4.13 (Approximate identity in the totally disconnected
case).

Let @xmath be a locally pro-finite group. Then @xmath is unital. The
function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the unit element of @xmath .

### 5.5. The Abel transform

We generalize the definition of the Abel transform as given in [
Lang:SL2 ] . The Abel transform appears under different names, such as
the Harish-transform [ Lang:SL2 ] , or the constant term [ Laumon1 ] in
literature. This transform allows to translate the representation theory
of a locally compact group to the representation theory of its
subgroups.

#### 5.5.1. The Iwasawa decomposition

We impose a topological datum on a topological group. This datum is most
natural in the context of @xmath , where @xmath is an arbitrary field,
and we use it soon only in the context where @xmath and @xmath is a
local field.

###### Definition 5.5.1 (Iwasawa datum).

Let @xmath be a locally compact group. A triple @xmath of closed
subgroups is called an Iwasawa datum if the following conditions are
satisfied:

-   the group @xmath normalizes the group @xmath , i.e., @xmath for all
    @xmath and @xmath ,

-   the group @xmath and @xmath have trivial intersection, i.e., @xmath
    ,

-   the group @xmath is compact,

-   we have a surjection

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

The Iwasawa datum is strict if @xmath implies @xmath . The Iwasawa datum
is unimodular if @xmath and @xmath are unimodular.

###### Example 5.5.2 (Some examples).

The trivial Iwasawa data are @xmath and @xmath . If we apply the theory
of this section to these triples, we obtain trivial statements.

The following triples are examples which the reader should keep in mind.
Consider @xmath , @xmath or @xmath , with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath , @xmath or @xmath with

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Then @xmath is an Iwasawa datum. It is not strict, since @xmath . When
we replace @xmath by a co-compact subgroup, i.e., for @xmath and @xmath
set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then the triple @xmath is a strict Iwasawa datum. If we replace @xmath
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath or @xmath , or

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath , then @xmath is not a strict Iwasawa datum either.

The group decomposition @xmath results in a decomposition of the Haar
measures.

###### Lemma 5.5.3 (Measure decomposition of an Iwasawa datum).

Let @xmath be a locally compact group, and let @xmath be an Iwasawa
datum. Define @xmath as the semi-direct product @xmath . There exist
left Haar measures @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath on @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath such that for all @xmath , we have that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Furthermore, we can choose three of the Haar measures arbitrarily, and
the last is uniquely determined by the others.

###### Proof.

Since @xmath normalizes @xmath and both groups have trivial
intersection, the semi-direct product is well-defined and equal to the
group generated by @xmath and @xmath . The left Haar measure @xmath of a
semi-direct product @xmath is computed according to the quotient
integral formula, see [ DeEc ] *Theorem 1.5.2:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Two Haar measures are chosen arbitrarily, and the last one is determined
uniquely. Furthermore, the inversion formula yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is compact, we can appeal to [ DeEc ] *Proposition 1.5.5

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Two of the three Haar measures @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are chosen
arbitrarily, and the remaining one is then determined uniquely. ∎

#### 5.5.2. The Abel transform of an Iwasawa datum

From this point forward, I will restrict my attention on unimodular
groups and unimodular Iwasawa data. This is mostly for convenience, but
I am also not aware of any interesting non-unimodular Iwasawa datum. We
define the Abel transform in this context.

###### Definition 5.5.4 (The Abel transform).

Let @xmath be a unimodular, locally compact group with an Iwasawa datum
@xmath . Let @xmath be a unitary, finite-dimensional representation of
@xmath , and let @xmath the modular character of @xmath .

The following operator is referred to as the Abel transform

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition 5.5.5.

The Abel-transform is a @xmath -algebra-homomorphism.

###### Proof.

The operator is certainly linear. Let us now verify that it is a @xmath
-linear homomorphism, i.e.,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is unimodular and @xmath is the semi-direct product @xmath
, we have that the operator @xmath respects the @xmath operation. Let
@xmath , then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

On the other hand, the definition gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which verifies the @xmath -property.

Now let us verify that the Abel transform is an algebra homomorphism.
Consider @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The Iwasawa decomposition and the property of @xmath -invariance yield
now:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have shown that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

#### 5.5.3. The dual of the Abel transform

The following definition is inspired by [ Sarkar:Abel ] *Section 3, page
258, but it has no significance for the rest of the thesis. I included
it for the sake of completeness.

###### Definition 5.5.6 (The dual Abel transform — Case @xmath).

Let @xmath be a unimodular group, and let @xmath be a strict, unimodular
Iwasawa datum. Assume that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is smooth, and that there exists a smooth map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath . Then there exists a (unique) element @xmath such that
@xmath . Let @xmath be an irreducible representation of @xmath such that
for all @xmath the restriction @xmath is trivial.

The dual Abel transform is the operator

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Lemma 5.5.7.

The operator @xmath is well-defined, @xmath -bilinear and independent of
the section @xmath considered.

###### Proof.

The integration along compact subgroups preserves both smoothness, and
the property of being compactly supported. Note that @xmath implies that
@xmath , i.e., @xmath is defined up to right translation by @xmath .
Since @xmath is trivial on @xmath , the dual Abel transform is
independent of @xmath Furthermore, by the invariance of the Haar
measure, we observe that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition 5.5.8 (@xmath).

The dual Abel transform @xmath is the adjoint of the Abel transform
@xmath , that is,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Proof.

The adjoint formula follows from a computation

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The matrix @xmath is the identity. Now, we appeal to the measure
decomposition in Lemma 5.5.3 for the inner integral

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The duality follows, since

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

## Chapter 6 Invariant harmonic analysis and representation theory

### 6.1. Preliminaries in representation theory

###### Definition 6.1.1 (Standard terminology).

1.  A (topological) representation @xmath of @xmath on a topological
    vector space is a weakly continuous group homomorphism into the
    invertible operators of @xmath .

2.  We say that a vector @xmath of @xmath for a representation @xmath of
    @xmath is smooth if for all functionals @xmath the matrix
    coefficient

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    is smooth. If all vectors are smooth, then we say that the
    representation @xmath is smooth.

3.  Let @xmath be a large subgroup of @xmath , that is, a closed
    subgroup which contains the unique (up to conjugation) ¹ ¹ 1
    Regarding the existence and uniqueness of a maximal compact subgroup
    in a connected group, the reader may consult [ MontgomeryZippin ]
    Theorem 4.13. maximal compact subgroup of the identity component
    @xmath and is open under the surjection @xmath . A representation
    @xmath of @xmath is said to be admissible if the restriction to
    @xmath decomposes with finite multiplicity. ² ² 2 The definition is
    independent of the large subgroup chosen. If it holds for one large
    compact subgroup, it holds for all large compact subgroups, since
    any two open compact subgroups in a totally disconnected group are
    commensurable up to conjugation, i.e., their common intersection has
    finite index in either one of the groups.

4.  A representation @xmath of @xmath is said to be unitarizable if
    there exists a positive sesquilinear product

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    such that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

5.  A representation @xmath of @xmath on a Hilbert space is said to be
    trace class if the operator associated to @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    is trace class, i.e., for each orthonormal basis @xmath and each
    @xmath , the following series converges absolutely:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Example 6.1.2.

Let @xmath be the ring of adèles of a global field. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a large subgroup of @xmath .

I will list a number of standard facts which allow for an algebraic
classification of smooth, admissible representations.

###### Theorem 6.1.3 (Smooth and algebraic representations).

Let @xmath be a topological representation of a locally compact group.

1.   The set of smooth vectors @xmath is a dense, invariant subspace of
    @xmath . We denote the restriction to the smooth vectors by @xmath .
    The space @xmath is endowed with the uniform topology, where a net
    @xmath converges if and only if the net of functions @xmath
    converges inside @xmath . The representation on @xmath is
    topological.

2.   Let @xmath be a large subgroup of @xmath , then every smooth vector
    has a @xmath -expansion. That is to say, given a finite-dimensional
    unitary representation @xmath of @xmath , the projection

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    surjects onto the @xmath -isotype of @xmath , i.e., the largest
    @xmath -invariant subspace such that @xmath is equivalent to
    possibly several copies of @xmath . A vector @xmath is automatically
    smooth, and for every smooth vector @xmath , the series

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    converges absolutely towards @xmath in the uniform topology, where
    the sum runs through a set of representatives @xmath of isomorphism
    classes of unitary, irreducible representations of @xmath . In
    particular, the algebraic sum

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    of the @xmath -isotypes is a dense subspace in @xmath .

3.   Let @xmath be a large subgroup, and let @xmath be a representation
    of @xmath and @xmath the contragredient of @xmath . Let @xmath carry
    a left-invariant Haar measure. Let @xmath be an element of the
    algebra @xmath of smooth functions. Then the operator

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    maps @xmath into the smooth vectors @xmath ; in fact, @xmath Let
    @xmath be an element of the Hecke algebra @xmath (see Definition
    5.4.9 ), and then the operator @xmath maps @xmath into the @xmath
    -isotype @xmath ; in fact, @xmath .

###### Proof.

The first two statements are true for all unimodular Lie groups [
Harish:DiscreteII ] *Corollary 1, Lemma 4, Lemma 9, page 7-13. They
follow for a general locally compact group by considering it locally as
a projective limit of Lie groups. This argument was demonstrated on
numerous occasions in the preceding chapter, and repeating it is
unnecessary. The third statement is proved by two short computations:
for any vector @xmath , any element @xmath and @xmath , we compute

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and for any vector @xmath and @xmath , we compute

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Corollary 6.1.4.

Let @xmath be a topological representation of a locally compact group,
let @xmath be a large subgroup of @xmath , and let @xmath be a
finite-dimensional representation of @xmath . The following statements
are equivalent:

-    the @xmath -isotype has finite multiplicity in the restriction of
    @xmath , and

-    the operator @xmath has finite rank for all elements @xmath .

###### Definition 6.1.5 (The character distribution).

Let @xmath be an admissible, unitarizable representation of a locally
compact group @xmath , and let @xmath be a large subgroup of @xmath .
For all irreducible unitary representations @xmath of @xmath , we define
the character distribution

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In principle, the definition applies to @xmath as well, but the trace is
always zero if @xmath . The character distributions for representations
on non-Hilbert spaces can be defined more generally, but this would
require the introduction of an extensive amount of material.

The content of the following observation directly follows from the above
Definition and Theorem 6.1.3 .

###### Corollary 6.1.6 (Vanishing character distribution).

Let @xmath be an admissible, unitary representation of a locally compact
group @xmath , let @xmath be a large subgroup of @xmath , and @xmath be
a finite-dimensional, unitary representation of @xmath .

The character distribution @xmath vanishes on @xmath if @xmath is not
contained in @xmath .

###### Examples 6.1.7.

-   Each irreducible, unitarizable representation of a locally compact
    abelian group is one-dimensional, smooth, admissible, and trace
    class. The irreducible representations thus form a group, denoted by
    @xmath , which is locally compact in the compact-open topology. For
    a one-dimensional representation @xmath , the character distribution
    of @xmath is the Fourier transform at @xmath , i.e., for @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   Each irreducible representation of a compact group is
    finite-dimensional, smooth, unitarizable, and trace class. This is
    the Peter-Weyl Theorem.

-   Every smooth, admissible representation of an algebraic reductive
    Lie group over a local field is trace class. It is understood in
    many cases that the distribution @xmath determines the
    representation @xmath up to Naimark equivalence [
    BernsteinZelevinskii:GLN ] *Corollary 2.20, page 20, [ Knapp:Semi ]
    *Theorem 10.6, page 336.

-   Let @xmath be a locally compact group with a closed, co-compact
    subgroup @xmath , i.e., @xmath is a compact space. Then @xmath is
    unimodular as well, and there exists a right invariant measure
    @xmath on @xmath , which is unique up to a constant. The right
    regular representation on @xmath is a unitary, trace class
    representation [ DeEc ] *Theorem 9.2.2, page 175.

-   An example of a representation, which is not trace class, is the
    right regular or left regular representation on every non-compact
    group, which is unitary, but not trace class.

-   Another counterexample — more in the spirit of the main focus of
    this thesis — is the right regular representation of @xmath or
    @xmath on @xmath or @xmath respectively.

### 6.2. Hilbert space and unitary representation

###### Definition 6.2.1.

Let @xmath be a second-countable, locally compact group with a large
compact subgroup @xmath .

-   A @xmath -unitary representation of @xmath is a strongly continuous
    representation of @xmath on a separable Hilbert space, such that the
    restriction to @xmath is unitary.

-   A subquotient of a @xmath -unitary representation is the image of a
    @xmath -equivariant projection onto a @xmath -isotype.

-   Two @xmath -unitary representations @xmath and @xmath are (Naimark)
    equivalent if there exists a closed (possibly unbounded), injective
    operator @xmath with closed range and dense image, and @xmath for
    all elements @xmath .

###### Theorem 6.2.2.

Let @xmath be a second-countable, locally compact group with a large
compact subgroup @xmath . Consider two @xmath -unitary, irreducible
representations @xmath and @xmath . The following are equivalent:

1.   the representations @xmath and @xmath are equivalent

2.   the representations @xmath and @xmath have a common matrix
    coefficient

3.   if both @xmath and @xmath have a common @xmath -isotype with
    multiplicity one, the character distributions of @xmath and @xmath
    coincide on @xmath

###### Proof.

Look at [ Koornwinder:SL2C ] . The equivalence of the first two
statements is given as Lemma 1.4 on page 409. The equivalence between
point one and three is Theorem 1.5 on page 410. ∎

###### Theorem 6.2.3 ([Rao]).

Let @xmath be a local field. Let @xmath and @xmath be @xmath / @xmath /
@xmath for @xmath non-archimedean / complex / real. Every smooth,
admissible representation can be embedded densely into a @xmath -unitary
representation, and every @xmath -isotype has at most multiplicity one.

For what follows, we summarize some of classical results about unitary
representations of type @xmath groups. Definitions, proofs and
references can be found in [ Barut ] *Chapter 5 and [ DeEc ] *Chapter 8.

###### Example 6.2.4.

Let @xmath be a local field. The group @xmath is a unimodular, locally
compact, separable group of type @xmath .

###### Theorem 6.2.5.

Let @xmath be a separable, locally compact group. Every unitary
representation @xmath on a separable Hilbert space admits a direct
integral decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

into irreducible representation @xmath for some measure space @xmath .
The decomposition is unique if the representation is type @xmath .

###### Theorem 6.2.6 (Abstract Plancherel formula).

Let @xmath be a unimodular, locally compact, separable group of type
@xmath . Let @xmath denote the set of irreducible, unitary
representations which are contained in the right regular representation
of @xmath on @xmath . With the Fell topology, the set @xmath becomes a
local Hausdorff space. Then there exists a unique positive Radon measure
@xmath on @xmath , also known as the Plancherel measure, such that for
all @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The theorem is proven in [ Dixmier:Cstar-algebres ] *18.8.1 in terms of
the Hilbert-Schmidt norm

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The Dixmier-Malliavin Theorem and the polar decomposition generalize
this to the trace. ∎

###### Example 6.2.7.

Let @xmath be a local field. The unitary one-dimensional and the
complementary principal series representations of @xmath are
unitarizable, but not contained in the right regular representation.
Explicit computations are given in Sections 7.7 and 8.7 .

### 6.3. Abstract parabolic inductions

###### Definition 6.3.1 (The parabolic induction).

Let @xmath be a locally compact group with a unimodular Iwasawa datum
@xmath , let @xmath . Let @xmath be a smooth representation of @xmath .

Define the Jacquet-module @xmath of @xmath as the right regular
representation on the space of smooth functions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that for all @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The functions are necessarily bounded, since @xmath is compact.

###### Lemma 6.3.2.

If @xmath is a unitarizable representation of @xmath , then @xmath is a
unitarizable representation of @xmath .

However, there do exist unitarizable parabolic inductions which do not
come from a unitarizable representation of @xmath , such as the
complementary series representations of @xmath or @xmath . The
importance of the parabolic induction in the representation theory of
real reductive Lie groups can be understood from the following theorem:

###### Theorem 6.3.3 (Casselman submodule theorem
[Casselman-Osborne:Restriction_admissible], [Harish:SS2]).

Let @xmath be an algebraic linear reductive group over @xmath . Then
every irreducible representation is a subquotient of a Jacquet-module
associated to a parabolic subgroup.

For non-archimedean fields, the above statement does not hold. There are
also the super-cuspidal representations, which were first discovered by
Mautner [ Mautner:Spherical2 ] .

Now let us emphasize the importance of the Abel transform in the context
of the parabolic induction:

###### Theorem 6.3.4.

Under the assumptions and in the notation of Definition 5.5.4 , let
@xmath be an irreducible, @xmath -unitarizable, admissible
representation.

We have for @xmath the following formula:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The proof strategy is the same as for the Frobenius character formula..

###### Lemma 6.3.5.

For each orthonormal basis @xmath of @xmath , we have a formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Endow @xmath with a normalized Haar measure, and @xmath with the unique
left invariant Haar measure @xmath , such that for each @xmath , see [
DeEc ] *Proposition 1.5.5:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath . Consider

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The operator @xmath is thus a kernel transformation @xmath , with kernel

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is a trace class representation, we have that for each
orthonormal basis @xmath of @xmath the sum

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

converges absolutely. Every trace-class operator on @xmath is a
Hilbert-Schmidt operator, and the series is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

absolute convergent.

The restriction of @xmath to @xmath is a unitary representation of
@xmath . Choose a @xmath -equivariant orthonormal basis, in the sense
that any vector sits exactly in one @xmath -isotypic component. Since
@xmath is compact and the basis is @xmath -invariant, the function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

indexed by finite subset @xmath converges uniformly to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is thus continuous, and in particular, square integrable over @xmath .
The operator @xmath is therefore a Hilbert-Schmidt operator, since the
kernel is @xmath integrable with the Hilbert-Schmidt norm being

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that @xmath is a @xmath -algebra homomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By the Dixmier-Malliavin Theorem, we know that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a finite sum of products of Hilbert-Schmidt operators, hence a trace
class operator. By the polarization identity, we can write @xmath as a
sum of four positive, trace class operators

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This means we only have to verify the formula for an element of the form
@xmath because the trace is a linear functional. We thus have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The following rules apply to the kernel functions:

  --------- -- -------- --
  (6.3.1)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

We thus have that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Removing and adding the outer brackets yields the proof via the relation
6.3.1 :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Proof of the theorem.

By the quotient integral formula and the decomposition @xmath , we have
for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is trivial on @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

### 6.4. The compact induction

###### Definition 6.4.1.

Let @xmath be a locally compact group with center @xmath . Let @xmath be
a one-dimensional representation of @xmath . Define @xmath as the space
of smooth functions @xmath , which are compactly supported modulo the
center with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 6.4.2.

The right and the left regular representation of @xmath on @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are unitarizable if and only if @xmath is unitary.

###### Definition 6.4.3 (Compact-mod-center).

A closed subgroup @xmath in a locally compact group @xmath is called a
compact-mod-center subgroup

1.  if it contains the center of @xmath , and

2.  if it is compact modulo the center of @xmath .

###### Definition 6.4.4 (Compact induction).

Let @xmath be a locally compact group, and let @xmath be a
compact-mod-center subgroup. Let @xmath be a finite-dimensional
representation of @xmath . The representation @xmath denotes then the
right regular representation on the smooth functions @xmath , which are
compactly supported modulo the center and satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A smooth, admissible representation is called supercuspidal if its
matrix coefficients are compactly supported modulo the center.

###### Example 6.4.5 ([BernsteinZelevinskii:GLN],
[BushnellHenniart:GL2]).

Let @xmath be a non-archimedean field. Then every irreducible
supercuspidal representation of @xmath is isomorphic to the compact
induction of an irreducible representation from a compact-mod-center
subgroup. All irreducible unitary representations of @xmath , which are
not isomorphic to subquotients of parabolic inductions associated to
parabolic subgroups, are supercuspidal representations. There are
precisely @xmath conjugacy classes of maximal compact-mod-center
subgroups in @xmath .

###### Theorem 6.4.6 ([Bushnell:Induced]*Theorem 1, page 107).

Let @xmath be a locally profinite, unimodular group and let @xmath be a
compact-mod-center subgroup of @xmath . Let @xmath be an irreducible
representation of @xmath . The following assertions are equivalent:

1.   the representation @xmath is admissibile;

2.   the representation @xmath is admissibile;

3.   there is an isomorphism of representations @xmath ;

4.   the representation @xmath decomposes into a finite sum of
    irreducible supercuspidal representations.

###### Lemma 6.4.7.

The representation @xmath is unitarizable if and only if the central
character of @xmath is unitarizable.

We compute the character distribution of the compact induction along the
same lines as the Frobenius character formula. The first formula can be
found in [ Sally:CharacterSL2 ] , [ Kutzko:CharacterGLL ] *page 201. We
will call it the Iwasawa-Frobenius character formula, since it relies on
the structure of the Iwasawa decomposition.

###### Theorem 6.4.8 (The Iwasawa-Frobenius character formula).

Let @xmath be a unimodular locally compact group, @xmath a closed
subgroup, @xmath the center of @xmath , and @xmath a compact-mod-center
subgroup with @xmath . Normalize the Haar measures in such a fashion
that for all @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be a unitary irreducible representation of @xmath such that
@xmath is an admissible, trace class representation.

Its character distribution satisfies for all @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The normalization of the Haar measure is given by [ DeEc ] *Proposition
1.5.5, page 25. As an induced representation of a unitary
representation, the representation @xmath is unitarizable. Let us
consider an arbitrary element @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Set @xmath . For all @xmath , we compute

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Therefore, the operator @xmath is a kernel transformation @xmath with
kernel

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The claim of the above theorem follows if we can argue that

  --------- -- -------- --
  (6.4.1)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

We write according to the Dixmier-Malliavin Theorem

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We know that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The operator @xmath is furthermore a linear composition of self adjoint,
positive trace class operators via the polarization identity

  --------- -- -------- --
  (6.4.2)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

where we use the notation @xmath . The trace for such an operator is
computed simply by an integral over the diagonal of @xmath [ DeEc ]
*Lemma 9.3.1, page 180, and Equation 6.4.1 is justified. ∎

We state and prove the next theorem for locally profinite groups only,
but an analogue holds also in full generality. I am only aware of
interesting applications of the above theorem in the context of
reductive groups over non-archimedean fields, since the compact
inductions from compact-mod-center subgroups in linear reductive Lie
groups are never admissible.

The next theorem includes two distinct compact-mod-center subgroups.
Situations may arise, where it may be necessary to switch the
compact-mod-center subgroup. For example, the group @xmath contains two
distinct conjugation classes of compact-mod-center subgroups.

###### Theorem 6.4.9.

Let @xmath be a locally profinite group, @xmath a closed subgroup, and
let @xmath and @xmath be open compact-mod-center subgroupsa with @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath open in @xmath . Let @xmath be the center of @xmath
, and let @xmath be contained in @xmath . We fix the unique right Haar
measure, in such a fashion that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath carry right
Haar measures with

  --------- -- -------- --
  (6.4.3)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

Additionally, there is a unique constant @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be a unitary finite-dimensional representation of @xmath ,
such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an admissible, trace class representation. For all @xmath , the
following formula is valid:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we have defined

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath is the extension of the modular character @xmath of @xmath to
@xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Before proving the theorem, we need a short lemma:

###### Lemma 6.4.10 (Measures on double cosets).

Let @xmath be a locally profinite group, and let @xmath be two open
compact subgroups with normalized Haar measure, then we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

An analogous statement holds in greater generality [ Liu ] .

###### Proof.

The space @xmath is discrete, and the coset @xmath is open. The identity
is true for every characteristic function of a coset. We also have for
all @xmath that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is compactly supported, constant on @xmath -cosets, and can be written
as a finite linear combination of characteristic functions of cosets. ∎

###### Proof of the theorem.

The function @xmath is well-defined since @xmath is open
compact-mod-center and therefore @xmath . We can rely on Theorem 6.4.8
and write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , we may write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath and @xmath are open compact in @xmath . The suggested
normalization ( 6.4.3 ) yields that @xmath has measure one in @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Iwasawa decomposition yields that there exists a unique left Haar
measure on @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now let us compare the measures @xmath and @xmath . By the uniqueness of
right Haar measures, we have a constant @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now, we appeal to Lemma 6.4.10 for @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Example 6.4.11 (@xmath-reductive groups).

In the case of a reductive group @xmath of a non-archimedean field, we
have a formula for the measure associated to @xmath , where @xmath is
the Iwahori subgroup possibly enlarged by the center. The coset space
@xmath carries the structure of a Coxeter group. Relevant computations
for the measures can be found in [ IwahoriMatsumoto:Bruhat ]
*Proposition 3.2, page 44. The Iwahori subgroup is always contained as a
co-finite subgroup modulo the center in at least one representative of
each conjugacy class of maximal compact-mod-center subgroups.

We give an example, how to exploit this formula for a computation.

###### Corollary 6.4.12 (Existence of pseudo-matrix coefficients).

In the notation and under the assumptions of Theorem 6.4.9 , pick any
compact group @xmath and set @xmath . Assume furthermore that @xmath is
irreducible for an irreducible representation @xmath of @xmath .
Consider

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For every irreducible, trace-class representation @xmath of @xmath , we
have that @xmath unless @xmath for some unitary character @xmath with
@xmath , and in the latter case

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

By admissibility, we have that @xmath , see [ Bushnell:Induced ]
*Theorem 1, page 107. Schur’s Lemma implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

unless @xmath is contained in @xmath . Induction by steps in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the pasting lemma in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

yield that this is only the case if @xmath . Frobenius reciprocity
implies

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Mackey’s restriction-induction formula yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Applying Frobenius reciprocity again results in

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Since the dimension of this vector space is zero for @xmath , only the
component corresponding to the coset of the unit does not vanish. Let us
turn our attention to the character distribution. The integral is given
as

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Moreover @xmath by definition plus the integral

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . ∎

### 6.5. The theory of Gelfand pairs

###### Theorem 6.5.1 (Gelfand principle).

The following statements are equivalent:

-    the algebra @xmath is commutative;

-    the representation @xmath occurs in the restriction of every
    irreducible, unitary, admissible representation of @xmath at most
    with single multiplicity;

-    either of these facts are true for the contragedient @xmath .

###### Proof.

The algebra @xmath is commutative if and only if @xmath is, since we
have an anti-algebra homomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similar to the Schur isomorphism, we now have a dense embedding

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The algebra @xmath is commutative if and only if @xmath has single
multiplicity in every irreducible representation in @xmath . Otherwise,
there would exist two non-commuting projections. ∎

###### Definition 6.5.2 (Gelfand pairs).

-   We say that @xmath is a Gelfand pair if @xmath is abelian.

-   We say that @xmath is a Gelfand triple if @xmath is abelian.

-   We say that @xmath is a strong Gelfand pair if @xmath is a Gelfand
    triple for all irreducible representations @xmath of @xmath .

###### Example 6.5.3.

The pairs @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath are strong Gelfand pairs. Let @xmath be a non-archimedean field
with ring of integers @xmath , then @xmath is a strong Gelfand pair [
Silberger:SphericalPGL2 ] .

The next statement is taken from [ Godement:Spherical ] , [
Harish-Chandra:Harmonic ] *Part II, page 12, [ Warner1 ] . We say that
an associative algebra is @xmath -commutative if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every @xmath -tuple of elements.

###### Theorem 6.5.4 (Godement prinicple).

The following statements are equivalent:

-    the algebra @xmath is @xmath -commutative;

-    the representation @xmath occurs in the restriction of every
    smooth, admissible representation of @xmath at most with
    multiplicity @xmath ;

-    either of these facts are true for the contragedient @xmath .

The commutativity is verified often by the “Gelfand-Kahzdan trick.” The
following theorem is inspired by, and certainly implies [ Lang:SL2 ]
*Theorem 1, page 21.

###### Proposition 6.5.5 (Gelfand-Kahzdan trick).

Let @xmath be a unimodular, locally compact group, and let @xmath be a
compact subgroup, such that there are two homeomorphisms

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that

1.  @xmath and @xmath are the identity automorphism for some @xmath ,

2.  @xmath is an anti-automorphism, i.e., @xmath ,

3.  @xmath is an automorphism, i.e., @xmath , and

4.   for any element @xmath , there exists @xmath such that @xmath .

The algebra @xmath of @xmath -conjugation invariant functions is then
commutative.

###### Proof.

Define the linear operators

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We immediately note that (4) implies @xmath for @xmath for all @xmath
and @xmath . It is sufficient to prove the following claim, since @xmath
is a @xmath -isomorphism. ∎

###### Claim 1.

@xmath

###### Proof of claim.

At most, the (anti-)automorphism scales the Haar measure by a positive
constant @xmath by the uniqueness of invariant measure, since the group
is unimodular. Because the (anti-)automorphismS have finite order
according to point (1), the constant satisfies @xmath , i.e., @xmath .
The first equality is straightforward:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The second equality is more complicated:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

### Remarks

-   It would be worthwhile to reprove the decomposition of @xmath as
    @xmath -bi-module for a closed subgroup @xmath , which is compact
    only modulo the center @xmath . For such subgroups, an analogue of
    the Peter-Weyl Theorem holds if there exists a compact subgroups
    @xmath with @xmath has finite index in @xmath .

-   The approach to the computation of the character distribution is
    somewhat different than what is usually done. The distribution of a
    smooth, admissible representation of a reductive group over local
    fields is a locally integrable function @xmath such that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Frequently, only the function @xmath is computed, but it is more
    useful in our context to efficiently calculate the scalar @xmath for
    fixed @xmath or @xmath .

## Part III — Local harmonic analysis on @xmath

In this part, we partially specialize the harmonic analysis developed in
Part two to the locally compact group @xmath for a local field @xmath
(short: local field), i.e., either [ Weil:Basic ]

-   the field @xmath of real numbers,

-   the field @xmath of complex numbers,

-   a non-archimedean field @xmath , either

    -   a finite extension of the field @xmath of the @xmath -adic
        rationals, or

    -   a finite extension of the Laurent series in one-variable over a
        finite field.

The treatment is to a large extent kept independent from the previous
parts, despite the overlap.

We stressed the common ground for the theory in Part I. We will not
stress the similarities between the harmonic analysis of the different
groups @xmath , @xmath and @xmath from this point forward, but it should
be self-explanatory from the organization and enumeration of the
material.

For @xmath , I have omitted a full treatment. I focus instead on
bi-invariant harmonic analysis. This restricts the spectral analysis to
automorphic forms with complex constituents which are unramified
principal series representations. There are no classical references for
integral identities. The difficulties to be overcome have a purely
special function theoretic origin. Although this harmonic analysis seems
less interesting, because of the absence of discrete series
representations, its omission is a remaining gap in a complete treatment
of the @xmath trace formula from a computational point of view.

The main goal of this part is to show the computation of all local
distributions and constants, which appear in the Arthur trace formula as
given in [ JacquetLanglands ] *page 271ff. for a global field on a
special set of test functions.

We will not describe the distributions explicitly here, but rather
address them by their names only. The distributions occuring in the
Arthur trace formula are

1.  the spectral distributions: the character distribution of all
    irreducible unitary representations of @xmath [ GelbartJacquet ]
    *page 244(7.16). These are

    -   the one-dimensional representations,

    -   the continuous series representations,

    -   the complementary series representations,

    -   the discrete series representations for @xmath ,

    -   the supercuspidal representations and Steinberg representations
        for @xmath non-archimedean,

2.  the Eisenstein spectrum (Section 1.10 ), ³ ³ 3 Some of the values
    have to be computed globally.

3.  the Eisenstein residues (Section 1.11 ), ⁴ ⁴ 4 These have to be
    computed globally and are only treated in a global context.

4.  the identity distribution: this is a specialization of the
    Plancherel formula (Section 1.5 ),

5.  the parabolic distribution: the value of the local zeta integral and
    its derivative at @xmath (Section 1.7 ),

6.  the hyperbolic distribution: the orbital integral and the weighted
    orbital integral of a hyperbolic element (Section 1.8 ),

7.  the elliptic distribution: the orbital integral of an elliptic
    element if @xmath (Section 1.9 ).

Note that only [ JacquetLanglands ] treats the function field case,
whereas the exposition in [ GelbartJacquet ] and [ Gelbart ] works in
the algebraic number field setting only. The differences between the
function field setting and the number field setting are minor. At the
non-archimedean places, the local harmonic analysis only depends mildly
upon the residue characteristic.

By a special set of test functions, we mean a subset of @xmath , which
has the following two properties:

-   only “very few” character distributions do not vanish

-   the test functions are able to determine/distinguish automorphic
    representations up to their factorization into local factors

Let us be precise. Consider the maximal compact subgroup @xmath of
@xmath , i.e., either @xmath , @xmath or @xmath depending on whether
@xmath is complex, real, or non-archimedean. Define @xmath as the
product of @xmath and the center @xmath of @xmath . For a central
unitary one-dimensional representation @xmath , define

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Note that the irreducible representations of @xmath are unitarizable and
finite-dimensional.

###### Definition (Distinction and separation).

-   (Parametrization) We say that two infinite-dimensional, irreducible,
    unitary representations of @xmath are @xmath -equivalent if they are
    isomorphic as @xmath representations.

-   (Distinction property) We say that a non-zero function @xmath is a
    pseudo-coefficient of a @xmath -equivalence class @xmath if the
    character distribution vanishes on @xmath for all unitary
    infinite-dimensional representations ⁵ ⁵ 5 We have to exclude the
    one-dimensional representations here. but those from the @xmath
    -equivalence class @xmath . We say that @xmath is @xmath
    -distinguishing element. ⁶ ⁶ 6 Note that the Plancherel formula
    implies that for non-zero elements in @xmath , not all character
    distributions can vanish simultaneously.

-   (Separation property) A @xmath -distinguishing element @xmath
    separates two isomorphism classes of representations @xmath if the
    character distributions differ, i.e.,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    We say that a subset @xmath of the @xmath -distinguishing elements
    in @xmath separates @xmath if for any two representation @xmath
    there exists an element @xmath which separates @xmath and @xmath .

The parametrization via irreducible representations of @xmath is
necessary and crucial for the classification of all unitary
representations. The distinction property allows to specialize the trace
formula to a more explicit form, such as the classical Selberg trace
formula for Maass forms on @xmath , and the Eichler-Selberg trace
formula for the Hecke eigenvalues of modular forms. Actually, our
specialization will be an improvement over these classical formulas, in
the sense that our trace formula analyzes only one fixed @xmath
-equivalence class at every place. The separation property guarantees
that the full power of the Arthur trace formula is exhausted and no
information is given away.

There are three classes of @xmath -equivalence classes:

-   The irreducible parabolic inductions include the continuous series
    representations and the complementary series representations. The
    construction is fairly easy, since a representation @xmath of @xmath
    will always exist which does not occur in any other @xmath
    equivalence class. Unfortunately, these @xmath -equivalence classes
    are large and have uncountably many elements. If we generalize the
    definition of a Hecke algebra @xmath to open subgroups @xmath which
    are only compact modulo the center, then elements of @xmath separate
    and distinguish this @xmath -equivalence class up to twist by
    one-dimensional characters.

-   The irreducible, infinite-dimensional subquotients of the parabolic
    inductions include the discrete series representations, and the
    Steinberg representations. The @xmath -equivalence class contains
    only two @xmath -isomorphism classes of representations, so the
    separation axiom is easy to satisfy. For the construction, one has
    to carefully study the Abel transform and arrange suitable linear
    combinations of elements @xmath for different irreducible
    representations @xmath of @xmath .

-   For the supercuspidal representations, we have to appeal to their
    classification. There will always exist a representation @xmath of
    @xmath which does not occur in any other @xmath -equivalence class
    of unitary representations. Additionally, the @xmath -equivalence
    class contains either one or two elements, depending on whether the
    supercuspidal representation is associated to a ramified or
    unramified quadratic extension. In the first case, everything works
    as intended and the function @xmath is essentially the only option
    for the distinguishing function. In the second case, we have to
    switch to another open subgroup, which is compact modulo the center.
    This subgroup is the normalizer of the Iwahori subgroup @xmath
    inside @xmath . The method is the same – only in terms of this
    latter subgroup.

The above @xmath -equivalence relation is weaker than the “local
analogue” of the similarity classes. However, the only distinction is
that ramified supercucpidal representation contain not one but two
isomorphism classes in a @xmath -equivalence class. The Seperation
property ensures that we can seperate the two isomorphism classes, and
construct pseudo coefficients in this way as well.

The results, to be quoted in this part, rely more or less directly on
methods involving the use of the Lie algebra, root systems, or the
Bruhat-Tits building. These concepts are modern and powerful but require
much notation. I have not introduced these concepts here, because for
the group @xmath , they seemed like overkill.

There is one technical difference between this part and the harmonic
analysis in the preceding part. Here, we will work with @xmath instead
of @xmath , i.e., modulo the center. This is a minor technical
modification, and it is rather easy to translate results between the two
settings. If the one-dimensional representation @xmath of @xmath and the
irreducible representations of @xmath coincide on @xmath , then
everything can be generalized directly via the surjective algebra
homorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Observe that as a consequence of Schur’s Lemma, the restriction of a
unitary irreducible representation to its center is a one-dimensional
representation. Its character distribution on @xmath factors through
@xmath . There is no loss of generality here.

An alternative route suggests working with @xmath instead of @xmath ,
since the former group has a compact center. The differences in the
representation theory and the harmonic analysis of @xmath and @xmath are
not crucial, and one can translate between the settings rather easily.
This route is preferred in the papers of Arthur, cf. [ Arthur:Invariant
] .

Note that naively switching to the group @xmath instead of @xmath is not
always possible. The representation theory of @xmath is not as rich as
that of @xmath . Also understanding the representations of @xmath from
those of @xmath is in general non-trivial, in particular, it is hard for
the supercuspidal representations if the residue characteristic of
@xmath is two. I have avoided every approach which requires a
case-by-case analysis depending on the characteristic or residue
characteristic.

## Chapter 7 Harmonic analysis on @xmath

### 7.1. Haar measure

The computations depend in a fairly obvious manner upon the Haar
measures. We will fix the Haar measures to avoid confusion.

Let @xmath be the Lebesgue measure on the real line, which assigns unit
measure to the interval @xmath . For all elements @xmath and @xmath , we
have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We consider the locally compact group @xmath with its closed subgroups

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- --

and its closed compact subgroups @xmath and @xmath . Only the group
@xmath is not unimodular.

The compact groups are endowed with the unit Haar measures. The group
@xmath has index two in @xmath , hence for all elements @xmath , the
following integral identity holds

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We endow @xmath with the Haar measure of @xmath by identifying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We endow @xmath with the Haar measure of @xmath via

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the group @xmath , we define the Haar measure by @xmath :

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

We have an integral formula

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We fix the unique left invariant Haar measure @xmath on @xmath with

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and the unique right invariant Haar measure @xmath by

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The modular character is then given as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Iwasawa decomposition @xmath yields a unique Haar measure on @xmath
such that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The Haar measures on @xmath and @xmath are both denoted by @xmath ,
although they differ by a constant when restricted to @xmath .

### 7.2. The compact subgroups @xmath and @xmath

All irreducible representations of the abelian group @xmath are
one-dimensional. We can identify them with the group of integers

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem 7.2.1 (All irreducible representations of @xmath).

All irreducible representations of @xmath are contained for some @xmath
in

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

-   @xmath is irreducible if and only if @xmath ,

-   @xmath if and only if @xmath ,

-   @xmath .

###### Proof.

The group @xmath is abelian and the group @xmath is a semi-direct
product of two abelian groups @xmath . We determine the irreducible
representations via the Mackey machine [ Mackey:Unitary ] *page 73,
which is designed for the analysis of irreducible representations of
group extensions. We identify @xmath with @xmath via

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We identify the Pontryagin dual of the abelian group @xmath with the
group @xmath of integers via sending @xmath , where @xmath . Conjugation
by @xmath on @xmath results on @xmath in taking inverses, i.e., @xmath ,
and hence on the Pontryagin dual @xmath as well.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence for @xmath , we observe that the irreducible representation @xmath
is irreducible, and for @xmath , that @xmath splits into two
one-dimensional representations, i.e., the trivial representation and
the determinant map @xmath . ∎

An alternative proof avoiding the Mackey Machine can be found in [
KnightlyLi ] *Section 11.2, page 155.

### 7.3. The representation theory of @xmath

We will now list all the unitary representations of @xmath . They are
all given as subquotients or subrepresentations of Jacquet-modules by
the Casselman submodule theorem. References include [ Bump:Auto ] , [
GoldfeldHundley1 ] , [ JacquetLanglands ] , and [ KnightlyLi ] .

Consider a one-dimensional representation @xmath . It determines
uniquely two one-dimensional representations @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 7.3.1.

Let @xmath . The representation @xmath is the right regular
representation of @xmath on the space of smooth functions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Every one-dimensional representation @xmath can be uniquely decomposed
as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some unique @xmath and @xmath being either trivial or the sign
character. We say that @xmath is algebraic if @xmath . Similarly, we say
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is algebraic if @xmath and @xmath are algebraic. It is sufficient to
consider parabolic inductions with algebraic @xmath , since we have an
isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Generally, we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The central character of @xmath is given by @xmath . If @xmath is
algebraic, it will be algebraic as well. We assume from now on that all
the one-dimensional representations denoted as @xmath are algebraic.

The parabolic induction @xmath with algebraic characters @xmath is
irreducible and unitarizable in the following two cases:

-   if @xmath , or

-   if @xmath and @xmath .

In general, it will be neither irreducible nor unitarizable. If it is
reducible, it contains a unique irreducible invariant subspace and a
unique irreducible invariant subquotient. Either the subquotient is
finite-dimensional (then @xmath ) or the subspace is finite dimensional
(then @xmath ). The subspace (the subquotient) is a unitarizable
representation if and only if it is either one-dimensional or
infinite-dimensional. These representations exhaust all unitary,
irreducible representations. To be precise:

###### Theorem 7.3.2 (Classification of the unitary dual).

Every irreducible, unitarizable representation of @xmath with algebraic
central character is isomorphic either to

1.   a one-dimensional representation @xmath for @xmath or @xmath ,

2.   a continuous series representation,

    1.   a principal series representation @xmath for @xmath and @xmath
        ,

    2.   a complementary series representation @xmath for @xmath and
        @xmath ,

3.   a discrete series representation, for @xmath and @xmath

    1.   an even discrete series representation, i.e., the unique
        irreducible subrepresentation

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

    2.   an odd discrete series representation, i.e., for @xmath the
        unique irreducible subrepresentation

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

We have an isomorphism @xmath . All the other listed representations are
non-equivalent.

There are various proofs of this in the literature [ KnightlyLi ]
*Theorem 11.15, page 164, table.1, page 186 and the subsequent
discussion, [ JacquetLanglands ] *Chapter 5, [ Bump:Auto ] , [
GoldfeldHundley1 ] . The references also address growth properties. The
discrete series representations have integrable matrix coefficients if
@xmath , and but only square integrable matrix coefficients if @xmath .
The limit of discrete series representations is among the principal
series representations, which are tempered, i.e., their matrix
coefficients are contained in @xmath for all @xmath . The complementary
series representations are not tempered. They do not occur in the right
regular representation of @xmath . The Selberg eigenvalue conjecture
asserts that the complementary series representations do not occur as
constituents of automorphic representations.

As subquotients of parabolic inductions, all unitary representations of
@xmath are automatically admissible and have a character distribution.
The computations of these distributions will depend on the @xmath -type
decomposition of the unitary representations.

###### Theorem 7.3.3 ([KnightlyLi]*Proposition 11.12, page 161 and
Theorem 11.15, page 164).

We observe the following @xmath -type decomposition for the
infinite-dimensional representations:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Hence, the irreducible representations @xmath and @xmath are in the same
@xmath -equivalence class. DBut thee difference is superficial in the
sense that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similar statements are true for @xmath and @xmath . For computational
and notational simplificity, we prefer an approach which does not
distinguish between these representations. ¹ ¹ 1 We will shortly
introduce a subspace of @xmath , which is denoted by @xmath . The
subspace @xmath cannot separate @xmath and @xmath , whereas @xmath can.
The difference between @xmath and @xmath is trivial in the sense that
the global spectral analysis of the related automorphic forms is stable
under character twists. @xmath can be treated much more economically in
terms of required notation.

### 7.4. The Abel inversion for @xmath

As demonstrated in Section 5.5 and Section 6.3 , the Abel transform
plays a central role in the analysis of the character distributions of
irreducible submodules of parabolic inductions. A good, explicit
understanding of the Abel transform seems required for computational
aspects in the harmonic analysis of @xmath . The Abel transform has an
inverse, which is the main technical detail for an explicit trace
formula.

Let @xmath be a unitary, finite-dimensional representation of @xmath .
As an outcome of the computations, it will become clear that we can
restrict our attention to the subspace @xmath of @xmath with little
loss. The space @xmath has index two in @xmath if @xmath . It is defined
as the space of smooth functions @xmath , which have compact support
modulo the center, and satisfy

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

We have to normalize by the dimension because @xmath .

We will see that the space @xmath for @xmath irreducible and
two-dimensional cannot separate @xmath and its twist by a non-trivial
one-dimensional representation of @xmath . Because of this, it seems
more pleasant for us to argue with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath , despite the fact that @xmath is not irreducible:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 7.4.1.

Elements from @xmath are supported on

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We have that @xmath for @xmath by the Frobenius character formula. ∎

###### Remark.

Although everything is phrased in terms of @xmath , the harmonic
analysis is that of @xmath . I have decided to go this route after
realizing that it has notational and computational advantages, and
because it is not less general.

Furthermore, we can identify

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by setting

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and in general

  --------- -- -------- --
  (7.4.1)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

if @xmath is self adjoint for @xmath . By the polar decomposition, there
does always exist such an element @xmath which is unique up to
conjugation.

The coordinates chosen in this section are to a great extent arbitrary.
We have adopted the choices and the notation of the standard texts [
Hejhal1 ] , [ Hejhal2 ] , [ DeEc ] , [ Iwaniec:Spectral ] [ Kubota ] , [
Venkov ] . ² ² 2 Most of the sources prefer to use the notation @xmath
(for kernel) instead of @xmath . This would be inconvenient, since we
prefer that @xmath is always an element of a compact subgroup.
Hopefully, this simplifies the transfer and comparison for the reader
familiar with at least one of these references.

The Chebyshev functions @xmath are defined for each real number @xmath
on page 114 in [ Matsushita ] as special values of the hypergeometric
series. Their connection to the representation theory of @xmath is as
follows: For nonzero integers @xmath and elements @xmath , the trace of
@xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The constant @xmath is usually referred to as weight. We will here avoid
a detailed definition, and only characterize them as a solution to

  --------- -- -------- --
  (7.4.2)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

and more generally as solution to

  --------- -- -------- --
  (7.4.3)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

The solutions to these equations extend to the domain of complex
numbers, where the @xmath -th power is understood as a principal value.
They specialize to the Chebyshev polynomials, if @xmath is a
non-negative integer. Everything in the current and following sections
holds true for real @xmath . In later considerations integer values are
sufficient and we will focus on this case. Arbitrary real, non-integral
@xmath correspond to the harmonic analysis on the universal cover @xmath
of @xmath .

The Abel transform @xmath can then be expressed on @xmath rather than on
@xmath via the Identification 7.4.1 .

###### Definition-Theorem 7.4.2 (Main inversion identity [Matsushita],
[Hejhal2]).

For each non-negative real number @xmath , define the operators

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by setting

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Let @xmath denote the derivative of @xmath . Both of the operators
@xmath and @xmath are invertible, since the following inversion formula
holds

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This inversion formula holds more generally for every function @xmath
which is differentiable on @xmath and satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath . We have the following alternative integral kernels for
@xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Proof.

Certainly the operators are well defined. They are bounded. They send
smooth, compactly supported functions into the space of smooth,
compactly supported functions by the Lebesgue’s Dominated Convergence
Theorem. The inversion formula is classical for @xmath , and can be
found in many references [ DeEc ] , [ Lang:SL2 ] , [ Iwaniec:Spectral ]
. I will only present a complete proof for the inversion formula in the
case @xmath and @xmath , since it is short and painless:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We will not give the proof for arbitrary non-negative real weight @xmath
, since the known proofs are long. I am aware of two essentially
equivalent proofs, see [ Hejhal1 ] *page 455ff., [ Hejhal2 ] *eq. 6.5
and 6.5, page 386 partly due to Selberg and, see [ Matsushita ] *Theorem
2.3.1, page 114, partly due to Shintani. The proofs go via the Mellin
inversion formula and reduce the inversion formula to integral
expressions for the Beta function.

The proposition gives two alternative kernel transformations. In fact,
Hejhal [ Hejhal1 ] , [ Hejhal2 ] prefers the later presentation of
@xmath and @xmath , whereas Matsushita [ Matsushita ] prefers the former
definition in a slightly different normalization. The statement that the
inversion formula holds for a larger set of test functions can only be
found in [ Hejhal1 ] *page 455ff. It remains for us to prove that both
definitions coincide. This is the content of the next lemma. ∎

###### Lemma 7.4.3.

For @xmath , we have that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Proof.

We start with Equation 7.4.3 . For @xmath , set @xmath and derive

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
                       
  -- -------- -------- --

and therefore we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
              
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly, we encounter

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and therefore we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark (Common alternatives for @xmath and @xmath).

Often one finds the following alternative definition for @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

see e.g. [ Hejhal1 ] *Proposition 4.1, page 15, [ Kubota ] *Theorem
5.3.1,page 56, [ Iwaniec:Spectral ] *page 33, etc.

The operator @xmath is precisely the Abel transform on the group level,
which was introduced in Section 5.5 .

###### Lemma 7.4.4 (Relation to the Abel transform).

Let @xmath . Define for @xmath and @xmath , the unique compactly
supported, smooth function @xmath on @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, we obtain

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Proof.

Consider the homeomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

An element @xmath in @xmath can be written by the Cartan decomposition
as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some smooth compactly supported function @xmath , and where @xmath
for some symmetric matrix @xmath . Recall that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath , we have

  --------- -- -------- --
  (7.4.4)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

We obtain that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have accordingly

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So we have achieved

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

∎

We introduce new notation cf. [ Hejhal1 ] *page 15-16 and [ Hejhal2 ]
*page 385-386:

###### Definition 7.4.5 (@xmath, @xmath and @xmath).

Let @xmath . Define for @xmath

-   the smooth, compactly supported function @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   the smooth, compactly supported function @xmath via

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   the smooth, even, compactly supported function @xmath via

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   the even, entire function @xmath , which is a Schwartz function on
    every line @xmath , via

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

For the remainder of this section, we will explicitly express all local
real distributions occurring in the Arthur trace formula in terms of
@xmath and @xmath only. Note that since we are dealing with @xmath
instead of @xmath , some minor modifications appear.

### 7.5. The character of the infinite-dimensional representations

Let @xmath be a pair of algebraic one-dimensional representations, i.e.,
@xmath is either the trivial representation or the sign representation
of @xmath . Define

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We obtain the following formula of Theorem 6.3.4 for the character
distribution of @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is defined (see Section 6.3 ) as the right regular
representation on the space of smooth functions @xmath , which satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We compute the algebraic character distribution, which comes in a
slightly different normalization than the unitary character
distribution. The difference can be read from the Plancherel formula.

###### Proposition 7.5.1 (Relation of @xmath to the Jacquetn modules).

Extend @xmath to a representation of @xmath with algebraic central
character @xmath . Let @xmath be an algebraic character of @xmath . Let
@xmath . The following identity holds for the character distribution for
@xmath ³ ³ 3 The contragedient @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath . ⁴ ⁴ 4
The function @xmath is entire as the Fourier transform of a compactly
supported function.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The proof is straightforward and a specialization of the proof of
Theorem 6.3.4 . We choose the ordinary Lebesgue measure @xmath on @xmath
, and set @xmath on @xmath . We let @xmath carry a unit Haar measure
@xmath . We have fixed the unique Haar measure @xmath on @xmath , such
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the central character of @xmath , then @xmath acts on the
algebraic representation @xmath via a section @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that this definition is independent of the specific section. We
separate the integral according to the Iwasawa decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall @xmath for @xmath . By the Iwasawa decomposition for @xmath , we
can identify @xmath with a subspace of @xmath . This is merely the
definition of being an algebraic representation, plus the fact that
every representation of @xmath occurs at most with multiplicity one in
@xmath . The identification happens on the level of complex vector
spaces, and is not true on the level of @xmath -representations. Hence
the operator @xmath acts by a kernel transformation with kernel

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This operator has continuous kernel, and is a Hilbert-Schmidt operator.
The operator can be rewritten as a finite linear combination of positive
trace class operators (see the proof of Theorem 6.3.4 ). The trace is
computed

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Write as in Proposition 5.4.7 :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some unique @xmath , and we have by the Schur orthogonality
relations that the character distribution vanishes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

if the representation @xmath is not contained in @xmath . The
definitions otherwise yield

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

If @xmath , we can further identify

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Corollary 7.5.2 (Character of DS).

The character distribution of the discrete series representations
vanishes on @xmath . Let @xmath for @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

This follows from the fact that discrete series representations are
subquotients of the parabolic inductions, from the formula for their
character distributions provided by Proposition 7.5.1 and from the
analysis of their @xmath -isotypes. Recall from Theorem 7.3.3 that for
@xmath odd

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for @xmath even

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The vanishing assumption follows from Corollary 6.1.6 , and the
non-vanishing cases from Proposition 7.5.1 . ∎

###### Definition 7.5.3.

Let @xmath be a locally compact group, and let @xmath be an irreducible,
unitary representation of @xmath with central character @xmath . A
pseudo coefficient of @xmath (modulo character twists) is a function
@xmath such that for all irreducible @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Corollary 7.5.4 (Construction of pseudo coefficient for DS).

Let @xmath . For each pair of elements @xmath and @xmath with @xmath and
@xmath , the function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a pseudo coefficient of the discrete series representation of weight
@xmath .

###### Proof.

This follows from the linearity of the character distributions and
Corollary 7.5.2 . ∎

Note that the above corollary solves a problem implicitly posed in [
KnightlyLi ] *Remark, page 214. In a similar vein, this has already been
exploited in [ Hejhal1 ] *page 459, though in a completely different
language. The existence of pseudo coefficients for square integrable
representations of reductive Lie groups is known [ ClozelDelorme ] .

###### Remark (Non-existence of pseudo matrix coefficient of PS).

There exists no pseudo coefficient for the principal series
representations. A rigorous proof is too expensive here, since we have
decided to work with @xmath instead of @xmath . The argument is however
then simple. It follows immediately from the fact that the principal
series representations @xmath all contain the same @xmath -types and
that the functions of type @xmath are entire.

### 7.6. The character of one-dimensional representations

###### Proposition 7.6.1.

Let @xmath be a one-dimensional algebraic representation of @xmath . We
have for @xmath with @xmath that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The only @xmath -type in @xmath is @xmath , hence the vanishing result.
For the remaining formula, we recognize that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
                       
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Corollary 7.6.2.

Let @xmath be a one-dimensional algebraic representation of @xmath . Let
@xmath be a pseudo matrix coefficient of the discrete series
representation of weight @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 7.7. The identity distribution

The following computations can be found in [ Hejhal1 ] *page 440–441,
page 459, [ Hejhal2 ] *Eq. 6.35, page 397. The computations are a
specialization of the Plancherel formula for the @xmath -isotypic
component of the right regular representation @xmath .

###### Proposition 7.7.1 (The identity distribution).

Let @xmath . For @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The appearance of the finite sums is due to the existence of discrete
series representations.

###### Corollary 7.7.2.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof of the proposition.

Appeal to the Abel inversion formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The computation works for real @xmath . If we apply the formulas for
@xmath , this yields that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

First consider @xmath [ Hejhal2 ] *page 397,(C), [ BMP4 ] *page 88(7).
Apply the Fourier inversion formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that @xmath is an odd function and vanishes at @xmath . For @xmath
, we encounter somewhat differently [ Hejhal1 ] *page 440–441

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We create a shortcut to reduce the general case to the case where @xmath
. Note that for general @xmath , the following identity holds

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Choose now @xmath such that @xmath an integer. Repeating the above
procedure yields the result by induction:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

### 7.8. The parabolic distributions

The parabolic distribution [ Gelbart ] *Proposition 1.2, page 47 is
related to the local zeta integral

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We compute its value and the value of its derivative at @xmath for every
element in @xmath . We have for @xmath by definition:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The computation of its derivative at @xmath requires some work, however.
Fortunately, equivalent computations can be found in [ Hejhal2 ] .

###### Proposition 7.8.1 (The local Zeta integral and its derivative at
@xmath).

For @xmath with @xmath , we obtain

  -- -- -------- --
        @xmath   
  -- -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the standard gamma function and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the Euler-Mascheroni constant.

###### Corollary 7.8.2 (Parabolic distributions).

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Proof.

Consider Proposition 7.8.1 for @xmath and @xmath . Note that we have
identities @xmath and @xmath by definition.

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Proof.

We copy the explicit form of @xmath from Tate’s thesis [ Tate:Thesis ]
*page 317

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We compute the special values of the Euler gamma function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We evaluate accordingly

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The first equation then follows from the definitions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the light of [ Hejhal2 ] , we will assume without loss of generality
that @xmath is a real-valued function. The computations are valid for
@xmath real-valued.

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We appeal to Equation 7.4.3 for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We end up with

  -- -- -------- --
        @xmath   
        @xmath   
  -- -- -------- --

For the derivative at @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Mimicking the computations from the [ Hejhal2 ] *pages 407–408 yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . Set

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The computation continues in this notation on [ Hejhal2 ] *page 410–411:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

These computations sum up to the second equation:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

### 7.9. The hyperbolic distributions

We will consider an element @xmath . By definition, an element @xmath is
hyperbolic if its characteristic polynomial splits into two distinct
factors over @xmath . Then @xmath is conjugate inside @xmath to an
element

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath with @xmath . The stabilizer of an element @xmath is the
subgroup @xmath of diagonal matrices in @xmath . The Arthur trace
formula associates two types of distributions to a hyperbolic element
(see [ Gelbart ] *Proposition 1.1, page 46), namely, a hyperbolic
(orbital) integral for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and a weighted hyperbolic integral for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The quotient measure @xmath is defined here as the unique right
invariant Radon measure on @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath is defined via the Iwasawa decomposition and the modular
character

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the weight

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have the following invariance properties for all @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The hyperbolic integral and the weighted hyperbolic orbital integral can
be expressed in terms of the function @xmath .

###### Proposition 7.9.1 (The hyperbolic distributions).

Let @xmath be a hyperbolic element in @xmath , i.e., @xmath . Fix @xmath
for @xmath .

-    The hyperbolic integral and the weighted hyperbolic integral vanish
    for @xmath .

-    For @xmath , the hyperbolic integral of @xmath evaluates to

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    For @xmath , the hyperbolic integral and the weighted hyperbolic
    integral vanish if @xmath is supported in @xmath .

Readers interested in a more explicit formula for the weighted
hyperbolic integral should manipulate Equation 7.9.1 accordingly. For
the Weyl law, the vanishing assertion and the next corollary are fully
satisfying. Note that the first point would not hold if we had decided
to argue with the irreducible representations @xmath and @xmath in place
of the reducible representation @xmath .

###### Corollary 7.9.2.

For every constant @xmath , there exists a pseudo coefficient @xmath of
the discrete series representation @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

if @xmath , or if @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

The hyperbolic integral of @xmath is absolutely convergent [ Rao ] . We
subdivide the proof of this proposition in several lemmas.

###### Lemma 7.9.3 (Explicit form of @xmath).

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We have by definition for @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have for real @xmath the following matrix decomposition:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have for @xmath and positive @xmath the decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We complete the computation

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Lemma 7.9.4.

For @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We choose the ordinary Lebesgue measure @xmath on @xmath , and set
@xmath on @xmath . We let @xmath carry a unit Haar measure @xmath . We
have fixed the unique Haar measure @xmath on @xmath and @xmath , such
that for all @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The quotient measure is, according to the Iwasawa decomposition,
definable via the property: For all continuous, compactly supported
functions @xmath , we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The (weighted) hyperbolic integral is computed for @xmath as

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where the weight @xmath is either constant or @xmath . Of course, this
requires some knowledge about @xmath as given by Lemma 7.9.3 . Note that
for @xmath , we get the lemma immediately, since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The computation without weight is simple.

###### Lemma 7.9.5 (The invariant hyperbolic integral).

For @xmath , we obtain for @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By definition, the function @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we can express the integral in terms of the Abel transform

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Lemma 7.9.6.

Assume that @xmath is supported in @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We obtain in the same way as above

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Abel inversion yields

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

  --------- -- -------- -------- --
  (7.9.1)               @xmath   
  (7.9.2)      @xmath   @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- -------- --

∎

### 7.10. The intertwiner and its derivative

Let @xmath be an algebraic one-dimensional representation of @xmath for
@xmath . Let @xmath be the associated one-dimensional representation of
@xmath . Set @xmath and @xmath .

We define the intertwiner by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

By the Iwasawa decomposition, the smooth function @xmath is uniquely
determined by its value on @xmath , since by definition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A canonical basis is given by the representation theory of @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath runs through all non-zero even (odd) integers if @xmath
( @xmath ). We want to allow the parameter @xmath to vary, so we will
write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The operator @xmath is in this sense a meromorphic function in @xmath .

###### Proposition 7.10.1 ([Bump:Auto]*Proposition 2.3, page 230).

In the above notation, we have an identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We will demonstrate an elementary derivation of this formula, but the
identity can also be derived via Whittaker models [ Bump:Auto ] .

The operator @xmath is an intertwiner. Every @xmath representation
occurs with multiplicity one. By Schur’s lemma, there exists a unique
complex value @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We introduce the Beta-function as a quotient of Euler @xmath functions:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A short computation gives the exact value for @xmath real, and follows
for all @xmath by uniqueness of analytic continuation:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Let us now appeal to the Legendre duplication formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We transform

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

### 7.11. The elliptic distributions

Let @xmath be an elliptic element in @xmath , i.e., the characteristic
polynomial is irreducible over @xmath .

###### Lemma 7.11.1.

Let @xmath be an elliptic element in @xmath . The determinant of @xmath
is positive and @xmath is conjugate inside @xmath to an element

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath in @xmath . Its centralizer is isomorphic to @xmath .

###### Proof.

The roots of an irreducible polynomial over @xmath come in pairs @xmath
. The characteristic polynomial of @xmath is of degree two, and its
roots @xmath are precisely the eigenvalues of @xmath , i.e., @xmath .
Set @xmath , where @xmath , then @xmath is conjugate to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since the characteristic polynomials of @xmath and @xmath coincide. ∎

The distribution associated to an elliptic element is the integral

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition 7.11.2 (The elliptic orbital integral).

Consider the elliptic element

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We compute the orbital integral for @xmath with @xmath

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Corollary 7.11.3 (For @xmath).

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof of the corollary.

Assume the proposition. For odd weight @xmath , we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For even weight, the kernel satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The same identity holds

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Proof of the proposition.

Set @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

###### Lemma 7.11.4.

Let @xmath be an element in @xmath , and let @xmath . We have the
integral identity:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
              
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We choose the ordinary Lebesgue measure @xmath on @xmath , and set
@xmath on @xmath . We let @xmath carry a unit Haar measure @xmath . We
have fixed the unique Haar measure @xmath on @xmath and @xmath , such
that for all @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we choose a normalized Haar measure on @xmath , we have that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

It is therefore clear that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We fix a unique Haar measure on @xmath , such that ( [ DeEc ] *Theorem
11.1.3)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have the following decomposition ( [ DeEc ] *Theorem 11.2.1)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We accordingly obtain for @xmath that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath            
                       
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Lemma 7.11.5.

For @xmath , define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We factor

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Choose @xmath in such away that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

is symmetric. Note that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To summarize our progress, we have achieved the analogue of [ Hejhal2 ]
*page 389:

###### Lemma 7.11.6.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

This proof is an exercise in calculus. We have so far produced

  -- -------- --
              
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Replace

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Substitution of @xmath yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We appeal to 7.4.3

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The expression in the last lemma is computed in terms of @xmath and
@xmath on [ Hejhal2 ] *page 389–396. For similar computations, the
reader can additionally consult [ Kubota ] *page 100–102, [ Hejhal1 ]
*Remark 9.4, page 449 or [ Iwaniec:Spectral ] *Section 10.6, page 163.
We will omit a repetition of this expensive computation and quote the
results:

###### Lemma 7.11.7.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Look at [ Hejhal2 ] . For the first equality, compare the expression at
the end of page 389 with the expression at the end of page 393. The
second equality is given by equation (6.34a) and (6.34b) on page 396. ∎

We have now completed the computation of the elliptic distribution. ∎

## Chapter 8 Harmonic analysis on @xmath

### 8.1. Haar measure

We endow @xmath with the Haar measure @xmath , which is twice the
ordinary Lebesgue measure. The set @xmath has measure @xmath .
Equivalently, we have for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the Haar measure @xmath on @xmath is as in the preceding section.
The group @xmath is endowed with a norm

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is the square of the ordinary absolute value. We endow @xmath with
the Haar measure

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The following integral formulas are direct consequences of these
selections. Let @xmath and @xmath be the Lebesgue measure on the real
line. For all @xmath , we have

  --------- -- -------- -------- --
  (8.1.1)      @xmath   @xmath   
  (8.1.2)               @xmath   
  (8.1.3)      @xmath   @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- -------- --

These can be easily verified by computing the measure of the unit
circle. We consider the locally compact group @xmath , with its closed
subgroups

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- --

and its closed compact subgroups @xmath and @xmath . Only the group
@xmath is not unimodular.

The compact groups @xmath and @xmath are endowed with the unit Haar
measures. We endow @xmath with the Haar measure of @xmath by identifying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We endow @xmath with the Haar measure of @xmath via

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the group @xmath , we define the Haar measure via @xmath :

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

We fix the unique left invariant Haar measure on @xmath with

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and the unique right invariant Haar measure with

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The modular character is then given as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Iwasawa decomposition @xmath yields the existence of a unique Haar
measure on @xmath , such that

  --------- -- -------- -------- --
  (8.1.4)      @xmath   @xmath   
                                 
                                 
                                 
  (8.1.5)               @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- -------- --

### 8.2. The compact subgroups @xmath and @xmath

As usual the compact groups @xmath and @xmath carry a probability Haar
measure.

###### Proposition 8.2.1 (All irreducible representations of @xmath).

All irreducible representation of @xmath are constructed from its
canonical representation on @xmath and the determinant @xmath . The
representations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are irreducible representations of @xmath . Every irreducible
representation of @xmath is isomorphic to some @xmath .

###### Proof.

The description of all irreducible representations of the compact group
@xmath can be found in [ Teleman:Lecturenotes ] *Proposition 22.9, [
Faraut:Lie ] , [ tomDieck:Lie ] . I will outline the argument. Every
element in @xmath is conjugate to an element

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Two distinct elements, @xmath and @xmath , are in the same conjugacy
class if and only if @xmath and @xmath . The character of @xmath is

  --------- -- -- --
  (8.2.1)         
  --------- -- -- --

We want to verify that each representation @xmath is irreducible.
Moreover, representations of this type should exhaust all irreducible
representations of @xmath . We need only to show that the functions
@xmath give an orthonormal basis for the conjugation invariant functions
in @xmath . This is a standard consequence of the Peter-Weyl Theorem.
Clearly the functions @xmath span all the symmetric Laurent series
@xmath . They span the conjugation invariant functions in @xmath by the
Stone-Weierstrass Theorem, yielding the exhaustion part. The Weyl
integration formula for @xmath gives on the conjugation invariant
functions @xmath as:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From this, it can be directly seen that the functions @xmath form an
orthonormal basis for the class function in @xmath . This implies the
irreducibility of each @xmath . ∎

###### Proposition 8.2.2 (All irreducible representations of @xmath).

Let @xmath be the trivial representation of @xmath . Let @xmath be the
standard representation of @xmath on @xmath , and define for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The representations @xmath for @xmath exhaust all the irreducible
unitary representations of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Every conjugacy class contains a matrix of the form @xmath . Two
distinct diagonal matrices in @xmath are in the same conjugacy class if
and only if they are inverses. The trace of @xmath is given on a
diagonal element

  --------- -- -------- --
  (8.2.2)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

These polynomials are dense in the conjugation invariant functions on
@xmath by the aforementioned classification of conjugacy classes, and by
the Stone-Weierstrass Theorem. The Weyl integration formula yields for a
conjugation invariant function [ Teleman:Lecturenotes ] *Theorem 20.9,
page 49

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The functions

  --------- -- -------- --
  (8.2.3)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

thus give an orthonormal basis. We conclude that @xmath is irreducible.
∎

###### Lemma 8.2.3.

We have, for an irreducible representation @xmath of @xmath , that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Recall equation 8.2.1 for @xmath and compare it with the character 8.2.2
:

  -- -- -------- --
        @xmath   
                 
  -- -- -------- --

### 8.3. The representation theory of @xmath

We now classify all unitary representations of @xmath . The same
discussion as seen in Section 7.3 applies. Let us repeat it
nevertheless. All irreducible, unitary representations of @xmath are
given as subquotients or subrepresentations of parabolic inductions by
the Casselman submodule theorem.

Consider a one-dimensional representation @xmath , which determines
uniquely two one-dimensional representations @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 8.3.1.

Let @xmath . The representation @xmath is the right regular
representation of @xmath on the space of smooth functions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that @xmath

Every one-dimensional representation @xmath can be uniquely decomposed
as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some unique @xmath and some unique one-dimensional representation
@xmath . We say that @xmath is algebraic if @xmath . Similarly, we say
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is algebraic if @xmath and @xmath are algebraic. It is sufficient to
consider parabolic inductions with algebraic one-dimensional
representation @xmath , since we have an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Generally, we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The central character of @xmath is given by @xmath . If @xmath is
algebraic, the central character will be algebraic as well. We assume
from now on that all one-dimensional representations denoted by @xmath
are algebraic.

###### Theorem 8.3.2.

Every irreducible, unitarizable, smooth, admissible representation of
@xmath is isomorphic to either

1.   a one-dimensional representation,

2.   a principal series representation,

    1.   a continuous series representation @xmath for @xmath ,

    2.   a complementary series representation @xmath for
        @xmath .

We have an isomorphism @xmath . All the other listed representations are
non-equivalent.

The above theorem is deduced from the representation theory of @xmath .
For the classification of the irreducible, smooth, admissible
representations of @xmath , the reader may consult [ JacquetLanglands ]
*Chapter 6. I have no reference for the issue of unitarizability of
representations of @xmath . The statements for @xmath can be found in [
Knapp:Semi ] , [ Wallach1 ] .

###### Definition 8.3.3.

Let @xmath . The representation @xmath is the right regular
representation of @xmath on the space of smooth functions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem 8.3.4 ([Knapp:Semi],[Wallach1]).

Every irreducible, unitarizable, smooth, admissibile representation of
@xmath is isomorphic to either

1.   a one-dimensional representation,

2.   a principal series representation,

    1.   a continuous series representation @xmath for @xmath ,

    2.   a complementary series representation @xmath for
        @xmath and @xmath .

We have an isomorphism @xmath . The other listed representations are
non-equivalent.

One concept of how to derive the representation theory of @xmath from
the representation theory of @xmath is presented in [ Knapp:GL2 ] .
Knapp suggests pasting on a one-dimensional representation of @xmath to
an irreducible representation @xmath of @xmath , which coincides on the
restriction to @xmath . I use a variant of this argument, which is
available for any local field. The next lemma clarifies why Theorem
8.3.4 implies Theorem 8.3.2 .

The continuous series representations are tempered, the complementary
series representations are not. The continuous series representations
occur in the right regular representation, while the complementary
series representations do not. The Ramanujan-Petersson conjecture
asserts that the complementary series representations do not occur as
constituents of automorphic forms. Both groups @xmath and @xmath have no
square-integrable representations, which is a general feature of
reductive Lie groups without compact Tori [ Harish:DiscreteII ] .

###### Lemma 8.3.5.

Let @xmath be a local field. An irreducible, smooth, admissible
representation of @xmath with unitary central character is unitarizable
/ square-integrable (mod center) / tempered if and only its restriction
to @xmath is unitarizable / square integrable (mod center) / tempered.

###### Proof.

The map @xmath gives a group extension

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the closed, normal subgroup is defined

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

After twisting by an appropriate unitary character @xmath , we may
assume that the central character of an irreducible representation
@xmath of @xmath lives on @xmath only. The later unitary /
square-integrable / tempered representations of @xmath are in one-to-one
correspondence with the unitary / square-integrable / tempered
representations of @xmath , since @xmath .

Now @xmath has a @xmath as a normal cocompact subgroup. In the case of
induction from and restriction to a cocompact subgroup, all the
properties listed above are preserved. If an irreducible representation
@xmath of @xmath is unitarizable, then @xmath is automatically
unitarizable. Assume now that the representation @xmath is unitarizable.
The Mackey induction functor is given for a unique invariant Haar
measure @xmath on the compact abelian group @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This representation is undoubtedly unitary. It decomposes discretely and
contains @xmath . Hence, @xmath is unitarizable. For the consideration
of temperedness, we note that every matrix coefficient @xmath of @xmath
gives a matrix coefficient of @xmath of @xmath , and this restriction is
of course surjective. Certainly by the cocompactness of @xmath , the
matrix coefficient @xmath is @xmath -integrable if and only if @xmath is
@xmath -integrable. ∎

###### Theorem 8.3.6.

The set of algebraic characters of @xmath is indexed by @xmath :

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The set of of irreducible unitary representation of @xmath is given by
@xmath for @xmath and @xmath with @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Proof.

The first equality is a product of the Iwasawa decomposition, see also
Mackey’s Induction Restriction Formula [ Barut ] *Section 18.1:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A standard computation yields the results. First, we rely on the
Frobenius reciprocity for compact groups:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The dimension is computed

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

We have seen that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows that the dimension of the space of @xmath -intertwiners

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is at most one. This dimension is exactly one if there exists @xmath ,
such that @xmath and @xmath . ∎

Note that [ JacquetLanglands ] *Lemma 6.1(ii), page 112 contains a typo.

###### Lemma 8.3.7.

For any two integers @xmath , we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

This follows immediately from theorem 8.3.6 and lemma 8.2.3 :

  -- -------- --
              
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 8.4. The Abel inversion for @xmath

The Abel inversion for @xmath is available in the literature [
Koornwinder:SL2C ] . From the preceding section, we know that the
representations of @xmath and @xmath are closely related. The field
@xmath is algebraically closed. After an appropriate twist by a
one-dimensional representation, we must only address the irreducible
unitarizable representations of @xmath and @xmath , both of which admit
a trivial central character. All representations of @xmath are precisely
given by the symmetric tensors for all non-negative integers @xmath of
the natural action of @xmath as endomorphisms on @xmath and all integer
powers of the determinant map @xmath , that is,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This representation has trivial central character if and only if @xmath
. We set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Be aware that although @xmath also denotes a representation of @xmath ,
there is little potential for confusion.

As for @xmath , the group @xmath has a non-compact center. All
computations are done modulo the center. The irreducible representations
of @xmath with trivial central character are the inflations of
irreducible representations @xmath of @xmath to @xmath . The character
of @xmath is the Chebyshev polynomial @xmath of the second kind. Instead
of defining them via power series, we define them as the solution to an
equation

  --------- -- -------- --
  (8.4.1)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

For @xmath , the function @xmath satisfies:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that every element in @xmath is conjugate to a diagonal matrix.

The purpose of this section is to understand the Abel inversion formula.
We state the Abel inversion formula on @xmath as suggested in [
Koornwinder:SL2C ] *Theorem 6.5, page 431. Define for this the group

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem (Main inversion identity for @xmath [Koornwinder:SL2C]).

Consider the irreducible representation @xmath of @xmath . We define the
operator

  --------- -- -------- -------- --
  (8.4.2)      @xmath   @xmath   
  (8.4.3)      @xmath   @xmath   
               @xmath            
  --------- -- -------- -------- --

for the kernel

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The following inversion formula applies:

  -- -------- -- --
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --

The equivalence of @xmath to the group theoretic Abel transform @xmath
as introduced in Section 5.5 is given by [ Koornwinder:SL2C ] *Theorem
5.2, page 425. The Abel inversion formula as stated above is fairly
complicated. I am not aware of any reference in the complex case which
computes the local distributions classically such as [ Hejhal1 ] , [
Hejhal2 ] . Only the case of bi-invariant functions has been examined by
[ Tanigawa ] , [ Szmidt ] , [ Bauer1 ] , [ Bauer2 ] and [ Elstrodt ] .
In this special case, the inversion formula simplifies significantly.
Set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and identify

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On this set of functions, the Abel inversion formula is given by [
Elstrodt ] *Lemma 3.5.5, page 121.

###### Definition-Theorem 8.4.1 (Main inversion identity on @xmath —
Bi-invariant case).

Define the operators

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

via kernel transformations

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We have the inversion formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

This follows directly from integration by parts

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The analytical difficulties in presenting closed formulas for all
distributions, for which one has to appeal to the Abel inversion
formula, becomes a formidable task in advanced integral calculus and the
theory of special functions. These distributions are:

-   the Plancherel formula

-   the derivative of the local zeta function

-   the weighted orbital hyperbolic integral

These distributions will be computed only for bi-invariant functions.
All other distributions are computed in full generality. Recalling the
real situation, I will restrict the analysis to a suitable subspace of
test functions given as

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

for the irreducible representation @xmath . These subspaces are
sufficient for the analysis of all spectral parameters. On this set of
test functions, we compute all the remaining distributions

-   the value of character distribution of the irreducible, unitary
    representations,

-   the local zeta function,

-   the hyperbolic integral.

There are no local elliptic distributions, since the field @xmath is
algebraically closed.

With the provided analysis, only the automorphic representations with
unramified principal series representations as constituents at the
complex places can be analyzed. Since @xmath has no discrete series
representations, there is less interest in the general computations. The
restriction happens mostly for the sake of brevity and clarity.

As for @xmath , we can identify

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by setting for @xmath

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The Abel transform simplifies to the following form on this subspace
after a suitable shift of coordinates.

###### Lemma 8.4.2.

The operator @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

satisfies for all @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Set @xmath in Equation 8.4.2 . This simplifies the transform:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The identity @xmath allows us to rewrite the expression for @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Lets us now verify that the transform @xmath coincides with the abstract
Abel transform @xmath on the group level introduced in Section 5.5 .

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
                       
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where in Equation 7.4.4 , we have computed

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We therefore obtain

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We introduce new notation following [ Hejhal1 ] *page 15–16, [ Hejhal2 ]
*page 385–386, which differs slightly from [ Elstrodt ] : ¹ ¹ 1 We
provide a comparison with [ Elstrodt ] *Lemma 3.5.5, page 121, whose
functions will be given a superscripct for the authors of [ Elstrodt ]
Elstrodt, Grunewald, and Mennicke.

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

In particular, the last identity differs significantly. Classically, one
expresses the spectral side of the Selberg trace formula in terms of the
eigenvalues of the Laplace-Beltrami/Casimir operator, whereas I want to
express it in terms of the parameters of the principal series
representation.

###### Definition 8.4.3 (@xmath, @xmath and @xmath).

Let @xmath be the irreducible representation @xmath of @xmath . Define
for @xmath

-   the smooth, compactly supported function @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   the smooth, compactly supported function @xmath via

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   the smooth, even, compactly supported function @xmath via ² ² 2 The
    different normalization — compare with the real situation @xmath —
    has been chosen, because of the form of the modular character of
    @xmath and its relation to the parabolic inductions.

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   the even, entire function @xmath , which is a Schwartz function on
    every line @xmath , via

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

### 8.5. The character of the infinite-dimensional representations

Let @xmath be a pair of algebraic one-dimensional representations, i.e.,
@xmath . Define

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Proposition 8.5.1 (Relation of @xmath to the principal series
representation).

Let @xmath be an irreducible representation @xmath with trivial central
character @xmath . Let @xmath be an algebraic character of @xmath . Let
@xmath , then the character distribution of the parabolic induction is
computed for @xmath as

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Proof.

The proof is straightforward and a paraphrasing of the proof of
Proposition 7.5.1 . We prefer to compute the character in terms of a
section @xmath . We obtain the following formula (Theorem 6.3.4 ) for
the character distribution of @xmath , and for @xmath

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

This distribution factors through the space @xmath via Equation 8.1.5 .
For the element

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we obtain the formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Assume that @xmath . If @xmath with @xmath , then the character
distribution vanishes as in Corollary 6.1.6 due to general facts.
Otherwise, we have that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

### 8.6. The character of the one-dimensional representations

###### Proposition 8.6.1.

Let @xmath be a one-dimensional algebraic representation of @xmath . We
have for @xmath that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The only @xmath -type in @xmath is @xmath , hence the vanishing results.
For the remaining formula, we have by Equation 8.1.5

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

### 8.7. The identity distribution

We compute the Plancherel formula for @xmath . Equivalent computations
can be found in [ Elstrodt ] *page 306.

###### Proposition 8.7.1 (The Plancherel formula).

For @xmath , we obtain

  --------- -- -------- --
  (8.7.1)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Appeal to the Abel inversion formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The chain rule gives us

  --------- -- -------- --
  (8.7.2)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

Since @xmath , the later expression does not allow direct conclusions
about the relation between @xmath and @xmath . In the limit, however, we
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Fourier inversion formula yields that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Collecting these pieces together, we get the formula

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

### 8.8. The parabolic distributions

We compute the local zeta integral at @xmath for @xmath and its
derivative at @xmath only for @xmath . These values are significant for
an explicit version of the Arthur trace formula (see [ Gelbart ]
*Proposition 1.2, page 47). The computations on the pages 301–302 in [
Elstrodt ] are therefore relevant.

###### Proposition 8.8.1 (The local Zeta integral and its derivative at
@xmath).

For @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

For @xmath , we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The local zeta function @xmath is computed in Tate’s Thesis [
Tate:Thesis ] *page 319

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The first identity is evidenced merely by checking the definitions

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The second identity is more difficult to demonstrate. Assume that @xmath
is @xmath -bi-invariant:

  -- -- -------- --
        @xmath   
                 
        @xmath   
        @xmath   
  -- -- -------- --

Set @xmath . We use the Abel inversion formula

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Derivation with respect to @xmath yields that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We evaluate at @xmath , then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The first integral is computed via integration by parts and Fourier
inversion

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The second integral is calculated by appealing to [ Elstrodt ] *Equation
5.17, page 302,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We apply the Fourier inversion formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This yields at @xmath

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Finally, we obtain by the multiplication rule

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
              
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 8.9. The hyperbolic distributions

We consider an element @xmath . By definition, @xmath is a hyperbolic
element if its characteristic polynomial splits into two distinct
factors over @xmath , that is, @xmath is conjugate to a diagonal matrix

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath with @xmath .

The stabilizer of the element @xmath is the subgroup @xmath of diagonal
matrices in @xmath . The Arthur trace formula [ Gelbart ] *Proposition
1.1, page 46, [ GelbartJacquet ] *page 214 associates to a hyperbolic
element two types of distributions, i.e., an orbital integral for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and a weighted orbital integral for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have the following invariance properties for all @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proposition 8.9.1 (The hyperbolic orbital integral).

Set @xmath for @xmath . Consider the irreducible representation @xmath
of @xmath .

For each @xmath the orbital integral of @xmath evaluates to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For each @xmath , the weighted orbital integral gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Corollary 8.9.2.

If @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The orbital integral of @xmath is absolutely convergent [ Rao ] . We
subdivide the proof of this theorem in several lemmas.

###### Lemma 8.9.3 (Explicit form of @xmath).

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is double the value than in the real case (Lemma 7.9.3 ), and the
computation is identical.

###### Proof.

We have by definition for @xmath , @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is sufficient to prove the equality for @xmath . We can recycle the
proof of Lemma 7.9.3 . We have for @xmath real

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have for @xmath and @xmath the decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So this yields for

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The Iwasawa decomposition allows us to rewrite the orbital integral as
an integral over the subgroup @xmath .

###### Lemma 8.9.4.

For @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Set @xmath . The (weighted) orbital integral on @xmath is computed for
@xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Lemma 8.9.3 , we have that @xmath . According to Equation 8.1.4 , we
have that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Lemma 8.9.5 (The unweighted hyperbolic integral).

For @xmath , we have for

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

After the preceding lemma, the proof follows essentially from the
definition of @xmath . Set @xmath for @xmath . According to the last
lemma, we write

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
                       
                       
  -- -------- -------- --

By definition, we have that @xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 8.9.6 (The weighted hyperbolic integral — Bi-invariant
case).

For @xmath , we have

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Proof.

After the preceding lemma, the proof follows essentially from the
definition of @xmath . Set @xmath for @xmath . According to Lemma 8.9.4
, we write

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
                       
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We refer to the Abel inversion formula and complete the computation
with:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This completes the proof of the proposition.∎

### 8.10. The intertwiner and its derivative

Let @xmath be an algebraic one-dimensional representation of @xmath for
@xmath . Let @xmath be the associated one-dimensional representation of
@xmath . Set @xmath and @xmath .

We define the intertwiner

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

By the Iwasawa decomposition, the smooth function @xmath is uniquely
determined by its value on @xmath , since by definition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The @xmath th symmetric tensor representation @xmath can be realized as
the action on the space of complex homogeneous polynomials in two
variables of degree @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A canonical basis is given by the representation theory of @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have restricted our attention to bi-invariant test functions. For
this, it turns out that we are only required to understand the action of
@xmath on @xmath for @xmath being the trivial representation.

###### Proposition 8.10.1.

In the above notation, we have an identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The operator @xmath is an intertwiner. Every @xmath representation
occurs with multiplicity one. By Schur’s Lemma, there exists a unique
complex value @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A short computation gives the exact value for @xmath real, and follows
for all @xmath by uniqueness of analytic continuation:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
                       
                       
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

## Chapter 9 Harmonic analysis of @xmath over a non-archimedean field

Let @xmath be a local, non-archimedean field, i.e., a finite extension
of the rational @xmath -adic numbers @xmath or the Laurent series in one
variable over a finite field.

### 9.1. Haar measure

Let @xmath be the ring of integers of @xmath . Let @xmath be the maximal
ideal of @xmath . We fix a generator @xmath of @xmath , called the
uniformizer.

Let @xmath denote the residue field @xmath , with @xmath elements and of
characteristic @xmath . We scale the valuation, such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We endow the groups @xmath , @xmath , and their subgroups @xmath ,
@xmath for @xmath with unit Haar measures. We endow @xmath / @xmath with
the unique Haar measures @xmath / @xmath such that the open, compact
subgroups @xmath / @xmath have unit measure. These normalizations are
assumed in [ GelbartJacquet ] *Section 7.A, page 241. Note that these
choices coincide with those in the real and complex situation, when we
define @xmath for all valuations. Here, @xmath is the local zeta
function of @xmath .

We also define for negative integers @xmath the open, compact subgroup
of the additive group @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This set has measure @xmath in @xmath . Let @xmath . Since @xmath has
index @xmath inside @xmath , we obtain the integral identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Observe that @xmath , therefore,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The set @xmath has measure @xmath in @xmath . The decomposition @xmath
yields that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We consider the locally compact group @xmath , with its closed subgroups

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Only the group @xmath is not unimodular. Define the following pro-finite
groups:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The group @xmath / @xmath / @xmath / @xmath / @xmath admits a unique
(left invariant) Haar measure, such that @xmath / @xmath / @xmath /
@xmath / @xmath carry a unit measure. All compact groups are always
endowed with a probability Haar measure.

The following integral identities result:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
              
  -- -------- --

We say that a one-dimensional representation @xmath is algebraic if
@xmath .

### 9.2. The compact, open subgroups

The representation theory of @xmath is far more complicated than that of
a compact Lie group. The classification of all irreducible
representations of @xmath for @xmath is not known. The case @xmath is
well understood [ Stasinski:Smooth ] .

To classify all irreducible representations of @xmath would, in our
context, be excessive, since they only interest us as a tool to
classify, parametrize, and construct the smooth, admissible
representations of @xmath . For our purposes, it is only necessary to
construct and understand a certain subset of these and a certain subset
of those of the Iwahori subgroup

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Due to the work of Bushnell and Kutzko [ BushnellKutzko:GLNopen ] , we
have sufficient control over the representation theory of @xmath to
construct all the smooth, admissible representations of @xmath
explicitly. The theory depends only on the residue characteristic of
@xmath , and this in a fairly uniform manner.

###### Remark (@xmath is easier than @xmath).

Incidentally, this is one of the main reasons why we went with @xmath ,
and not @xmath . Note that we have a semi-direct product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The group @xmath depends on the explicit structure of @xmath if @xmath
divides the residue characteristic of @xmath .

The only finite-dimensional representations are the one-dimensional
representations. There are two mutually disjoint sets of
infinite-dimensional, irreducible, smooth, admissible representations of
@xmath :

-   The parabolic inductions and their subquotients (=Steinberg
    representations). Here, we have to understand for every
    one-dimensional representation @xmath the representation

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   The irreducible, supercuspidal representations. These are isomorphic
    to compactly induced representations of maximal compact-mod-center
    subgroups of @xmath . This can be examined in several steps

    -   Classify the maximal compact-mod-center subgroups of @xmath :
        These are the subgroups @xmath and the normalizer of @xmath .

    -   Relate the representation theory of @xmath and @xmath to the
        representation of the maximal compact-mod-center subgroups.

    -   Identify and construct all the irreducible representations of
        @xmath and @xmath , such that the related irreducible
        representations @xmath of the maximal compact-mod-center
        subgroups @xmath give all the irreducible supercuspidal
        representations via

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

I deal with the two cases disjointly. This is not entirely necessary, as
Bushnell and Kutzko’s theory allows us to view all the irreducible,
smooth, admissible representations in the same framework.

The representation theory of profinite groups reduces to that of finite
groups. Every irreducible, topological representation of a profinite
group has a finite index kernel. We will frequently utilize results in
the representation theory of finite groups within the context of
profinite groups.

#### 9.2.1. Parabolically induced representations of @xmath

Let @xmath be the ring of integers of a non-archimedean field @xmath ,
and let @xmath be its unique maximal ideal.

We will now analyze the representations of @xmath associated with the
parabolic inductions. This was previously obtained in [ Casselman:Restr
] *Theorem 1 and [ Silberger:PGL2 ] *Theorem 3.3, page 58.

###### Lemma 9.2.1.

For an irreducible representation @xmath of @xmath , the following are
equivalent:

1.   the trivial representation of @xmath is contained in the
    restriction @xmath ,

2.   there are two one-dimensional unitary characters @xmath such that
    @xmath is contained in the induced representation @xmath , i.e., in
    the right regular representation on smooth functions

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Proof.

If the following intertwiner ring is non-zero

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

then, via the Frobenius reciprocity theorem, the same is true for:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Induction by steps produces

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath denote the inflation functor and @xmath the discrete
Pontryagin dual of @xmath , then we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 9.2.2.

An irreducible unitary representation @xmath of @xmath is

1.  supercuspidal, if @xmath does not contain the trivial
    representation,

2.  parabolically induced, if @xmath does contain the trivial
    representation.

Let us motivate the term “supercuspidal” in this context.

###### Theorem 9.2.3 ([Bushnell:Induced]*Theorem 1 suppl., page 111,
[Mautner:Spherical2]).

Let @xmath be a supercuspidal representation of @xmath , and let @xmath
be a one dimensional representation of @xmath such that the central
characters of @xmath and @xmath coincide. The compactly induced
representation

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

decomposes as a finite sum of irreducible, supercuspidal representations
of @xmath . The converse holds as well.

At this point, we turn our attention to the understanding of parabolic
inductions, for which only the parabolically induced representations of
@xmath are important. We aim for a simple notation. Every parabolically
induced representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is brought, after a twist by a one-dimensional representation, into the
form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will only classify irreducible subrepresentations of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 9.2.4.

The conductor of @xmath is the largest ideal @xmath such that @xmath .
We write @xmath .

Define a family of open, compact, normal subgroups in @xmath for all
@xmath

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Lemma 9.2.5.

Let @xmath , the representation @xmath then has a @xmath -invariant
vector if and only if @xmath .

###### Proof.

The group @xmath is normal. If @xmath , we have that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

so the condition is clearly necessary. In the case that @xmath , we can
consider the function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is a @xmath -invariant vector, so the condition is here sufficient
as well. ∎

###### Lemma 9.2.6.

Let @xmath for @xmath . The subrepresentation of @xmath -invariant
vectors of @xmath is isomorphic to the representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The group @xmath is normal, thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the inflation functor of @xmath representations to
@xmath representations. ∎

###### Lemma 9.2.7.

The trivial representation is contained in @xmath with simple
multiplicity. No other one-dimensional representation that factors
through the determinant map is contained in @xmath for each
one-dimensional representation @xmath of @xmath .

###### Proof.

This is a straightforward consequence of Frobenius reciprocity and the
preceding lemma. Let @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be one-dimensional
representations of @xmath . We have isomorphisms of endomorphism rings:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

As usual, let @xmath denote the orthogonal difference.

###### Definition 9.2.8.

Consider a one-dimensional unitary representation @xmath of @xmath with
conductor @xmath . Define representations of @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and, by induction, for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For our purposes, it is sufficient to understand @xmath and @xmath .
However, the reader may find it beneficial to analyze all of them.

###### Theorem 9.2.9.

The representation @xmath is irreducible.

We need the Mackey induction restriction formula (short: MIR).

###### Theorem 9.2.10 (Mackey induction restriction formula
[Weintraub]).

Let @xmath and @xmath be closed subgroups of a profinite group @xmath .
Assume that @xmath has finite index in @xmath . Let @xmath be a
finite-dimensional representation of @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof of Theorem 9.2.9.

Set @xmath , since the case @xmath is solved by Lemma 9.2.7 . The
endomorphism ring satisfies according to Frobenius reciprocity and the
MIR:

  --------- -- -------- --
  (9.2.1)      @xmath   
  (9.2.2)      @xmath   
  (9.2.3)      @xmath   
  (9.2.4)               
  --------- -- -------- --

Now the coset space @xmath is computed from the Bruhat decomposition
over the residue field [ BushnellHenniart:GL2 ] *page 44

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and the Iwahori decomposition [ BushnellHenniart:GL2 ] *(7.3.1), page 52

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A set of representatives for @xmath -double coset is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is defined as above, and for @xmath , define @xmath . Set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We observe that @xmath if and only if @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath .
The dimension is therefore computed

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We see that @xmath , which completes the proof. ∎

###### Theorem 9.2.11.

The representations @xmath and @xmath are isomorphic if and only if
@xmath and @xmath and @xmath coincide on @xmath .

###### Proof.

The implication @xmath follows, because the dimension of the
representations must coincide. If @xmath , then the cardinality of the
coset space @xmath is precisely @xmath for @xmath , with @xmath being
the cardinality of the residue field. The proof of the remaining claim
is identical to that of the preceding theorem. We obtain an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have that @xmath if and only if @xmath . Additionally, we know that
@xmath for @xmath if and only if @xmath and @xmath coincide on @xmath .
∎

#### 9.2.2. Unramified cuspidal types

We define a neighborhood base of open, normal subgroups of @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We define the level of a finite-dimensional representation @xmath as the
integer

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Because @xmath is normal, we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We say that @xmath is minimal if

  --------- -- -------- --
  (9.2.5)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

for all one-dimensional representations @xmath .

###### Definition 9.2.12.

An unramified cuspidal type is an irreducible representation @xmath of
@xmath , such that

-   the representation @xmath is minimal,

-   the compactly induced representation @xmath is irreducible for all
    one-dimensional representations @xmath , which coincide with @xmath
    on @xmath .

###### Corollary 9.2.13 (of Theorem 9.2.3).

An unramified cuspidal type is a supercuspidal representation of @xmath
.

The converse is not true. The adjective “unramified” in the above
definition suggests that the unramified cuspidal types are constructed
from unramified quadratic extensions of @xmath . Note that this differs
significantly from the meaning of the adjective “unramified” for a
principal series representation. A principal series representation is
called unramified if it admits a @xmath -invariant vector.

###### Case 1: @xmath

The cuspidal types of level zero and the associated irreducible
supercuspidal representations are called depth-zero.

###### Theorem 9.2.14 ([BushnellHenniart:GL2]*Section 6.4, page 47 and
Section 15.5, page 107).

Let @xmath be the residue field of @xmath . We have a one-to-one
correspondence between:

1.   the unramified cuspidal types of level zero,

2.   the supercuspidal representations of @xmath , and

3.   the regular quadratic characters of @xmath , i.e., one-dimensional
    representations of the (unique up-to-isomorphism) quadratic
    extension @xmath of @xmath , which are not fixed under the action of
    the Frobenius map

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Let us explain this correspondence.

From (1) to (2) and back: By definition, an unramified cuspidal type of
level zero factors through the group @xmath . On the other hand, every
representation of @xmath can be inflated to a representation of @xmath .

From (2) to (3) and back: The group @xmath embeds into @xmath as the
centralizer of an element whose characteristic polynomial is
irreducible. Let @xmath be a supercuspidal representation of @xmath ,
then there exists a one-dimensional representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of @xmath , such that

  --------- -- -------- --
  (9.2.6)      @xmath   
  (9.2.7)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

Here, @xmath is an arbitrary nontrivial character of @xmath .

##### Clifford theory

If the level is larger than one, the irreducible representations of
@xmath are best classified via the neighborhood base of open, normal
subgroups @xmath . Clifford theory allows a parametrization of the
irreducible representations of a finite group in terms of its normal
subgroups.

###### Theorem 9.2.15 (Clifford’s Theorem).

Let @xmath be a finite group. Let @xmath be a normal subgroup of @xmath
. The groups @xmath resp. @xmath act on the irreducible representations
of @xmath via conjugation on @xmath .

1.   Let @xmath be an irreducible representation of @xmath , then the
    restriction @xmath contains precisely one @xmath -orbit of
    irreducible representations of @xmath .

2.   Let @xmath be an irreducible representation of @xmath , and let
    @xmath be its stabilizer in @xmath . We have a one-to-one
    correspondence between irreducible representations @xmath of @xmath
    , contained in @xmath , and irreducible representations @xmath of
    @xmath , contained in @xmath . The correspondence is given by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

A reference can be found in [ Isaacs ] *Theorem 6.2, pg.76 and Theorem
6.11, pg.82.

We want to apply Clifford theory to the irreducible representations of
@xmath of level @xmath , we follow [ Stasinski:Smooth ] . The quotient
@xmath is abelian and isomorphic to the endomorphism ring @xmath of
@xmath via

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

According to Clifford theory, the restriction

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

decomposes into a @xmath -orbit of one-dimensional representations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Pontryagin dual @xmath is canonically isomorphic to @xmath via

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The orbit space of the conjugation action of @xmath on @xmath is
isomorphic to the orbit space of the action of @xmath on the ring @xmath
by conjugation with inverse elements.

We will only classify the unramified classical types via Clifford
theory. A classification of all irreducible representations of @xmath is
provided in [ Stasinski:Smooth ] .

###### Definition 9.2.16.

The stratum of a minimal, irreducible representation @xmath of @xmath is
a one-dimensional representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

contained in the restriction

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem 9.2.17.

A minimal, irreducible representation @xmath of @xmath of level @xmath
is an unramified cuspidal type if and only if there exists an elliptic
element @xmath in @xmath , such that @xmath is a stratum of @xmath . Let
@xmath . In this case, there exists a unique irreducible representation
@xmath of @xmath contained in @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Combine the classification theorem on page 108 with the definition on
page 99 in [ BushnellHenniart:GL2 ] . The rest follows from Clifford’s
Theorem. ∎

###### Case 2: @xmath odd

Let @xmath be a cuspidal type of odd level @xmath . Here, the associated
representation @xmath of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is one-dimensional.

###### Theorem 9.2.18.

All cuspidal types of level @xmath with stratum @xmath are associated to
an elliptic conjugacy class @xmath in @xmath with @xmath , such that
@xmath are in one-to-one correspondence with characters

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

coinciding with @xmath on @xmath , where @xmath is an extension @xmath
to @xmath . For every cuspidal type @xmath of level @xmath , there
exists a unique character @xmath as above, such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The construction is independent of the extension @xmath being
considered.

###### Proof.

According to Clifford theory, we have a one-to-one correspondence of
cuspidal types of level @xmath with irreducible sub-representations
@xmath . We can extend @xmath to a one-dimensional representation @xmath
of @xmath , since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is abelian. Let @xmath be another such extension. We have an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This follows by applying Clifford theory to the functor @xmath and from
the observation that @xmath and @xmath must be in the same @xmath
-conjugacy class. Since the quotient

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is abelian, the final result is derived from the Fourier theory for
abelian groups. ∎

###### Case 3: @xmath even

Let @xmath be a cuspidal type of even level @xmath . In this case, the
associated representation @xmath of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is @xmath -dimensional.

###### Theorem 9.2.19.

The cuspidal types of level @xmath , associated to an elliptic conjugacy
class @xmath in @xmath with @xmath , such that @xmath , are in
one-to-one correspondence with characters

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

coinciding with @xmath on @xmath . The representation @xmath admits a
unique extension @xmath to @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For every cuspidal type @xmath of level @xmath , there exists as above a
unique character @xmath , such that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Proof.

The argument for extension of @xmath to @xmath functions as before.
Since the quotient

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is not abelian, the induced representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is far more difficult to decompose. We refer to [ BushnellHenniart:GL2 ]
*Lemma, page 109 and [ Stasinski:Smooth ] *Section 4.2, page 4422. ∎

#### 9.2.3. Ramified cuspidal types

Ramified cuspidal types are certain irreducible representations of
@xmath . Recalling Clifford theory, we define a neighborhood base of
open, normal subgroups of @xmath for @xmath

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

with @xmath . There are conceptual considerations for these decisions [
BushnellHenniart:GL2 ] *Section 12, page 86. We have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The normalizer @xmath of @xmath in @xmath is the semi-direct product

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Every maximal, open subgroup of @xmath which is compact modulo the
center is conjugate to either @xmath or @xmath . The level of an
irreducible representation @xmath of @xmath is defined as the integer or
half-integer

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We say that @xmath is minimal if

  --------- -- -------- --
  (9.2.8)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

for all one-dimensional representations @xmath . The irreducible
representations of @xmath are related to the irreducible representations
of @xmath in the following fashion:

###### Theorem 9.2.20.

The irreducible representations @xmath of @xmath with an algebraic
central character are isomorphic to either

1.   one of the two non-isomorphic extensions @xmath and @xmath of the
    representations @xmath of an irreducible representation @xmath of
    @xmath with @xmath , and, in this instance,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    The extensions @xmath and @xmath become isomorphic after a twist by
    a one-dimensional representation @xmath of @xmath with order two:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.   an induced-inflated representation

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    of an irreducible representation @xmath of @xmath , with @xmath .

###### Proof.

We appeal to the Mackey machine for the group extension of @xmath by
@xmath . Note that conjugation by @xmath acts trivially via conjugation
on representations with @xmath -central character. Let @xmath be an
irreducible representation of @xmath inflated from @xmath . Then there
are two classes of orbits in @xmath :

1.  If @xmath , then the stabilizer of @xmath is the full group @xmath .
    The quotient is cyclic, hence the existence of a representation
    @xmath of @xmath with @xmath is granted.

    ###### Theorem 9.2.21 ([Isaacs]*Corollary 11.22, page 186).
    Let @xmath be a normal subgroup of a finite group @xmath . Let
    @xmath be an irreducible representation of @xmath , and let @xmath
    be the stabilizer of @xmath in @xmath .

    If @xmath is a cyclic group, there is an extension of @xmath to
    @xmath .

    In this special case, the induced representation @xmath is easily
    decomposed:

    ###### Theorem 9.2.22 (Gallagher’s Theorem [Isaacs]*Corollary 6.17,
    pg.85).
    Consider a chain @xmath of finite groups, such that @xmath is normal
    in @xmath . Let @xmath be an irreducible representation of @xmath
    which has an extension @xmath to @xmath . Thus,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    We consequently obtain

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.  If @xmath , then the stabilizer of @xmath is @xmath , and @xmath is
    irreducible. ∎

###### Definition 9.2.23 (Ramified cuspidal types).

A ramified cuspidal type is a representation @xmath of @xmath , such
that for each extension @xmath to @xmath , the compactly induced
representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an irreducible, supercuspidal representation.

We want to apply Clifford theory once again.

###### Definition 9.2.24.

A stratum of an irreducible representation @xmath of @xmath is a
one-dimensional representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A stratum of a ramified cuspidal type is called a ramified simple
stratum.

According to [ BushnellHenniart:GL2 ] *Proposition 13.1(1), page 96, a
ramified cuspidal type has a half integer level @xmath , and there
exists a unique element @xmath for each stratum @xmath of @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For any two strata of @xmath , the associated elements @xmath are
conjugate in @xmath . The element @xmath is elliptic and has odd
valuation determinant. The stabilizer of @xmath in @xmath is given by [
BushnellHenniart:GL2 ] *Section 15.3, page 106

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and consequently in @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem 9.2.25.

Let @xmath be a ramified cuspidal type with stratum @xmath .

-    The level of @xmath is a half integer.

-    There exist two non-isomorphic extensions to @xmath , such as those
    given in point @xmath of Theorem 9.2.20 .

-    For each extension of @xmath of @xmath to @xmath , there is a
    unique one-dimensional representation @xmath of @xmath with

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The assumption about the level is given as Proposition 13.1(2) on [
BushnellHenniart:GL2 ] *page 96. The second assertion can be found as
Proposition 15.7(1) on [ BushnellHenniart:GL2 ] *page 109. The extension
to @xmath is possible, because the quotient

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is abelian. The decomposition of the induced representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

follows as claimed, since the quotient @xmath is abelian as well. The
last assertion is thus obtained by Clifford theory. ∎

### 9.3. The representation theory of @xmath

The discussion of Section 7.3 applies as well. However, we observe an
additional feature here. The group @xmath , asopposed to the groups
@xmath and @xmath , also admits supercuspidal representations, i.e.,
representations with a compactly supported matrix coefficient. Only the
non-supercuspidal irreducible, unitary representations can be realized
as subrepresentations or subquotients of parabolic inductions.

Consider a one-dimensional representation @xmath . It determines
uniquely two one-dimensional representations @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 9.3.1.

The representation @xmath is the right regular representation of @xmath
on the space of smooth functions @xmath which satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Every one-dimensional representation @xmath can be uniquely decomposed
as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some unique @xmath , with @xmath being a one-dimensional
representation of @xmath . We say that @xmath is algebraic if @xmath .
Similarly, we say that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is algebraic if @xmath and @xmath are algebraic. It is sufficient to
consider only parabolic inductions with algebraic one-dimensional
representation @xmath of @xmath , since we have an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Generally, we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The central character of @xmath is given by @xmath . We assume from this
point on that all one-dimensional representations denoted by @xmath are
algebraic.

The parabolic inductions are decomposed by the following theorem:

###### Theorem 9.3.2 ([BushnellHenniart:GL2]*Section 9.5).

1.   The representation @xmath is irreducible if and only if either

    -   @xmath , or

    -   @xmath and @xmath .

2.   The representation @xmath contains a one-dimensional irreducible
    subrepresentation @xmath .

3.   The representation @xmath contains an infinite-dimensional
    irreducible subrepresentation @xmath of co-dimension @xmath .

Now let us state the classification of unitarizable irreducible
representations of @xmath ;

###### Theorem 9.3.3.

Every smooth, unitarizable representation of @xmath for a
non-archimedean field @xmath with algebraic central character @xmath is
isomorphic to

1.   a one-dimensional representation @xmath if @xmath ,

2.   an irreducible, supercuspidal representation with central character
    @xmath ,

3.   a continuous series representation,

    1.   a principal series representation @xmath with @xmath and @xmath
        algebraic with @xmath ,

    2.   a complementary series representation @xmath for @xmath with
        @xmath ,

4.   a Steinberg (or special) representation @xmath if @xmath .

We have an isomorphism @xmath . All the other listed representations are
non-equivalent.

The unitarizability of the principal series representations is addressed
in [ Bump:Auto ] *Theorem 4.6.7, page 511, and that of the supercuspidal
representations in [ Bump:Auto ] *Theorem 4.8.1, page 523. The Steinberg
representation is square-integrable [ Laumon1 ] , i.e., automatically
unitarizable.

#### 9.3.1. The supercuspidal representations of @xmath

###### Theorem 9.3.4 ([Bushnell:Induced]*Theorem 1 suppl., page 111).

Let @xmath be a non-archimedean field. Let @xmath be a maximal
compact-mod-center subgroup of @xmath . Let @xmath be an irreducible
representation of @xmath . The following assertions are equivalent:

1.   the representation @xmath is a supercuspidal representation of
    @xmath , i.e., @xmath does not contain the trivial representation
    for any unipotent subgroup of @xmath ;

2.   the representation @xmath decomposes into a finite sum of
    irreducible supercuspidal representations.

###### Lemma 9.3.5.

Let @xmath be a non-archimedean field. Every maximal compact-mod-center
subgroup of @xmath is conjugate to the normalizer of either the standard
compact open subgroup @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or the Iwahori subgroup @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem 9.3.6 ([Kutzko:SuperGL2]*Theorem, page 43).

Let @xmath be a non-archimedean field. Let @xmath be a supercuspidal
representation of @xmath . There exists a maximal compact-mod-center
subgroup @xmath of @xmath and an irreducible representation @xmath of
@xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Corollary 9.3.7.

A supercuspidal representation of @xmath is infinite-dimensional. It is
unitarizable if and only if the central character is unitary.

###### Proof.

The representation is infinite-dimensional, since the coset space @xmath
is discrete and infinite. It is unitarizable as the induction of a
unitarizable representation. ∎

###### Proposition 9.3.8.

Let @xmath be a maximal compact-mod-center subgroup of @xmath , such
that @xmath is supercuspidal and irreducible. Every irreducible, smooth,
admissible representation @xmath of @xmath which contains @xmath , i.e.,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

contains it at most with multiplicity one, and is isomorphic to @xmath .

###### Proof.

The Frobenius reciprocity theorem [ BushnellHenniart:GL2 ] *page 18
yields that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Schur’s Lemma [ BushnellHenniart:GL2 ] *page 21 demonstrates that the
dimension is at most one, since @xmath and @xmath are irreducible. ∎

Let @xmath be an irreducible, supercuspidal representation of @xmath .
We define the level

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We also say that @xmath is minimal if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all one-dimensional representations @xmath of @xmath .

###### Theorem 9.3.9 ([BushnellHenniart:GL2]*Chapter 15).

An irreducible, minimal supercuspidal representation contains only one
isomorphism class of cuspidal types. It contains a ramified cuspidal
type if and only if @xmath is a half-integer. An irreducible, minimal
supercuspidal representation with central character @xmath is
unitarizable if and only if @xmath is unitarizable, and contains only
cuspidal types whose central characters coincide with @xmath on @xmath .
The three types of minimal supercuspidal representations are:

-    an irreducible unramified supercuspidal representation

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for a unique unramified cuspidal type @xmath with @xmath

-    an irreducible ramified supercuspidal representation

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for a unique ramified cuspidal type @xmath with @xmath

-    an irreducible ramified supercuspidal representation

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for a unique ramified cuspidal type @xmath with @xmath

#### 9.3.2. The parabolic inductions of @xmath

As always, we aim for a simple notation. Twisting by a one-dimensional
character yields that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We must classify the @xmath -types of the Jacquet-modules. Recall
Definition 9.2.8 .

###### Proposition 9.3.10 (The @xmath-types of parabolic inductions).

Assume that @xmath has conductor @xmath . We have the following
decomposition

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Conversely, if for a smooth, admissible, infinite-dimensional,
irreducible representation @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath is a parabolic induction for @xmath . Additionally, if for a
smooth, admissible, infinite-dimensional, irreducible representation
@xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath is a special representation.

###### Proof.

By the Iwasawa decomposition, we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The decomposition of @xmath follows from Lemma 9.2.1 and Theorem 9.2.9 .
Likewise, we know that @xmath is the subquotient of @xmath by the
trivial one-dimensional representation [ BushnellHenniart:GL2 ]
*Equation 9.10.4, page 69, so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The converse statement then follows from Theorem 9.2.11 , the
classification theorem, and the fact that neither of the representations
@xmath or @xmath can occur in the restriction of any supercuspidal
representation.

To elaborate: we note that the stratum of a supercuspidal representation
is split for @xmath with @xmath , or scalar for @xmath , or
non-fundamental for @xmath . No split stratum can be included in an
irreducible supercuspidal representation [ BushnellHenniart:GL2 ] *Cor.,
page 98. Also, no supercuspidal representation has a @xmath -invariant
vector, i.e., it cannot contain the trivial representation. The case
@xmath must be checked by hand. First, if a supercuspidal representation
contains @xmath , it will contain a @xmath -invariant vector. Certainly
@xmath cannot be a @xmath -type in an unramified supercuspidal
representation, since it has a @xmath -invariant representation. A
ramified supercuspidal representation with a @xmath -invariant vector is
isomorphic to the compact induction of an inflation to @xmath from a
supercuspidal representation of @xmath . Now assume that @xmath is a
ramified supercuspidal and admits a @xmath -invariant vector. This is
not possible [ BushnellHenniart:GL2 ] *Section 15.5, page 107. ∎

### 9.4. The Abel transform and construction of test function

At this point, we will adopt a completely different approach than in the
case of the Lie groups @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath be a maximal
compact-mod-center subgroup, and let @xmath be a unitary,
finite-dimensional representation of @xmath . Define, as usual,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The Abel transform

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

is equally important in the harmonic analysis, but it fails to be an
isomorphism if @xmath does not factor through the determinant. In
particular, no Abel inversion formula is available. The space @xmath is
easily understood because @xmath is discrete. In fact, we have a Cartan
decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In order to construct test functions which separate and distinguish all
@xmath -equivalence classes, we have to analyze carefully the @xmath
-type decompositions and the character distributions of the irreducible
unitary representations. This section will concern itself primarily with
this analysis.

Recall that two irreducible, unitary representations of @xmath are
@xmath -equivalent if their restrictions to @xmath are isomorphic. The
results from the previous section demonstrate that there are essentially
three different @xmath -equivalence classes of infinite-dimensional,
irreducible representations:

1.  the @xmath -equivalence classes of principal series representations
    associated to a fixed one-dimensional representation of @xmath ,
    which contains a one parameter-family of non-isomorphic,
    irreducible, unitary representations;

2.  the @xmath -equivalence class of a special or Steinberg
    representation, which has only one isomorphism class of irreducible
    representations;

3.  the @xmath -equivalence class of an irreducible, unramified/ramified
    supercuspidal representation, which has one/ two isomorphism
    class/es of irreducible representations.

Since the @xmath -equivalence class of a ramified supercuspidal
representation has two isomorphism class/es of irreducible
representations, we have to look upon them from another maximal
compact-modulo-center subgroup, i.e., the normalizer of the Iwahori
subgroup.

A direct consequence of this is the following observation:

###### Theorem 9.4.1 (Distinguished set of test functions).

Set @xmath .

-    Let @xmath be a one-dimensional representation, and let @xmath be
    an irreducible, unitary infinite-dimensional representation, such
    that the character distribution @xmath does not vanish on @xmath .
    Then @xmath .

-    Consider elements @xmath and @xmath , such that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    In this case, if @xmath for some irreducible, unitary,
    infinite-dimensional representation of @xmath , the representation
    is a Steinberg representation

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Moreover, there exist such functions @xmath and @xmath with @xmath .

-    Let @xmath be a cuspidal type. If @xmath does not vanish on the
    algebra @xmath for some irreducible, unitary, infinite-dimensional
    representation of @xmath , we can conclude

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Proof.

This follows immediately from the @xmath -type classification in
Propositions 9.3.10 and 9.3.8 . The second assertion also requires the
formula for the character distribution of the parabolic induction
(Theorem 6.3.4 ) for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 9.4.2.

Let @xmath be a maximal compact-mod-center subgroup of @xmath , and let
@xmath be an irreducible representation of @xmath . We define a
non-trivial element in @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 9.4.3.

The element @xmath is the unit of the algebra @xmath .

###### Proof.

This is a direct consequence of the Schur orthogonality relations for
characters. ∎

###### Lemma 9.4.4 (The identity distribution of @xmath).

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 9.4.5 (The Abel transform of @xmath).

Let @xmath be an irreducible representation of @xmath . We have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, @xmath is supported on @xmath .

###### Proof.

Since @xmath is supported on @xmath , we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath and all @xmath . So @xmath is supported on @xmath .
Furthermore, we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the result follows by the Schur orthogonality relations. ∎

###### Lemma 9.4.6 (The Abel transform — support @xmath).

Fix any integer @xmath . Let @xmath be a function with support on

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The Abel transform is supported on

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is directly seen in the following matrix decomposition:

###### Lemma 9.4.7.

For any non-negative integer, we have that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Proof.

The disjointness of the sets on the right-hand side is immediate. A
case-by-case analysis is required in order to confirm that every element
on the left-hand side can be brought in the form suggested by the coset
decomposition on the right. The Bruhat decomposition over the residue
field asserts:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Iwahori decomposition warrants

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Levi decomposition indicates

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The group @xmath commutes with @xmath and can be absorbed in the right
@xmath , i.e.,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

We have that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

as well as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The later set of cosets is not yet in the desired form, so for @xmath
with @xmath for @xmath , we decompose

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Finally, we transform this matrix into the suggested form

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Remark.

For most purposes, we are well-served with test functions supported on
@xmath . However, if we want to distinguish between non-isomorphic,
@xmath -equivalent principal series representations, we must to choose
test functions which are not supported on @xmath . From a computational
perspective, Lemma 9.4.6 and Lemma 9.4.7 suggest that we should try to
work with test functions supported on

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Each function in @xmath with such support can separate the principal
series representations. Simultaneously, the Abel transform of such
functions has small support and also the integrals along the unipotent
subgroup @xmath with weights are more manageable.

#### 9.4.1. Pseudo coefficients for the square-integrable
representations

The existence of pseudo coefficients for square integrable
representations is a general result [ Kazhdan:Pseudo ] . It is
particularly convenient, that we can find pseudo-coefficients for the
square-integrable representations of @xmath which are supported on
maximal compact-mod-center subgroups of @xmath . We give a constructive
proof.

###### Lemma 9.4.8.

Let @xmath be a cuspidal type, then all elements of @xmath are matrix
coefficients of @xmath .

###### Remark (Suggested Interpretation of theorem).

The above lemma states that for supercuspidal representations, there is
essentially no other choice for pseudo coefficients than matrix
coefficients of @xmath . To spell this out carefully would require much
care and more analysis.

###### Proof of the lemma.

Set @xmath . The Schur isomorphism yields an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Because @xmath is irreducible and supercuspidal as the contragredient of
an irreducible and supercuspidal representation @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by Schur’s Lemma. The lemma follows by comparing the dimensions. ∎

###### Definition-Theorem 9.4.9 (Pseudo coefficient of the supercuspidal
representation).

Let @xmath be an irreducible, supercuspidal, unitary representation with
cuspidal type @xmath . The function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a pseudo coefficient of @xmath .

###### Proof.

The vanishing property follows from Corollary 6.4.12 . We obtain by
Theorem 6.4.9

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The Haar measure of @xmath was normalized in such a way that @xmath has
unit measure. The Iwahori subgroup @xmath has index @xmath in @xmath ,
and measure @xmath . The group @xmath has index two in @xmath . Let
@xmath be the Haar measure of @xmath , such that @xmath admits a unit
Haar measure. We compare the volumes of the set @xmath and obtain the
relation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition-Theorem 9.4.10 (Pseudo coefficient of the Steinberg
representation).

Define the smooth, compactly supported function @xmath as the
characteristic function of @xmath , and @xmath as in Definition 9.4.2 .
The character distribution of each irreducible, unitary,
infinite-dimensional representation — except for the Steinberg
representation @xmath — vanishes on

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The above observations are an immediate consequence of Theorem 9.4.1 ,
Lemma 9.4.3 and a computation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us demonstrate the computation. Note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By general properties of class functions @xmath , we have that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The Mackey induction restriction formula yields that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

whereas the Bruhat decomposition over the residue field [
BushnellHenniart:GL2 ] *page 44 and the Iwahori decomposition [
BushnellHenniart:GL2 ] *(7.3.1), page 52 produce

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The result follows because

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, the Abel transforms have been computed @xmath , and @xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 9.4.11.

The Abel transform of both @xmath for @xmath supercuspidal and @xmath
vanishes.

###### Proof.

The Abel transform of @xmath vanishes by construction. The Abel
transform of @xmath vanishes by Theorem 9.3.4 . ∎

#### 9.4.2. Distinguished vectors for the principal series
representations

###### Definition-Theorem 9.4.12 (Distinguished vectors for the
principal series representation).

For any one-dimensional representation @xmath of @xmath , define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all irreducible, unitary representations @xmath , with the exception
of the parabolic induction @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

This follows from the formula for the character distribution of the
parabolic induction 6.3.4 , the support of the Abel transfrom 9.4.6 and
the @xmath -type classification 9.3.10 . ∎

For various computations, it is important to understand the
normalization factors.

###### Lemma 9.4.13.

@xmath

###### Proof.

We appeal to the Mackey Induction Restriction Formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We give a set of coset representatives obtained from the Bruhat
decomposition over the residue field [ BushnellHenniart:GL2 ] *page 44
and the Iwahori decomposition [ BushnellHenniart:GL2 ] *(7.3.1), page 52

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The contribution of the element @xmath is given bu

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The contribution of an element @xmath with @xmath can be read from the
Iwahori decomposition as well as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and provides us with

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

It contains the trivial representation of @xmath if and only if @xmath .
∎

#### 9.4.3. The unramified Hecke operator — Separation of the unramified
principal series representations

Let @xmath be the characteristic function of the set

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Definition-Theorem 9.4.14 (The (unramified) Hecke operator).

Define the unramified Hecke operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For every, irreducible, unitary representation @xmath of @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Certainly all character distributions of representations without @xmath
-invariant vector vanish on @xmath . The only irreducible unitary
representations with a @xmath -invariant vector are the trivial
representation and the unramified principal series representations. The
formula for the character distribution of a parabolic induction is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The character distribution is easily computed for @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The remaining conclusion results from the following lemma:

###### Lemma 9.4.15.

The @xmath is supported on

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As a consequence of a matrix decomposition:

###### Lemma 9.4.16.

We have a coset decomposition

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Proof of the coset decomposition.

This coset decomposition follows from the Bruhat decomposition over the
residue field [ BushnellHenniart:GL2 ] *page 44 and the Iwahori
decomposition [ BushnellHenniart:GL2 ] *(7.3.1), page 52

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
                       
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

A matrix computation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

yields both

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the coset decomposition. ∎

###### Proof of Lemma 9.4.15.

The coset decomposition proves the claim about the Abel transform’s
support. Now let us compute the value of the Abel transform of @xmath
explicitly

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This completes the proof of the main theorem as well.∎

#### 9.4.4. The ramified Hecke operator — Separation of the ramified
principal series representations

Let @xmath be a one-dimensional representation of @xmath with conductor
@xmath for some @xmath . We say that the principal series @xmath is
ramified. Similarly to the unramified situation in the preceding
subsection, we want to construct a test function @xmath , such that
@xmath has vanishing character distribution for all unitary, irreducible
representations except for all the parabolic inductions of type @xmath .
Additionally, we will separate every two non-isomorphic principal series
representations

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

via reconstructing the complex value @xmath . This can all be done via
the theory of ramified Hecke operators which is much more complicated
than their unramified counterpart.

As we will see, the choice @xmath for @xmath replicates the discussion
of the preceding subsection.

Consider @xmath as a one-dimensional representation of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by setting

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Define a smooth, non-vanishing function @xmath , which is supported on
the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The function @xmath distinguishes and separates the principal series
representations of type @xmath , but fails to be @xmath conjugation
invariant. Note that by the Iwahori decomposition [ BushnellHenniart:GL2
] *(7.3.1), page 52

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it is straightforward to compute

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows for the integral

  --------- -- -------- -------- --
               @xmath            
  (9.4.1)               @xmath   
  (9.4.2)                        
  --------- -- -------- -------- --

###### Definition-Theorem 9.4.17 (The ramified Hecke operator).

For every function @xmath with the above properties,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We define the unramified Hecke operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It does not depend on the specific non-vanishing function @xmath given.
It is supported on the set

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and satisfies for all unitary, irreducible representations @xmath of
@xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For normalization and uniqueness purposes, we have normalized the
function by the value of its Abel transform at @xmath .

###### Proof.

First, we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To this end, we must prove the following lemma:

###### Lemma 9.4.18 (Frobenius Character Formula).

Consider @xmath as above, then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
                       
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Proof.

Note that the function @xmath is @xmath -conjugation invariant. If we
endow @xmath and @xmath with unit Haar measures @xmath and @xmath , then
the quotient integral formula yields for @xmath :

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

This follows by the uniqueness of the quotient measure and by verifying
the equation for constant functions only. We obtain the first equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The quotient

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is computed, as always, from the Bruhat decomposition over the residue
field [ BushnellHenniart:GL2 ] *page 44 and the Iwahori decomposition [
BushnellHenniart:GL2 ] *(7.3.1), page 52. The cardinality is exactly
@xmath for @xmath . ∎

The immediate consequence is:

###### Corollary 9.4.19.

@xmath

###### Proof.

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Equation 9.4.4 implies the non-vanishing of the Abel transform and
indeed provides the exact value.

###### Corollary 9.4.20.

@xmath

###### Lemma 9.4.21.

@xmath

This is a result of a more general statement.

###### Lemma 9.4.22 (Nesting of Hecke algebras).

Let @xmath be a locally compact group, @xmath a compact subgroup of
@xmath , and @xmath a compact subgroup of @xmath . Let @xmath be a
finite-dimensional unitary representation of @xmath . We have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

maps

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

For any finite-dimensional representation @xmath of @xmath , the
function @xmath is defined on @xmath , and can be extended to @xmath by
zero off @xmath . Similar conventions are assumed for @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We appeal to the Frobenius character formula for compact groups

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we eliminate one of the integrals

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The identities for the character distributions remain to be shown. It is
equivalent for an irreducible representation @xmath of @xmath to have a
@xmath -isotype @xmath and to have a @xmath -isotype @xmath . This can
be proven by the associativity of the restriction function and the
Frobenius reciprocity law:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By the invariance of character distributions, we undoubtedly achieve

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

And because the only irreducible, unitary representations with non-zero
@xmath -isotype @xmath are the irreducible, unitary principal series
representation @xmath , the character distribution vanishes on all other
@xmath -equivalence classes. Since @xmath is a @xmath
-conjugation-invariant function, and by the described vanishing
properties, it must be an element of @xmath . Now according to the
formula for the character distribution of a parabolic induction, we
obtain

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

We note that @xmath is supported on

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and @xmath is supported on

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The Abel transform

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is supported on

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

according to the coset decomposition

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

We know from the general properties of the Abel transform from Section
5.5 that the Abel transform is invariant under conjugation of the Weyl
group

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

According to the normalization, this gives us

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The formula for the trace of the parabolic induction yields now

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 9.5. The character of the infinite-dimensional representations

The values of the spectral distribution have been determined in
Definition-Theorem 9.4.9 , 9.4.10 and 9.4.12 .

### 9.6. The character of the one-dimensional representations

###### Proposition 9.6.1.

Let @xmath and @xmath be algebraic one-dimensional representations of
@xmath . Let @xmath be the character distribution of @xmath . Let @xmath
be a supercuspidal representation of @xmath

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

### 9.7. The identity distribution

The computation of the identity distribution has already been partially
introduced in Lemma 9.4.4 . However, we must be more precise.

###### Proposition 9.7.1.

Let @xmath be a one-dimensional representation of @xmath with conductor
@xmath , and let @xmath be a supercuspidal representation with cuspidal
type @xmath . We obtain

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Proof.

The Hecke operator is not supported on @xmath and satisfies @xmath by
definition. From Lemma 9.4.4 and Lemma 9.4.13 , we immediately obtain

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

For finite-dimensional representations, we have @xmath ∎

### 9.8. The parabolic distributions

The local @xmath zeta integral is given for @xmath , and @xmath as the
value

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Special values of this function contribute to the Arthur trace formula.
At @xmath , the Abel transform is evaluated at the identity, i.e., for
@xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the derivative of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the local zeta function of @xmath [ Tate:Thesis ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The computations for our set of test functions are presented in the next
proposition.

###### Proposition 9.8.1.

We have the following special values for

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Proof.

The first equalities are easily concluded from prior observations and
the equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Abel transform vanishes for @xmath and @xmath . The Abel transform
of @xmath is by definition normalized to @xmath . The Abel transform of
@xmath is not supported on @xmath .

The third equality requires more work. The quotient rule of differential
calculus tells us that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

For @xmath , the value is zero because @xmath .

The function @xmath is not supported on @xmath , since @xmath is not a
square. This is evidenced because the decomposition in Lemma 9.4.16
provides that the support of @xmath is contained in the set

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Looking at the valuation of the determinant yields the result. The
valuation of the determinant is even on @xmath and odd on the support of
@xmath .

Assume that @xmath is equal to the trace of the irreducible
representation @xmath of @xmath on @xmath and to zero elsewhere. The
derivative at @xmath is computed as a sum

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Similarly, if @xmath is an irreducible representation of the normalizer
of the Iwahori subgroup @xmath , and @xmath equals the trace of @xmath
on @xmath and is zero off @xmath , then essentially the same computation
yields

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

From Theorem 9.3.4 , we deduce

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

None of these expressions vanish, because we are dealing with
irreducible representation of pro-finite (modulo the center) groups. In
the case of the ramified and the unramified supercuspidal
representations, the proposition gives only the above formulas. For the
Steinberg representations and the principal series representations, the
proposition provides more. For the former, we write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the characteristic function of @xmath and @xmath the
trace of @xmath the trivial representation on @xmath and zero off @xmath
. The above formulas directly yield

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Mackey Restriction Induction formula yields

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The dimension is equal to the cardinality of the coset

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which gives us

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally, the linearity of the zeta integral yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the principal series representation, we must compute for @xmath ,
with conductor @xmath for @xmath , the dimension via the Mackey
Induction Restriction formula

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
                       
                       
  -- -------- -------- --

according to the coset decomposition:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The coset decomposition is derived, as usual, via both the Bruhat
decomposition over the residue field [ BushnellHenniart:GL2 ] *page 44
and the Iwahori decomposition [ BushnellHenniart:GL2 ] *(7.3.1), page
52. For the element @xmath , the dimension is read via

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and evaluated to

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This evaluates the first summand

  -- -------- -- --
     @xmath      
                 
  -- -------- -- --

For the element @xmath , the dimension is understood via

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and evaluated as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

thus evaluating the second summand to

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

In this way, we have established for @xmath

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The results follow by linearity and the definition @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath , and a short calculation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 9.9. The hyperbolic distributions

Similarly to the real and complex discussion, we consider an element
@xmath . By definition, an element @xmath is hyperbolic if its
characteristic polynomial splits into two distinct factors over @xmath ,
or alternatively, if @xmath is conjugate to an element

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath with @xmath . The stabilizer of @xmath is the subgroup @xmath
of diagonal matrices in @xmath . The Arthur trace formula associates to
a hyperbolic element two types of distributions [ Gelbart ] *Proposition
1.1, page 46; a hyperbolic orbital integral for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and a weighted hyperbolic orbital integral for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The quotient measure @xmath is defined here as the unique right
invariant Radon measure on @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is defined via the Iwasawa decomposition, the modular
character

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the weight

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have invariance properties for all @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition 9.9.1 (The hyperbolic distributions).

Consider the hyperbolic element @xmath in @xmath of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The hyperbolic distributions evaluate to

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Proof.

The orbital integral of @xmath is absolutely convergent [ Rao ] . We
divide the proof of this theorem into several lemmas.

###### Lemma 9.9.2 (Explicit form of @xmath).

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

By definition, we have for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The result for @xmath is clear. We have for @xmath the matrix
decomposition

  --------- -- -------- --
  (9.9.1)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

We complete the computation with

  --------- -- -------- -------- --
  (9.9.2)      @xmath            
  (9.9.3)               @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- -------- --

###### Lemma 9.9.3.

For @xmath , we obtain

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We choose the ordinary measure @xmath on @xmath , and set @xmath on
@xmath . We assign to @xmath a unit Haar measure @xmath . We have fixed
the unique Haar measure @xmath on @xmath and @xmath , such that for all
@xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

According to the Iwasawa decomposition, the quotient measure is
definable via the property that for all continuous, compactly supported
functions @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The (weighted) orbital integral is computed for @xmath as

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where the weight @xmath is either constant or @xmath . Of course, this
requires some knowledge of @xmath as given by Lemma 9.9.2 . By
restricting the result to elements @xmath , which satisfy by definition

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

we have proven the claim. ∎

###### Corollary 9.9.4.

If @xmath is supported on @xmath , then the weighted hyperbolic orbital
integral vanishes.

###### Proof.

The weight @xmath as a function @xmath is supported on @xmath . For
@xmath , we have that for @xmath

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This proves the vanishing assumption of the weighted hyperbolic orbital
integral in all but the case of @xmath , where @xmath is a ramified
supercuspidal representation. This remaining case is covered by a
similar argument.

###### Corollary 9.9.5.

If @xmath is supported on the normalizer @xmath of @xmath in @xmath ,
then the weighted hyperbolic orbital integral vanishes.

###### Proof.

We have that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The weight @xmath as a function @xmath is supported on @xmath . For
@xmath , we have that for @xmath

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 9.9.6 (The invariant orbital integral).

For @xmath and @xmath , we obtain for @xmath and @xmath

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Proof.

Set @xmath Consider the matrix

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which yields

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Corollary 9.9.7.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

What remains to be shown is the weighted hyperbolic integral of the
Hecke operators. Fortunately, we have efficiently controlled their
support.

###### Lemma 9.9.8.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The support of @xmath is precisely

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and that of its Abel transform is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The vanishing assertion follows directly from support considerations.
Now let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We compute

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
                       
                       
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and similarly

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
                       
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

∎

### 9.10. The intertwiner and its derivative

Let @xmath be an algebraic one-dimensional representation of @xmath for
@xmath . Let @xmath be the associated one-dimensional representation of
@xmath . Set @xmath and @xmath .

We define the intertwiner

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

By the Iwasawa decomposition, a smooth function @xmath is uniquely
determined by its value on @xmath , since by definition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A canonical basis is provided by the representation theory of @xmath .
Because @xmath is an intertwiner, it restricts to an intertwiner on the
@xmath -isotype

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For our later applications, it is enough to compute it for the
representation @xmath of @xmath .

###### Proposition 9.10.1.

The @xmath -intertwiner @xmath acts by the scalar

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath , the @xmath -intertwiner @xmath acts by the scalar one.

###### Proof.

Every @xmath -isotype has at most single multiplicity and the @xmath
-isotype has multiplicity one in the representation @xmath . By Schur’s
Lemma, the intertwiner acts as a scalar –*- however, there is an
implicit identification

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

occuring. Let @xmath be the conductor of @xmath . We begin with @xmath ,
since the computation is straightforward. Consider the element @xmath ,
such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have an identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We compute the scalar @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Now let @xmath . For any coset

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we define a vector in @xmath

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

which is supported on @xmath .

###### Lemma 9.10.2.

The isomorphism @xmath acts by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The element @xmath lies in @xmath if and only if @xmath lies in @xmath .
The Iwahori decomposition [ BushnellHenniart:GL2 ] *(7.3.1), page 52
yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The function is a linear combination

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We compute the values @xmath

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Corollary 9.10.3.

@xmath

By Schur’s Lemma, there exists only one intertwiner up to a complex
scalar. So on the @xmath -isotype @xmath and @xmath differ only by a
scalar.

Consider the element @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We compute the scalar @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
                       
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Additionally, we have to treat the irreducible representation @xmath ,
i.e., the Steinberg representation of @xmath .

###### Proposition 9.10.4 (The Steinberg representation).

The @xmath -intertwiner @xmath acts by the scalar

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Set @xmath . Let us first project an element

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

onto @xmath by considering

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The intertwiner

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is up to a complex scalar the only intertwiner on @xmath by Schur’s
Lemma. By the Bruhat decomposition over the residue field

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The operator @xmath is an isometry. Choose @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consequently, @xmath acts on the @xmath -isotype by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We compute @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

### 9.11. The elliptic distributions

In this section, I will present a method for computing the orbital
elliptic integrals for @xmath . This method differs slightly from the
real situation, but the central idea remains the same. We will require a
decomposition of the Haar measure that corresponds to the Cartan
decomposition. The computations become easier when we first make use of
the Iwahori subgroup @xmath in place of @xmath , and deduce the results
for @xmath [ IwahoriMatsumoto:Bruhat ] from there.

Compare the situation with the real case in Section 7.11 . An element of
@xmath is elliptic if its characteristic polynomial is irreducible over
@xmath . As usual, we are only interested in results modulo the center.

###### Lemma 9.11.1.

Let @xmath be an elliptic element in @xmath for a non-archimedean field
(or, a Henselian field) @xmath with characteristic polynomial

  ---------- -- -------- --
  (9.11.1)      @xmath   
  ---------- -- -------- --

The element @xmath is conjugate in @xmath to the element

  ---------- -- -------- --
  (9.11.2)      @xmath   
  ---------- -- -------- --

###### Definition 9.11.2 (Unramified elliptic elements).

We say that an elliptic element @xmath is unramified if @xmath for some
integer @xmath , and else, we call it ramified.

###### Proof of the lemma.

If @xmath is elliptic, then @xmath is elliptic for all @xmath . Note
that @xmath for @xmath if @xmath is even or @xmath if @xmath is odd. The
theory of the canonical rational form [ BushnellHenniart:GL2 ] *Section
5.3, page 44 gives that @xmath is conjugate to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and consequently, that @xmath is conjugate to an element

  ---------- -- -------- --
  (9.11.3)      @xmath   
  ---------- -- -------- --

By Hensel’s Lemma [ Neukirch ] *Corollary 6.5, page 147, an irreducible
polynomial @xmath satisfies @xmath . The statement of the lemma follows
then from the irreducibility of the characteristic polynomial, as it
implies that @xmath . ∎

Let @xmath be @xmath , and let @xmath be the centralizer of @xmath in
@xmath . If @xmath is elliptic, then @xmath is compact modulo the center
@xmath . The Haar measure of the group @xmath has been fixed in the case
of @xmath , and is the counting measure in the @xmath . Let the quotient
@xmath carry the unique right @xmath -invariant probability measure
@xmath . We fix the unique Haar measure @xmath on @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The orbital integral is then defined as a distribution @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the unique Radon measure on the homogeneous space @xmath
, such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

With this, we have introduced enough notation that the main result of
this section can be stated:

###### Proposition 9.11.3 (The elliptic distributions).

Consider the function @xmath for a one-dimensional representation @xmath
of @xmath with conductor @xmath , the functions @xmath and @xmath for a
supercuspidal representation @xmath .

-    Let @xmath be an unramified elliptic element, then

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

-    Let @xmath be a ramified elliptic element, then

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

There are various equivalent approaches towards such a computation. The
Bruhat-Tits building plays a central role in [ Kottwitz:GL3 ] , [
Langlands:BaseGL2 ] , [ Rogawski:Thesis ] , and lattices in [ KnightlyLi
] *page 394. A general argument for pseudo coefficients of a
square-integrable representation for characteristic zero is given in [
Kazhdan:Pseudo ] *Theorem K. For a connection between the building of
@xmath or rather @xmath with lattices, the reader may consider [
Abramenko-Brown ] or [ Garrett:Buildings ] . We avoid introducing large
parts of these theories and the relevant notation, as we will only use
the resulting measure decomposition.

However, some useful details are required. Define @xmath with @xmath and

  ---------- -- -------- --
  (9.11.4)      @xmath   
  ---------- -- -------- --

Note that the group

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

generated by the set @xmath modulo the center is a Coxeter group with
the relations @xmath and @xmath . The group @xmath is a set of
representatives for @xmath . We define the Iwahori subgroup as

  ---------- -- -------- --
  (9.11.5)      @xmath   
  ---------- -- -------- --

We define the operator

  ---------- -- -------- --
  (9.11.6)      @xmath   
  ---------- -- -------- --

The proposition is a conclusion of the following theorem.

###### Theorem 9.11.4.

Consider an elliptic element

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in @xmath . Let @xmath be the center of @xmath , and @xmath be the
centralizer of @xmath . For any element @xmath , the elliptic orbital
integral is given as

  ---------- -- -- --
  (9.11.7)         
  ---------- -- -- --

###### Proof of Proposition 9.11.3.

Let @xmath . Assume first that @xmath is supported either on @xmath or
on the normalizer of the Iwahori subgroup and that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For simplicity, we may assume that @xmath is of the form suggested by
Lemma 9.11.1 , i.e.,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Assume that the element

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

lives in the support of @xmath , then we have that @xmath .
Consequently, we have that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The distribution vanishes if

-   @xmath is supported on the normalizer of the Iwahori, and @xmath is
    unramified, or

-   @xmath is supported on @xmath , and @xmath is ramified.

Let us now show that for any one-dimensional representation @xmath of
conductor @xmath and @xmath and any unramified elliptic elements @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is a direct result of the Frobenius Character Formula:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
                       
  -- -------- -------- --

The first summand vanishes; for @xmath

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

is never an element of @xmath for @xmath . The second summand does not
vanish in general; for @xmath , we have that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

This yields the result. In particular, the equality @xmath implies that
@xmath , since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

if and only if

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

By Hensel’s Lemma, the characteristic polynomial of @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it thus reducible over @xmath , which contradicts the fact that @xmath
is elliptic.

For the Steinberg representation, we write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have demonstrated the identities for @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

A Hecke operator @xmath is supported on

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Thus, it necessarily vanishes on the distribution of the unramified
elliptic element, since the distribution is supported on matrices whose
determinant has even valuation. Assume that @xmath is a ramified
elliptic element of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and consequently

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

For @xmath and @xmath , we have that @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consequently, the distribution evaluates to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath , both expression vanish. We argue with @xmath and Lemma
9.4.18 . Set @xmath . We have that @xmath is a linear combination of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for a set of representatives @xmath , and a linear combination of

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

for a set of representative @xmath . The function @xmath is supported on
the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have two cases

1.  Set @xmath and @xmath : Since @xmath for @xmath , we have that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Since @xmath for @xmath , since @xmath and @xmath by assumption, we
    have that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.  Set @xmath and @xmath : Then @xmath is not possible, since @xmath ,
    and @xmath . ∎

###### Proof of the theorem.

Let @xmath be the normalizer of the Levi subgroup @xmath . The group
@xmath together with @xmath gives a BN pair in the sense of [
Abramenko-Brown ] *Definition 6.55, page 319. As a conclusion [
Abramenko-Brown ] *Definition 6.55, page 319, we have a disjoint
decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By the discreteness of the quotient @xmath , this results in a
decomposition of the Haar measure @xmath (see Lemma 6.4.10 )

  ---------- -- -------- --
  (9.11.8)      @xmath   
  ---------- -- -------- --

We assume without loss of generality that @xmath is given in the form of
Lemma 9.11.1 . Now we consider @xmath , that is,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The elliptic integral can be translated into an integral over the group:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The Iwahori decomposition yields that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The theorem follows from the next lemma. ∎

###### Lemma 9.11.5.

Let @xmath . For each element @xmath and every elliptic element @xmath ,
we have the identity

  ---------- -- -------- --
  (9.11.9)      @xmath   
  ---------- -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We write @xmath . The Iwahori decomposition [ BushnellHenniart:GL2 ]
*(7.3.1), page 52 gives for every permutation @xmath of three elements
the isomorphism

  ----------- -- -------- --
  (9.11.10)      @xmath   
  ----------- -- -------- --

The Iwahori decomposition 9.11.10 results in a measure decomposition

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Note that the computations for

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

will verify the computations for @xmath as well. I distinguish between
whether or not @xmath is positive. Modulo the center, we may assume that
@xmath . For @xmath , we encounter for the nontrivial case @xmath

  ----------- -------- -------- --
              @xmath            
              @xmath            
  (9.11.11)            @xmath   
  ----------- -------- -------- --

In both cases, we note that @xmath for @xmath . This can be seen in the
basic matrix manipulations

  ----------- -- -------- --
  (9.11.12)      @xmath   
  (9.11.13)      @xmath   
  ----------- -- -------- --

It can be deduced from the fact that the polynomials @xmath and @xmath
are irreducible, because the characteristic polynomial @xmath of @xmath
is irreducible. We compute, for @xmath and

  ----------- -- -------- --
  (9.11.14)      @xmath   
  ----------- -- -------- --

the affine Bruhat decomposition explicitly:

  ----------- -------- -------- --
              @xmath            
  (9.11.15)            @xmath   
  ----------- -------- -------- --

The Equation 9.11.11 results for @xmath in

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
              
              
  -- -------- --

and for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
              
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
              
  -- -------- --

### 9.12. An easy example: Depth-zero supercuspidal representations

###### Definition 9.12.1.

An irreducible, supercuspidal representation with central algebraic
character is of depth zero if it admits a @xmath -invariant vector.

Isomorphism classes of depth-zero supercuspidal representations are in
one-to-one correspondence with isomorphism classes of cuspidal
representations of @xmath . More precisely, this is realized as follows:
Let @xmath be a cuspidal representation of @xmath , then the
representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a depth-zero supercuspidal representation. Every depth-zero
supercuspidal representation contains the inflation of a unique cuspidal
representation of @xmath with simple multiplicity.

###### Proposition 9.12.2 (The parabolic distributions for depth-zero
supercuspidal pseudo coefficients).

Let @xmath a depth-zero supercuspidal representation, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

According to Proposition 9.8.1 , we have the formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

At this point, the representation @xmath is an inflation of a cuspidal
representation of @xmath , and has no @xmath -invariant vector

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Because every vector is @xmath -invariant, we have for all @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

See below for this dimension formula. We obtain a telescopic sum

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The cuspidal representations of @xmath are in one-to-one correspondence
with Galois orbits of regular multiplicative characters of the quadratic
extension @xmath of @xmath . A multiplicative character of @xmath is
regular if it is not fixed by the Galois group of @xmath over @xmath .
This Galois group is generated by @xmath . Two distinct multiplicative
characters, @xmath and @xmath , are in the same Galois orbit if and only
if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The correspondence works as follows [ BushnellHenniart:GL2 ] *Section
6.4, page 47: fix a non-trivial additive character @xmath and an
embedding of @xmath . Given a multiplicative character @xmath of @xmath
, the representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is both irreducible and cuspidal representation of @xmath . In
particular, this implies [ Lang:Algebra ] *page 714

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The isomorphism class of the representation is independent of the
embedding and character. We have an isomorphism:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We write

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Proposition 9.12.3 (The elliptic distributions for depth-zero
supercuspidal pseudo coefficients).

Let @xmath be an depth-zero supercuspidal representation as described
above, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are the roots of the characteristic polynomial
of @xmath modulo @xmath .

###### Proof.

By our definition of @xmath and Proposition 9.11.3 , we have the
vanishing result for ramified elliptic elements, and for an unramified
elliptic element @xmath , we have the equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The formula follows from [ BushnellHenniart:GL2 ] *Theorem 6.4, page 47
and in particular [ BushnellHenniart:GL2 ] *Equation 6.4.1, page 48

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hensel’s Lemma implies that @xmath is elliptic in @xmath as well, and
conjugate to an element in @xmath , specifically

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

## Index

-    (un)ramified supercuspidal representations Definition 1.2.31
-    @xmath §1.1.1
-    @xmath §1.1.2
-    @xmath §1.1.2
-    @xmath §1.1.2
-    @xmath §1.1.2
-    Abel transform, @xmath Definition 5.5.4
-    algebraic character case @xmath §8.3
-    algebraic character case @xmath §7.3
-    algebraic character of @xmath §1.1.1
-    algebraic Hecke character §1.1.2
-    @xmath Definition 6.4.4
-    @xmath Definition 6.4.1
-    @xmath Definition 5.1.3
-    @xmath Definition 5.4.9
-    compact groups @xmath §1.1.5
-    compact-mod-center subgroup Definition 6.4.3
-    @xmath Definition 1.5.3
-    Dirac net Definition 5.3.1
-    @xmath discrete series representation item 3a
-    @xmath §1.1.1
-    @xmath §1.1.1
-    @xmath Definition-Theorem 4.2.1
-    groups @xmath §1.1.5
-    @xmath 3rd item , 3rd item
-    @xmath Definition 5.4.9
-    @xmath . 4th item , 4th item
-    Iwasawa datum @xmath Definition 5.5.1
-    @xmath for @xmath Definition 8.3.3
-    @xmath for @xmath Definition 8.3.1
-    @xmath for @xmath Definition 7.3.1
-    @xmath item 2
-    @xmath Definition 1.7.1
-    large compact subgroup item 3
-    local zeta function @xmath §1.1.4
-    @xmath §1.1.1
-    @xmath §1.1.1
-    principal series representation or parabolic induction Similarity
    classes of @xmath -automorphic representations and spectral
    parameters
-    @xmath 2nd item
-    @xmath 2nd item , 2nd item
-    Ramanujan-Petersson conjecture §8.3
-    @xmath §1.1.1
-    Selberg eigenvalue conjecture §7.3
-    @xmath §7.4
-    similarity classes Similarity classes of @xmath -automorphic
    representations and spectral parameters
-    small hyperbolic support 2nd item
-    spectral parameter Spectral parameters
-    @xmath Chebyshev polynomial of the second kind §8.4
-    @xmath 3rd item
-    @xmath for @xmath §8.4
-    @xmath , @xmath - repr. of @xmath §7.4
-    @xmath for @xmath supercuspidal Definition 1.2.31
-    @xmath Proposition 5.4.10
-    @xmath Lemma 7.4.4