# Chapter 1 Introduction

#####

It is not exactly clear when the very first idea of a computer was born:
It seems that the first idea of an automatic computing machine was
proposed by Charls Babbage in 1822. In the middle of 1930, Alan Turing
by introducing the universal Turing machine, made it clear what
characteristics computing machines needs to have, and how important the
programming is. Shortly after his paper, the first computer was built.

#####

From 1947, onward transistors made the computer hardware develop very
rapidly. So steadily the miniaturization pace that, in the middle of the
sixties, Gordon Moore claimed that every two years the number of
transistors used in a specific volume would doubl. This obviously had
increased the speed of processing and the memory of the computers. This
technology development went on until now, that we are not using the 30
tons computers anymore, but much smaller and lighter. However making
computers and their hardware smaller, requires new considerations: when
facing atomic scales, quantum effects play the major role instead of
classical ones. Therefore if we want to have smaller computers, we might
need to replace the classical computer technology by a quantum one.

#####

In 1982, Richard Feynman, mentioned that simulating a quantum system by
a classical computer is very difficult [ 26 ] . Instead he suggested to
use a computer which is ruled by Quantum Mechanics. Three years later,
in 1985, David Deutsch proposed a model of quantum Turing machine [ 22 ]
. This was one of the first attempts to reveal the extreme power of
quantum computing. The interesting point is that quantum technology not
only permits the use of very small size microchips, but it also gives
the possibility to tackle calculations by a new generation of algorithms
based on Quantum Mechanics. It was Peter Shor, in 1994, who made one of
the biggest steps in this field and showed how powerful such a quantum
algorithm can be in factorizing a given number into its prime factors [
62 ] .

#####

In order to understand the main idea behind such an algorithm, let us
mention some simple facts. From a physical point of view, a bit is a
system which can be in two different states; these states can be yes or
no, right or wrong, 0 or 1. A classical bit can be a mechanical on/off
switch, or an electronic device capable of distinguishing a voltage
difference. But if we choose an atom as a bit, in this case called
qubit, then quantum mechanics tells us that the state of the atom can be
a superposition the only two states available to a classical bit.
Mathematically we write such a state as:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now, consider a classical memory of three bits: at a given time, it can
be in only one of the eight possible states @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,…,
@xmath . On the other hand, a quantum memory of three qubits, can
instead be in all the eight states at the same time: @xmath . Therefore
if we increase the number of qubits, the information stored in them
increases exponentially: a memory of @xmath qubits stores @xmath
classical binary strings simultaneously, while its classical partner
does store only one string. This gives the possibility of performing the
computation on the superposition of all the possible states in one step.
This is called parallelism: a quantum computer can do a certain
computation on @xmath numbers using @xmath qubits in one operation,
while a classical computer has to do the same computation @xmath times
with different entries, or it has to have @xmath processors operating at
the same time. This means that quantum computers can in line of
principle perform exponentially faster than the classical ones. Of
course, after a quantum computation of sort, the solution of a given
problem will be contained in just one of the classical strings appearing
in the quantum superposition; indeed, the very core of quantum
algorithmics is not only to write a sequence of quantum gates in order
to solve the problem, but also to devise protocols able to read the
superoposition so that it gets projected onto the solution string with
very high probability.

#####

However this is not the only spectacular feature of the quantum
computers. The other aspect which makes them very much different from
their classical counterparts is the quantum effect called entanglement .
In 1935, Einstein, Podolski and Rosen, tried to explain the odd
characters of the entangled quantum states , using the hidden variables
[ 25 ] . It was however, John Bell in the sixties, the one who deeply
investigated, the borders between Classical and Quantum Mechanics. His
celebrated inequalities [ 10 ] , that are to be satisfied by any local
classical probabilistic theory, are violated by entangled states . That
means that entanglement has no classically local counterpart.

#####

Consider the following state:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where Alice has the first qubit and Bob owns the second one. Here the
states @xmath and @xmath are the eigenstates of the spin along the
@xmath axis, with eigenvalues @xmath and @xmath respectively. If Alice
does no measurements on her qubit, she can only guess that Bob’s qubit
is in the state @xmath with probability @xmath or, it is in the state
@xmath with the same probability. However if she does a measurement
along the @xmath axis on her qubit, according to what she gets, she can
say exactly in which state Bob’s qubit is. For instance, if after
measurement, she gets @xmath , then she can say that Bob’s qubit is in
state @xmath . While if she would have got @xmath , then Bob’s state
would have been @xmath .

#####

Now consider the state

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this case Alice can say that Bob’s qubit is in the state @xmath
without doing any measurement on her qubit. Indeed Bob’s qubit state,
before and after the measurement on Alice’s qubit does not change. While
in the first case the state of Bob’s qubit was modified by Alice’s
measurement, in the second case it did not.

#####

This gives an idea that entangled states such as ( 1.1 ) are correlated
in a way that the separable states as in ( 1.2 ) are not and that these
correlations have no classical counterparts.

#####

As we mentioned before entanglement plays a very important rule in
quantum computation and quantum information. Quantum dense coding and
quantum cryptography are examples of that. However the most astonishing
application of entanglement is quantum teleportation, which concerns
sending a qubit from one party to another one.

Suppose Alice wants to send the following state to Bob:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

All Alice knows about the coefficients @xmath and @xmath is that @xmath
; that is the state @xmath is unknown to her. In order to send this
state, they share one of the following maximally entangled states (later
we will see that these states are called Bell states, and form and
orthonormal basis in @xmath ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Let Alice and Bob share the state @xmath . Then the overall state would
be:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This can be re-written as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Now if Alice does a measurement of the Bell basis on her first two
qubits, according to whether she finds them in @xmath , @xmath the state
would collapse into one of the following states:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore if she calls Bob through a classical channel (phone, e-mail,
skype, etc.) and tell him what was the outcome of her measurement on
Bell states basis, then Bob can do one of the following operations on
his qubit in order to get it into the initial @xmath state:

-   If Alice gets @xmath , Bob does nothing.

-   If Alice gets @xmath , Bob acts with @xmath on his qubit.

-   If Alice gets @xmath , Bob acts with @xmath on his qubit.

-   If Alice gets @xmath , Bob acts with @xmath on his qubit.

Where @xmath is the first Pauli matrix, and @xmath is the third one.
This way Alice has sent her unknown qubit to Bob. This process is called
quantum teleportation: it amounts to sending one qubit of information
using two classical bits and an entangled state as transmission channel.

#####

Ever since, quantum entanglement has been one of the the main
ingredients of quantum information theory, and the focus of many studies
[ 37 ] . However very fundamental questions have still partial answers:
when is it that a generic quantum state is entangled? How much entangled
is it? Or, is its entanglement useful for quantum information processing
or not? Indeed, just detecting entanglement in physical systems is one
of the most challenging issues.

Interestingly, beside rejuvenating the whole of Quantum Mechanics,
quantum information has also stimulated a more abstract interest in an
old mathematical problem: the characterization of positive linear maps
on (the states on) @xmath algebras of operators [ 36 ] .

From a physical point of view, all actually occurring processes must be
described by completely positive (CP) maps whose structure was fully
characterized by Stinespring in the 50ties and whose central role in
Quantum Mechanics was clarified by Kraus in the 70ies [4]. Their
importance is due to the fact that they are much more than positive: let
the system on which they act (A) be coupled to an ancillary system (B)
completely inert and extend the action of the map from A to A+B by
composing it with the identity action on B. Then, CP maps preserve
positivity when they act on the states of the bipartite system A+B.
Instead, only positive maps do not because there surely exist entangled
states of the compound system A+B whose spectrum does not remain
positive under a positive, but not completely positive map composed with
the identity.

Since one cannot physically exclude such statistical couplings, complete
positivity is the only guarantee against the appearance of unphysical
negative probabilities in the spectrum of a transformed entangled state
in the case of couplings to ancillas. The most renown amongst positive,
but not completely positive maps is matrix-transposition: as
transposition, it preserves positivity, but fails to do so as
partial-transposition, that is when acting on one party only of a
bipartite compound system [ 36 ] .

Thus, positive maps are not fully consistent as descriptions of actual
physical processes; however, exactly because they do not preserve the
positivity of all entangled states, they can then be used as
entanglement witnesses. Transposition is such a witness, which is
exhaustive only in lower dimension; that is for two qubits (2-dim.
system), or one qubit and one qutrit (three-dim. system). Otherwise, for
instance already for two pairs A and B of two qubits each, there are
entangled states of A+B which remain positive under
partial-transposition: they are called PPT entangled states, namely
positive under partial transposition, but entangled nevertheless.

The physical interest of PPT entangled states is that their entanglement
content cannot be augmented by any distillation protocol operating on
great numbers of them: they are also called bound entangled states as
their entanglement is somewhat locked in and cannot be extracted. The
mathematical interest of these states is instead related to the notion
of decomposable positive maps. It was introduced by Størmer and Choi in
order to isolate a particular sub-class of positive maps and used by
Woronowicz to characterize all positive maps in low dimension (this
makes transposition an exhaustive witness in such cases) [ 36 ] .

Only a sub-class of higher dimensional positive maps is decomposable,
that is can be split into the sum of a CP map and a CP map composed with
transposition and these cannot detect the entanglement of PPT states.
Therefore, one is interested in constructing new families of
non-decomposable positive maps able to witness certain bound-entangled
states. This activity has been pursued in recent years, among others, by
the Horodeccy [ 36 ] , by Kossakowski and Chruściński [ 20 , 21 ] in
Poland.

In this thesis work we have studied of @xmath density matrices of two
pairs of qubits, equidistributed over particularly symmetric orthogonal
one-dimensional projections @xmath , @xmath , for which Benatti et al.
have been able to classify all PPT states, but only a few entangled ones
among them. As PPT states are related to specific discrete geometric
structures associated to a 16 point lattice, the issue is to understand
whether bound entanglement might be related to a further specification
of such structures and, if so, to characterize all PPT entangled lattice
states.

The organization of the thesis will be as follows:

#####

Chapter 2: We present an essential introduction of Functional Analysis
as the basic mathematical tools dealing with Quantum Mechanics: Hilbert
spaces and operators acting on them with a couple of most important
norms on them will be defined. In this work, we shall consider only
finite dimensional Hilbert spaces, @xmath ; therefore the algebra of
bounded linear operators defined on them will be isomorphic to the full
matrix algebra @xmath .

#####

Chapter 3: We explain how quantum systems can be described using the
mathematical tools of Chapter 2. Density matrices will be introduced as
quantum states, which are, in general, mixtures of pure states with
corresponding weights. Pure states, that is projectors onto Hilbert
space vectors, are a particular case when the physical state of a
quantum system is completely known.

The von Neumann entropy as a counterpart of Shannon entropy will also be
introduced; in compound systems, this quantity is used to compare the
mixedness of density matrices of subsystems, called reduced density
matrices, to the one of whole system. Throughout this work, we shall be
interested in bipartite systems only. The definition of entangled and
separable states in such systems will follow. We shall see, that as far
as one is dealing with pure states, thanks to the Schmidt decomposition,
distinguishing entangled and separable states is an easy task, which is
not the case for mixed states. We will present Bell states and Werner
states as examples of entangled states.

#####

Chapter 4: We explain what are the requirements for a linear map which
is to describe a physical transformation. We start by giving some
mathematical definitions of positive maps and completely positive maps.
Using the Kraus representation we will study the structure of CP maps.
Then Choi matrix will be introduced, as it provides a technique based on
its block positivity or positivity to decide whether the corresponding
map is positive or completely positive. We shall see that, though
positive maps are not suitable candidates for describing physical
transformations, nevertheless they can be used as mathematical tools to
detect the entanglement.

Many examples will be given throughout the chapter; particularly the
Transposition Map, which will be used to define decomposable maps. We
shall also see, how a generic positive map can be written in terms of
the Trace Map and a suitable completely positive map.

#####

Chapter 5: This chapter focuses on variety of entanglement detecting
methods. Partial Transposition, which is exhaustive in low dimensions,
and PPTness as a necessary condition for separability will be presented.
Using the Hahn-Banach separation theorem, we introduce entanglement
witnesses and how they can be connected to positive maps through the
Jamiołkowski isomorphism. The Reduction Criterion, which is based on the
Reduction Map, already introduced in chapter 4 as a decomposable map,
will be presented. Further, we shall rapidly overview the Range
Criterion, which was used to detect the first PPT entangled state in
@xmath , it will be followed by the notion of Unextendible Product Bases
(UPB). We end this chapter by explaining the Realignment Method, which,
unlike the other methods which manipulate only one subsystem, involves
both subsystems to detect the entanglement. Many examples will be given
throughout this chapter.

#####

Chapter 6: The last chapter contains new results. They concern a class
of states over two parties consisting of @xmath qubits each. The states
studied are diagonal in the basis generated by the action of tensor
products of the form @xmath , @xmath , on the totally symmetric state
@xmath . We first characterize the structure of positive maps detecting
the entangled ones among them; we will show that their possible
entanglement will be witnessed using a subclass of positive maps, namely
diagonal positive maps. Then, the result will be illustrated by
examining some entanglement witnesses for the case @xmath . Further, we
will show how, for pairs of two qubits, being separable, entangled and
bound entangled are state properties related to the geometric patterns
of subsets of a @xmath point square lattice.

## Chapter 2 Preliminaries

### 2.1 Banach and Hilbert spaces

In this chapter we focus on the essential background of functional
analysis [ 57 , 69 , 44 ] , and review the basic mathematical tools
which are used in Quantum Mechanics as we are interested to describe it
using the vector and operators over vector spaces, in particular Hilbert
spaces.

###### Definition 1

Banach Space

A Banach space is a vector space with a norm defined on it, with respect
to which, it is complete.

###### Definition 2

Hilbert Space

A Hilbert space @xmath is a Banach space with respect to a norm given by
the scalar product @xmath . For every vector @xmath , @xmath denotes its
norm.

We shall consider Hilbert spaces with countable orthonormal bases @xmath
, the corresponding projectors @xmath satisfying the completeness
relation: @xmath .

###### Definition 3

Operator Norm

The norm of an operator @xmath on a Hilbert space @xmath is defined as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

It satisfies:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is said to be bounded if @xmath . We denote the set of all
bounded linear operators acting on @xmath by @xmath .

The linear combination and the product of two bounded operator is also
bounded. Moreover all Cauchy type sequences with respect to the norm( 3
), converge to an element in @xmath [ 3 ] which makes this space
complete. That means that @xmath is a @xmath .

###### Definition 4

Spectrum

The spectrum of a bounded operator @xmath denoted by @xmath , is the set
of all complex numbers @xmath such that @xmath has no inverse in @xmath
, where @xmath is the identity operator.

The projectors onto vectors of Hilbert spaces are the simplest examples
of bounded operators on @xmath with the spectrum @xmath .

In Quantum Mechanics positive linear operators are highly important,
they are bounded operators with non-negative spectrum, indeed they can
be considered as observables whose measured outcomes are positive.

###### Definition 5

Positive Operator

An operator @xmath acting on @xmath , is positive if @xmath for all
@xmath .

@xmath denotes the set of all bounded linear positive operators acting
on a Hilbert space @xmath : @xmath .

A set is said to be a cone if it is invariant to non-negative scaling.
For any positive operator @xmath it holds that @xmath , where @xmath ,
therefore the set @xmath is a cone.

### 2.2 Operators on a Finite Dimensional Hilbert Space

#####

Every finite Hilbert space @xmath of dimension @xmath is isomorphic to
vector space of d-dimensional complex vectors @xmath . Fixing the
orthonormal basis set @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

any vector @xmath can be represented over the field of complex scalars:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and linear operators are represented by @xmath matrices. Then the
physical observables are Hermitian @xmath matrices with complex entries,
and their algebra is denoted by @xmath , the entries of @xmath being
@xmath .

###### Theorem 1

Spectral decomposition

Any normal operator @xmath , @xmath , on @xmath can be diagonalized with
respect to the orthonormal basis of its eigenvectors:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, @xmath is positive semidefinite if all its eigenvalues are
non-negative. Notice that matrix algebra @xmath can be treated as a
Hilbert space equipped with the Hilbert-Schmidt scalar product of two
operators @xmath and @xmath in @xmath which is defined to be :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the trace of @xmath which is defined with respect to any orthonormal
basis set @xmath . The corresponding norm, called Hilbert-Schmidt norm:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

can be expressed in terms of the eigenvalues @xmath of the positive
operator @xmath . Another equivalent norm is the so called trace norm:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Example 1

Trace map [ 3 ]

Let @xmath , where @xmath is a set of @xmath matrices which are
orthogonal with respect to the Hilbert-Schmidt scalar product, @xmath .
They form an orthonormal basis set, so that:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now consider the Trace Map, @xmath defined to be:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Given an orthonormal basis @xmath , one constructs the so called unit
matrices @xmath in @xmath , which form an orthonormal basis in @xmath
with respect to the Hilbert-Schmidt scalar product. Therefore, using
this orthonormal set, the Trace Map reads:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

since the two orthonormal basis @xmath and @xmath can be transformed one
into the other using a unitary matrix @xmath : @xmath . The Trace Map
can thus be re-written as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.8)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

###### Example 2

The simplest quantum systems are the 2-level systems, which are
described by @xmath matrices: @xmath . Most distinguished among them are
the self-adjoint Pauli matrices:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

with respect to the orthonormal basis @xmath , @xmath of eigenvectors of
@xmath @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . For the other
matrices we have @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

The algebra of Pauli matrices is summerized by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the antisymmetric 3-tensor, @xmath is the @xmath
identity matrix which we also denote by @xmath . These four matrices are
orthogonal in the sense of Hilbert-Schmidt scalar product, that is
@xmath if @xmath , when normalized, @xmath they form an orthonormal
basis set in @xmath . Therefore any matrix @xmath can be written as:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Example 3

Trace map in @xmath [ 4 ]

Using the Pauli matrices as an orthonormal basis set we can write the
Trace Map defined in ( 2.7 ) as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this case Pauli matrices permit us to simplify this map even more.
Let us define the map @xmath such that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Trace Map is re-written as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

We shall refer to this map in the next chapters.

## Chapter 3 States and Operators

#####

In this chapter, we present some mathematical aspects concerning quantum
states of multipartite systems. The presence of many parties introduces
the notion of quantum correlations and entanglement. For the rest of
this work, we consider only finite complex Hilbert spaces @xmath , where
@xmath denotes the dimension of the Hilbert space. States both in
Classical and Quantum Mechanics are generic linear, positive, normalized
functionals on the algebras of observables that fix their mean values.
In Classical Mechanics one deals with probability distributions on
phase-space; in Quantum Mechanics distributions are replaced by density
matrices which extend the notion of quantum state beyond the single
vectors in Hilbert spaces.

### 3.1 Density Matrices

#####

Usually one is accustomed to states of quantum systems only as vectors
in a suitable Hilbert space. However, more general ones need to be
introduced. Consider an ensemble of projectors @xmath corresponding to
the vector states @xmath , with weights @xmath . If the only knowledge
about the physical system is that it can be found in such states with
weight @xmath , one is effectively dealing with a statistical ensemble.
Its mathematical description is by a density matrix, namely:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 6

Density Matrix

Any positive operator @xmath with @xmath describes a mixed state; let
@xmath be its spectral representation with @xmath and @xmath . Then
@xmath defines a positive, linear and normalized functional on @xmath [
3 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Remark 1

When the density matrix is a projector onto the corresponding state
vector, which is its eigenvector with eigenvalue one, the state is said
to be pure, hence the spectral representation of the density matrix
reduces in to a one-dimensional projection.

The set of all the density matrices of a quantum system @xmath , is
denoted by @xmath . Since any convex combination of two density matrices
is a density matrix as well, therefore @xmath is a convex set. Its
extreme points, which can not be written as a convex combination of
other density matrices, correspond to pure states.

###### Example 4

Bloch Sphere

There is a very useful geometrical representation for density matrices
@xmath of qubits: the Bloch sphere. Taking the two eigenvectors @xmath
and @xmath of the Pauli matrix @xmath as the axes of this sphere:

[]

Then any normalized vector @xmath in a two-level system can be
represented in terms of these two vectors:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It corresponds to a point on the surface of this sphere, which can be
also represented using polar coordination by a new vector @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The vector @xmath is known as Bloch vector. In general a mixed density
matrix @xmath can be represented in terms of Bloch vectors and Pauli
matrices, called Bloch representation:

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

The positivity of @xmath is equivalent to asking that @xmath Note that
pure qubit states correspond to Bloch vectors @xmath with norm one, i.e.
to the points on the surface of the sphere. Mixed states are instead
represented by points inside the sphere where @xmath . The maximally
mixed state @xmath corresponds to the center of the sphere, while
orthogonal states, in the sense of the Hilbert-Schmidt product, are
connected by diameters.

Therefore a density matrix is a Hermitian, unit-trace operator with
non-negative eigenvalues. For pure states @xmath , while for mixed
states @xmath . Given two density matrices, there are different methods
to judge about their mixedness.

The mixedness measure on a Hilbert space with dimension d, is defined to
be [ 54 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

This quantity is known as linear entropy and is 0 for pure states and
maximal for maximally mixed states, i.e. @xmath .

However, the most reknown entropy is the von Neumann entropy [ 73 ] .

###### Definition 7

von Neumann Entropy

Given a density matrix @xmath , the von Neumann entropy is defined:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the eigenvalues of @xmath and @xmath is the dimension
of the system.

Evidently this quantity is zero only for pure states, as the projectors
have only eigenvalues equal to 0 or 1. For the maximally mixed states
@xmath , the von Neumann entropy is maximum:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This shows that the von Neumann entropy can measure the mixedness of
density matrices, and we have @xmath .

### 3.2 Composite Systems

In Quantum Information, one very frequently deals with systems
consisting of several subsystems, called multi-partite systems: @xmath .
The Hilbert space of @xmath is the tensor product of the Hilbert spaces
of its subsystems: @xmath . On tensor product Hilbert spaces, operators
act as tensor product of matrices.

###### Definition 8

Matrix Tensor Product

Consider a bipartite system described by the Hilbert space @xmath ,
together with the matrix algebra @xmath for the first party and @xmath
for the second one. Thus the algebra of the whole system consists of the
tensor product of the form [ 29 , 15 ] :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

When @xmath , the algebra of @xmath is @xmath .

#####

The opposite of combining the subsystems to get a bigger one, is partial
tracing. By tracing over a subsystem @xmath with respect to an
orthonormal basis @xmath , one reduces a density matrix @xmath to
another density matrix:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

acting on @xmath .

#####

In the following, we will consider only finite-dimensional bipartite
systems, i.e. @xmath , with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Therefore for
the whole system we have @xmath Density matrices are positive @xmath of
trace 1. The partial trace yields:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath (resp. @xmath ) is called reduced density matrix for the
system @xmath (resp. for the system @xmath ), the sets @xmath and @xmath
are orthonormal basis of @xmath and @xmath respectively.

The reduced density matrices describe the states that two parties
locally possess. Their meaning is easy to understand in terms of local
observables, of the first party, say: @xmath . The mean value of such a
local observable, of the first party alone, with respect to the two
party state @xmath reads

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

showing that it is completely specified by the reduced density matrix
@xmath of the considered party.

For bipartite systems, we have the following lemma:

###### Lemma 1

Schmidt decomposition

Every vector @xmath , can be represented as [ 49 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath are orthonormal sets of vectors in
@xmath and @xmath respectively. The non-negative scalars @xmath are such
that @xmath .

Proof: Without loss of generality let us assume @xmath . Given two ONB
@xmath and @xmath , any vector @xmath can be written as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Its corresponding density matrix is @xmath . The reduced density matrix
@xmath is obtained by partial tracing over the second subsystem, which
in its spectral representation is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Choosing @xmath as an ONB for @xmath , we can re-write ( 3.9 ) as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath . Note that the vectors @xmath are not in general
orthonormal. Using this new ONB, partial tracing over the second
subsystem of @xmath , will be read as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Comparing this with ( 3.10 ), we see that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

After normalization we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Replacing this in to ( 3.2 ), we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Which ends the proof. @xmath

The coefficients @xmath are called Schmidt coefficients, and their
multiplicity is known as Schmidt rank. Note that using the Schmidt form
of a given vector @xmath , the reduced density matrices are:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

one sees that they have the same eigenvalues @xmath , with the same
multiplicity.

### 3.3 Separable and Entangled States

#####

Consider a vector state @xmath , which is a tensor product of two vector
states: @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . The corresponding density
matrix is of the form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are pure states projections. As we see the density matrix
corresponding to a product vector state is itself a tensor product.
Using this fact we can give a definition for a separable state:

###### Definition 9

[ 30 ] A bipartite pure state @xmath is separable if and only if it is
the tensor product of the density matrices of its subsystems:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Otherwise it is an entangled pure state.

For a pure separable state, tracing over one subsystem gives a projector
over the other subsystem, i.e. pure states:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Examples of entangled pure states are the Bell states which are
maximally entangled.

###### Example 5

Bell States

The following four symmetric vectors in @xmath are known as Bell basis
vectors [ 40 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.15)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

For instance consider the density matrix corresponding to the @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

reduced density matrices are:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which are maximally mixed states.

#####

The following theorem provides a necessary and sufficient condition of
separability for bipartite pure states, based on their Schmidt
decomposition:

###### Theorem 2

The pure vector state @xmath is separable if and only if only one
Schmidt coefficient is different from zero.

Therefore the pure states, whose Schmidt decomposition contains more
than one Schmidt coefficient, or in other words, their Schmidt rank is
greater than one, are entangled.

###### Example 6

According to Schmidt decomposition the following state is separable:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One can easily see that the von Neumann entropy is zero for the density
matrix @xmath , as well as the reduced density matrices @xmath and
@xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Example 7

The Schmidt rank of Bell states in ( 3.15 ) is 2, and their Schmidt
coefficients are @xmath .

The symmetric states in ( 3.32 ) are another example of entangled
states, which Schmidt rank d.

#### 3.3.1 Shannon entropy and von Neumann entropy

Example 5 is a clear indication that entanglement embodies correlations
that have no classical counterpart. Indeed, the von Neumann entropy is
for quantum states what the Shannon entropy [ 19 ] is for classical
states, that is for probability distributions of stochastic variables.
Let @xmath be a @xmath -valued stochastic variable whose outcomes @xmath
occur with probabilities @xmath , then the Shannon entropy of @xmath is
defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

One thus sees that the von Neumann entropy of density matrix @xmath is
nothing else than the Shannon entropy of its spectrum. However, the
Shannon entropy of a composite system, described say by two stochastic
variables @xmath and @xmath is always larger than the Shannon entropy of
each of its two parties, that is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Shannon entropies of the joint probability
distribution @xmath and @xmath are the Shannon entropy of the reduced
probability distributions @xmath , @xmath with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

This can be seen as follows: let us introduce the conditional
probability

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

that the outcome for @xmath be @xmath given that the outcome @xmath has
been obtained and the conditional entropy of @xmath given @xmath ,
namely the following convex combination of Shannon entropies

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.21)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Then, the result follows because @xmath and @xmath are @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

#####

###### Remark 2

Unlike the Shannon entropy, the von Neumann entropy of subsystems can be
larger than that of the total system. This fact indeed signals
entanglement but, as we shall see, is not always implied by
entanglement.

One could now guess that quantum states either carry entanglement or
classical correlations. It is not so: there can be separable states
which are not simply classical correlated.

In order to understand this fact one has to introduce the so-called
Quantum Discord of a given state. One starts by recalling that, using
the conditional entropy, one can define the mutual information:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

which measures the amount of information that is common to both
classical stochastic variables. It can also be rewritten as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can extend the notion of mutual information to quantum systems [ 13
, 14 ] ; To do so, starting from ( 3.25 ), one can simply replace the
probability distributions of individual systems by reduced density
matrices of subsystems:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

However this generalization, in the case of expression ( 3.24 ) for
classical mutual information, is not trivial; in fact, the definition of
conditional entropy of quantum systems involves quantum measurement
processes. Expressing the state of system @xmath , when the state of
system @xmath is known, is equivalent to having done a set of
measurements on system @xmath . Therefore the post-measurement state of
system @xmath , after performing measurement @xmath will be:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Given a complete set of orthogonal measurements @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, on system @xmath , the conditional entropy will be defined as [ 50 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

With this definition of quantum conditional entropy, @xmath in ( 3.24 )
reads:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Unlike in the classical case where the two expressions for mutual
information, @xmath and @xmath , are equal, in quantum case, the two
expressions are not in general the same [ 50 , 28 ] . Their difference
depends on the set of measurements performed on system @xmath which can
be removed by minimizing it over all possible sets @xmath , and define
the minimum as the Quantum Discord of the given state @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.30)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The Quantum Discord measures the non-classical correlations whhc are
present in a quantum state: it is @xmath for separable states with only
classical correlations, and maximal for entangled states which are
extremely non-classical correlated. However, there exist separable, that
is non-entangled, states with non-zero Quantum Discord.

#### 3.3.2 Mixed entangled states

For mixed states the notion of separability extends as follows:

###### Definition 10

A mixed state @xmath is separable if and only if it cannot be written as
a convex combination of product states:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Otherwise, it is an entangled mixed state.

###### Example 8

Consider a bipartite system @xmath , where the Hilbert spaces of the
subsystems are of the same dimension. Consider the symmetric states [ 4
] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath is any fixed orthonormal basis in @xmath . The
corresponding projectors are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Also in this case reduced density matrices are maximally mixed:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

which means that @xmath is entangled. We shall refer to this set of
symmetric states in the future.

###### Example 9

Werner States

Werner states in @xmath are constructed as follows [ 56 , 74 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Where @xmath is one of the Bell states, introduced in ( 3.15 ). In the
basis where @xmath is diagonal, Werner states can be represented by the
following matrix:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The above range for @xmath is to guarantee the positivity of @xmath .
Werner states are entangled for @xmath . The reduced density matrices
are:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As we see, also in this case the reduced density matrices are maximally
mixed and therefore their von Neumann entropy is maximum. Indeed, by
checking how the function @xmath behaves:

[]

one might then think that entangled Werner states are detected by
checking whether their entropy is smaller than the entropy of one of the
parties. We shall later see a counterexample to such a claim.

However the situation in case of pure states is completely clear thanks
to Schmidt decomposition, deciding if a given mixed state is entangled
or separable is still an open problem, even in case of bipartite
systems. In the following chapters we will study how to partially answer
this question.

## Chapter 4 Positive and Completely Positive Maps

Physical transformations of Quantum systems are described by linear
maps, either on the space of states or, dually, on the algebra of
observables. If a linear map on the convex space of states describes a
physical transformation (that, of course, transforms physical states
into physical states), then it must transform density matrices into
density matrices. It must thus be positivity preserving and trace
preserving. However, though necessary, positivity is not sufficient to
guarantee the physical consistency of a linear map. Via coupling the
system affected by the transformation with a suitable unaffected
ancilla, the existence of entanglement between the two subsystem
requires the map to be also completely positive. In this section we will
see how these constraints can take part in the challenge of detecting
entangled states.

### 4.1 Positivity and Complete Positivity

###### Definition 11

Positive Map A linear map @xmath is positive if and only if @xmath for
all @xmath [ 31 , 51 ] . The set of positive maps is denoted by @xmath .

###### Example 10

Trace Map

The Trace Map, introduced in ( 2.7 ), is a positive map, as it is the
sum of the eigenvalues of an operator. Therefore if @xmath , @xmath ,
then

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Example 11

Transposition Map

Transposition map is another example of positive maps:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

with respect to a fixed orthonormal basis. Given a matrix @xmath , its
transposed is @xmath . Since transposing an operator does not affect its
spectrum, it preserves positivity, which means that it is a positive
map.

###### Example 12

Transposition Map on @xmath

Using the Pauli matrices as an orthonormal basis set in @xmath ,
similarly to the Trace Map in Example 3 , we can also write the
Transposition Map as [ 4 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath when @xmath , whereas @xmath . In terms of the map @xmath
as in  ( 2.12 ), the Transposition Map is of the following form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

One can thus check that, in the standard representation, @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath , which is exactly what transposition does in the chosen
representation.

###### Definition 12

K-positivity

A linear map @xmath is k-positive if and only if @xmath is a positive
map, where @xmath . @xmath denotes the set of k-positive maps [ 75 , 63
] .

###### Definition 13

Complete Positivity

If a linear map @xmath is k-positive for every @xmath , it is called
completely positive. The set of completely positive maps is denoted by
@xmath .

A linear map @xmath is a CPU map if it is both CP and unital, that is
@xmath .

The following theorem fully characterizes the completely positive maps:

###### Theorem 3

Kraus representation

A map @xmath is completely positive if and only if there exists a set of
operators @xmath , such that [ 43 , 17 , 3 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The operators @xmath , are called Kraus operators. Furthermore, such a
map is CPU if and only if @xmath .

Theorem 3 concerns the action of maps on operators (Heisenberg
representation); however, one is often interested in how states
transform (Schrödinger representation). This fact can easily be derived
by duality.

###### Definition 14

Dual map

For any map @xmath , its dual map @xmath is defined as [ 4 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

for every @xmath and @xmath .

The Kraus representation of the dual map @xmath will be:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore, one can see that CPU maps and trace-preserving maps are dual:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consider a CP map @xmath , with its Kraus representation as in ( 4.6 ).
By choosing a Hilbert-Schmidt ONB set @xmath , the Kraus operators
@xmath can be written as:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore the Kraus representation of @xmath will be:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.7)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Where @xmath are the entries of a positive matrix @xmath . The
representation ( 4.7 ) of a CP map @xmath is also known as Canonical
Kraus Representation [ 7 ] . Indeed the Kraus form ( 4.6 ), is obtained
by diagonalizing this general form.

One should also note that the set of Kraus operators @xmath is not
unique, however, each two sets of Kraus operators corresponding to the
same CP map, can be related by a unitary matrix. Indeed, given a
canonical Kraus form, of a CP map @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using the diagonal form of @xmath in terms of its eigenvectors:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the matrix elements @xmath are:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Replacing this in ( 4.8 ), we get:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

#####

Any hermiticity and trace-preserving linear map @xmath can be written as
[ 27 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . This can be shown as follows: consider the @xmath
elementary linear maps @xmath and define on the linear space @xmath of
maps @xmath the scalar product

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the completely symmetric projection ( 3.33 ). It turns
out that @xmath ; therefore, being orthogonal, the @xmath constitute an
orthonormal basis in @xmath . As we shall soon see, the scalar product
defined above is strictly related to the notion of Choi matrix.

When the map @xmath is completely positive the matrix @xmath is
positive, while in case of positive maps, the matrix @xmath is no longer
positive, but with separating the positive and negative eigenvalues, one
can write a positive map @xmath as the difference of two completely
positive maps:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

#####

Based on the complete characterization of the structure of CP maps, the
following concept provides a simple test to determine if a given map is
CP or not [ 52 ] .

###### Definition 15

Choi-Jamiołkowski isomorphism

Given a linear map @xmath , its Choi matrix is the matrix on @xmath
defined by [ 18 , 2 , 55 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath projects onto the completely symmetric state

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is useful to see how the Choi matrix of the map @xmath looks like:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Choi matrix, @xmath , is uniquely defined by @xmath since its
entries @xmath with respect to an orthonormal basis of the form @xmath
are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

It turns out that the map @xmath from the vector space @xmath of linear
maps onto the matrix algebra @xmath is invertible map and defines the so
called Jamiołkowski isomorphism. In fact, any @xmath is determined by
its action on matrix units @xmath which is in turn completely
characterized by the matrix elements in ( 4.13 ). Therefore, given
@xmath this uniquely determines a linear map @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Equipped with these tools one can readily prove the following

###### Theorem 4

Every linear map @xmath with positive semi-definite Choi matrix @xmath
is completely positive and vice versa [ 18 , 32 ] .

Proof: By definition of complete positivity, @xmath is positive if
@xmath is completely positive, and thus @xmath .

Vice versa, if @xmath , then it can be spectralized as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The eigenvectors @xmath can be conveniently rewritten using the
completely symmetric vector as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with the matrix @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, one can rewrite

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, by the Jamiołkowski isomorphism, @xmath can be written in the
Kraus-Stinespring form and is thus completely positive. @xmath

###### Remark 3

In general, positive maps @xmath on bounded operators are completely
positive if @xmath for all @xmath . However, in the finite dimensional
cases, when @xmath , the above result shows that one needs check the
positivity of @xmath , only.

###### Example 13

Consider the Trace Map @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is easy to see that this map is CPU; indeed:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It’s Choi matrix is:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The positivity of Choi matrix shows the Trace Map is completely
positive.

###### Definition 16

Block Positive Operator

Given a matrix @xmath , using any fixed orthonormal basis, we can write
it as @xmath , where @xmath , for @xmath . Then matrix A is said to be
block-positive if and only if for all @xmath and @xmath , the following
holds:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In another word, block-positivity of @xmath is equivalent to positivity
of @xmath for @xmath .

###### Theorem 5

A linear map @xmath is positive if and only if its Choi matrix is
block-positive [ 39 , 42 ] :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every @xmath and @xmath in @xmath .

Proof: Given a positive map @xmath , by definition, it preserves
positivity of matrices in @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Given an ONB @xmath , then any vector @xmath is @xmath , where @xmath .
Using this ( 4.15 ) is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Which shows that the positivity of @xmath is equivalent to the block
positivity of its Choi matrix and vice versa. @xmath

###### Example 14

Consider the Transposition Map @xmath , in ( 4.1 ). It’s Choi matrix is:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Which coincides with the definition of the Flip operator:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is also that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , its eigenvalues are @xmath .

For any vector @xmath and @xmath , we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since @xmath has negative eigenvalues, @xmath , Transposition Map is not
completely positive.

###### Example 15

Reduction Map

In the next chapter we will introduce a number of positive maps, which
are known to be able to detect some entangled states, one of them is
called Reduction Map [ 32 ] , which has the following form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Reduction map is positive: as the trace is the sum of the
eigenvalues, which are non-negative as @xmath is a density matrix,
therefore @xmath . Let @xmath be eigenvectors of @xmath with eigenvalues
@xmath , then using the spectral decomposition of @xmath , we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since @xmath , @xmath is a positive matrix. On the other hand, the Choi
matrix of this map is:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, @xmath has one negative eigenvalue @xmath and is not positive
semi-definite. Therefore, the Reduction Map is not completely positive.

In what follows, we shall explain the results given in [ 65 ] , which is
extensively used in the last chapter of this thesis.

###### Theorem 6

Let @xmath be the Trace Map. Then, given any positive map @xmath can be
written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a positive constant and @xmath a completely positive
map.

Proof:

Let @xmath be a self-adjoint map, that is @xmath , then its Choi matrix
@xmath is self-adjoint as well. Therefore @xmath can be written as
difference of two positive matrices, i.e. @xmath where @xmath . Let
@xmath be the smallest positive number such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The above inequality is satisfied by choosing @xmath , which is the
greatest eigenvalue of @xmath .

Now consider the following positive matrix:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The completely positive map @xmath of which @xmath is the Choi matrix
reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, re-arranging the ( 4.20 ),we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the only assumption was to consider the map @xmath to be
self-adjoint. Therefore any self-adjoint map can be written as in ( 4.21
). Taking into account that the set of positive maps is a subset of
self-adjoint maps completes the proof. @xmath

###### Example 16

We have seen in Example 3 that the transposition on @xmath can be
represented as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, on @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that the transposition is not written in the Kraus form ( 4.6 )
as the products @xmath whenever @xmath or @xmath .

On the other hand, the completely positive trace map @xmath on @xmath
has the following Kraus representation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, on @xmath , the trace map has the Kraus form ( 4.6 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

We would like to write the transposition map as in the form suggested by
Theorem 6 :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

When @xmath is the transposition map on @xmath , the CP maps @xmath in (
4.26 ) are easily found: the linear map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is of the form ( 4.6 ), thus CP, if and only if @xmath . The smallest
choice, @xmath , yields the completely positive map

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 4.2 Entanglement and Positive Maps

As we have seen the structure of completely positive maps is wholly
understood via the Kraus representation. Moreover Choi’s theorem
provides a technique to sort them out. Instead, as soon as one is
dealing with positive maps, the situation becomes much less clear due to
the lack of a complete structural representation of them. As we will
see, only in low dimensions, when @xmath , the structure of positive
maps is under control [ 75 , 63 ] . While in higher dimensions these
maps are only partially understood [ 20 , 21 , 38 , 70 , 72 , 48 ] .

#####

From a physical point of view, it turns out that a linear map which
describes a physical transformation needs not to be only positive but
completely positive [ 47 ] : since the eigenvalues of a system in
statistical interpretation represent the probabilities, when a linear
map describes a physical transformation, it has to preserve the
positivity of the spectrum of the physical system, otherwise a negative
eigenvalue representing a probability brings up a contradiction. As we
have seen, by Definition 13 any extension of completely positive maps
does this job. However this might not be true in general if the
transformation is described by a positive, not CP, map. While the
extension of positive maps preserves the positivity of separable states,
it can fail when the subsystems are entangled. Consider a bipartite
separable state which is a convex combination of tensor product of
states its subsystems:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The action of @xmath when @xmath is a positive map gives:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The positivity of @xmath guarantees that @xmath and therefore @xmath ,
remains a positive state. But if the state @xmath is not separable it
cannot be written as ( 4.28 ), and consequently, for a generic @xmath
and @xmath , @xmath is positive only if @xmath is completely positive.

#####

However, though positive maps cannot be used to describe physical
transformations, they provide a new powerful theoretical approach to
detect the entanglement. Indeed, if a given state @xmath does not remain
positive under the action of an extended positive maps, it must be
entangled:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#####

The prototype of positive, but not completely positive map is
transposition. In the following example we show that the extension of
this map fails to be k-positive already when k is equal to 2, which
means that it is not a complete positive map. In other words, though a
positive matrix remains positive after being transposed, it might not be
positive after being partially transposed.

###### Example 17

Take one of the maximally entangled Bell states, introduced in ( 3.15 ),
@xmath , its density matrix is:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The action of @xmath on this state is to transposing each block of the
matrix, the result is the following matrix:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

which has a negative eigenvalue @xmath .

According to Partial Transposition, the states can be divided into two
classes: those which remain positive under this map, called PPT states,
and those which turn out to have at least one negative eigenvalue after
being partially transposed, known as NPT states.

The following class of positive maps has been used to classify these
maps in low dimensional Hilbert spaces.

###### Definition 17

Decomposable Map

A positive map @xmath is decomposable if and only if it can be written
as [ 64 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are complete positive maps.

###### Theorem 7

All the positive maps @xmath where @xmath are decomposable [ 75 , 64 ] .

###### Example 18

The reduction map @xmath in ( 4.17 ) is decomposable [ 32 ] .

The Choi matrix of this map reads:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Its partial transposition with respect to the second subsystem yields:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.30)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Since the flip operator @xmath , introduced in ( 4.16 ), has eigenvalues
@xmath , it implies that @xmath has no negative eigenvalue and therefore
is a positive matrix, whence the corresponding map @xmath is completely
positive, according to Theorem 4 . Furthermore, since @xmath where
@xmath is CP, results decomposable.

In the next chapters we will see how and under which conditions positive
maps can detect the entanglement.

## Chapter 5 Detecting Entanglement

In the previous chapter we have seen formal necessary and sufficient
conditions for separability, practically, establishing whether a given
state is separable or not is in general a very hard task. Indeed apart
from PPT criterion in low dimensions, the available theorems do not
provide constructive tools to detect entangled states in general. In the
present chapter we will review some of the entanglement detecting
methods. Though none of them is able to detect all entangled states,
they nevertheless work for particular classes of states.

### 5.1 PPT Criterion

In the last chapter, we have introduced Transposition Map. Since this
map is not CP, it can be used to detect entangled states. In fact,
partial transposition provides one of the most easily applicable tools
to detect entanglement. Unfortunately in higher dimensions, being PPT is
no longer a sufficient condition for separability.

###### Theorem 8

Horodecki Criterion

A bipartite state @xmath is separable if and only if for any positive
map @xmath , @xmath is positive [ 31 ] .

As this must hold for any positive map @xmath , so does it for
Transposition Map:

###### Theorem 9

Peres Criterion

If a bipartite state @xmath is separable, then @xmath [ 53 ] .

Obviously when @xmath , the state is NPT, and according to the above
theorem, is entangled. As we have already mentioned, Transposition Map
is an exhaustive entanglement witness in low dimensions:

###### Corollary 1

PPT Criterion A state @xmath acting on @xmath , @xmath or @xmath is
separable if and only if its partial transposition is a positive matrix
[ 31 ]

Proof:

If @xmath is separable, Theorem 8 tells us that its partial
transposition @xmath is also positive.

The sufficiency is proved as follows: In Theorem 7 we have seen that all
positive maps @xmath when @xmath are decomposable and can be written as:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are CP maps. The extension of this map acting on @xmath
gives:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The first term is positive because @xmath is a CP map and by definition
@xmath . If @xmath is PPT, then @xmath , then the second term remains
positive as well, due to complete positivity of @xmath , which completes
the proof. @xmath

###### Example 19

All Bell states introduced in ( 3.15 ), have negative partial
transposition and are NPT entangled.

###### Example 20

In ( 3.34 ), we have introduced the Werner States in @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Their partially transposed density matrix is:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Its eigenvalues are:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As we see the first three eigenvalues are positive, while the fourth one
when @xmath is negative. Therefore:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
              
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In Example 9 , we have seen the behavior of @xmath , where we have
mentioned, though it might look like that von Neumann entropy might be
able to detect the entangled Werner states, however, it only detects
entangled states for @xmath , but it fails to detect the entangled
Werner states for @xmath .

### 5.2 Entanglement Witness

The question of whether a given density matrix @xmath of a higher system
is separable or not is very difficult to answer due to the difficulties
of reconstructing the whole density matrix in terms of tensor product of
its subsystems, i.e. to write @xmath . However the fact that a set of
such separable states is convex and closed, makes it possible to apply
the Hahn-Banach separation theorem. This opens a new approach to detect
entanglement, called entanglement witnessing.

###### Theorem 10

Hahn-Banach Theorem

Let @xmath be a finite-dimensional Banach space and S a convex compact
set in it. Let @xmath be a point in @xmath such that @xmath . Then there
exists a hyperplane which separates @xmath from S [ 15 , 7 ] .

[]

Let the set @xmath correspond to the set of separable states which by
definition is convex, compact and closed. Therefore the Hahn Banach
theorem 10 says that there must exists a hyperplane separating this set
from an entangled state which lies outside. This separator is called
Entanglement Witness, which is a Hermitian operator [ 31 , 71 ] .

###### Definition 18

Entanglement Witness

A Hermitian operator W acting on @xmath is called an entanglement
witness if

1.  @xmath

2.  @xmath

3.  @xmath

The second property shows the block-positivity of the non-positive
operator W, while the last one asks only for normalization. There are
immediate consequences:

###### Theorem 11

@xmath is entangled if and only if there exists an entanglement witness
such that @xmath [ 31 ] .

###### Theorem 12

@xmath is separable if and only if @xmath for all entanglement witnesses
W [ 31 ] .

###### Definition 19

Decomposable Entanglement Witness

Let P and Q be positive operators acting on @xmath , then W is a
decomposable entanglement witness if and only if [ 76 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is Partial Transposition.

###### Theorem 13

An entanglement witness, EW, is non-decomposable if and only if it
detects PPT entangled states [ 46 ] .

###### Theorem 14

@xmath is PPT entangled if and only if there exists a non-decomposable
entanglement witness such that @xmath [ 31 , 76 ] .

Given two entanglement witnesses @xmath and @xmath , the latter one is
said to be finer [ 46 ] if all the entangled states detected by @xmath
are also detected by @xmath . An EW, @xmath is optimal [ 46 , 31 ] if
there exists a separable state @xmath such that @xmath . It means that
the hyperplane corresponding to @xmath is tangent plane to @xmath (for
illustrations see Fig ( 5.2 )). Since optimal entanglement witnesses
detect more entangled states than those non-optimal ones, they are
highly interesting. Indeed the set of separable states can be completely
characterized by the set of optimal EW [ 11 ] .

[]

It has been shown [ 46 ] that a non-optimal EW can be optimized, but one
should note that none of these entanglement witnesses can detect all the
entangled states.

Both positive maps and entanglement witnesses provide necessary and
sufficient conditions for separability. Indeed to some extent their
behavior is quite similar toward entangled states; there exists a
positive map and an EW for each entangled state. This brings up the
conjecture that these connections can be explained through an
isomorphism.

###### Definition 20

Jamiołkowski Isomorphism

Jamiołkowski isomorphism says that there is a one-to-one relation
between an EW as an operator and a positive map @xmath [ 39 ] :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Given an operator @xmath acting on @xmath and choosing an orthonormal
product basis set @xmath in @xmath , the corresponding linear map @xmath
is defined [ 15 ] :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Conversely from a given map @xmath , the operator @xmath is obtained:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is defined in ( 3.32 ).

The following properties hold [ 31 , 39 , 76 ]

-   @xmath if and only if @xmath is completely positive.

-   @xmath is EW, if and only if @xmath is positive.

-   @xmath is decomposable if and only if @xmath is decomposable.

-   @xmath is non-decomposable if and only if @xmath is
    non-decomposable.

### 5.3 Reduction Map

In the previous chapter, we have introduced a positive (not CP) map
@xmath , called Reduction map:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Below we will see how this map can be used to detect the entanglement:

###### Theorem 15

Reduction Criterion

A bipartite state @xmath acting on @xmath with @xmath , is separable if
and only if [ 32 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For states acting on higher dimensional Hilbert spaces, the criterion is
only necessary for separability.

This map however can not detect PPT entangled states, as we have shown
in the last chapter, that this map is decomposable.

### 5.4 Range Criterion

The range criterion is another approach to detect entanglement. This
method is based on finding the product vectors in the range of the
states. The range of @xmath is the set of all the vectors @xmath for
which there is another vector @xmath such that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 21

Product Vector

Let @xmath be an m-partite Hilbert space. A vector @xmath is called
product vector if and only if it has the form @xmath where @xmath .

Note that a product vector is not necessarily separable with respect to
all the partitions of Hilbert space. For example consider the vector
@xmath . This is a product vector when we look at it a bipartite state,
i.e. in @xmath it can be written as @xmath . However in three-partite
system in @xmath the vector @xmath is no longer a product vector.

###### Theorem 16

Range Criterion

If a bipartite density matrix @xmath acting on Hilbert space @xmath , is
separable then there exits a set of product vectors @xmath where @xmath
, @xmath , where @xmath is complex conjugate , such that @xmath spans
the range of @xmath and @xmath spans the range of @xmath [ 34 ] .

###### Example 21

The following PPT state in @xmath has been shown [ 34 ] to be entangled:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath .

Note that the range criterion is neither stronger nor weaker than PPT
criterion, as it can detect PPT entangled states, while there are NPT
states which do not violate this criterion either.

There are some states which extremely violate this criterion, such
states are called Edge states [ 45 , 35 ] .

###### Definition 22

Edge state

An edge state @xmath is a PPT entangled state such that, for all product
vectors @xmath @xmath and @xmath and @xmath , @xmath is not positive or
does not have a positive partial transposition [ 34 , 35 , 46 ] .

Obviously the edge states lie between PPT entangled states and NPT
states.

###### Example 22

Indeed the first PPT entangled state in @xmath found in [ 34 ] is an
example of an edge state:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath .

Using an edge state @xmath , one can construct a non-decomposable
entanglement witness as follows [ 46 ] :

Let us denote the range and kernel of @xmath by @xmath and @xmath
respectively. Let @xmath and @xmath denote the projector onto @xmath and
@xmath respectively and define

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Define also

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Theorem 17

[ 46 ] Given and edge PPT entangled state @xmath , then @xmath is a
non-decomposable entanglement witness, where @xmath and @xmath are
defined in ( 5.2 ) and  ( 5.3 ).

Proof:

To show that W is an entanglement witness, we have to show that it
satisfies the requirements in ( 18 ). The block positivity of W requires
that for any @xmath and @xmath we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The first two terms cannot vanish simultaneously, as @xmath is an edge
state: If @xmath then @xmath , then by definition of an edge state,
@xmath , which implies that @xmath and therefore @xmath , and vice
versa. Therefore @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath .

On the other hand @xmath detects @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The first two terms are zero due to fact that @xmath . Since @xmath
detects a PPT entangled states, by ( 13 ) it is a non-decomposable
entanglement witness. @xmath

### 5.5 Unextendible Product Basis

Searching for the product states in the range of a density matrix was
leading into a new method called Unextendible product basis, mentioned
for the first time in [ 9 ] .

###### Definition 23

Unextendible Product Basis

Consider a multipartite quantum system @xmath with m parties. An
orthogonal product basis (PB) is a set S of pure orthogonal product
states spanning a subspace @xmath of @xmath . An uncompletable product
basis (UCPB) is a PB whose complementary subspace @xmath i.e. the
subspace in @xmath spanned by vectors that are orthogonal to all the
vectors in @xmath , contains fewer mutually orthogonal product states
than its dimension. An unextendible product basis (UPB) is an
uncompletable product basis for which @xmath contains no product state.

As an example of product basis which does not span the whole space, one
can take @xmath and @xmath . As we see these two orthogonal vectors form
a PB which spans a two dimensional subspace in @xmath .

###### Example 23

Consider the following example of UPB given in [ 23 ] , known as Tiles.
It is a set of five product vectors in @xmath , spanning a 5-dimensional
subspace:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

One sees that as all of these vectors are mutually orthogonal and each
three of them span a full 3-dimensional Hilbert space, therefore it is
not possible to find another product vector which would be orthogonal to
all of them.

For the bipartite Hilbert space @xmath , when @xmath is even, one can
construct UPB as follows [ 24 ] ; Let’s denote the set of @xmath
orthonormal vectors by @xmath , then the set of vertical tiles are
constructed as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . Similarly, the horizontal tiles are defined to be:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The following theorem illustrates the role of the UPB in the challenge
of detecting entanglement.

###### Theorem 18

The state that corresponds to the uniform mixture on the space
complementary of a UPB @xmath in a Hilbert space of total dimension d

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

is a PPT entangled state [ 9 ] .

Proof:

Partial Transposition maps a set of UPB into another set of UPB, while
leaving the identity unchanged, this shows that the state in ( 5.7 ) is
indeed a PPT state. On the other hand, @xmath by construction contains
no product state which means that it is entangled, all together it is a
PPT entangled state. @xmath

### 5.6 Realignment

We first introduce some new notions which will be used in the following.

###### Definition 24

Reshaping

Consider an @xmath matrix @xmath where @xmath are its entries. By
putting the elements of each column one after another, one obtains a
vector, which can be associated to this matrix. Conversely, a vector of
length @xmath can be turned into an @xmath matrix [ 16 ] .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let @xmath be an @xmath block matrix and @xmath the vector corresponding
to the block @xmath of size n. The realigned matrix @xmath of size
@xmath , is defined by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Example 24

As an example let us take @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The vector corresponding to the first block is @xmath and the realigned
matrix is:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In [ 7 ] , reshaping a matrix is performed by aligning its rows one by
one in a vector, instead of its columns:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now any @xmath square matrix can be reshuffled by reshaping each row
into a square matrix and putting them block after block into a new
matrix. The new reshuffled matrix, @xmath obtained from matrix X in (
5.9 ) is:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In general, given a matrix @xmath , let us consider the orthonormal
basis consisting of tensor products @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are
orthonormal bases in @xmath . Further, let us denote as in [ 7 ] by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, the matrix elements of reshuffled matrix @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Remark 4

Note that the result of both methods are equivalent up to a permutation.
In both cases after reshaping a matrix into a vector, the
Hilbert-Schmidt product [ 7 ] will be read as scalar product between two
vectors:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Reshuffling the tensor product of two matrices turns to be very simple.
Consider two matrices @xmath and @xmath . We denote the vectors assigned
to each matrix by @xmath and @xmath . Now consider their tensor product:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.12)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

By the above method the vector corresponding to the first block is:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the vector corresponding to the matrix @xmath @xmath
see ( 5.8 ) @xmath . Putting all these vectors as rows of a new matrix,
we have the reshuffled matrix of this tensor product:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We now show that reshuffling a density matrix can be useful to detect
its entanglement.

###### Theorem 19

Reshuffling Criterion If a bipartite density matrix @xmath is separable,
then the trace norm of its reshuffled matrix will not be increased [ 16
, 59 ] , i.e.:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof:

If @xmath is separable, then it can be written as @xmath where @xmath .
Consider the pure separable state: @xmath . As we have seen in the last
remark, by reshuffling this state we have: @xmath . But in this case,
@xmath and @xmath are projectors and therefore their norm is equal to
the norm of the corresponding vectors. We have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By properties of the norm, we can see that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

This theorem provides a necessary condition for separability, therefore
if one finds that for a given density matrix @xmath , after reshuffling
@xmath , this means that the state is entangled. Note that @xmath is not
Hermitian. It was proved [ 60 , 61 ] that realignment is independent of
Partial Transposition, therefore none of them is neither stronger nor
weaker than the other one.

###### Example 25

As an example one can consider the density matrix constructed as in
theorem ( 5.7 ), using the UPB given in example ( 23 ), called tiles:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However we know that this state is entangled but we can also see it by
direct calculation of the norm of @xmath . Since @xmath it reveals the
entanglement of this state using the reshuffling method.

## Chapter 6 @xmath-diagonal States

In the following chapter, we consider bipartite states that are diagonal
in the basis generated by the action of tensor products of the form
@xmath , @xmath , on the totally symmetric state @xmath . We first
characterize the structure of positive maps detecting the entangled ones
among them; then, the result will be illustrated by examining some
entanglement witnesses for the case @xmath . Further, we will show how,
for pairs of two qubits, being separable, entangled and bound entangled
are state properties related to the geometric patterns of subsets of a
@xmath point square lattice.

### 6.1 @xmath-diagonal and lattice states

In the following we shall freely call entanglement witness both positive
maps @xmath such that @xmath and their Choi matrices @xmath .

We shall consider a bipartite system consisting of two parties in turn
comprising @xmath qubits; the corresponding matrix algebra @xmath is
linearly spanned by @xmath tensor products of the form @xmath .

Given the totally symmetric state, already introduced in ( 3.32 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath , the vectors

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

form orthogonal projectors

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Orthonormality follows since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 25

The class of bipartite states we shall study will consist of states of
the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

that is diagonal with respect to the chosen orthonormal basis in @xmath
: we shall call them @xmath -diagonal states.

A particular sub-class of states of two pairs of two qubits, @xmath and
@xmath , are considered in [ 4 , 5 , 6 ] and called lattice states. In
this case the orthonormal basis vectors and their corresponding
projectors are the following:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is defined in ( 3.33 ).

For them partial results concerning their entanglement properties have
been obtained. We shall tackle them again in the following: the class of
lattice-states is defined as follows.

###### Definition 26

Lattice States

Taking a subset @xmath of cardinality @xmath , then the corresponding
lattice state @xmath is defined by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let @xmath denote the set of pairs @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath run
from @xmath to @xmath : it corresponds to a @xmath square lattice,
whereas the subsets

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

correspond to the columns and rows of the lattice, respectively.

If compared with those in ( 6.3 ), the lattice states are uniformly
distributed over, and thus completely characterized by chosen subsets of
@xmath .

###### Example 26

As an example consider the lattice states associated with the following
subsets:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath            
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.7)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

In the following, we shall be interested in investigating the
entanglement properties of such states. As an appetizer, we consider
whether the von Neumann entropy of any @xmath can be smaller than that
of its reuced density matrices. Indeed, we have seen that, if so, @xmath
would be entangled. By tracing over the first or the second party we get
as reduced density matrices

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with maximal von Neumann entropy @xmath . On the other, end each lattice
state is already spectralized with equal non-zero eigenvalues @xmath ;
therefore, @xmath whenever @xmath .

Furthermore, if we consider the Reshuffling Criterion in Theorem 19 ,
using the relations ( 5.10 ) and ( 5.11 ), we obtain as reshuffled
lattice states

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we chose the ortonormal basis vectors in ( 5.10 ) to be the ones
used in writing the Lattice States, namely @xmath . Thus, using the
properties of the trace norm, one gets

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whence for @xmath no entangled lattice state can be detected by the
chosen criterion.

We now proceed to examine the lattice states from the point of view of
partial transposition. Positivity under partial transposition (PPT-ness)
of lattice states @xmath is completely characterized by the geometry of
@xmath [ 4 ] .

###### Proposition 1

A necessary and sufficient condition for a lattice state @xmath to be
PPT is that for every @xmath the number of points on @xmath and @xmath
belonging to @xmath and different from @xmath be not greater than @xmath
. In terms of the characteristic functions @xmath if @xmath , @xmath
otherwise, a lattice state @xmath is PPT if and only if for all @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Example 27

Consider the following lattice states:

  -- -- -------- -------- -- -------
        @xmath   @xmath      
                             
        @xmath   @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- -------

These states do not remain positive under partial transposition and are
therefore entangled: in the first state @xmath , the row and column
passing through the point @xmath contains @xmath points in @xmath ,
while in the second one @xmath points.

###### Example 28

By the same criterion, the following two states are instead PPT,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

They need not be separable as in lower dimension; indeed, a sufficient
criterion devised in [ 3 ] show them to be entangled.

###### Proposition 2

A sufficient condition for a PPT lattice state @xmath to be entangled is
that there exists at least a pair @xmath not belonging to @xmath such
that only one point on @xmath and @xmath belongs to @xmath .
Equivalently, @xmath is entangled if there exists a pair @xmath , @xmath
, such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In both patterns of the states in Example ( 28 ), it is the point @xmath
which satisfies the sufficient criterion.

###### Example 29

Unfortunately, this criterion fails in the case of the PPT lattice state
characterized by the following subset

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Indeed, the only candidate point to fulfill the criterion in
Proposition ( 2 ) is @xmath ; however, it belongs to @xmath .

Luckily, a refined criterion [ 6 ] based on [ 12 ] shows it to be
entangled.

###### Proposition 3

A @xmath lattice state @xmath is entangled if the quantity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes summation modulo @xmath , is such that @xmath for a
column @xmath and a row @xmath , independently of whether @xmath belongs
to @xmath or not.

###### Example 30

Thus, the state in ( 29 ) fulfills the sufficient condition @xmath .

Another example of a lattice state detected by the last proposition is
the following:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As it is apparent from these examples the various criteria for
entanglement are closely related to the structure of the subsets that
define the lattice states; in the following we will try to clarify this
correspondence.

### 6.2 Entanglement detection for @xmath-diagonal states

In this section, we will show that positive maps that be entanglement
witnesses for states of the form ( 6.3 ) can be sought in a particular
subclass of them.

Any linear map on @xmath can be written as [ 3 ] :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the matrices @xmath form an orthonormal basis with respect to
Hilbert-Schmidt scalar product, namely @xmath and the coefficients
@xmath are complex numbers.

In the present case, the normalized tensor products @xmath constitute
such a basis in @xmath , whence linear maps @xmath can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The next one is a simple observation based on ( 6.1 ) and ( 6.2 ).

###### Lemma 2

A @xmath -diagonal state @xmath is entangled if and only if there exists
a positive map @xmath as in  ( 6.12 ) such that @xmath .

Proof: According to Horodecki Criterion in ( 8 ), the state @xmath is
entangled if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some positive map @xmath .

Using the orthogonality of the vectors @xmath in ( 6.1 ), @xmath is
entangled if and only if there is a positive map @xmath such that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

The lemma indicates that the class of diagonal positive maps of the form
@xmath might suffice to witness the entanglement of states of the form
@xmath . What is needed to show that it is indeed so is the following
result.

###### Lemma 3

Given a positive map of the form @xmath , the diagonal map @xmath is
also positive.

Proof: From Choi’s theorem ( 5 ), we know that a given map is positive
if and only if its Choi matrix is block positive. Considering the map
@xmath , the positivity assumption is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Given a pair @xmath , consider another pair @xmath , @xmath , where
@xmath denotes the tensor product @xmath where @xmath for @xmath and
@xmath . Inserting the new pair into ( 6.13 ), we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Consider @xmath ; because of the Pauli algebraic relations, one can
always choose @xmath in such a way that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whence all the terms in ( 6.14 ) corresponding to the chosen pair of
indices @xmath contribute with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, adding inequalities ( 6.13 ) and ( 6.14 ) yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By applying the very same argument for pairs @xmath with varying index
@xmath , one cancels all contributions from @xmath and remains with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

This, by Choi’s theorem ( 5 ) amounts to the positivity of the
diagonalized map @xmath . @xmath

The previous result allows us to conclude with

###### Proposition 4

Entangled @xmath can be witnessed by diagonal positive maps @xmath .

Proof: By the previous lemma, diagonalizing a positive map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

always yields a positive map @xmath . Then, from Lemma ( 2 ) it follows
that either the entanglement of @xmath is witnessed by an already
diagonal map or, if by a non-diagonal one, also by the map obtained by
diagonalizing the latter. @xmath

###### Remark 5

From the above Proposition we only get that entangled states of the
form ( 6.3 ) can be witnessed by diagonal maps @xmath ; the main problem
is of course to characterize the coefficients @xmath in such a way
that ( 6.15 ) be satisfied and thus @xmath be positive.

Expression ( 4.25 ) for Trace map in @xmath can be extended to the trace
operation on @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the second part of chapter 4, we have seen that positive maps can be
related to the complete positive maps. This relation was given in
Theorem ( 4.26 ), which allows us to write a positive map as:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore diagonal positive maps @xmath are also related to completely
positive diagonal maps

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by setting

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

and asking for block positivity of its Choi matrix, which is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using these observations, we get necessary and sufficient conditions for
the separability of @xmath -diagonal states.

###### Proposition 5

A @xmath -diagonal state @xmath is separable if and only if for all sets
of @xmath positive real numbers @xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

it holds that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Otherwise, if a set of @xmath positive real numbers @xmath can be found
that satisfy ( 6.18 ) and such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

then the @xmath -diagonal state @xmath is entangled.

Before tackling the case of lattice states, that is of @xmath -diagonal
states with @xmath , as a simple application, we consider the case of
only two qubits, @xmath , for which we know PPT-ness to coincide with
separability.

###### Example 31

In the case @xmath , @xmath -diagonal states have the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the @xmath ’s project onto the Bell states, already introduced in (
3.15 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Under transposition @xmath , @xmath and under partial transposition the
projection @xmath goes into the flip operator @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, the action of partial transposition on a @xmath -diagonal
state yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.22)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

###### Definition 27

In the above expression, the following construction has been employed:
given @xmath , @xmath , @xmath is the unique index from @xmath to @xmath
such that @xmath , where @xmath is a phase @xmath or @xmath , they can
be considered as non-zero elements of the following matrices:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Because of the Pauli algebraic relations, the symbol @xmath enjoys the
following properties that can be used to derive ( 6.22 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, @xmath is a one to one map from the set @xmath onto itself.

Since positivity under partial transposition identifies all separable
states of two qubits, a @xmath -diagonal state is separable if and only
if @xmath for all @xmath .

On the other hand we have seen that all positive maps acting on @xmath
are decomposable, therefore using ( 4.26 ), ( 4.22 ) and ( 4.24 ), we
can write any diagonal positive map @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath are, according to Theorem ( 4.4 ), positive numbers. Then,
the coefficients

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

can always be made positive and thus @xmath completely positive, by
choosing @xmath large enough. Then, they fulfill the condition ( 6.18 )
that corresponds to @xmath being positive. We can thus consider when and
whether inequality ( 6.19 ) which reads

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is satisfied. By choosing @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath , one gets

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and thus, by varying @xmath , @xmath for all @xmath . Vice versa, if
@xmath for all @xmath , one obtains

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

### 6.3 Lattice states

In this section we shall restrict ourselves to the lattice states @xmath
in ( 6.4 ), namely to uniformly distributed @xmath -diagonal states with
@xmath . Proposition ( 5 ) now reads

###### Corollary 2

A lattice state @xmath is separable if and only if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all choices of @xmath coefficients @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Otherwise, if a choice of positive coefficients exists that satisfy (
6.24 ) and for which

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

then a lattice-state @xmath is entangled.

Before drawing concrete conclusions from this result, we examine the
entanglement criteria in Propositions ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) in the light of
the diagonal structure of witnessing maps which is the main result of
the previous section.

###### Example 32

The states considered in Example ( 28 ) were found to be entangled by
showing that they do not remain positive under the action of @xmath
where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

was proved to be a positive map from @xmath into itself. This map,
expressed by means of the notation of the last Example in chapter 4  (
4.25 ), is already in diagonal form; the diagonal completely positive
maps associated to it by Størmer Theorem ( 4.26 ) have the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with @xmath which has to be adjusted taking into account that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, complete positivity of the map @xmath is guaranteed by @xmath
which yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

These coefficients surely satisfy condition ( 6.24 ) as the latter just
reflects the positivity of the originating map @xmath ; they also
satisfy condition ( 6.25 ). Indeed,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      (6.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

For both subsets in ( 28 ), the second term in  ( 6.29 ) is negative due
to @xmath . Thus, @xmath for small times.

###### Example 33

Let us now consider the lattice state in Example ( 29 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

In [ 6 ] , it has been shown to be entangled by using the following
positive map

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

consisting of the trace map to which one subtracts the transposition map
and a completely positive map @xmath constructed with a @xmath matrix
@xmath such that, in the standard representation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this way,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are orthogonal one-dimensional projections and
thus ensure the positivity of the map.

Because of @xmath , the map @xmath is non-diagonal in the maps @xmath :
in order to illustrate the content of Proposition ( 5 ) we diagonalize
it. Using

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

one gets

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The mean value of the Choi matrix of @xmath with respect to the lattice
state in ( 6.30 ) reads

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and becomes negative choosing @xmath hence revealing the entanglement of
@xmath .

Proposition associates to @xmath completely positive maps of the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

whose coefficients can always be made positive by choosing @xmath . The
sum of the coefficients corresponding to the subset @xmath of the
lattice state in ( 6.30 ) yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for the choice of @xmath which exposes the entanglement of @xmath , in
agreement with ( 6.25 ).

### 6.4 Separable Lattice States

In absence of a positive map that witness the entanglement of a lattice
state @xmath , one can check its separability by trying to express it as
a convex combination by other lattice states that are known to be
separable. For some @xmath this is feasible as shown in [ 6 ] ; for
instance, consider the lattice state

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

According to Proposition ( 1 ), it is PPT and is also separable; indeed,
the defining subset @xmath splits as follows

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The @xmath -point subsets @xmath are not disjoint, but all points
contribute exactly twice to @xmath , thence one rewrites

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in terms of rank- @xmath lattice states corresponding to the subsets
@xmath . The result follows since the criterion of Proposition ( 1 )
ensures that they are all PPT [ 35 ] .

#### 6.4.1 Special Quadruples

A more general sufficient condition for the separability of lattice
states can be derived by introducing the notion of special quadruples .

###### Definition 28

Special Quadruples

A special quadruple @xmath is any subset of the square lattice @xmath
consisting of @xmath points @xmath such that there exist @xmath for
which

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Given a lattice point @xmath , we will denote by @xmath any special
quadruple containing @xmath , by @xmath the set of such quadruples and
by @xmath its cardinality.

###### Example 34

Consider the lattice state:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By choosing @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath , we see that
the set @xmath satisfies ( 6.34 ).

###### Example 35

Some more examples of special quadruples are the following lattice
states:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath if and only if @xmath with @xmath a pure phase, a set of
@xmath points @xmath is a special quadruple if and only there exist
@xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us focus upon @xmath , the set of all special quadruples @xmath
@xmath containing the point @xmath . Each of them is obtained from the
fact that, using ( 6.35 ) with @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, the @xmath of a special quadruple must commute. Indeed,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.36)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath            (6.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath are the coefficients @xmath and @xmath , introduced in
Definition ( 27 ), such that @xmath and the @xmath coefficients @xmath
are given by the Pauli matrix commutation relations, which can be
considered as the elements of the following matrix:

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.38)
  -- -- -- --------

It thus follows that @xmath if and only if @xmath , whence @xmath
consists of the following @xmath special quadruples (omitting the point
@xmath common to all of them)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (6.39)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

Knowledge of @xmath is sufficient to derive the form of all @xmath ; in
order to prove this fact, let us introduce the following family of maps
indexed by lattice points @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the map @xmath has been introduced in Definition ( 27 ). It
follows that the maps @xmath are invertible: @xmath . Given a subset
@xmath , @xmath will denote the subset @xmath .

###### Lemma 4

The map @xmath is one-to-one.

Proof: If @xmath is a special quadruple for @xmath , then @xmath for
some @xmath . Right multiplication by @xmath yields:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Then, @xmath is a special quadruple for @xmath exposed by the vectors
@xmath and @xmath . The one-to-one correspondence follows from the
invertibility of the maps @xmath . @xmath

It is easy to check that all @xmath in ( 6.4.1 ) give rise to lattice
states @xmath that satisfy the criterion in Proposition ( 1 ) for being
PPT; this is also true for lattice states corresponding to @xmath :
indeed, they are obtained from the previous ones by the local action
@xmath .

###### Lemma 5

Properties of the special quadruples @xmath

1.   Given two commuting @xmath and @xmath there is a unique @xmath
    commuting with both of them.

2.   Two quadruples cannot have more than one pair @xmath in common;
    otherwise they would coincide.

3.   Each @xmath commutes with @xmath @xmath different from itself and
    from @xmath

4.   Each @xmath belongs to three different quadruples.

5.   The pairs @xmath belonging to the @xmath quadruples with @xmath in
    common correspond to anti-commuting @xmath ’s.

Proof: The first and second property follow directly from ( 6.37 , they
implies the third and fourth ones, while the last one is a consequence
of the fourth property. @xmath

The following Lemma shows that they are indeed separable as dictated by
the general result in [ 35 ] .

###### Lemma 6

Let @xmath ; all positive coefficients @xmath satisfying inequality (
6.23 ) are such that @xmath for all special quadruples @xmath .

Proof: Recall the trace map ( 4.25 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consider a given special quadruple @xmath , then we can split ( 6.4.1 )
into two terms:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Therefore, if @xmath and @xmath satisfy ( 6.34 ) for a given special
quadruple @xmath , then @xmath for all @xmath not belonging to @xmath ,
i.e. the last term in the above equality vanishes, on the other hand
@xmath for all @xmath .

Consider now a set of positive coefficients @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is a special quadruple and @xmath , @xmath satisfy ( 6.34 ),
then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

###### Corollary 3

Each rank @xmath lattice state @xmath with @xmath is separable.

Proof: Given any four positive coefficients @xmath satisfying ( 6.24 ),
from the assumption and the previous Lemma it follows that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since @xmath is a special quadruple for each of its points @xmath .
Summing over all @xmath , each point is counted four times, thus

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

whence the criterion ( 6.24 ) for separability is satisfied. @xmath

#### 6.4.2 Separability and Quadruples

The main tool in the previous proof is the fact that all points in
@xmath belongs to a same number, @xmath , of special quadruples, @xmath
itself; that is each point in @xmath belongs to a special quadruple
contained in @xmath .

Because of its importance in what follows, we now study this occurrence
in more detail considering a higher rank lattice state corresponding to
the subset

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath , of the set ( 6.4.1 ) the following quadruples are contained
in @xmath :

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Given another point @xmath , consider the lattice state @xmath , where
@xmath is the set @xmath transformed into @xmath by the map @xmath
introduced in Lemma ( 6.40 ). The point @xmath is mapped into @xmath
and, by Lemma ( 4 ), it belongs to @xmath special quadruples contained
in @xmath that are images under @xmath of the @xmath special quadruples
relative to @xmath . Therefore, each point @xmath belongs to @xmath
special quadruples contained in @xmath .

###### Example 36

As a concrete example, consider the following quadruples

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

They are contained in @xmath but do not belong to @xmath ; consider the
point @xmath , it is mapped into @xmath by @xmath which sends @xmath and
@xmath into

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

One thus checks that @xmath is a special quadruple contained in the
transformed subset @xmath . Analogously, @xmath , respectively @xmath ,
map @xmath , respectively @xmath , into @xmath and @xmath , @xmath ,
respectively @xmath , into

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

###### Definition 29

Given a subset @xmath we shall term a covering of @xmath any collection
@xmath of special quadruples (not necessarily disjoint) contained in
@xmath and denote by @xmath its cardinality. Further, we shall denote by
@xmath the number of special quadruples in @xmath that contains the
point @xmath and refer to them as to the multiplicities of @xmath .
Finally, we shall call uniform any covering @xmath of @xmath of constant
multiplicity: @xmath , for all @xmath .

The usefulness of uniform coverings can be seen as follows: summations
over @xmath can be split into sums of contributions from the special
quadruples of any covering by taking into account to how many special
quadruples @xmath a point @xmath does belong:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whence, if the covering is uniform with multiplicity @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 7

Let @xmath contain @xmath points and @xmath be a uniform covering of
@xmath of cardinality @xmath and multiplicity @xmath ; then,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Proof: Each of the @xmath points in @xmath belongs to @xmath special
quadruples each containing @xmath points of @xmath . @xmath

In the case of  ( 6.41 ), the special quadruples in  ( 6.4.2 ) form a
covering of @xmath , but not a uniform one as its multiplicities are

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

A uniform covering @xmath is provided by @xmath special quadruples in  (
6.4.2 ) and the @xmath in  ( 6.43 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.45)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Since all points of @xmath belongs to exactly @xmath special quadruples
contained in @xmath , this uniform covering has multiplicity @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is also a minimal covering among the uniform ones; indeed, by (
6.44 ), as @xmath is an integer, @xmath can only be satisfied by @xmath
, @xmath .

It thus follows that the lattice state corresponding to the subset (
6.41 ) is separable as it can be decomposed into a convex combination of
PPT separable rank- @xmath lattice states:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are the special quadruples of the minimal covering  ( 6.45
).

The previous argument proves the separability of the lattice state (
6.41 ), an issue which left unsettled in [ 6 ] ; it can be generalized
as follows.

###### Proposition 6

Suppose @xmath is a subset with minimal covering @xmath of cardinality
@xmath and multiplicity @xmath , then @xmath can be convexly decomposed
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the special quadruples in @xmath , and is thus
separable.

Proof: Let @xmath , @xmath , be the elements of the minimal covering
@xmath . From Lemma ( 6 ) it follows that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

so that Corollary ( 2 ) ensures separability. Furthermore, using ( 6.44
),

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

@xmath

###### Example 37

The following lattice states mentioned in [ 6 ] were also unknown to be
separable:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The next state is:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

From Proposition ( 6 ) one draws the following conclusions:

###### Corollary 4

All the lattice states with @xmath are separable.

Proof:

1.  @xmath =16: is trivial.

2.  @xmath =15: As we have seen in (section III of this chapter), every
    point @xmath can take part in 15 quadruples. Therefore in @xmath we
    have:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    By dropping out one point from the lattice, we decrease the number
    of quadruples by three for each point and therefore each point has
    12 quadruples contained in I:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.  @xmath : Here there are two points missing from @xmath , note that
    every two given points can share three quadruples. This is easy to
    verify it; by sending one of the two into the origin @xmath , one
    sees that the other one appears in exactly three Q’s (section III).
    Therefore, there are six pairs @xmath , where the two points @xmath
    and @xmath , remove only five quadruples, leaving 10 special
    quadruples contained in I. While for the other eight pairs @xmath ,
    they remove six quadruples. Therefore any @xmath would look like:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Then one can divide it into two subsets: @xmath the six elements
    with 10 special quadruples contained in I, and @xmath the eight
    elements with 9 special quadruples contained in I:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    In order to show that all @xmath are separable, we need to show that
    they satisfy ( 6.23 ):

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for all choices of the coefficients @xmath introduced in Corollary 2
    . But since we can divide @xmath into two subsets, we have:

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    Where we have used the separability of the two states @xmath and
    @xmath . Indeed in case of @xmath the minimum number of special
    quadruples for every point to be included in I, is equal to @xmath ,
    which is much less than what happens.

@xmath

### 6.5 Entanglement and lattice geometry

In this section we single out a family @xmath of geometric patterns such
that, if @xmath , then @xmath is surely entangled. Given a sub-set
@xmath , choose @xmath such that for a certain @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a suitable parameter. Then, @xmath and inequality ( 6.25
) in Corollary 2 is satisfied. According to the same corollary, given
such a subset @xmath , the corresponding lattice state @xmath is
entangled, if also inequality ( 6.24 ) is fulfilled, namely if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Remark 6

Suppose that inequality ( 6.48 ) can be satisfied by @xmath uniformly in
the vectors @xmath and @xmath . Then, using ( 4.25 ) and ( 4.26 ), the
choice of coefficients in ( 6.47 ) corresponds to a witness of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

By comparison with the expression of the transposition in ( 4.23 ), one
sees that, unlike the @xmath negative contribution of the latter, @xmath
presents only one negative contribution. Yet, for the special subset
@xmath , it proves to be more flexible as an entanglement witness.

Clearly, if @xmath belongs to a special quadruple contained in @xmath ,
such a @xmath cannot exist; indeed, if @xmath and @xmath satisfy ( 6.34
), then @xmath and @xmath , together with inequality ( 6.48 ) yield
@xmath .

We now show that lattice state @xmath for which not all points of @xmath
belong to special quadruples contained in @xmath , such a @xmath can
indeed be found and thus that they are entangled.

###### Theorem 20

Given a lattice state @xmath , if there exists a point @xmath such that
@xmath for all @xmath , then @xmath is entangled. We shall call any such
@xmath a special sub-set and denote by @xmath their family.

It is very constructive to present some examples before going through
the proof.

###### Example 38

According to the last theorem the following state is entangled, as non
of the special quadruples of @xmath are included in I:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

Another example of such entangled lattice states is the following:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we observe the point @xmath has no special quadruple contained in I,
it can be easily verified when this point is sent to @xmath , the
resulting state is:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As the last example consider the following state:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

Also in this case @xmath has no special quadruple contained in I.

Proof of Theorem 20 :

According to Lemma 4 , the point @xmath can be transformed into @xmath
and @xmath into a new set, that we shall denote again by @xmath for sake
of simplicity, without altering the entanglement or separability of the
transformed @xmath with respect to the initial one. Then, the assumption
of the theorem translates into the fact that no special quadruple in the
list ( 6.4.1 ) is contained in @xmath . Having set @xmath , inequality (
6.48 ) now reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

It proves convenient to introduce the following @xmath -dependent @xmath
matrices

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that one has to prove that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

Further, from ( 4.25 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Clearly, the major obstruction to @xmath with @xmath arises when @xmath
has eigenvalue @xmath . Then, because of ( 6.56 ), the corresponding
eigenvectors, @xmath , satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let the eigenvalues of @xmath be decreasingly ordered and consider the
spectral decomposition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath projects onto the eigenspace relative to the eigenvalue
@xmath and @xmath are the other orthogonal spectral projections relative
to the eigenvalues @xmath . Then, if @xmath , @xmath in ( 6.55 ) is only
possible with @xmath . These preliminary considerations allow us to
prove ( 6.48 ) through a series of lemmas and corollaries. @xmath

###### Lemma 8

With the notation of ( 6.58 ), if @xmath for all @xmath , then ( 6.55 )
is satisfied.

Proof: If @xmath , then, by compactness, there exists a converging
sequence @xmath of vectors in @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . Then,
@xmath converges in norm to @xmath with @xmath and @xmath which is a
contradiction. Therefore, @xmath ; hence, choosing @xmath , from @xmath
and @xmath , one gets

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

###### Corollary 5

Given a lattice state @xmath and @xmath , let @xmath be the subspace
spanned by the vectors @xmath with @xmath , where @xmath is the
complement of @xmath . If @xmath for all @xmath , then @xmath is
entangled.

Proof: From ( 6.57 ) it follows that @xmath for all @xmath ; thus Lemma
8 applies. @xmath

Based on the previous two results, we now focus upon when @xmath and
show that it projects onto a subspace orthogonal to @xmath .

###### Lemma 9

If @xmath for some @xmath , then, with the notation of ( 6.58 ), @xmath
.

Proof: If @xmath and @xmath , then, from ( 6.57 ), @xmath for all @xmath
, hence to @xmath . Suppose then that @xmath and rewrite inequality (
6.55 ) as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the index set @xmath has been split into

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The vectors @xmath from these two subsets are orthogonal; indeed, @xmath
and @xmath yield

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, the following two are orthogonal matrices:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.59)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.60)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Then, @xmath can only be due to @xmath , in which case @xmath . Indeed,
@xmath .

This can be seen as follows: at most three @xmath may contribute to the
sum in @xmath and they must anti-commute. In fact, if there were two
commuting @xmath contributing to the sum, then, as they would commute
with @xmath and form a special quadruple @xmath contained in @xmath
which is excluded by hypothesis. Therefore, the @xmath contributing to
the sum must anti-commute and, from Lemma 5 , cannot be no more than
three. Suppose this is the case; denote by @xmath , @xmath , these three
@xmath such that @xmath and rewrite

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Without restriction, we choose @xmath such that @xmath . Each @xmath is
an eigenstate of @xmath belonging to the same twice degenerate
eigenvalue @xmath . Let @xmath project onto the corresponding
eigenspace; then, @xmath and the rank @xmath matrices @xmath satisfy the
Pauli algebra ( 2.10 ) over @xmath . Thus, ( 2.11 ) holds on @xmath with
@xmath replacing @xmath , yielding

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If there are less than three anti-commuting contributions @xmath ,
@xmath , then the second equality becomes a strict inequality.
Therefore, @xmath . @xmath

Let us now consider the set of @xmath indexed by the points @xmath in
the complement set @xmath , that we list as @xmath , @xmath . The
following facts are a consequence of the structure of @xmath studied in
Lemma 5 and concern the points of @xmath and the special quadruples in
@xmath they belong to.

1.  Take the first point @xmath ; then, it belongs to three quadruples
    in ( 6.4.1 ) which cannot be contained in @xmath .

2.  Also the second point @xmath may eliminate three quadruples from
    those contained in @xmath ; it does so, only if it does not share
    any special quadruple with those of @xmath : this can happen only if
    @xmath and @xmath anti-commute. If they commute, then @xmath and
    @xmath share one special quadruple. In this case, @xmath eliminates
    only two special quadruples from those contained in @xmath . It thus
    follows that the minimum cardinality of @xmath complying with the
    hypothesis of Theorem 20 , namely that no special quadruple of
    @xmath is contained in @xmath , is five with the corresponding
    @xmath forming an anti-commuting set.

3.  Consider the third point @xmath : the number of special quadruples
    eliminated by this point from those contained in @xmath is equal to
    three minus the number of previous points whose @xmath commute with
    @xmath .

4.  Moving to the fourth point @xmath and further on, the rule is the
    same; only, one has to take into account that @xmath does not
    commute with more than three @xmath . Therefore, if this happens,
    @xmath does not eliminate from those contained in @xmath any further
    special quadruple with respect to those already eliminated by the
    previous points.

Based on these properties, we now distinguish the following cases.

  Case 1.  

    @xmath : the matrices @xmath , with @xmath anti-commute.

  Case 2.  

    @xmath and there is a set of anti-commuting @xmath , with @xmath :
    let @xmath not belong to the index set of the five anti-commuting
    @xmath ’s . The corresponding @xmath must commute with at least one
    of them and may commute with at most three of the @xmath .
    Therefore, there must exist at least two of them that anti-commute
    with @xmath . By putting together @xmath with the one in the
    anti-commuting set which commutes with it and with the two which
    anti-commute with it, then one can construct a set @xmath of four
    @xmath where @xmath of them anti-commute among themselves and the
    fourth one commutes with only one of them.

  Case 3.  

    @xmath , but there is no set of @xmath anti-commuting @xmath indexed
    by @xmath . If there are @xmath anti-commuting @xmath indexed by
    points in @xmath , these latter correspond to twelve special
    quadruples in @xmath not contained in @xmath . Therefore, there are
    three special quadruples of @xmath left that also can not be
    contained in @xmath . Thus, some of their points must be excluded
    from @xmath . These three quadruples share a common point that
    cannot be excluded from @xmath , otherwise the corresponding @xmath
    , together with the four which have already been assumed to
    anti-commute, would constitute a set of five anti-commuting @xmath
    ’s contrary to the hypothesis of the present case. Therefore, in
    order to eliminate the three remaining special quadruples from being
    contained in @xmath , one point for each of the three special
    quadruples must be excluded from @xmath . The corresponding @xmath
    will then anti-commute. Then, we have constructed two sets @xmath of
    @xmath ’s, the first one containing four anti-commuting @xmath , the
    second one three anti-commuting @xmath . We already know that each
    element from @xmath commutes at least with one from @xmath ;
    further, it cannot commute with more than two of them. Indeed, if
    this happened, one would have two anti-commuting @xmath in the same
    special quadruple which is impossible.

    This makes it possible to contruct a set @xmath as in the previous
    case consisting of three anti-commuting @xmath and a fourth one
    which commutes with only one of them. This set @xmath can be
    constructed as follows: consider the set @xmath with @xmath , @xmath
    , take the first three of them and @xmath from @xmath : if @xmath
    commutes with only one @xmath , @xmath , the set @xmath consists of
    these four @xmath ’s. Otherwise, if @xmath commutes with two @xmath
    , then replace one of them with @xmath ; as said before @xmath does
    not commute with it because of the previous argument. Therefore,
    these four elements form the set @xmath sought after.

    The above procedure works also in the case of sets of anti-commuting
    @xmath ’s with less than four elements.

The next two Lemmas concern Case @xmath above, where @xmath corresponds
to a set of @xmath anti-commuting @xmath : the first lemma specifies the
structure of the anti-commuting set, while the second one is about the
sub-space generated by these matrices acting on a vector state @xmath .

###### Lemma 10

All sets of @xmath anti-commuting @xmath , @xmath , must be of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath such that the anti-symmetric tensor @xmath .

Proof: Since we have @xmath indices @xmath and @xmath to choose among
@xmath , at least two @xmath s and two @xmath s must be equal: let us
consider @xmath .

If @xmath , in order to have @xmath , the corresponding @xmath and
@xmath must be different and different from @xmath ; therefore, @xmath ,
@xmath , with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , so that the first two
anti-commuting matrices are @xmath and @xmath . In the three @xmath
left, there cannot appear @xmath , otherwise the corresponding @xmath ,
which cannot be @xmath and must equal either @xmath or @xmath , would
lead to a @xmath violating anti-commutativity. Then, with the three
remaining @xmath , the three corresponding @xmath must be different from
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , otherwise @xmath would commute with either
@xmath or @xmath . Thus, @xmath with @xmath , @xmath , while the
corresponding @xmath must be different, namely @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . This gives the set @xmath

If @xmath , the corresponding @xmath cannot be equal and must be both
different from @xmath . Thus, two @xmath in the anti-commuting set are
@xmath and @xmath , with @xmath . Only one of the remaining @xmath can
be @xmath , otherwise we would be back to the previous case: for @xmath
to anti-commute with @xmath and @xmath , @xmath must be equal to @xmath
with @xmath , @xmath . In order to anti-commute with @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath , must be of the form @xmath
and @xmath with @xmath and both different from @xmath and @xmath . But
then, they would commute among themselves; thus, @xmath . At least one
of them, say @xmath must equal @xmath ; then, anti-commutativity only
holds if @xmath with @xmath , @xmath . Finally, since at least two
@xmath ’s must be equal, in order to anti-commute among themselves and
with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath and @xmath must have @xmath and
@xmath , @xmath such that the antisymmetric tensor @xmath . This fixes
the set @xmath . The same result would obtain if one started arguing
with two equal @xmath s instead of @xmath s. @xmath

###### Lemma 11

Let @xmath be the two sets of @xmath anti-commuting @xmath as described
in the previous lemma. For any @xmath , let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, any vector orthogonal to @xmath is also orthogonal to @xmath .

Proof: Consider the set @xmath and let @xmath and @xmath be the
eigenvectors of @xmath . Furthermore, fix @xmath and @xmath so that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Given @xmath , consider their expansions with respect to the orthonormal
basis @xmath where @xmath , @xmath , are eigenvectors of @xmath : @xmath
and @xmath . Acting with the first four @xmath on @xmath , we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.61)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

If @xmath is orthogonal to each of the previous vectors, it follows that

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath      @xmath   
     @xmath      @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

These relations recast in matrix equation read

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The determinant of the matrix is @xmath ; thus, @xmath orthogonal to the
linear span of the vectors in ( 6.61 ) can only exist if all components
of @xmath are non-zero. Then,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Such a vector results orthogonal to both the fifth vector @xmath and
@xmath itself. Similar considerations hold for the set @xmath . @xmath

The next Lemma concerns the dimensionality of the linear spans of
vectors of the form @xmath where the matrices belong to the sets
discussed in Cases @xmath and @xmath in the proof of Theorem 20 where
three anti-commute and the fourth one commutes with only one of them.

###### Lemma 12

Consider a sub-set @xmath consisting of three anti-commuting matrices
@xmath plus a fourth one which commutes with only one of these three,
say the first:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, unless @xmath is an eigenstate of some @xmath , @xmath , where
@xmath is the linear span of @xmath .

Proof: Suppose @xmath is not an eigenstate of any @xmath , then the
vectors @xmath , @xmath cannot be proportional. For the same reason, the
vectors @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are linearly independent. Indeed,
suppose

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, acting on both sides with @xmath we obtain @xmath , where @xmath ,
@xmath . When substituting this expression for @xmath in the right hand
side of the equality, the relations ( 6.62 ) yield

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which, for non-trivial @xmath , is only possible if @xmath is an
eigenstate of the the @xmath proportional to the commutator in the
previous equality. The same conclusions can be drawn about the linear
independence of the four vectors spanning @xmath . Indeed, if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the same argument of before obtains

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This implies that, unless @xmath is eigenstate of the @xmath arising
from the anti-commutator in the above expression, the four vectors
spanning @xmath are linearly independent. @xmath

The previous results show that, as a consequence of the assumption that
no special quadruple @xmath is contained in @xmath , given a vector
@xmath the sub-space linearly generated by @xmath with @xmath is either
@xmath or contains @xmath . The proof of Theorem 20 is thus completed by
using Lemma 8 and its corollary. @xmath

#####

It might look like that, when all the points of the lattice have at
least one special quadruple contained in I, the corresponding lattice
state might be separable. But in the following examples, we will show
that this is not in general true.

###### Example 39

Consider the following state:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This looks very similar to the state in example 6.52 , where none of the
special quadruples of @xmath were included in I. However in the above
lattice state, @xmath has two special quadruples contained in I, which
are:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But from Proposition 1 , we know that this state is NPT: the
contribution to I from the row and the column for the point @xmath is
@xmath .

## Summary and Outlook

In this thesis work, we have studied the role of positive and completely
positive maps in detecting entanglement. In the first chapters we have
reviewed the necessary techniques that have been employed in the last
chapter.

Indeed, in the final chapter of the thesis we have considered a
particular class of bipartite states @xmath on @xmath , introduced in [
4 ] , called Lattice States. These are uniform mixtures of projections
indexed by points @xmath belonging to subsets @xmath of the finite
square lattice of cardinality @xmath . The projections are generated by
the action of @xmath on the completely symmetric vector in @xmath ,
where @xmath is the tensor product of the Pauli matrices @xmath , @xmath
. We have generalized them to states on @xmath , referred to as @xmath
diagonal states.

One of the main issues was to decide whether a given @xmath diagonal
state, is entangled or separable. We have tackled this problem using the
results of [ 65 ] and showed that, starting from a general non-diagonal
positive map, possible entanglement of @xmath diagonal states would be
revealed using only a particularly simple sub-class of positive maps
adapted to the diagonal structure of the states, that are combinations
of elementary maps of the form @xmath .

Back to the Lattice States in @xmath , we have shown the compatibility
of the results given in [ 5 , 6 ] , with ours.

As the next step, we have partially shown how the entanglement @xmath
respec-
tively, separability @xmath of the Lattice States can be explained
through their geometrical structure. The results obtained are based on
particular separable lattice states consisting of four points, called
special quadruples, which play a crucial role in this game.

Using this notion, we have shown that if there exists a point in the set
@xmath , such that none of its special quadruples are contained in
@xmath , then the corresponding Lattice State @xmath , is entangled. We
have also provided a proper entanglement witness for such a state based
on the results obtained in the first part of the chapter.

Also, using the notion of uniform covering by special quadruples
contained in the subset @xmath , we could show that some of the Lattice
States whose separability was left unknown in previous works, are indeed
separable:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#####

However, there are still some Lattice States whose separability could
not be decided by the methods developed in this thesis; for instance,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For this Lattice State, all points have at least three special
quadruples contained in I, but no uniform covering could be found, nor
could be excluded.

#####

Another interesting issue, still to be understood, is the relation
between the special quadruples and partial transposition.The
difficulties can be appreciated by looking at the following state:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is NPT entangled, nevertheless all points belong to at least one
special quadruples contained in @xmath . Obviously, in this case there
does not exist a uniform covering of special quadruples as the state is
entangled.

#####

Further interesting issues to be tackled are whether separable Lattice
States carry quantum discord and whether the structure of PPT entangled
Lattice States could be investigated in terms of Edge States and
Unextendible Product Bases.

## Appendix A Convexity

A good introduction of Convex Analysis is given in [ 1 , 58 ] .

###### Definition 30

Convex Set

Let @xmath be a finite set of points in @xmath . @xmath is said to be
convex if

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Consequently a point @xmath is said to be a convex combination of @xmath
@xmath if:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Example 40

The set ofstates and the subset of separable states @xmath are convex
sets.

###### Definition 31

Convex hull

Convex hull of a convex set @xmath , denoted by @xmath is the set of all
the convex combinations of the elements of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Convex hull of @xmath is the smallest convex set containing @xmath .

Let @xmath be a convex set. Then its elements split into two subsets:

###### Definition 32

Interior points

The point @xmath is an interior point if the line segment from any point
in @xmath to @xmath can be extended within @xmath .

###### Definition 33

Extreme points

A point @xmath is said to be extreme if:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In other words, extreme points of @xmath do not belong to any proper
segment defined by two distinct elements of @xmath .

###### Example 41

The pure states or projectors are extreme points for the set of density
matrices, whereas the density states of mixed states are the interior
points.

When an inner product @xmath is defined on @xmath , we have:

###### Definition 34

Hyperplane

Let @xmath and @xmath be vectors in @xmath . Then a hyperplane is a set
of the form @xmath . The vector @xmath is called the normal vector for
the hyperplane.

The hyperplane divides @xmath into two halfspaces:

###### Definition 35

Halfspace A halfspace is a set of the form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The concept of hyperplanes and halfspaces are very useful as using them
we can separate the convex sets which do not intersects:

###### Theorem 21

Let @xmath and @xmath be two convex sets such that @xmath . Then there
exists @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath for
all @xmath . In another words, @xmath is non-positive on @xmath and
non-negative on @xmath .

[]

If a hyperplane is tangent to the set, at some extreme point @xmath ,
then it is called supporting hyperplane. Note also that the separating
hyperplanes as well as supporting hyperplanes are not unique.

###### Definition 36

Cones

A set @xmath is a cone if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is said to be a convex cone if:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To any convex cone one can associate a dual cone.

###### Definition 37

Dual Cone

The dual cone @xmath is defined to be:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The dual cone @xmath is always closed, even if @xmath is open.

###### Example 42

When the cone and dual cone coincide then the cone is said to be
self-dual, i.e. :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Example 43

The cone of positive semidefinite @xmath matrices is self-dual. This
also holds for the cone of completely positive maps: @xmath .

###### Example 44

All these concepts can be extended to the Hermitian operators and linear
maps as well. Indeed one can easily verify that the set of positive
operators is a convex set, and that positive (resp. complete positive)
maps are unaffected by multiplication by positive scalars.

Let @xmath denote the cone of (positive, completely positive) linear
maps, the dual cone @xmath in this case is defined via the Jamiolkowski
Isomorphism. Let @xmath be an orthonormal set of unit matrices, then the
Choi matrix @xmath , for the map @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using the Hilbert-Schmidt scalar product introduced in ( 2.4 ), the dual
cone @xmath is defined to be:

  -- -- -- -------
           (A.4)
  -- -- -- -------

Let @xmath be the set of positive linear maps @xmath , and @xmath be a
closed cone in @xmath . Recall that the set of complete positive maps is
denoted by @xmath .