#

  Declaration

  This thesis describes work done by the candidate during his tenure as
  Ph.D. student at the Department of Physics and Astrophysics,
  University of Delhi, Delhi, India under the supervision of Sanjay
  Jain. The work reported in this thesis is original and it has not been
  submitted earlier for any degree to any university.
  Candidate:
  Varun Giri
  Supervisor:
  Sanjay Jain
  Head of the Department:
  R. P. Tandon

### List of Publications

##### In International Refereed Journals

1.  The origin of large molecules in primordial autocatalytic reaction
    networks,
    Varun Giri and Sanjay Jain,
    Accepted for publication in PLoS ONE (2011)
    doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029546.

2.  A universal power law and proportionate change process characterize
    the evolution of metabolic networks,
    Shalini Singh, Areejit Samal, Varun Giri , Sandeep Krishna, N.
    Raghuram and Sanjay Jain,
    Eur. Phys. J. B , 57:75-80 (2007).

3.  Low degree metabolites explain essential reactions and enhance
    modularity in biological networks,
    Areejit Samal, Shalini Singh, Varun Giri , Sandeep Krishna, N.
    Raghuram and Sanjay Jain,
    BMC Bioinformatics , 7:118 (2006).

The work reported in this thesis is based on publication 1 mentioned
above.

##### In Conference Proceedings

1.  Modelling stock market: Expectation bubbles and crashes,
    Varun Giri and Areejit Samal,
    Student paper for IMSc Complex Systems School, January 2-27 2006,
    held at the Institute of Mathematical Sciences, Chennai, India in
    association with Santa Fe Institute, New Mexico, USA.

### Important Talks and Oral Presentations

1.  Presented a talk titled “Dynamics of autocatalytic reaction networks
    and the origin of life” at Sixth Dynamics Day Delhi, held at Sri
    Venkateswara College, University of Delhi on 27th November, 2010.

2.  Presented a talk titled “Modeling the chemical dynamics of
    autocatalytic networks in a pre-biotic scenario” at

    1.  Complex Structures in Biology and Cognition Group, Max Planck
        Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, Leipzig on 1st
        October, 2010,

    2.  Herbstseminar Bioinformatik 2010, Vysoka Lipa (Decin), Czech
        organized by Institut für Informatik, University of Leipzig,
        Leipzig on 8th October, 2010,

    3.  Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research, Potsdam on 12th
        October, 2010,

    4.  Biologische Experimental Physik Group, University of Saarlandes,
        Saarbrucken on 13th October, 2010.

3.  Presented a talk titled “Using network topology to optimize
    molecular production in an artificial chemistry model” at
    Application of Control Theory and Optimization Techniques in
    Biochemical Pathways, satellite symposium of the International
    Congress of Mathematics, held at Hyderabad International Convention
    Centre (HICC), Hyderabad, India, from 16th to 18th August, 2010.

4.  Presented a talk titled “Modeling the effects of autocatalytic
    networks on pre-biotic organization” at International Workshop on
    Chemical Evolution and Origin of Life, organized by Department of
    Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, held at IIT-R,
    Roorkee from 5th to 7th March, 2010.

5.  Presented a talk titled “Bistability in autocatalytic reaction
    networks” at Dynamics Day Delhi, held at Department of Physics and
    Astrophysics, University of Delhi, Delhi on 15th November, 2008.

6.  Invited talk with hands-on-session titled “A practical guide to
    graph-theoretic analysis of large scale biological networks” at
    Workshop on knowledge discovery in Life Sciences: Tools & Techniques
    in Bioinformatics, January 29 to February 2, 2007, held at
    Bioinformatics Centre, University of Pune, India. This talk was
    presented with Areejit Samal.

### Poster Presentations

1.  Presented a poster titled “Modeling the chemical dynamics of
    autocatalytic networks in a pre-biotic scenario” at Multi-scale
    dynamics and evolvability of biological networks, organized by Max
    Planck Society (MPG) and the Centre National de la Recherche
    Scientifique (CNRS), held at Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in
    the Sciences, Leipzig from 4th to 6th October, 2010.

2.  Coauthored poster titled “Classifying reactions and locating
    evolutionary hotspots in metabolic networks” at International
    Conference on Bioinformatics, held at Hotel Ashok, New Delhi, India,
    from 18th to 20th December, 2006.

3.  Presented a poster titled “Modeling stock markets: Formation of
    bubbles and crashes” at International Workshop on Econophysics of
    Stock Markets and Minority Games (Econophysics II), held at Saha
    Institute of Nuclear Physics (SINP), Kolkata, India from 14th to
    17th February, 2006.

4.  Presented a poster titled “Bow-Tie decomposition of metabolic
    networks” at Statphys - Kolkata V: Complex Networks: Structure,
    Function and Processes, held at S. N. Bose National Centre for Basic
    Sciences, Kolkata, India from 27th to 30th June, 2004.

{dedication}

‘Life’

###### Contents

-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 The Earth’s history
    -    1.2 Life
        -    1.2.1 Life: An organized system
        -    1.2.2 Diversity and universality of life
        -    1.2.3 Minimum complexity of life
    -    1.3 Origin of Life: The chicken or the egg?
        -    1.3.1 Miller’s experiment and other related works: The
            spontaneous production of certain building blocks of life
        -    1.3.2 What came first?
    -    1.4 Motivation
        -    1.4.1 Possible role of small molecule catalysis
        -    1.4.2 Autocatalytic sets
        -    1.4.3 Models of prebiotic autocatalytic organization
            -    1.4.3.1 A model for autocatalytic chemical focussing
            -    1.4.3.2 A model of network evolution and emergence of
                organization
    -    1.5 Thesis organization
-    2 A model of pre-biotic chemistry
    -    2.1 The model
        -    2.1.1 Nomenclature
        -    2.1.2 Inclusion of catalysts
        -    2.1.3 Numerical simulations
    -    2.2 Chemistries with @xmath
        -    2.2.1 An example with @xmath
            -    2.2.1.1 An example of inclusion of catalyst
    -    2.3 Chemistries with @xmath
        -    2.3.1 An example with @xmath
    -    2.4 Rate equations in terms of dimensionless variables
    -    2.5 Comparison with existing models
-    3 Steady state properties of the spontaneous chemistry
    -    3.1 Behaviour of the system in the limiting case of @xmath
        -    3.1.1 Analytical solution
        -    3.1.2 Numerical results
    -    3.2 Behaviour of the system for @xmath
        -    3.2.1 Dependence on parameters
    -    3.3 Results for a sparse chemistry
    -    3.4 Results for a heterogeneous chemistry
    -    3.5 Summary
-    4 Catalyzed chemistries and autocatalytic sets
    -    4.1 Autocatalytic Sets (ACSs)
    -    4.2 An example of chemistries with autocatalytic sets
        -    4.2.1 Understanding why ACS concentrations are large (the
            @xmath limit)
        -    4.2.2 Multistability in the ACS dynamics and ACS domination
    -    4.3 Bistability in simple ACSs
    -    4.4 ACSs and sparse chemistries
    -    4.5 ACSs and heterogeneous chemistries
    -    4.6 Summary
-    5 Using ACSs to produce large molecules: The problem
    -    5.1 Scaling of @xmath and @xmath with the size of the catalyst
        -    5.1.1 Generating extremal ACSs of length @xmath
        -    5.1.2 The requirement of exponentially large catalytic
            strengths
        -    5.1.3 Why the initiation threshold is exponentially large
    -    5.2 A problem for primordial ACSs to produce large molecules
-    6 Nested ACSs: A structure to promote large molecules
    -    6.1 Using a small ACS to reinforce a larger one
        -    6.1.1 Why a small ACS reinforces a larger one: The role of
            the background and spontaneous reactions
    -    6.2 The role of ‘overlapping’ catalyzed pathways in nested ACSs
    -    6.3 Summary
-    7 Hierarchy of nested ACSs: A possible route for the appearance of
    large molecules
    -    7.1 Generating a cascade of nested ACSs
    -    7.2 Dominance of an ACS of length 441 (ACS441)
    -    7.3 Cascading nested ACSs with @xmath
-    8 Discussion and future outlook
    -    8.1 Summary
    -    8.2 Possible applications of the model to prebiotic scenarios
    -    8.3 Caveats and future directions
-    A @xmath -independence of results at large @xmath
    -    A.1 Uncatalyzed chemistry
    -    A.2 Catalyzed chemistry
-    B Model run at fixed input rate of monomer instead of buffered
    concentration
-    C Comparison with the model of Ohtsuki and Nowak
    -    C.1 Reducing our @xmath model to Ohtsuki and Nowak model
-    D The origin of multistability in ACS65
    -    D.1 Catalyzed chemistries not containing an ACS
    -    D.2 Reasons for multistability in dynamics of ACS65
-    E Effect of ACS topology on bistability
-    F List of reactions and their catalysts in ACS441
-    G List of reactions and their catalysts in ACS(36,28)
-    H List of reactions and their catalysts in ACS(18,27)
-    I Description of the programs used to generate the results in the
    thesis.
    -    Chapter 7

‘see’ key doesn’t have any effect when used in the document environment.
Move the definition to the preamble after “makeglossaries or
“makenoidxglossaries

‘see’ key doesn’t have any effect when used in the document environment.
Move the definition to the preamble after “makeglossaries or
“makenoidxglossaries

## Chapter 1 Introduction

  “ It is often said that all the conditions for the first production of
  a living organism are now present, which could have ever been present.
  But if (and oh! what a big if!) we could conceive in some warm pond,
  with all sorts of ammonia and phosphoric salts, light, heat,
  electricity, etc., present, that a protein compound was chemically
  formed ready to undergo still more complex changes, at the present day
  such matter would be instantly devoured or absorbed, which would not
  have been the case before living creatures were formed. ”

  – Charles Darwin (1809-1882)

\lettrine

[lines=2, lhang=0, loversize=0.0, lraise=0.0]Earth is special in that it
is the only known planet that supports life. Yet, life is ubiquitous on
Earth. Within a rather short period after its creation, life emerged on
Earth. Over the course of 3.5 – 4 Gyr (gigayears) life has evolved to
its current form. While biologists have made great progress in
understanding how life ‘works’, there has not been an equal progress on
the question of life’s origin. This thesis is an attempt to formulate
and answer one of the many questions that relate to the problem of
origin of life on Earth. More concretely we discuss, with the help of a
mathematical model of primordial chemistries, the set of initial
bootstrapping processes that could have led to the production of large
molecules that were needed for the emergence of life. In this chapter,
we discuss some of the facts known about life and the some of the
questions that relate to its origin.

### 1.1 The Earth’s history

The age of the Earth is approximated to be 4.54 billion years ( @xmath )
[ 1 , 2 , 3 ] . Fig. 1.1 illustrates the major events in the history of
Earth since its birth. Formed from a gas cloud made up of hydrogen and
helium and interstellar dust under intense heat and pressure, at its
birth Earth was a molten planet. Over the next few hundred million
years, it cooled to form a solid crust [ 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 ] . As it cooled
further, clouds formed and rains created the ocean. It is also believed
that part of the water that exists on Earth was delivered by impacting
comets that contained ice. There are evidences to suggest that oceans
formed on Earth between 4.4 – 4.2 Ga (gigayears ago) [ 8 , 9 , 4 ] . (It
was earlier believed that it took much longer for Earth to cool enough
to be able to support liquid water.) The Earth’s atmosphere contained
water vapour, carbon dioxide, nitrogen and smaller amounts of other
gases [ 10 ] . It is estimated that in about 600 million years (around
3.8 Ga) first life forms appeared [ 11 ] . The earliest living organisms
were microscopic bacteria, which show up in the fossil record as early
as 3.5 Ga [ 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 ] . Some other studies suggest that
life could have been present even earlier (as early as 4.25 Ga) [ 17 ,
18 , 19 ] . The earliest life forms were chemoautotrophic, i.e. , they
relied on chemical sources for energy. Later, photosynthesis was adopted
as a mechanism for energy production [ 20 ] . Photosynthetic prokaryotic
organisms emitted oxygen as a waste product [ 21 ] . This is believed to
have caused the ‘great oxygenation event’ at 2.45 Ga leading to release
of oxygen into the atmosphere [ 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 ] (see Fig. 1.2
). There are studies that suggest alternate mechanisms for oxygenation
of Earth’s atmosphere [ 27 , 28 ] . The presence of oxygen provided life
with new opportunities. Organisms switched to aerobic metabolism, which
is more efficient than anaerobic pathways. Multicellular life appeared
soon after oxygen became available. As the oxygen level rose further
life became more diversified and led to the ‘Cambrian explosion’ around
530 Ma (million years ago). Humans emerged on Earth only 2.2 Ma.

### 1.2 Life

Life is one of the most complex phenomena known to human kind. Life
involves several intricate processes, such as metabolism, genetic
regulation, formation of physical structures, etc., that work in unison
to allow organisms to harness energy, repair themselves, grow and
replicate. Each of these processes is indispensable for life, and
depends upon other processes to be able to successfully perform its
task.

#### 1.2.1 Life: An organized system

Cells are the fundamental units of life. Cells respond to the
environment, conduct internal processes, grow and replicate with
variation. A cell contain several small and large molecules enclosed in
a membrane. The membrane provides the cell a spatial form and separates
the interior from the environment. The membrane contains several
proteins which sense external signals, and allow a selective exchange of
material between cell and the environment. The internal machinery of the
cell is complex, involving metabolism, regulation and signaling.

A cell converts simple food molecules absorbed from the environment
(such as glucose, fructose, etc.) into other ‘building-block’ molecules
(such as amino acids, nucleotides, lipids, etc.) and produces energy,
which is essential for the cell to grow and function. This process is
called ‘metabolism’. Metabolism only involves the chemical conversion of
small molecules called metabolites, but is dependent upon the
availability of a set of ‘large’ molecules called enzymes (a class of
proteins that catalyze metabolic reactions). Enzymes govern which
metabolic processes happen inside a cell. The instructions to produce
these (and other) proteins are contained in the DNA of the cell. When
needed this information is read and the corresponding proteins produced
via a two step process called gene expression. In the first step, called
‘transcription’, a machine called RNA polymerase reads a gene on a DNA
molecule and assembles nucleotides in right linear order to produce the
corresponding single-stranded messenger RNA (mRNA) molecule (Fig. (a)a
). Then, in the processe called ‘translation’, another machine called
ribosome reads the mRNA molecule and assembles amino acids in the right
linear order to produce the corresponding protein molecule (Fig. (b)b ).
To be able to produce these macromolecules, RNA or the proteins, the
cell needs the small building-block molecules that are the end product
of metabolism – the nucleotides and the amino acids (which in the first
place require these macromolecules for their own production) [ 29 ] . It
also needs the machines, RNA polymerase and ribosomes that are made up
of a number of macromolecules.

The genetic code stored in DNA is “interpreted” during gene expression,
and the properties of the expression (proteins, RNAs produced as result
of gene expression) give rise to the organism’s phenotype. This process
also highlights the information flow inside the cell. In 1958, Francis
Crick pointed out that the information flow can happen only from nucleic
acids to proteins and such information cannot be transferred back from
protein to either protein or nucleic acid [ 30 , 31 ] . In other words a
protein sequence can not be used to create a DNA in the cell. In the
usual case the information flows from @xmath , and never from @xmath or
@xmath or RNA.

With the kind of elaborate machinery described above, life has to
maintain a balance between various participating subcomponents. This
requires regulation and synchronization of all the processes for life to
be able to perform its tasks efficiently. This adds another level of
complexity to the way life functions. Based on the environmental
conditions (and some internal cues, such as cell division, etc.) the
cells may express different sets of genes at different times. The
ability to differentially express genes based on different environmental
conditions gives cell the ability to adapt to different environments.
The process of regulation also allows the same genome to express
different phenotypes, as is the case for multicellular organisms where
the same stem cell can differentiate into different adult cell types.
Regulation involves both small and large molecules and it happens at all
levels of gene expression.

A similarly large and complex biochemical machinery is needed to produce
a copy of DNA at the time of cell division. The process, which is called
DNA replication, involves several macromolecules, such as, DNA
polymerase, DNA ligase, helicase, etc. In this process, DNA is used as a
template on which these complex assemblies of proteins work to produce a
copy of the DNA. Errors in copying can produce a non identical copy of
DNA which results in two genetically different offsprings, producing the
variation necessary for the evolution of life.

#### 1.2.2 Diversity and universality of life

Life appears in various forms and sizes on Earth. The smallest cell
measures a few hundred nanometers and the largest organism measures
about tens of meters. Life can exist in the harshest of habitats ranging
from extremely hot to extremely cold places. The diversity of life can
be estimated from the fact that about @xmath different eukaryotic
species inhabit Earth [ 32 , 33 ] . A recent study put this number at
@xmath million [ 34 ] . Of this only about 10% are known to us. In
addition, it is estimated that there are about @xmath prokaryotic cells
that live on Earth [ 35 ] . One may imagine that such a diversity of
organisms would require different mechanisms to operate. Though the
specific pathways differ amongst different organisms, the biochemical
machinery involved in encoding, transcription and translation is
universal. It is believed that all life forms diverged from a common
ancestor, called the Last Universal Common Ancestor (LUCA). Based on
similarity of the genes, proteins, and metabolism, the tree of life has
been constructed rooted on a common ancestor [ 36 , 37 , 38 , 39 ] .

#### 1.2.3 Minimum complexity of life

Mycoplasma genitalium , a parasitic bacterium which lives in the primate
genital and respiratory tracts, is the smallest known organism capable
of independent growth and reproduction. The genome of M. genitalium
consists of 521 genes of which 482 are protein encoding genes [ 40 ] .
In comparison most bacterial genomes typically encode for more than 2000
different proteins. E. coli , the best studied bacterium, has about 4500
genes. The proteins produced from these genes are involved in
metabolism, replication, as well as building and maintenance of
structure. A theoretical study based on comparison of the genome of M.
genitalium with that of Haemophilus influenzae suggested 256 genes that
were close to the minimal set necessary and sufficient to sustain the
existence of a modern-type cell [ 41 ] . It has been estimated that a
minimal bacterium will require about 206 protein coding genes based on
an analysis of several free-living and endosymbiotic bacterial genomes [
42 ] . It is worth noting that according to this estimate even the
simplest cells require over 200 proteins to function.

### 1.3 Origin of Life: The chicken or the egg?

  “ If there has been a first man he must have been born without father
  or mother which is repugnant to nature. For there could not have been
  a first egg to give a beginning to birds, or there should have been a
  first bird which gave a beginning to eggs; for a bird comes from an
  egg. ”

  – Aristotle (384 – 322 BC)

The complexity of life has perplexed and enthralled us, more so the
enigma of its origin [ 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 , 48 , 49 , 50 , 51 , 52 ]
; [ 53 , 54 , 55 , 56 , 57 , 58 , 59 , 60 , 61 , 62 , 63 , 64 , 65 , 66
, 67 ] . It is difficult to imagine how an organization, as intricate as
seen in life, could self-organize on a primordial Earth when none
existed. We now review some experiments that have provided a perspective
on what was possible on the prebiotic Earth.

#### 1.3.1 Miller’s experiment and other related works: The spontaneous
production of certain building blocks of life

Miller’s experiment was the first experiment to show that amino acids
can be produced spontaneously in simulated primordial Earth conditions [
68 ] (see Fig. 1.4 for the description of the experiment). Miller
simulated an early Earth atmosphere that contained methane, ammonia,
hydrogen gas, and water vapor. It has been successfully repeated by
others who have also considered other possible primordial environmental
conditions [ 69 , 70 , 71 , 72 , 73 ] . There have been other
experiments that have demonstrated production of purines and pyrimidine
ribonucleotides [ 74 , 75 , 76 , 77 ] .

These experiments are based on the studies that suggest a reducing or
partially reducing atmosphere existed on the early Earth [ 78 , 79 , 10
, 80 ] . Recent findings suggest that the primordial Earth’s atmosphere
may not be reducing as suggested earlier [ 81 ] . A reducing environment
may have existed locally, such as in the presence of iron or other
metals in early oceans which could reduce nitrites to ammonia [ 82 , 83
] , or around deep sea hydrothermal vents or volcanic discharges [ 84 ,
85 , 86 , 87 , 88 , 89 ] allowing a prebiotic chemistry to initiate.

Collectively these experiments indicate that several of the basic
building-block molecules, such as amino acids, other molecules and
possibly also nucleotides could be synthesized on the prebiotic Earth by
natural processes.

#### 1.3.2 What came first?

The above experiments as well as other work on prebiotic chemistry has
led to several hypotheses about what were the first chemical steps
towards life on Earth. Broadly these hypotheses have been classified
into three categories: ‘metabolism first’, ‘replication first’, or
‘membranes first’. These three scenarios are not necessarily mutually
exclusive. We briefly discuss the three scenarios below.

  Metabolism first:  

    In this hypothesis it is argued that a system of chemical reactions
    producing small organic molecules, metabolites, would have appeared
    first [ 90 , 91 , 46 , 92 , 93 , 94 , 85 , 95 , 60 , 96 , 66 , 97 ]
    . One proposed candidate for the most primitive set of chemical
    reactions is the reductive tricarboxylic acid cycle (rTCA cycle).
    The TCA cycle is a universal structure found in the metabolic
    networks of most organisms and is the starting point in these
    networks for chemical pathways to synthesize all the building block
    molecules – amino acids, nucleotides and lipids. The pathways
    leading to the synthesis of simple organic molecules might be
    promoted by natural catalysts such as minerals and porous surfaces
    in rocks, or as an autocatalytic system. The idea is that the origin
    of life was triggered by the accumulation of simple organic
    molecules in thermodynamically favorable conditions. The simple
    molecules formed as result of the above process can combine in
    various ways to form more complex molecules, the system as a whole
    constituting a primitive ‘metabolism’. The production of all the
    molecules involved in the primordial metabolism is envisaged as a
    self sustaining system, as it uses as input simple inorganic
    molecules readily available on the Earth and incrementally builds
    more complex molecules using catalysis. Eventually, simple peptides
    will be formed and would lead to better catalysts; as well as
    nucleic acids that would form the templates for information storage.

  Replication first:  

    One of the fundamental properties of cells is to replicate. The
    replication of a whole cell is preceded by the replication of a
    single molecule, the DNA molecule, which carries information about
    all the genes. This information is central to how cell works and is
    transmitted from generation to generation through the above
    molecular replication. In the replication first scenario, it is
    believed that first the molecules capable of replication would have
    arisen. RNA is mooted as the candidate molecule for its ability to
    store, transmit, and duplicate information (like DNA) and act as
    catalyst for various chemical processes (ribozyme). It is believed
    that RNA was once capable of supporting independent life forms
    before giving rise to the DNA–RNA–protein world of today. This is
    called the ‘RNA world’ hypothesis. DNA is thought to have taken over
    the role of data storage due to its increased stability at a later
    stage, while proteins, through a greater variety of amino acids,
    replaced RNA’s role in specialized catalysis [ 98 , 99 , 100 , 101 ,
    102 , 103 , 104 , 105 , 106 , 107 , 108 ] . The RNA world hypothesis
    suggests that RNA in modern cells is an evolutionary remnant of the
    RNA world that preceded it.

  Membrane first:  

    In the membrane first scenario, it is hypothesized that physical
    enclosures were formed first. In water lipid molecules are known to
    spontaneously form micelles or vesicles. These vesicles allow
    selective interaction with the environment and can provide an
    isolated space for other systems to grow. The idea of lipid vesicles
    was first proposed by Oparin [ 43 ] . He proposed that coacervates,
    which are tiny spherical droplets of assorted organic molecules
    (specifically, lipid molecules) held together by hydrophobic forces
    from a surrounding liquid, would form first and followed by
    cell-like structure. A variant of this scenario is popularly called
    the ‘lipid world’ [ 109 , 110 , 111 , 112 , 113 ] . These vesicles
    can grow by the addition of monomers and divide to produce two
    vesicles [ 114 , 115 ] . Additionally these vesicles can provide
    semi-permeable membranes for small molecules to pass through and
    enable chemical reactions to flourish inside the vesicle [ 116 , 117
    , 118 ] . As an alternate, proteinoids (protein-like molecules
    formed by inorganic polymerization of amino acids) have been
    proposed as the precursors to first living cells. When present in
    certain concentrations in aqueous solutions, proteinoids form small
    structures called microspheres or protocells capable of growth and
    division [ 119 , 120 ] .

None of these theories is self-sufficient and there are several issues
that need to be resolved to have a comprehensive scenario for the origin
of life [ 121 , 60 , 62 , 122 ] . A common theme that these hypotheses
are based upon is that a self sustaining system arises first, providing
the right starting point for more complex organization to arise. It
could be a metabolism, which gave birth to protein world and
subsequently RNA/DNA world; or beginning with an RNA world, that later
gave rise to protein and DNA life; or beginning with a lipid world and
later giving rise to metabolism/replicating molecules. There are models
that discuss co-evolution of more than one subsystem in prebiotic
scenarios [ 123 , 124 , 116 , 125 , 126 , 127 , 128 ] .

### 1.4 Motivation

Instead of asking specific historical questions about whether the TCA
cycle, or RNA molecules, or lipid enclosures came first, one can posit
some general questions at a higher level of abstraction. These questions
are also motivated by empirical facts about living systems. Our work is
motivated by three such observations about the structure and
organization of the biochemical machinery of life.

1.   The existence of a chemical organization. As described earlier a
    cell contains molecules with specific properties carrying out
    specific carefully orchestrated processes. Without these, it will
    not have the capability to uptake food sources from the environment,
    convert them to building blocks of life through chemical processes,
    grow, replicated and evolve. Life is an ‘organized’ chemical system.
    Each of the process is well regulated and synchronized with other
    processes. The existence of such an organization is in itself
    interesting, but it also poses a question: how did such an
    organization arise in the first place?

2.   The question of a sparse biochemistry. The set of molecules that
    participate in biochemical pathways is a very small subset of all
    organic molecules [ 93 , 129 , 130 ] . The Kyoto Encyclopedia of
    Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database lists 16,311 metabolites and small
    molecules in all characterized organisms (1,761 organisms)
    participating in 8,840 biochemical reactions [ 131 , 132 ] . In a
    recent analysis of metabolism of Aquifex aeolicus , a reductive
    chemoautotroph and the smallest freely living bacteria, only 125
    compounds were found in the core metabolism [ 129 ] . In comparison
    the number of small molecules weighing less than 300 Da has been
    estimated to be about 13.9 millon [ 133 ] and all molecules of up to
    11 atoms of C, N, O, and F possible under consideration of simple
    valency, chemical stability, and synthetic feasibility rules were
    found to be 26.4 million in number [ 134 ] . The fact that
    biochemistry uses a very sparse subset of molecules point to some
    underlying pruning principles. The primitive biochemistry need not
    have been as sparse as the modern biochemistry (selection has
    operated for long), but would have seeded the selection that exists
    now. We wish to understand at the level of dynamics, the selection
    rules that could have been operative in selecting such a sparse set
    of molecules. Could the chosen subset have some special properties
    that enable it to spontaneously arise in prebiotic conditions?

3.   Production of large molecules need large molecules: A
    chicken-and-egg problem in chemistry. Large molecules, such as RNA
    and protein molecules, containing about a hundred to several
    thousand monomers, are essential in the functioning of life. As
    discussed in the Section 1.2.1 , these molecules are responsible for
    the normal functioning of the cell. These molecules are produced
    inside a cell using machinery which is itself composed of such large
    molecules. The RNA polymerase reads the genes on DNA molecules and
    produces the corresponding messenger RNA molecules. The ribosome
    reads the messenger RNA molecule and produces the corresponding
    protein molecules. These machines, RNA polymerase and ribosome, are
    composed of macromolecules such as proteins and RNA molecules that
    are produced by the same process. When cells produce daughter cells,
    the latter are already endowed with these macromolecular assemblies
    at birth, from which they synthesize other molecules. Nowhere in the
    living world is there a natural process we know of that produces
    macromolecules and that does not itself use macromolecules. Hence
    the puzzle: how did the large molecules first arise? There has been
    much experimental work to explore mechanisms that could enhance the
    concentrations of monomers and synthesize long polymers [ 135 , 136
    , 55 , 137 , 138 , 105 , 139 ] . While there is interesting
    progress, as yet there is no compelling scenario for the primordial
    origin of large molecules [ 140 , 141 ] .

One can ask if there are generic processes that might plausibly happen
on the prebiotic Earth that could provide an answer to the above
questions. Can one theoretically model such processes? Before we turn to
models, we discuss one more empirically observed chemical property that
seems to be fairly generic.

#### 1.4.1 Possible role of small molecule catalysis

It has been observed that catalysis is a fairly ubiquitous property that
arises in different kinds of molecules and even at small sizes. A
catalyst is a molecule that speeds up the rate of a reaction without
being consumed in the reaction. Enzymes are very powerful catalysts of
metabolic reactions in a cell; they speed up the rate of the reactions
they catalyze by factors ranging from @xmath to @xmath [ 142 ] . They
are also very specific catalysts, in that each enzyme catalyzes
typically a single reaction only. Enzymes are very large protein
molecules (containing from a few hundred to a few thousand amino acids)
and were not available in the early stages of prebiotic chemical
evolution.

However, small organic molecules which could have been produced by
natural prebiotic processes are also known to have catalytic activity
which is weaker and less specific. These include organocatalysts [ 143 ,
144 , 145 ] , peptides (small polymers of amino acids) [ 146 , 147 , 148
, 149 , 59 ] , and RNA molecules [ 150 , 151 , 152 , 153 , 154 ] .
Cofactors, which play an important role in catalyzing metabolic
reactions (or their evolutionary predecessors) may also have had a role
in prebiotic catalysis [ 129 ] .

#### 1.4.2 Autocatalytic sets

The molecules produced in the spontaneous reactions from the prebiotic
precursors (produced in Miller type experiements) may have included weak
catalysts for other reactions involving the same set of chemicals as
reactants, thereby producing in turn a new set of molecules. In this
respect, autocatalysis has been mooted as an important self-organizing
property. In chemistry, a reaction is said to be autocatalytic if one of
its products catalyzes the reaction, e.g., \ce A + B -¿[ \ce C] C. An
autocatalytic reaction has the consequence that the production of a
small quantity of the product, C, results in a positive feedback that
produces more of C.

A set of chemical reactions can be said to be ‘‘collectively
autocatalytic’’ if the products of the set mutually catalyze all the
reactions ¹ ¹ 1 A formal definition of autocatalytic sets relevant for
our work is given later in Chapter 4 , Section 4.1 . . Autocatalytic
sets (ACSs) were proposed by Eigen [ 155 ] , Kauffman [ 156 ] and
Rossler [ 157 ] . An ACS, like a single autocatalytic reaction, has the
property that the production of a small amount of the products of the
ACS can, in principle, lead to the collective production of an even
greater amount of the same. Thus if an ACS is present in the chemistry
this could lead to focusing of chemical resources preferentially into
the products of the ACS. This could address the problem of why a sparse
set of molecules has come to dominate biochemistry. Furthermore, an ACS
is a cooperative organization, in that the products collectively
reinforce each other’s presence. It is conceivable that ACSs can
therefore help us understand the cooperative nature of biological
organization.

These properties have motivated many people to explore ACSs as a
possible organization principle in the origin of life problem in variety
of ways. ACSs have been used by many authors to study various aspects of
self-organization, evolution and the origin of metabolism [ 158 , 159 ,
160 , 161 , 45 , 162 , 163 , 164 , 165 , 126 , 166 ] , the origin of
replication [ 167 , 168 , 169 ] , and the origin and dynamics of
protocells [ 110 , 116 , 117 , 170 , 127 ] .

#### 1.4.3 Models of prebiotic autocatalytic organization

We now discuss some models of autocatalytic organization that have
motivated the present work. A model proposed by Farmer, Kauffman and
Packard [ 158 ] discusses a mechanism based on ACSs via which a selected
set of molecules can dominate the chemistry (see Section 1.4.3.1 ).
Another model of network evolution by Jain and Krishna demonstrates how
a complex autocatalytic organization can arise and grow when none exists
to begin with [ 163 , 164 , 171 ] (see Section 1.4.3.2 ).

We discuss these two models below and also state their limitations which
we address in this work.

##### 1.4.3.1 A model for autocatalytic chemical focussing

The model was proposed by Farmer, Kauffman and Packard [ 158 ] and later
discussed and analyzed in series of papers by Bagley et al [ 172 ] ,
Bagley [ 173 ] , and Bagley and Farmer [ 159 ] . In the model they
consider an artificial chemistry in which polymers could form by
ligation of shorter polymers through spontaneous reactions as well as
reactions catalyzed by other polymers in the chemistry. They considered
a set of monomers @xmath as the starting material, members of which
could combine together to form polymers of different lengths. The
polymers are represented as strings of the monomers ( @xmath ), such as,
@xmath , where the order in which the monomers combine differentiate a
molecule. Furthermore they are considered to be oriented, so that @xmath
and @xmath would represent different polynomials. The polymers undergo
reactions of the form \ce A + B ¡=¿[ \ce E ] C + H , where A , B , C and
E are the polymers produced in the chemistry and H denotes water.

Bagley and Farmer analyzed the population dynamics of the molecular
species in a homogeneous (well-stirred) environment and established some
important properties of autocatalytic self-organization. When the food
set (monomers) were supplied at a fixed input rate and the chemistry
contained an ACS they showed that in a suitable range of parameters the
concentrations of the ACS molecules dominated over the rest of the
molecules (the background), thereby focusing the chemical resources of
the system into a small set of molecules comprising the ACS. Bagley,
Farmer and Fontana [ 160 ] also considered a version of the model
wherein new species could enter the system stochastically, resulting in
an evolution of the autocatalytic organization.

The identity of polymers considered by Bagley and Farmer depends on the
order in which monomers combine. Thus the number of molecules in their
chemistry grows exponentially with the length of molecules ( @xmath ,
@xmath is the number of distinct monomers, @xmath is the length of the
polymer). This prevents one from studying large chemistries. In the
model presented in this thesis, we ignore the order in which molecules
combine allowing us to simulate much larger chemistries.

Though the Bagley-Farmer model was successful in demonstrating a
mechanism of autocatalytic focusing, it only discusses this in cases
where the largest polymers in the ACSs have about 15-20 monomers. Bagley
and Farmer did not systematically investigate the problems that arise in
generating much larger molecules in their chemistry. This problem was
investigated by Ohtsuki and Nowak [ 169 ] in a much simpler model in
which they showed that for a large molecule to catalyze pathways of its
own production starting from small food molecules, it is required to
have a large catalytic strength that grows exponentially with the length
of the catalyst. However, they did not present a solution to this
problem.

##### 1.4.3.2 A model of network evolution and emergence of organization

Another motivation for our present model is the work of Jain and Krishna
in which a simple model of catalytic network evolution was discussed [
163 , 164 , 171 ] .

In the model, they consider a prebiotic soup of chemical species of
which some can catalyze the production of other species, forming a
catalytic network. On a short time scale, they consider the population
dynamics of the constituent chemical species. On a longer time scale
evolutionary dynamics are considered in which one of the least populated
species in the system is replaced with a new species. No qualitative
change to the attractor happens by repeated replacement of species till
a special structure, an autocatalytic set, arises in the network. An ACS
is formed in the network when two or more species mutually catalyze the
production of each other. Nodes downstream to an ACS also do well
populationally, these nodes form the periphery of the ACS. This causes
nodes outside the ACS to be selected for replacement. Soon, the ACS
grows to include the entire network.

This model with its simplicity is able to demonstrate how a complex
organization can build around an autocatalytic set over the course of
network evolution. Importantly it also shows that this organization
builds fairly quickly once an ACS appears in the system. One of the
limitations of Jain-Krishna model is that it presupposes a buffered
input for all the reactants required to produce the catalysts. One may
envisage situations wherein a catalyst itself acts as reactant in some
other reaction, causing its population to deplete. This in turn could
effect the rates of the reaction in which this molecule act as a
catalyst.

One of the motivations of the model discussed in the thesis was to study
the Jain-Krishna model with the above mentioned resource limitation. In
the model discussed in this thesis, we show that this affects the
dynamics.

### 1.5 Thesis organization

The subsequent chapters in this thesis are organized as follows:

  Chapter 2  

    introduces our mathematical model describing the population dynamics
    of molecules in a stylized but prebiotically plausible artificial
    chemistry. Larger molecules are produced in this chemistry by the
    coalescing of smaller ones, with the smallest molecules, the
    monomers, assumed to be buffered. Some of the molecules produced in
    the chemistry can also act as the catalysts for the reactions of the
    chemistry. They do so by enhancing the rate of the reaction in
    proportion to their concentration by a factor that denotes their
    catalytic strength. Using mass action kinetics we write the
    dynamical equations describing populations of molecules in this
    chemistry. This chapter discusses in detail the examples of
    chemistries that contain one and two monomers in the food set.

  Chapter 3  

    presents dynamical results from the model for the case of
    spontaneous chemistry, i.e. , the chemistry in which none of the
    reactions is catalyzed. It shows that the steady state
    concentrations of the molecules fall exponentially with their
    length. It discusses the dependence of the steady state
    concentrations on the various parameters of the model. Analytical
    results in a region of phase space are also discussed.

  Chapter 4  

    discusses the dynamics of the model when the chemistry contains some
    catalyzed reactions, and in particular autocatalytic sets. It
    defines autocatalytic sets in context of our model and discusses
    various dynamical features that arise in the system in the presence
    of an ACS in the chemistry. Using a specific example of an
    autocatalytic set we show that a sparse subset of molecules can
    dominate above the rest of the molecules in the chemistry (the
    background) under certain parameter regimes. We present an
    analytical understanding for this phenomena. We show how a large
    catalytic strength can counteract the effect of dissipation for the
    molecules produced in catalyzed reactions. We also show that ACSs
    can produce bistability in the population dynamics. This chapter
    also discusses the relation between the topology of ACSs, system
    parameters and the existence of bistability. The work described in
    this chapter extends the work of Bagley and Farmer on autocatalytic
    focusing.

  Chapter 5  

    articulates the problem of producing large catalysts using ACSs. For
    a class of ACSs, referred to as the ‘extremal’ ACSs, this chapter
    shows how the region of bistability changes with the length of the
    catalyst. It discusses that the catalytic strength required by a
    catalyst to dominate the chemistry starting from an initial
    condition relevant to the origin of life problem, grows
    exponentially with the size of the catalyst. This generalizes the
    results of Ohtsuki and Nowak to a larger class of chemistries and
    emphasizes the difficulty in producing large molecules via the ACS
    mechanism.

  Chapter 6  

    introduces the mechanism of nested ACSs. It discusses in detail an
    example of two nested ACSs where the smaller ACS reinforces the
    large one. We discuss how the relative topologies of the two ACSs
    and the background chemistry affect the reinforcement received by
    the larger ACSs. This chapter discusses how the mechanism of nested
    ACSs can be used to overcome the problem of producing large
    molecules presented in Chapter 5.

  Chapter 7  

    describes two algorithms, based on the discussion in Chapter 6, that
    produce a hierarchy of nested ACSs. It demonstrates that chemistries
    that contain a structure such as nested-ACSs can produce large
    molecules in prebiotically plausible conditions. We show an example
    where a molecule of size 441 ( i.e. , a molecule containing 441
    units of monomer) dominates the chemistry starting from a initial
    condition where only monomers were present and at a catalytic
    strength that only grows as a power of length of the catalysts (as
    against exponentially needed otherwise).

  Chapter 8  

    is a discussion of the results. It discusses some prebiotic
    scenarios where our model could be applied. It also discusses
    limitations and caveats of the model and directions for further
    work.

  Appendix A.  

    Though the model considers an infinite sized chemistry, it requires
    for numerical simulations to consider only a finite subset of the
    chemistry. This introduces an additional parameter @xmath , the size
    of the largest molecule considered. This appendix presents the
    evidence for the @xmath -independence of results for large @xmath .

  Appendix B.  

    The model discussed in this thesis considers a boundary condition in
    which the food set molecules are considered to be buffered, i.e. ,
    their concentrations remain a constant over the course of dynamics.
    We discuss in this appendix another boundary condition in which the
    monomers are supplied at a fixed input rate.

  Appendix C  

    discusses the special case of our model under which it reduces the
    model of Ohtsuki and Nowak.

  Appendix D  

    discusses examples of catalyzed chemistries that do not contain ACSs
    and the origin of multistability for an ACS.

  Appendix E  

    presents a discussion on how the topology of an ACS, especially the
    assignment of the catalysts to its reactions, affects the dynamics.

  Appendices F, G and H  

    list the reactions with their respective catalysts for various
    examples of catalyzed chemistry for @xmath and @xmath containing a
    cascade of nested ACSs generated using Algorithm 4 and 5 (described
    in Chapter 7 ).

  Appendix I  

    describes various programs used to generate results reported in this
    thesis. The programs are available from the following link:
    http://sites.google.com/site/varungiri/research/phd-thesis

## Chapter 2 A model of pre-biotic chemistry \lettrine

[lines=2, lhang=0, loversize=0.0, lraise=0.0]In this chapter, we
describe a model of pre-biotic artificial chemistry in which larger
molecules are produced by coalescing of smaller ones via spontaneous and
catalyzed reactions. In the following chapters, we use this model to
study how large molecules, relevant for the origin of life, can arise in
a pre-biotic scenario. We explore the model numerically and, in certain
regimes, analytically.

### 2.1 The model

The model is specified by describing the set of molecular species, their
reactions, and the dynamical rate equations for their population
dynamics. A special set of molecules, the ‘ food set ’, denoted @xmath ,
consists of small molecular species, @xmath in number, that are presumed
to be abundantly present in a prebiotic niche.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

A general molecule, say @xmath , is represented as an @xmath -tuple of
non-negative integers: @xmath , where @xmath is the number of monomers
of type @xmath contained in @xmath . The ‘size’ or ‘length’ @xmath of
the molecule is defined as the total number of monomers of all types in
it: @xmath . The food set molecules themselves are represented by the
@xmath -tuples @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

The identity of a molecule in the model is completely determined by the
number of monomers of each type contained in the molecule; the order in
which they appear is irrelevant. Thus the combinatorial diversity of
distinct compounds containing a total of @xmath monomers (of all types)
grows only as a power of @xmath ( @xmath ) instead of exponentially (
@xmath for strings) if the order had mattered. This simplification helps
in picturizing the chemistry and significantly reducing the
computational power needed to explore large values of @xmath .

Starting from the food set, larger molecules in this chemistry are made
through a series of ligation and cleavage reactions of the type @xmath ,
where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath . If @xmath denotes the
concentration of the molecule @xmath , using mass action kinetics, the
rate equations are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2a)
              @xmath   @xmath      (2.2b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

It is assumed that in a well stirred prebiotic region the concentration
of the members of the set @xmath are constant (buffered) ¹ ¹ 1 In a
prebiotic niche, such as a hydrothermal vent, even as the small
molecules are used up in chemical reactions to form other products,
natural geochemical processes replenish these molecules keeping their
concentrations at a significant level. For modeling purposes we assume
that their concentrations are constant in the region in question. .

  -- -- -- -------
           (2.3)
  -- -- -- -------

is the net forward flux of the reaction pair @xmath with forward
(ligation) rate constant @xmath and reverse (cleavage) rate constant
@xmath , @xmath is the loss rate of @xmath , and @xmath represents the
set of unordered pairs of molecules which can combine together to form
@xmath ( @xmath ).

The two terms in the first sum, in Eq. ( 2.2b ), represent the formation
(cleavage) of @xmath from (into) smaller molecules. The second sum and
the following term represent the cleavage (formation) of larger
molecules via reactions that produce (consume) @xmath . The
stoichiometric factor of 2 before @xmath arises because two molecules of
@xmath are involved in the corresponding reaction pair.

The set of parameters @xmath , @xmath that are non-zero define the set
of possible reactions; collectively they define the ‘ spontaneous
chemistry ’ (‘spontaneous’ in the sense that the reactions are possible
even in the absence of catalysts). A pair of ligation and cleavage
reactions can be excluded from the chemistry by setting both @xmath and
@xmath to zero. The scheme permits chemistries in which some reactions
proceed in only one direction (ligation or cleavage) by setting only one
of @xmath and @xmath to zero. However, we will primarily be interested
in a chemistry in which each reaction is reversible. The existence of
the cleavage reactions makes it more difficult for the long molecules to
survive; thus it is more significant to demonstrate the appearance of
long molecules in a model in which cleavage reactions are permitted than
in one where only the forward (ligation) reactions are.

#### 2.1.1 Nomenclature

We classify spontaneous chemistries based on their connectivity and
heterogeneity of parameters.

   ‘Reversible’ chemistry   

    A chemistry is called ‘reversible’ if each allowed reaction is
    reversible, i.e. , @xmath .

   ‘Connected’ chemistry   

    A chemistry is ‘connected’ if every molecule can be produced from
    the food set in some pathway consisting of a sequence of allowed
    reactions. A chemistry is ‘fully connected’ if all possible ligation
    and cleavage reactions are allowed: @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath
    , @xmath . A fully connected chemistry is a reversible chemistry by
    definition. A chemistry is called ‘sparse’ if it contains only a
    small fraction of all possible reactions. A sparse chemistry is not
    necessarily connected.

   ‘Homogeneous’ chemistry   

    A chemistry is called ‘homogeneous’ if all the non-zero rate
    constants, loss rates, and concentrations of the food set molecules
    are independent of the species labels: @xmath , @xmath independent
    of @xmath and @xmath , @xmath for all @xmath , and, @xmath .

#### 2.1.2 Inclusion of catalysts

We consider a simple scheme for inclusion of catalysts. We assume that a
molecule enhances the rate of a reaction that it catalyzes in proportion
to its own concentration. Thus, if @xmath is a catalyst of the reaction
pair @xmath , then the rate constants of this reaction pair, @xmath and
@xmath , are replaced

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.4a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.4b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the ‘ catalytic strength ’ of the catalyst for this
reaction pair. The first term in the bracket, unity, represents the
spontaneous reaction rate (which is present irrespective of whether the
reaction is catalyzed or not), and the second term @xmath represents the
enhancement of the reaction rate due to the catalyst. Note that in this
scheme a catalyst enhances both the forward and reverse reaction rates
by the same factor. If a reaction has multiple catalysts, @xmath is
replaced by @xmath , where the sum runs over all catalysts @xmath of the
reaction in question. Typically, only a small subset of the spontaneous
reactions will be catalyzed. The set of catalyzed reactions together
with the catalysts and their catalytic strengths will be referred to as
the ‘ catalyzed chemistry ’.

We refer to a catalyzed chemistry as ‘homogeneous’ if the catalytic
strength of every catalyst for each reaction that it catalyzes is the
same, i.e. , if @xmath , then @xmath .

Eqs. ( 2.2 ) in conjunction with ( 2.3 ) and ( 2.4 ) define a
deterministic non-linear dynamical system on a complex network. The
network structure is specified by the nonzero constants @xmath , @xmath
, and @xmath .

#### 2.1.3 Numerical simulations

While the chemistry under consideration is infinite, numerical
simulations were done by choosing a finite number @xmath for the size of
the largest molecule in the simulation. For a finite chemistry we
exclude all the ligation reactions (and their reverse) that produce
molecules of size larger than @xmath . In principle this introduces
another parameter, @xmath , an artifact of the simulation. However, we
find that most properties of physical interest become independent of
@xmath when @xmath is sufficiently large (evidence for this is presented
later in Appendix A ).

Our numerical work, which comprised of solving coupled ordinary
differential equations, was mostly done using the CVODE solver library
of the SUNDIALS (Suite of Nonlinear and Differential/Algebraic Equation
Solvers) package v.2.3.0 ² ² 2
https://computation.llnl.gov/casc/sundials/main.html [ 174 ] , and, for
smaller @xmath values, using XPPAUT v.6.11 ³ ³ 3
http://www.math.pitt.edu/~bard/xpp/xpp.html [ 175 ] . Steady states
obtained were verified using numerical root finders in Octave ⁴ ⁴ 4
http://www.gnu.org/software/octave and Mathematica [ 176 ] .

### 2.2 Chemistries with @xmath

The simplest version of the model ( @xmath ) contains only a single
monomer species. Here, instead of using a ‘1-tuple’, we represent the
molecule of size @xmath by the notation @xmath for clarity. The
concentration of the monomer, @xmath , is represented by @xmath and of
the other molecules, @xmath (dimers, trimers, etc.), is given by @xmath
respectively. Following Eqs. ( 2.2 ), the rate equations for the system
are given by @xmath , and, for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.5)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the net forward flux of the reaction pair @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath being the forward and reverse rate constants,
respectively. Explicitly,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.7a)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.7b)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.7c)
     @xmath               
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

For a finite chemistry , in simulating Eq. ( 2.2 ), all terms
corresponding to reactions in which any molecule larger than @xmath is
produced or consumed are omitted. This results in @xmath molecules and
@xmath coupled ordinary differential equations, given by:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

for @xmath (the third bracket is absent for @xmath ). Note that @xmath
is replaced by @xmath in the second summation so that the largest
molecule produced is of length @xmath . For the case of homogeneous
chemistry Eq. ( 2.2 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

#### 2.2.1 An example with @xmath

The fully connected spontaneous chemistry has 9 reaction pairs of
forward and reverse reactions:

R1: A (1) + A (1) \reactionrevarrow @xmath @xmath A (2)

R2: A (1) + A (2) \reactionrevarrow @xmath @xmath A (3)

R3: A (1) + A (3) \reactionrevarrow @xmath @xmath A (4)

R4: A (2) + A (2) \reactionrevarrow @xmath @xmath A (4)

R5: A (1) + A (4) \reactionrevarrow @xmath @xmath A (5)

R6: A (2) + A (3) \reactionrevarrow @xmath @xmath A (5)

R7: A (1) + A (5) \reactionrevarrow @xmath @xmath A (6)

R8: A (2) + A (4) \reactionrevarrow @xmath @xmath A (6)

R9: A (3) + A (3) \reactionrevarrow @xmath @xmath A (6)

From Eq. ( 2.2 ), the 5 equations defining the dynamics are:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.10a)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.10b)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.10c)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.10d)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.10e)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

For a homogeneous chemistry, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , for all @xmath
, the equations become

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.11a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.11b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.11c)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.11d)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.11e)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

##### 2.2.1.1 An example of inclusion of catalyst

Say reaction pairs R1 and R4 of the previous example are catalyzed by
@xmath with catalytic strengths @xmath and @xmath respectively. Then the
equations for @xmath and @xmath get modified to

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.12a)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.12b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The equations for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath remain as before. If the
catalyzed chemistry is homogeneous, then @xmath .

### 2.3 Chemistries with @xmath

For a @xmath chemistry, @xmath , a general molecule is given by @xmath ,
and the monomers are given by the 2-tuples (1,0) and (0,1). There are
@xmath molecules of length @xmath , given by the 2-tuples: @xmath . A
finite chemistry , has a total of @xmath molecules (including monomers),
and hence @xmath rate equations.

Since the number of species goes as @xmath and the number of reactions
as @xmath for a chemistry with @xmath , computational limitations
require us to work with a smaller @xmath than for @xmath . Qualitative
conclusions nevertheless appear to be @xmath independent.

#### 2.3.1 An example with @xmath

The fully connected spontaneous chemistry has 9 reaction pairs which we
label as @xmath .

R1: (0,1) + (0,1) \reactionrevarrow (0,2)

R2: (0,1) + (1,0) \reactionrevarrow (1,1)

R3: (1,0) + (1,0) \reactionrevarrow (2,0)

R4: (0,1) + (0,2) \reactionrevarrow (0,3)

R5: (0,1) + (1,1) \reactionrevarrow (1,2)

R6: (1,0) + (0,2) \reactionrevarrow (1,2)

R7: (0,1) + (2,0) \reactionrevarrow (2,1)

R8: (1,0) + (1,1) \reactionrevarrow (2,1)

R9: (1,0) + (2,0) \reactionrevarrow (3,0)

Using Eqs. ( 2.2 ) suitably modified for a finite chemistry, we can
write the following rate equations:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.13a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.13b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.13c)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.13d)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.13e)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.13f)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.13g)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

@xmath is the net forward flux of the reaction pair R @xmath . Eqs. (
2.13 ) can be expanded to get the equations in terms of the @xmath ’s.
For example, Eq. ( 2.13b ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where, @xmath and @xmath are the forward and reverse rate constant of
reaction @xmath , respectively.

When the catalysts are included, the reactions that involve catalysts
are changed in the same way as in @xmath case (see Section 2.2.1.1 ).

### 2.4 Rate equations in terms of dimensionless variables

The rate equations (Eqs. ( 2.2 )) can be cast in dimensionless form by
introducing a concentration scale @xmath and a time scale @xmath . We
discuss below the case of a homogeneous spontaneous chemistry with
@xmath .

We define dimensionless quantities @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and Eq. ( 2.2 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.16)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Without loss of generality one can choose @xmath and (whenever @xmath )
@xmath . Then the dimensionless concentration variables satisfy the same
equations as before, but with @xmath . There are now only two
independent dimensionless parameters, @xmath and @xmath . The dependence
on all 4 parameters can be recovered at the end by replacing @xmath by
@xmath , @xmath by @xmath , @xmath by @xmath and @xmath by @xmath . One
may also choose @xmath (whenever @xmath ). In that case the two
independent dimensionless parameters will be @xmath and @xmath .

### 2.5 Comparison with existing models

The model presented here is closely related to two existing models, one
discussed by Bagley and Farmer [ 172 , 159 ] and the other by Ohtsuki
and Nowak [ 169 ] . The differences between the present model and the
existing ones is discussed below.

##### Comparison with the model of Bagley and Farmer

The main differences between the present model and that studied by
Bagley and Farmer [ 172 , 159 ] are:

-   A simpler representation of molecules (we do not consider molecules
    as strings): Bagley and Farmer consider a polymeric chemistry in
    their model. The molecules produced in this chemistry are
    differentiated not only based upon their length but also the order
    in which the monomers appear in them, i.e. , @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath are considered to be three different molecules. We have only
    differentiated molecules based on their length and the number of
    monomers of each type they contain. The order in which the monomers
    appear is not considered. For a given maximum size of molecule
    @xmath , this results in a chemistry that contains much fewer
    molecules and reactions among them, making it possible to
    numerically investigate chemistries with much larger sized
    molecules.

-   A simpler treatment of catalysis (we do not consider intermediate
    complexes): They consider a detailed mechanism of catalysis
    including the production of intermediate complexes. Their dynamical
    equations included equations for these intermediate complexes. We
    consider an approximate and much simpler treatment for inclusion of
    catalysis.

-   We ignore the effects coming from small populations containing a
    discrete number of molecules: Bagley and Farmer discuss the effects
    that arise because of the stochasticity in molecular populations. We
    consider only continuous dynamics and ignore the effects arising out
    of finite number of molecules.

-   Their results are at fixed input rate of food set molecules, whereas
    ours are primarily at buffered concentration of food set molecules
    (we also show results for a fixed input rate in Appendix B ).

We reproduce the main phenomenon of ACS dominance that Bagley and Farmer
observed, but the relative simplicity of the present model allows us to
explore other phenomena that they do not report about (this includes a
multistability in the dynamics and the possibility of building large
molecules through nested ACSs).

##### Comparison with the model of Ohtsuki and Nowak

The main differences with the model of Ohtsuki and Nowak [ 169 ] are

-   A much richer spontaneous chemistry of ligation reactions and the
    inclusion of reverse reactions: Ohtsuki and Nowak considered
    chemistries that only contained forward reactions. Also, larger
    molecules in their chemistry get produced only by successive
    addition of monomers. We have considered chemistries that include
    reverse reactions and have multiple ways for production of
    molecules. This makes an analytical treatment of the system more
    difficult.

-   A much more general class of catalyzed chemistries, instead of a
    single catalyst (which allows us to talk of nested ACSs, in
    particular): They have only considered the cases wherein one
    molecule catalyses all the reactions in its production pathway; they
    do not discuss cases with more than one catalyst. We consider
    various topologies of catalyzed chemistries and discuss how the
    choice of topology affect dynamics.

With a specific choice of parameters our @xmath model reduces exactly to
their ‘symmetric prelife’ model with a catalyst. This is discussed in
Appendix C . In spite of greater complexity we are able to numerically
reproduce their main results in a much more general setting, and also
provide an analytical understanding of the results based on certain
approximations.

## Chapter 3 Steady state properties of the spontaneous chemistry
\lettrine

[lines=2, lhang=0, loversize=0.0, lraise=0.0]This chapter discusses the
behaviour of the model described in Chapter 2 when the chemistry only
contains spontaneous reactions. We first discuss a spontaneous chemistry
that is fully connected and homogeneous. This chemistry has 4
parameters, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , the concentration of
the monomers. The results for @xmath are discussed first, for which we
also present some analytical results. We then describe results for a
general @xmath and show that the concentration of large molecules fall
exponentially with their length. We have checked that introducing
irreversible reactions and bringing in a small amount of heterogeneity
does not change the conclusions. Some results for sparse and
heterogeneous chemistries are also presented.

In this chapter, and the remainder of this thesis, we discuss in detail
results for the chemistries with @xmath . We also give some results for
@xmath . The qualitative features of the model can be generalized for
any values of @xmath .

### 3.1 Behaviour of the system in the limiting case of @xmath

#### 3.1.1 Analytical solution

For @xmath , the following exact analytical solution for the steady
state concentrations exists for homogeneous and connected uncatalyzed
chemistries with @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

To see that this is a fixed point, note that when Eq. ( 3.1 ) holds,
then @xmath for all @xmath ; hence the r.h.s. of Eq. ( 2.5 ) vanishes
(at @xmath ). The same argument applies for a general @xmath ; for
@xmath the expression becomes,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the concentrations of the two monomers. In
the case when the two monomers have same buffered concentrations (case
of homogeneous chemistries), i.e. , @xmath , Eq. ( 3.2 ) reduces to Eq.
( 3.1 ) with @xmath .

#### 3.1.2 Numerical results

Starting from the initial condition in which all concentrations other
than that of the food set molecules are zero, i.e. ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

(we refer to this as the ‘standard’ initial condition ), in a fully
connected and homogeneous spontaneous chemistry with @xmath and @xmath ,
the concentrations were found to increase monotonically and reach a
steady state (Fig. (a)a ). The plot of steady state concentration @xmath
versus @xmath is shown in Fig. (b)b . The graph of @xmath versus @xmath
on a semi-log plot (inset of Fig (b)b ) was found to be a straight line,
given by the expression

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where, @xmath and @xmath are constants. @xmath , determined by
numerically fitting the slope, was found to be equal to @xmath ,
consistent with the Eq. ( 3.1 ). Hence, whenever @xmath , the steady
state concentrations are exponentially damped. When @xmath , the steady
state concentrations increase exponentially (for @xmath , the numerical
integration does not converge as the steady state solution is
numerically very large for large @xmath ).

Similar results hold when more than one monomer is present in the
system. For @xmath , the steady state concentration profile is shown in
Fig. (a)a , when the concentration of the two monomers is the same and
in Fig. (b)b , when they have have different buffered concentrations.
The results are found to be consistent with the Eq. ( 3.2 ).

Note that these results are independent of the size of the largest
molecules in the chemistry, @xmath ; @xmath ’s are completely determined
by the values of parameters @xmath and @xmath .

### 3.2 Behaviour of the system for @xmath

When @xmath we do not have an exact analytical solution. As in the case
for @xmath , for a fully connected and homogeneous spontaneous chemistry
( @xmath ), starting from the standard initial condition (Eq. ( 3.3 )),
the concentrations were found to increase monotonically and reach a
steady state (Fig. (a)a ). The steady state values, which now depend
upon the value of @xmath , were comparatively smaller. The plot of
steady state concentration @xmath versus @xmath for different values of
@xmath is shown in Fig. (b)b . The semi-log plot of @xmath versus @xmath
(inset of Fig (b)b ) was now found to be approximately a straight line
for large @xmath . The small molecules deviate from the straight line.
@xmath , calculated in this case by fitting the slope ignoring small
molecules, decreases monotonically as @xmath increases (Fig. (b)b ).

The ratio of steady state concentration of successive molecules, @xmath
( @xmath as given by Eq. ( 3.4 )), is not strictly a constant but
depends upon @xmath (Fig. 3.4 ). The ratio oscillates about a mean, and
is larger when @xmath is even (more so when it is a power of 2) than
when @xmath is odd; the molecules that are made up of two smaller
molecules of the same size tend to have higher populations. The
variation becomes quite small as @xmath increases (insets of Fig. (a)a
). Thus Eq. ( 3.4 ) can still be used to approximate the solution that
characterizes the steady state concentrations. Numerically, we find that
@xmath drops to below 1 even when @xmath .

Similar results hold for @xmath ; steady state concentration profiles
for two different values of @xmath are shown in Fig. 3.5 . ‘Diagonal
entries’ ( @xmath ) have higher concentrations in homogeneous
chemistries because there are more reaction pathways to build molecules
with equal numbers of both monomers than unequal, and the larger number
of production pathways for the diagonal molecules are able to counteract
the effect of dissipation more effectively.

The values of @xmath extracted from the slope of the straight line fit
are found to be @xmath independent for sufficiently large @xmath . A
detailed discussion for @xmath -independence of this and other results
is provided in the Appendix A .

#### 3.2.1 Dependence on parameters

@xmath is found to be a monotonically increasing function of @xmath and
@xmath , and a monotonically decreasing function of @xmath and @xmath .
This corresponds to the intuition that an increased ligation rate
favours large molecules and an increased cleavage or dissipation rate
disfavours them. Recall the discussion on casting the rate equations in
terms of dimensionless variables presented in Section 2.4 . For
homogeneous chemistries, whenever @xmath , the system can be described
by two dimensionless parameters, @xmath and @xmath ; or whenever @xmath
, by @xmath and @xmath . The behaviour of @xmath as a function of @xmath
and @xmath (keeping @xmath ) is shown in Fig. 3.6 , and as a function of
@xmath and @xmath (keeping @xmath ) is shown in Fig. 3.7 .

When @xmath and @xmath both the above choices for scaling fail. In this
case the system has no steady state for any finite @xmath as @xmath is
always positive (in Eq. ( 2.2 ) for @xmath , the longest molecule has
only a positive production term, thus system has no steady state). In
all other cases the uncatalyzed chemistry seems to have a global fixed
point attractor (all initial conditions tested lead to the same steady
state).

### 3.3 Results for a sparse chemistry

As defined earlier (in Section 2.1.1 ) a sparse chemistry is one that
contains only a small subset of all possible reactions. There are
several ways of constructing a sparse chemistry; we use the following
algorithm:
Algorithm to generate sparse chemistries: We prune the reaction set to
only @xmath ligation reactions per molecule, randomly chosen from all
possible ligation reaction producing the molecule. For molecules too
small to have @xmath ligation reactions, all ligation reactions are
retained. (Note that while we refer to only the ligation reactions and
not cleavage reactions for the purpose of defining the degree of a
molecule, in our simulations all reactions are treated as reverse
reactions. That is, for every ligation reaction included in the
chemistry the reverse (cleavage) reaction is also present.) Thus we
define a chemistry with degree @xmath as one in which the number of
ligation reactions producing a molecule is @xmath obtained as a result
of above pruning algorithm.

For a sparse spontaneous chemistry, the plot of steady state
concentration @xmath versus @xmath is shown in Fig. 3.8 . The steady
state concentration of molecules are smaller in a chemistry with smaller
average degree as compared to fully connected chemistry as the number of
ways is which a molecule can be produced are fewer.

### 3.4 Results for a heterogeneous chemistry

In the earlier sections we have discussed chemistries in which all
forward and reverse rate constants take same values, respectively. In
real chemistries, the rate constants depend upon various physical
parameters such as the energy of the reactants and products, the
activation energy of the reaction, etc. The difference in the energies
of the reactants and the products determine the ratio of forward and
reverse rate constants. Whereas, their actual value is determined by the
activation energy of the reaction, and is given by ‘Arrhenius’ equation,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where, @xmath is the pre-exponential factor and @xmath is the activation
energy of the reaction in the units of @xmath .

For a reversible reaction, @xmath , the two rate constants are given as,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where, @xmath ( @xmath ) is the activation energy for the forward
(respectively, reverse) reaction. The difference between @xmath and
@xmath is equal to the difference between the energy levels of the
reactants and the products (as defined for the forward reaction), i.e. ,
@xmath . @xmath is the energy of molecule @xmath . For every reaction
pair we define barrier height as the smaller of the two activation
energies (Fig. 3.9 ).

We employ following scheme to assign reaction rates. We first assign
each molecule an energy. For a molecule of length @xmath , the energy,
@xmath , is given as,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where, @xmath is the energy of the monomer, @xmath , and @xmath is the
scale of variation in energies. All energies are expressed in units of
@xmath . @xmath is a random number in @xmath . We then assign barrier
height to each reaction @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where, @xmath is the scale of the barrier heights and @xmath is a random
number in @xmath . @xmath is used to determine the forward and the
reverse activation energies using the energies of the reactants and the
products as,
if @xmath , @xmath (see Fig (a)a ), and
if @xmath , @xmath (see Fig (b)b ).
The reactions rates are calculated using Eq. ( 3.6 ). Thus the reaction
rates are determined by the parameters @xmath , and the random numbers
@xmath (one for each molecule) and @xmath (one for each reaction).

The Steady state concentration profile for a heterogeneous spontaneous
chemistry with @xmath is shown in Fig. (a)a . It shows that even in the
presence of a small amount of heterogeneity in the system, while there
are ups and downs in the steady state concentration profile, the steady
state concentrations of molecules still generally fall exponentially
with their lengths. We still find a single global fixed point attractor.
The energies assigned to the molecules are shown in Fig. (b)b and the
forward and reverse reaction rates in Fig. (c)c and (d)d respectively.

We remark that instead of the above scheme for choosing @xmath and
@xmath if we simply choose @xmath where @xmath and @xmath are random
numbers drawn uniformly from the range @xmath for some small @xmath ,
then a behaviour similar to Fig. (a)a is obtained.

### 3.5 Summary

We show that for the model presented in Chapter 2 , in presence of
buffered food set molecules, the concentrations of large molecules
produced via a spontaneous chemistry decline exponentially with the size
of the molecule. This system is found to have a global fixed point
attractor. We also discussed chemistries that are sparse and
heterogeneous. We find this qualitative feature is robust to small
heterogeneity present in the chemistry and also holds for sparse
chemistries. It may be interesting to relate this model to work on
monotone dynamical systems [ 177 , 178 ] . In subsequent chapters we
discuss the role of catalysis in production of large molecules.

## Chapter 4 Catalyzed chemistries and autocatalytic sets \lettrine

[lines=2, lhang=0, loversize=0.0, lraise=0.0]This chapter discusses the
model when the chemistries contain some catalyzed reactions in addition
to the spontaneous reactions. We study the dynamics in presence of
‘autocatalytic sets’ (ACSs). We begin by defining ACSs and then discuss
various dynamical properties exhibited by the chemistries containing
them including the existence of multistability. We show how a small
subset of molecules can be produced in large concentration (compared to
other molecules in the chemistry) in presence of an ACS.

### 4.1 Autocatalytic Sets (ACSs)

Consider a set @xmath of catalyzed one-way reactions. ‘One-way’ means
that each reaction in @xmath is either a ligation or cleavage reaction.
Thus the set of reactants and the set of products are unambiguously
defined for each reaction and the two sets are distinguished. The
presence of a given ligation or cleavage reaction in @xmath does not
mean that its reverse is also necessarily a member of @xmath . Let
@xmath be the union of sets of products of all reactions in @xmath , and
@xmath the union of sets of reactants of all reactions in @xmath . We
exclude the food set molecules from both @xmath and @xmath . We will
refer to the set @xmath of catalyzed reactions as an autocatalytic set (
ACS ) if (a) @xmath includes a catalyst for every reaction in @xmath ,
and (b) @xmath . The latter condition implies that all members of @xmath
can be produced from the food set by (recursively) applying reactions
from within @xmath . An ACS thus ensures the existence of a catalyzed
pathway, starting from the food set, for the production of each of its
products [ 155 , 156 , 157 ] . Alternative valid definitions of an ACS
can be given (see [ 91 , 93 ] for one such); the above definition
suffices for our present purposes.

Note that if @xmath is an ACS, then its extension, @xmath , that
additionally includes the reverse of some reactions in @xmath , is also
trivially an ACS, as in our scheme a catalyst works for both forward and
reverse reactions if both exist in the chemistry.

### 4.2 An example of chemistries with autocatalytic sets

As a specific example to display certain generic properties, we consider
the following catalyzed chemistry (for a diagrammatic representation of
the network topology see Fig. 4.1 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1d)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1e)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1f)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1g)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1h)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that this set of reactions constitutes an ACS (which we will refer
to as ACS65). If any one reaction pair is deleted from the set, it is no
longer an ACS. For the moment, for simplicity, we consider the case
where the catalytic strengths of all the catalyzed reactions are equal
(‘homogeneous’ catalytic strengths): @xmath , and all other @xmath .
(For clarity, in view of double digit indices, we have introduced a
comma between the pair of indices in the superscript.) Fig. (a)a
describes the steady state concentrations, starting from the standard
initial condition (Eq. ( 3.3 )), for the chemistry that contains these
eight catalyzed reactions in addition to all the reactions of the fully
connected spontaneous chemistry. At @xmath the ACS product molecules
‘dominate’ over the background (the ‘background’ being defined as the
set of all molecules except the ACS product molecules and the food set),
in the sense that the ACS molecules have significantly larger
populations than their ‘neighbours’, namely, the background molecules of
similar size [ 159 ] . There is a fairly sharp threshold value of @xmath
above which ACS domination appears, as evident from the comparison with
the lower curve in Fig. (a)a drawn for @xmath . Time evolution of
concentrations for a few ACS and background molecules is shown in Fig.
(b)b . As the right catalysts and/or reactants become available the
concentrations of ACS molecules jump sharply to higher values.

Fig. 4.3 shows that the steady state background concentrations decline
as @xmath increases, while the ACS concentrations are relatively
unaffected in this regime (thus ACS domination increases). If catalyzed
production pathways from the food set to other molecules are broken
somewhere, the concentration of the latter molecules declines
significantly. This is evident from Fig. 4.4 for which only one reaction
pair ( 4.1a ) is deleted from the catalyzed chemistry (which now
contains no ACS) while others are catalyzed at the same strength as
before.

ACS domination at a sufficiently high catalytic strength also occurs
when there is more than one monomer. An example with @xmath , referred
to as ACS(8,10), is given below (Eqs. 4.2 ) and the steady state
concentrations shown in Fig. 4.5 .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2d)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2e)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2f)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2g)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2h)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2i)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

#### 4.2.1 Understanding why ACS concentrations are large (the @xmath
limit)

The above features are generic for a large class of ACSs. It is
instructive to consider the @xmath limit which we discuss analytically.
We discuss the case when @xmath but the argument can be extended to a
general @xmath . When @xmath is nonzero, the terms in Eq. ( 2.5 )
corresponding to catalyzed reactions get modified. The net flux @xmath
of such reaction pairs on the r.h.s. (for brevity we are omitting the
subscript @xmath in @xmath ) is replaced by @xmath , where the sum over
@xmath is a sum over all catalysts of the reaction pair. Now let the set
@xmath of catalyzed reactions be an ACS. Then, if @xmath the r.h.s. of
@xmath contains at least one such catalyzed term, while if @xmath @xmath
contains no such term. For example, for the above mentioned ACS, ACS65,
we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3d)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3e)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3f)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3g)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3h)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

while the rate equations for all other (non ACS) molecules ( @xmath ,
@xmath , etc.) have no terms proportional to @xmath . In a steady state
solution the r.h.s. of Eqs. ( 4.3 ) is zero, and to leading order in the
@xmath limit we must set the coefficients of @xmath to zero. The
coefficients involve only the ACS fluxes @xmath and catalyst
concentrations. Each coefficient is a sum of terms, and each term is
proportional to an ACS flux @xmath . Thus @xmath for the ACS fluxes
provides a steady state solution in the @xmath limit. Numerically we
find that when @xmath is sufficiently high the rate equations converge
to this solution starting from the standard initial condition. Now
@xmath , therefore @xmath implies @xmath for the members of @xmath .
Since by definition there is a catalyzed pathway from the food set to
every ACS product, we can recursively express the steady state
concentration of every ACS molecule in terms of @xmath : @xmath .

It is evident that this argument applies whenever the set @xmath of
catalyzed reactions is an ACS; thus for every member of @xmath , @xmath
is a steady state solution of the rate equations in the limit @xmath .
This is corroborated numerically: in Fig. 4.3 since @xmath , all the
eight ACS products should have @xmath in this limit; the numerical
result at @xmath is not too far from this limiting analytical value.

##### A strong ACS counteracts dissipation

Recall from Eq. ( 3.1 ) and the discussion in Section 3.1.1 that every
molecule in a homogeneous connected uncatalyzed chemistry has the steady
state concentration @xmath when there is no dilution flux or dissipation
( @xmath ), and a smaller concentration when there is dissipation (
@xmath ). We have observed above that an ACS with a sufficiently large
@xmath can boost the steady state concentrations of its members, even
when @xmath , to the same level. The expression @xmath seems to
represent an upper limit on the steady state concentration of @xmath ,
which can be approached either when dissipation goes to zero, or, when
there is dissipation, by membership of an ACS whose catalytic strength
becomes very large.

When the reaction pair @xmath , in ACS65, is not catalyzed the
production of @xmath takes place at a much smaller rate, the spontaneous
rate. Therefore its concentration is much smaller, and hence so are the
concentrations of the larger molecules.

When @xmath belongs to the background the r.h.s. of @xmath contains no
term proportional to @xmath , and all the @xmath -independent terms have
to be kept, including the @xmath term. Thus its steady state
concentration depends upon @xmath , and as in the case of the
uncatalyzed chemistry, declines more rapidly with @xmath when @xmath
increases.

#### 4.2.2 Multistability in the ACS dynamics and ACS domination

The reason for the sudden change in the qualitative character of the
steady state profile as @xmath is increased (as shown in Fig. (a)a ) is
a bistability in the chemical dynamics due to the presence of the ACS.
Fig. 4.6 shows three regions in the phase diagram of the chemistry
containing ACS65, separated by values @xmath and @xmath of @xmath . For
@xmath (region I), the dynamics starting from both the initial
conditions mentioned in the figure caption converged to the same
attractor configuration, which is a fixed point in which the large ACS
molecules have a very small concentration which are comparable to the
background concentrations (the concentration declines exponentially with
@xmath ). For @xmath (region III), again they converge to a single
attractor, a fixed point in which the ACS molecules have a significant
concentration which approaches @xmath as @xmath while the background
molecules have significantly lower concentration. In the range @xmath
(region II), they converge to two different stable attractors, both
fixed points for the ACS under discussion.

This phase structure implies that if we start from the standard initial
condition and consider the steady state profile to which the system
converges for different values of @xmath , we will see a sharp change in
the steady state profile as @xmath is increased from a value slightly
below @xmath to a value slightly above @xmath . Below @xmath the large
ACS molecules will be essentially absent in the steady state, and above
@xmath they will be present in large numbers and will dominate over the
background.

Therefore, following the nomenclature of Ohtsuki and Nowak [ 169 ] , who
observed a similar bistability in their model with a single catalyst, we
refer to @xmath as the ‘initiation threshold’ of the ACS. Similarly
@xmath will be referred to as the ‘maintenance threshold’ of the ACS,
because once the ACS has been initiated, @xmath can come down to as low
a value as @xmath , and the ACS will continue to dominate.

We remark that using other initial conditions we have found at least one
more stable fixed point in a part of region II which has intermediate
values of @xmath (Fig. (a)a , indicating that this system has
multistability. The steady state concentration profile for a system in
the intermediate attractor is shown in Fig. (b)b . An intuitive reason
for appearance of this attractor is discussed in Appendix D .

### 4.3 Bistability in simple ACSs

In general @xmath and @xmath depend upon the other parameters, as well
as the topology of the catalyzed and spontaneous chemistries. The phase
structure is exhibited in more detail for a simpler example in Fig. 4.8
, where the catalyzed chemistry consists of only two reaction pairs:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which constitute an ACS (called ACS4). This system, investigated
numerically using XPPAUT, shows bistability. For a fixed @xmath the
bistability diagram is shown in Fig. (a)a . The dependence of @xmath on
@xmath is exhibited in Fig. (b)b . For a given @xmath , there is
critical value of @xmath at which the @xmath and @xmath curves meet,
below which there is no bistability. The locations of the phase
boundaries, the @xmath and @xmath curves, depend upon the specific
underlying chemistries (catalyzed and spontaneous) as well as the ACS
topology. The steady state profiles are shown at sample points in the
phase space in Fig. (c)c . For @xmath it can be seen, that as in the
case of the larger ACS discussed earlier, if we start from the standard
initial condition, the largest molecule of the catalyzed chemistry, here
@xmath , dominates over the background in the steady state only for
@xmath (e.g., the panel marked 3 in Fig. (c)c ). In the range @xmath ,
it dominates only if we start from initial conditions where it has a
large enough value to begin with (panel 2b), but not if we start from
the standard initial condition (panel 2a). It does not dominate for any
initial condition if @xmath (panel 1). If @xmath is below @xmath , there
is a single attractor with no significant ACS dominance if @xmath is
small (panel 4), or if @xmath is large (panel 5), ACS dominance exists
but is not very pronounced as the background concentrations are also
substantial. The dependence of @xmath on both @xmath and @xmath is shown
Fig. (d)d . For a smaller @xmath , bistability appears at smaller values
of @xmath . ¹ ¹ 1 A technical remark on the definition and calculation
of @xmath and @xmath : We have defined @xmath and @xmath as the values
of @xmath that mark the two extremes of the bistable region. To
calculate the limits of bistability, for each value of @xmath , we start
from two initial conditions, (i) the standard initial condition, @xmath
, and (ii) a ‘high’ initial condition, @xmath , and integrate the system
to identify the respective attractors these initial conditions lead to.
@xmath is the value of @xmath upto which the system remains in the lower
attractor starting from the initial condition (i), and, @xmath is the
value of @xmath at which the system first moves to the higher attractor
starting from the initial condition (ii). Alternatively, we can define
@xmath and @xmath by using an initial condition which tracks the
attractor at a neighbouring value of @xmath , i.e. , the steady state
concentrations calculated at a @xmath value are used as the initial
condition to calculate the attractor for @xmath (for small @xmath ).
Starting from the lower attractor and using initial conditions that
track the attractor as @xmath is increased, one can define @xmath as the
largest value of @xmath for which the lower attractor exists. Similarly,
starting from the higher attractor and using initial conditions that
track this attractor as @xmath is decreased, one can define @xmath as
the lowest value of @xmath for which the higher attractor exists. XPPAUT
uses the latter definition of @xmath and @xmath . In principle the
values of @xmath and @xmath obtained using the two approaches can be
different. For the case of ACS4, these two values happen to be same at
least upto 4 significant figures. The definition of @xmath that we have
followed based on the standard initial condition is more relevant for
the origin of life problem.

We remark that while bistability seems to be quite generic in
homogeneous chemistries containing ACSs, the existence of an ACS does
not guarantee that bistability exists somewhere in phase space. For
example consider the simplest possible chemistry ( @xmath ) containing
only the monomer (which is buffered) and the dimer. If we assume that
the sole reaction pair @xmath is catalyzed by @xmath , the catalyzed
chemistry is trivially an ACS and the only rate equation is @xmath . The
system can be solved exactly and always goes to a global fixed point
attractor starting from any initial condition @xmath . However, the
@xmath chemistry defined by the two catalyzed reactions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

does exhibit bistability at a sufficiently large @xmath . Ohtsuki and
Nowak [ 169 ] had also found a lower limit on catalyst size for
bistability to exist in their model. Similar results hold for the @xmath
case. From our simulations a general observation seems to be that
bistability is ubiquitous at sufficiently large values of @xmath in
homogeneous chemistries whenever the smallest catalyst is large enough
compared to the food set. When it does exist it seems to provide a crisp
criterion for ‘ACS domination’, including ‘initiation’ ( @xmath ) and
‘maintenance’ ( @xmath ).

ACSs with the same set of reactions (and hence the same product set
@xmath ) may differ from each other in the assignment of catalysts to
the reaction. We remark that the assignment of catalysts to the
reactions of an ACS affects the dynamics, specifically the existence and
extent of bistability. A detailed discussion of an example of how the
assignment of catalysts effects the dynamics is given in Appendix E .

There exists a substantial literature including results on the
conditions for bistability in chemical systems [ 179 , 180 , 181 ] . It
would be interesting to apply some of those results to models of the
kind being studied here, which involve a large number of molecular
species.

### 4.4 ACSs and sparse chemistries

We now discuss the dynamics of ACSs when the underlying chemistry is not
the fully connected chemistry discussed as far, but is a sparse
chemistry. We generate the sparse spontaneous chemistries with the
following modification to the algorithm described in Section 3.3 . For
every reaction in the catalyzed chemistry we include the same reaction
(without the catalyst) as part of the spontaneous chemistry. Thus if a
molecule is produced in @xmath catalyzed ligation reactions, it is
automatically also produced in @xmath spontaneous ligation reactions. If
@xmath is less than the degree of chemistry, @xmath , another @xmath
spontaneous reactions are chosen to be added randomly from the remaining
ligation reactions producing this molecule.

The steady state concentration profiles for ACS65 with spontaneous
chemistries with degree @xmath and @xmath is shown in Fig. 4.9 . As
sparseness increases ( @xmath decreases) the background concentrations
decline. This happens as there are fewer pathways to produce the
background molecules. There is also a larger variation in their
concentrations because their production reactions are chosen randomly,
and background molecules produced in reactions that happen to involve
the ACS molecules as reactants do better than others. The ACS molecules
are seen to dominate more strongly over the background in sparser
chemistries; this is because there are a fewer production pathways to
the background that drain their concentrations. Similar results are also
seen in chemistries with @xmath .

Sparseness can also effect the value of @xmath . As the chemistry
becomes more sparse, the number of ways in which a molecule is produced
and hence its concentration in the steady state accessible from the
standard initial condition decreases. If a molecule that acts as a
catalyst is not produced in sufficient concentration that can cause the
initiation of the ACS domination to happen at a larger value of @xmath .

### 4.5 ACSs and heterogeneous chemistries

In Section 3.4 , we discussed the effect of heterogeneity in the rate
constants on the steady state concentrations in a spontaneous chemistry.
For the same chemistry (rate constants) we study the effect of inclusion
of catalysts. The steady state concentration profile for ACS65 with
heterogeneous rate constants is shown in Fig. 4.10 . Again, the
molecules produced in the ACS have larger concentrations. The maximum
concentration that any ACS member achieves is limited by its
concentration in the equilibrium case of @xmath . When @xmath , members
of the ACS have concentrations very close to their limiting values,
whereas the background molecules have much lower values in comparison.

### 4.6 Summary

We have shown in this chapter that in the presence of an ACS at
sufficiently large values of @xmath , a small subset of molecules that
constitute the ACS can dominate the chemistry, i.e. , have much larger
concentrations as compared to the background (which consists of other
molecules in the system produced via spontaneous reactions). We present
an analytical reasoning, in the @xmath limit, for the domination of ACS
molecules. The chemistries which contain ACSs usually exhibit a rich
dynamical behaviour such as the existence of multistability. We find
that the qualitative features of these results are robust to a small
heterogeneity present in the system and also hold for sparse
chemistries. This provides a mechanism of ‘chemical selection’ that
allows a subset of molecules in a large set of molecules (comprising the
whole chemistry) to dominate over the rest. We now turn to the question:
can we build a sparse subset containing large molecules using ACSs? In
the following chapter we discuss the problem one encounters in
production of large molecules using ACSs and provide a solution to the
problem in later chapters.

## Chapter 5 Using ACSs to produce large molecules: The problem
\lettrine

[lines=2, lhang=0, loversize=0.0, lraise=0.0]We have seen that in
uncatalyzed chemistries, the concentrations of the large molecules
remain exponentially small ( @xmath ). In catalyzed chemistries,
especially in the presence of an ACS, a few specific large molecules
produced by the ACS can acquire a high population. However, this seems
to require a large catalytic strength for the catalysts. For example,
for ACS65 this happens at @xmath (see Fig. 4.6 ), starting from the
standard initial condition. The fact that such a large catalytic
strength is needed to produce appreciable concentrations of molecules of
even moderate length like @xmath could be a problem for the ACS
mechanism to produce large molecules in the kind of prebiotic scenario
we are considering. In this chapter we characterize the problem somewhat
more quantitatively by determining how @xmath depends upon the size
@xmath of the catalysts in the ACS.

### 5.1 Scaling of @xmath and @xmath with the size of the catalyst

The values of @xmath , @xmath for an ACS (for a fixed set of parameters)
depend upon its topology. The topology of the ACS includes the set of
catalyzed reactions and the assignment of catalysts to each of the
catalyzed reactions. We define the ‘length’ @xmath of an ACS as the size
of ( i.e. , the total number of monomers of all types in) the largest
molecule produced in the ACS. An ‘extremal’ ACS of length @xmath will be
referred to as one in which all reactions belonging to the ACS are
catalyzed by the same molecule which is the largest molecule (of size
@xmath ) in the ACS. For concreteness, since we are interested in the
dependence of @xmath on the catalyst size, we consider only extremal
ACSs of length @xmath . We assume that the catalyst has the same
catalytic strength @xmath for all the reactions in the ACS. We wish to
determine the bistable region for such ACSs and in particular how the
values of @xmath and @xmath depend upon @xmath . These values depend
upon the precise set of catalyzed reactions constituting the ACS. For
illustrative purposes we consider three different ways of generating the
ACS described below as Algorithm 1, 2 and 3, which generate ACSs with
different characteristic structure.

#### 5.1.1 Generating extremal ACSs of length @xmath

We describe three different algorithms used for generating a set of
reactions that provide a pathway to produce a molecule of a given length
@xmath from the food set.

  Algorithm 1:  

     Incremental, smallest-stepsize, deterministic construction. Each
    molecule of size @xmath ( @xmath ) is produced in the reaction
    @xmath . All such reactions for @xmath are included in the ACS.
    Example: For @xmath following reactions are included

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
         @xmath   
         @xmath   
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

  Algorithm 2:  

     Shortest path, top-down, deterministic construction. Start with
    @xmath . If @xmath is even, it is produced in the reaction @xmath .
    If @xmath is odd, say @xmath , then @xmath is produced in the
    reaction @xmath . The same algorithm is used to select a reaction
    for the production of the precursor(s) of @xmath (namely, for @xmath
    if @xmath is even, and for each of @xmath and @xmath if @xmath is
    odd ( @xmath )), and is iterated for their precursors, etc., until
    the only reactant appearing in the reactions is the food set
    molecule, A(1). All the production reactions mentioned above are
    included in the ACS.
    Example: For @xmath following reactions are included

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

  Algorithm 3:  

     Incremental, random construction. In this method, starting from the
    food set @xmath the set of reactants @xmath is sequentially enlarged
    step by step ( @xmath ) to include larger molecules and a reaction
    chosen randomly until a product of length @xmath is obtained. @xmath
    denotes the set of reactants at step @xmath in the algorithm, and
    @xmath the size of the largest molecule in @xmath . At step @xmath ,
    pick a pair of molecules (say @xmath and @xmath ) randomly from
    @xmath , and determine the product @xmath formed if they were to be
    ligated ( @xmath being the same as @xmath is allowed). If the size
    of this product, @xmath , is @xmath or @xmath , discard the pair and
    choose another pair. If @xmath , add the ligation reaction @xmath to
    the ACS, define @xmath , and iterate the procedure. If @xmath , add
    the ligation reaction @xmath to the ACS, and stop. Initially (
    @xmath ) the reactant set is just the food set, @xmath .

To complete the extremal ACS, we assign @xmath as the catalyst of all
the reactions generated using any of the above algorithms. For the
simulations reported in the paper, the reverse of each reaction is also
included as a reaction catalyzed by the same catalyst. For concreteness
we have described the Algorithms 1 and 2 for the single monomer case;
their generalizations to @xmath have also been considered by us.
Algorithm 3, as described above, can be used for any @xmath .

#### 5.1.2 The requirement of exponentially large catalytic strengths

We constructed ACSs of different values of @xmath using the above three
algorithms and determined the @xmath and @xmath values numerically.
These are plotted in Fig. 5.1 . It is evident that @xmath increases with
@xmath according to a power law

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath ranging from 2.1 to 2.8 for the three algorithms, while
@xmath increases exponentially,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath for all the algorithms. @xmath and @xmath depend upon the
other parameters. In particular we find that @xmath increases with
@xmath , i.e. , the catalytic strength needed for large molecules to
arise increases faster with the size of catalyst at larger values of
dissipation. This generalizes, to a much larger class of models, the
results of Ohtsuki and Nowak [ 169 ] , who found a linear dependence of
@xmath on @xmath and an exponential dependence of @xmath .

#### 5.1.3 Why the initiation threshold is exponentially large

The contribution of a catalyst to the rate of the reaction it catalyzes
appears through the factor @xmath , where @xmath is the catalytic
strength of the catalyst and @xmath its concentration. The term unity in
the above factor is the relative contribution of the spontaneous
(uncatalyzed) reaction rate. If the catalyst is to play a significant
role in the reaction, the catalytic contribution to the reaction rate
should be at least comparable to the spontaneous rate, i.e. , @xmath
should be at least comparable to unity. As we have seen earlier the
concentration of large molecules is typically damped exponentially with
their size. Therefore the compensating factor @xmath needs to increase
exponentially in order for the catalyzed reaction rate to be comparable
to the spontaneous reaction rate. For concreteness consider the extremal
ACSs of length @xmath and consider the steady state population @xmath of
the catalyst @xmath in the low fixed point as @xmath is increased. In
the spirit of this rough argument one expects that at the initiation
threshold the term @xmath should be of order unity. In Fig. 5.2 we
display this product for different values of @xmath . Though there is a
secular decreasing trend with @xmath , this product remains of order
unity (Fig. (a)a ) even as the individual factors change over several
orders of magnitude (Fig. (b)b ). This lends numerical support to the
above explanation for the exponential dependence of @xmath on @xmath .

### 5.2 A problem for primordial ACSs to produce large molecules

A natural initial condition for the origin of life scenario is one where
only the food set molecules, and perhaps a few other not very large
molecules (dimers, trimers, etc.) have nonzero concentrations, while the
large molecules have zero concentrations. It is from such an initial
condition that we would like to see the emergence of large molecules
through the dynamics.

The exponential increase of the initiation threshold, @xmath , with
@xmath , quantifies the difficulty in using ACSs to generate large
molecules in the primordial scenario of the type modeled above. This
means that one needs large molecules with unreasonably high catalytic
strengths to exist in the chemistry in order to get them to appear with
appreciable concentrations starting from physically reasonable
primordial initial conditions.

## Chapter 6 Nested ACSs: A structure to promote large molecules
\lettrine

[lines=2, lhang=0, loversize=0.0, lraise=0.0]We now discuss a mechanism
that may overcome the barrier of large catalytic strengths, and may
enable large molecules to arise from primordial initial conditions
without exponentially increasing catalytic strengths. This mechanism
relies on the existence of multiple ACSs of different sizes in the
catalyzed chemistry, in a topology such that the smaller ACSs reinforce
the larger ones, thereby enabling large molecules to appear with
significant concentrations without exponentially increasing their
catalytic strength.

### 6.1 Using a small ACS to reinforce a larger one

To illustrate the basic idea we consider the following simple example
where the catalyzed chemistry contains only two ACSs, one of length
three and the other of length eight (which we refer to as ACS3 and ACS8,
respectively), each generated by the Algorithm 2 mentioned in the
previous chapter. All reactions of the former are catalyzed by @xmath
with a catalytic strength @xmath , and of the latter by @xmath with the
catalytic strength @xmath . Thus the two ACSs are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.1a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.1b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.2a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.2b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.2c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The catalyzed chemistry consists of the above five catalyzed reaction
pairs (we will refer to this catalyzed chemistry as ACS3+8). The network
topology is pictorially depicted in Fig. (a)a . The system also exhibits
bistability, and the concentration of @xmath in the two fixed point
attractors is exhibited in Fig. 6.2 as a function of @xmath and @xmath .

When @xmath is small the two pictures in Fig. 6.2 show the usual
bistability of ACS8 along the @xmath axis. The initiation and
maintenance thresholds are @xmath and @xmath given by the location of
the boundary between the low concentration region (blue, @xmath ) and
the high concentration region (yellow @xmath ) along the @xmath axis in
Figs. (a)a and (b)b respectively. As @xmath increases, the initiation
threshold of ACS8 decreases slowly for a while (in Fig. 6.3 for @xmath =
100, ACS8 dominates at @xmath ), then drops sharply near @xmath . This
value of @xmath is the initiation threshold of ACS3 when @xmath . When
@xmath exceeds this value, the steady state value of @xmath is either
high (yellow, @xmath ) or intermediate (orange, @xmath ), depending upon
the value of @xmath (see panels corresponding to @xmath and @xmath in
Fig. 6.3 ).

The key point is that the initiation threshold of the larger catalyst
depends on the catalytic strength of the smaller catalyst. The former
plummets sharply when the latter approaches the initiation threshold of
the smaller catalyst, dropping to a much lower value than before
(compare the lower limit of the yellow region in Fig. (a)a to the left
and right of @xmath ; the value of @xmath plunges several orders of
magnitude from @xmath at @xmath down to @xmath at @xmath ). Starting
from the standard initial condition, thus, the larger catalyst can
acquire a significant concentration at a much lower value of its
catalytic strength in the presence of a smaller ACS operating above its
initiation threshold than in its absence.

#### 6.1.1 Why a small ACS reinforces a larger one: The role of the
background and spontaneous reactions

When @xmath exceeds the initiation threshold for a catalyzed chemistry
containing an ACS, not only do the steady state concentrations of the
ACS product molecules rise by several orders of magnitude, but also
those of the background molecules rise. As an example compare the two
steady state profiles of ACS65 in Fig. (a)a , which correspond to values
of @xmath below and above the initiation threshold. As one goes from the
lower to the upper curve, the concentration of the ACS members of course
increases dramatically (as shown by the sharp peaks), but note that the
concentrations of other molecules not produced by catalyzed reactions
also goes up significantly. Thus in the chemistry containing two ACSs
(ACS3+8) as one moves along the @xmath axis in Fig. (a)a and crosses the
initiation threshold of ACS3 ( i.e. , @xmath exceeds @xmath ), the
concentration of @xmath (a molecule belonging to the background of ACS3
as its production is not catalysed by ACS3) increases from @xmath (blue
region) to @xmath (orange region). This increase in the concentration of
@xmath by a factor of @xmath makes it easier for ACS8 to function and
its initiation threshold drops by a corresponding factor of about @xmath
(from @xmath to @xmath ).

This fact highlights the role of spontaneous reactions in the overall
dynamics. The background molecules are connected to the ACS through
spontaneous reactions, and if it were not for the latter, an ACS would
not be able to push up the concentrations of its nearby background. We
shall refer to a structure such as the one described above containing
ACSs of different sizes with the smaller ACS feeding into the larger one
through the spontaneous reactions as a ‘nested ACS’ structure.

We remark that the “distance” between the catalysts of the two ACSs (as
calculated on the network of spontaneous reactions linking the two
molecules) is pertinent to the point under discussion in this section.
If the two ACSs are very distant, e.g., instead of two catalysts of size
3 and 8 in the above example we had studied catalysts of size 3 and 20,
then even though the smaller ACS raises the concentration of the larger
catalyst, the rise may not be sufficient to allow the larger ACS to
dominate at reasonable catalytic strengths.

### 6.2 The role of ‘overlapping’ catalyzed pathways in nested ACSs

The above example also serves to highlight some other features of
catalyzed chemistries containing multiple ACSs. Note that the production
pathway of @xmath in ACS8 (Eqs. 6.2 and Fig. (a)a ) contains one
reaction pair in common with ACS3, namely the reaction pair @xmath . One
can consider a situation wherein the overlap is greater. E.g., consider
the ACS8 @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.3a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.3b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.3c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.3d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Now the set of reactions in ACS3 is a subset of ACS8 @xmath (ignoring
the catalyst, which is different in the two cases). The degree of
overlap of the catalyzed reaction sets between a pair of nested ACSs
makes a difference in the dynamics. Consider, for example, the catalyzed
chemistry consisting of ACS3 and ACS8 @xmath , i.e. , the set of
catalyzed reactions given by Eqs. ( 6.1 ) and ( 6.3 ), which we refer to
as ACS3+8 @xmath . This is picturized in Fig. (b)b . Like ACS3+8, this
chemistry also shows a reduction of @xmath , when @xmath exceeds its
initiation threshold. We find that while at @xmath the value of @xmath
for the two chemistries is not too different ( @xmath for ACS3+8 @xmath
versus @xmath for ACS3+8), at @xmath , @xmath reduces to a value 920 in
ACS3+8 @xmath , which is less than half of the value 2178 that it
reduces to in ACS3+8. Thus a larger degree of overlap between the
catalyzed reaction sets of nested ACSs causes more effective
reinforcement.

Another example with this behaviour for @xmath is described in Fig. 6.4
. In each of the three ACS pairs shown in the figure, the smaller ACS,
of length 4, is the same, (it will be referred to as ACS(2,2)) and is
defined by the reactions (each catalyzed by (2,2))

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.4a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.4b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The three larger ACSs, called ACS(5,3)(a), ACS(5,3)(b) and ACS(5,3)(c),
respectively, can essentially be determined from the figure. For
example, ACS(5,3)(a) consists of the two reaction pairs given by Eqs. (
6.4 ), both catalyzed by (5,3) as well as the three reactions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.5a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.5b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.5c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

ACS(5,3)(b) consists of the single reaction pair given by the first of
Eqs. ( 6.4 ), catalyzed by (5,3), as well as the four reactions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.6a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.6b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.6c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.6d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and ACS(5,3)(c) consists of the five reaction pairs

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.7a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.7b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.7c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.7d)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.7e)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The network topologies for three catalyzed chemistries are depicted
pictorially in Fig. 6.5 .

We consider the population dynamics of chemistries in which the
spontaneous part includes all possible ligation and cleavage reactions
involving molecules with upto @xmath monomers with homogeneous rate
constants @xmath , @xmath , and the catalyzed part containing one or
more of the above mentioned ACSs. When ACS(2,2) is the only ACS present,
the system shows bistability with the initiation threshold being @xmath
. When ACS(5,3)(a), (b) or (c) are the only ACSs present, the initiation
thresholds for them are 1125197, 1031082, and 1000112, respectively.
When ACS(2,2) and one of ACS(5,3) (a), (b) or (c) are both present, and
the catalytic strength of (2,2) is 552, the initiation thresholds of the
three larger ACSs reduce to 941, 1256, and 2482, respectively. Again, it
is seen that the larger the degree of overlap of the two nested ACSs,
the more effective is the reinforcement.

### 6.3 Summary

In this chapter we have considered nested ACSs in a simple setting,
wherein the catalyzed chemistry contains just two extremal ACSs, one
larger than the other. The catalyst of the larger ACS is in the
background of the smaller ACS, i.e. , it can be produced from the
product molecules of the smaller ACS via pathways of spontaneous
reactions. We have shown that this reduces the catalytic strength
required for the larger ACS to dominate by a substantial amount (by
several order of magnitude in the examples considered). We have given an
explanation for this, namely, that when the smaller ACS operates above
its own initiation threshold, it boosts the concentrations of its
background molecules including that of the larger catalyst by a large
factor resulting in a corresponding decrease of the initiation threshold
of the larger ACS.

## Chapter 7 Hierarchy of nested ACSs: A possible route for the
appearance of large molecules \lettrine

[lines=2, lhang=0, loversize=0.0, lraise=0.0]The process of nesting
discussed in the previous chapter for two ACSs can be extended to
multiple levels of ACSs connected to each other. Here we discuss
sequences of ACSs of increasing size, with the catalyzed reaction set of
each ACS in the sequence partially or completely contained within the
next one, and the catalytic strength of molecules increasing with size
in a controlled manner. We construct examples of such sequences in which
large catalyst molecules containing several hundred monomers can acquire
significant concentrations starting from the standard initial condition,
even though all catalysts have moderate catalytic strengths.

We construct a hierarchy of nested ACSs using two algorithms. In order
to construct a cascade of nested ACSs in which reaction sets of smaller
ACSs are completely contained in the larger ones (maximal overlap), we
used Algorithm 4 (described below). This algorithm produces a cascade of
ACSs with @xmath steps (generations), with the @xmath generation ACS
containing @xmath new reactions. We studied several catalyzed
chemistries containing a cascade of nested ACSs for @xmath and 2. One
example of each type is presented below; other examples gave
qualitatively similar results. To construct ACSs with a variable degree
of overlap, we used Algorithm 5. At each step @xmath , an extremal ACS
of length @xmath is added, generated using Algorithm 3. In Algorithm 5
the sequence of lengths, @xmath , is specified before running the
algorithm.

### 7.1 Generating a cascade of nested ACSs

  Algorithm 4:  

     Incremental, random construction of a sequence of reaction sets
    with maximal overlap. We construct successive sets, or
    ‘generations’, @xmath in number, @xmath , of product molecules,
    starting from the food set @xmath . Each generation @xmath @xmath
    has a pre-specifed number of molecules, @xmath ( @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath need to be specified before running the algorithm). At step
    @xmath of the cascade an ACS @xmath is constructed from the previous
    ACS @xmath by adding reactions between molecules belonging to a
    reactant set @xmath consisting of all the products of the previous
    generations and the food set, @xmath . Let @xmath denote the size of
    the largest molecule in @xmath . At the beginning of the @xmath
    step, @xmath is empty and the set of reactions in @xmath is the same
    as in @xmath , except that the catalysts of the reactions in @xmath
    are not yet assigned. ( @xmath is the empty set.) To construct
    @xmath and @xmath , pick a molecule @xmath at random from the
    previous generation of products @xmath and another molecule @xmath
    at random from @xmath , and determine the product @xmath formed if
    they were to be ligated ( @xmath being the same as @xmath is
    allowed). If the size of this product, @xmath , is @xmath , discard
    the pair and choose another pair. If @xmath , add the molecule
    @xmath to @xmath and the ligation reaction @xmath to @xmath . Repeat
    this procedure until @xmath molecules are added to @xmath and @xmath
    reactions are added to @xmath . Assign catalysts to each reaction in
    @xmath (which includes the reactions inherited from @xmath and the
    new @xmath reactions) randomly from @xmath . This completes the
    @xmath step. To get the full cascade with @xmath generations this
    process is carried out for @xmath . By construction the set of
    reactions (ignoring the catalyst) of each @xmath is fully contained
    in that of @xmath but the catalysts are different, being drawn from
    @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . The union of the @xmath ’s
    constitutes the set of reactions in the catalyzed chemistry. Note
    that in this catalyzed chemistry reactions have multiple catalysts,
    the multiplicity declining for reactions producing higher generation
    molecules.

    The size of the food set constrains how large @xmath can be. For
    @xmath , @xmath and @xmath as the only product one can make from a
    reaction in the food set is @xmath , and @xmath can only have values
    1 and 2 as the only products one can produce in the second
    generation (from reactants in @xmath are @xmath and @xmath , etc.
    Similarly for @xmath , @xmath can be only 1,2 or 3, as reactions
    among the two food set molecules @xmath and @xmath can only produce
    three molecules @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

  Algorithm 5:  

     Incremental, random construction of a sequence of reaction sets
    with partial overlap. In this algorithm we decide on a sequence of
    increasing lengths, @xmath , and generate an extremal ACS, denoted
    @xmath , of length @xmath using Algorithm 3 for each @xmath . The
    union of the @xmath ’s constitutes the set of reactions in the
    catalyzed chemistry.

    For each @xmath a different random number seed is used to initialize
    Algorithm 3. Changing the random number seed results in a different
    set of reactions defining the ACS.

### 7.2 Dominance of an ACS of length 441 (ACS441)

For @xmath we describe a cascade with @xmath and @xmath . This catalyzed
chemistry had 29 product molecules, the largest of which was @xmath
having 441 monomers. The list of molecules and reactions is given in
Appendix F . The catalytic strength @xmath of each molecule was chosen
by an explicit length dependent rule

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are constants. We describe a simulation with
@xmath and @xmath . This particular rule was chosen to contrast with Eq.
( 5.2 ) which characterizes the initiation threshold of an extremal ACS
of length @xmath . For a value of @xmath such as 441, the exponential
function in Eq. ( 5.2 ) would have given an astronomically large
catalytic strength ¹ ¹ 1 Extrapolating Eq. ( 5.2 ) with @xmath as given
below that equation would give @xmath . As mentioned in Section 5.1.2 ,
@xmath depends upon other parameters, including @xmath . The value
@xmath given in Section 5.1.2 is obtained for @xmath (see Fig. 5.1 ). In
this section we discuss simulations with larger values of @xmath for
which @xmath is large. Thus the corresponding values of @xmath from Eq.
( 5.2 ) (for extremal ACSs) would actually be significantly larger than
@xmath . , whereas the much slower growing power law in Eq. ( 7.1 )
gives @xmath for the above mentioned values of the constants. Starting
from the standard initial condition, the steady state concentration
profile of this catalyzed chemistry embedded in a fully connected
spontaneous chemistry with @xmath is shown in Fig. (a)a and for sparsely
connected spontaneous chemistry with @xmath and @xmath in Fig. (b)b and
(c)c , respectively. As also seen for chemistries with a single ACS
(Fig. 4.9 , Section 4.4 ) the increase of sparseness causes the
background concentrations to decline, while ACS molecules dominate more
strongly.

This example shows that with the nested ACS structure in the catalyzed
chemistry, large catalyst molecules can acquire significant
concentrations starting from an initial condition containing only the
monomers, even when catalytic strengths grow quite slowly with the
length of the catalyst. It is worth noting that product of the catalytic
strength of @xmath and its steady state concentration ( @xmath ) is
about 36000, and this is the factor by which it speeds up the reactions
it catalyzes over the spontaneous rate. In view of the fact that enzymes
containing a few hundred amino acids speed up the reactions they
catalyze within cells by factors of about @xmath and greater, the
catalytic efficiency demanded of @xmath does not seem unreasonably high.

Eq. ( 7.1 ), which gives a particular functional form for @xmath , is
ad-hoc, and, at this stage, merely an example given to quantify the
level of catalytic strengths that is sufficient for large molecules to
arise in appreciable concentrations in the prebiotic scenario under
consideration if chemistry has the nested ACS structure of the kind
discussed. One may ask if an even weaker requirement would suffice. We
have considered smaller values of @xmath (1.2 and 1.0) keeping @xmath
fixed, and found that ACS molecules upto a particular size (depending on
@xmath ) do well but that the concentration of larger ACS molecules
trails off and merges with the background (Fig. 7.2 ). The size range of
ACS molecules that do well can be increased by increasing the
coefficient @xmath . Since the results depend upon several factors,
including the topology of the ACS and the uncatalyzed chemistry, a
detailed investigation has not been carried out.

### 7.3 Cascading nested ACSs with @xmath

An example of a nested ACS with two food sources, ACS(36,28), is
presented in Fig. 7.3 . This is also generated by Algorithm 4 and has 7
generations with @xmath for each generation, the largest molecule being
(36,28) (the full list of molecules and reactions is given in Appendix G
). Again starting from the standard initial condition the larger ACS
molecules acquire appreciable concentrations with a moderate demand on
their catalytic strengths.

As a final example we present in Fig. 7.4 a cascade of ACSs, named
ACS(18,27) after its largest molecule, in which smaller ACSs have only a
partial overlap with longer ones. This is generated using Algorithm 5
and consists of a series of 10 ACSs of increasing length. The detailed
list of molecules, reactions and catalytic strengths is given in
Appendix H . At each step, we use the random number seed to control the
degree of overlap produced between successive generations of ACSs. At
each step @xmath , the random number seed was so chosen that the
catalytic strength required for ACS @xmath to dominate (given all the
ACSs of previous generations) is not too large compared to the one for
ACS @xmath and, at the same time, each successive ACS in the cascade has
only a few reactions in common with other ACSs. Unlike in the examples
discussed above, generated by Algorithm 4, in the present case molecules
(except the small molecules) produced in the catalyzed chemistry have
typically only one or two catalyzed ligation reactions producing them.
The chemistry also contains a number of catalyzed ‘side reactions’,
which produce molecules that are neither catalysts nor reactants in any
pathway leading to the largest molecule. In fact there is a ‘side
pathway’ consisting of several reactions that may be viewed as ‘draining
the resources’ of the main ACS. ACS dominance at moderate catalytic
strengths occurs for this chemistry also. The largest @xmath is 50000
for the molecule (18,27), and at a steady state population of 0.26
enhances the rate of a reaction by a factor of 13000 over the
spontaneous rate. This shows that the mechanism outlined by us is not
restricted to maximally overlapping nested ACSs but is more generic.

## Chapter 8 Discussion and future outlook

### 8.1 Summary

To summarize, we have considered the population dynamics in a well
stirred chemical reactor of an artificial chemistry in which large
molecules can in principle be produced by successive ligations of pairs
of smaller molecules, and where the populations of the smallest
molecules, the ‘food set’ molecules or monomers, are buffered. The
chemistry contains a large number of spontaneous reactions of which a
small subset could be catalyzed by molecules produced in the chemistry.
We have particularly considered the case where the set of catalyzed
reactions contains autocatalytic sets. The main questions this thesis
has been concerned with are: ( a ) under what circumstances do molecules
belonging to the ACSs dominate in concentration over the rest of
molecules in the chemistry (the background), and ( b ) starting from an
initial condition that does not contain good catalysts, does the
dynamics of such a chemical network permit a sparse set of large
molecules (containing several tens or a few hundred monomers) that are
good catalysts to arise and be maintained in the reactor at
concentrations significantly above the background?

Under ( a ) we confirm earlier results (Bagley and Farmer [ 172 , 159 ]
) that the mere existence of ACSs in the chemistry at the level of
network topology is not sufficient to guarantee their domination at the
population level, and extend them to quantitatively characterize the
interplay between ACS topology and rate constants including catalytic
strengths, dissipation rate, etc., that results in ACS domination. In
the absence of catalyzed reactions, and even the presence of an ACS if
the catalytic strength @xmath of catalysts is not large enough, the
steady state concentration profile in such a reactor shows an
exponential decline with the length of the molecule (see, e.g., Figs.
3.3 , 3.5 , (a)a and Eqs. ( 3.4 ), ( 3.1 )). In order for ACS molecules
to shine above the background, the catalytic strength needs to be
sufficiently large. We show that a high dissipation rate @xmath together
with a large catalytic strength contributes to ACS domination, the
former contributing to keeping the background low and the latter to
preferentially enhancing the ACS molecule concentrations (Fig. 4.2 and
the discussion below Eqs. 4.3 ). We show that ACSs often produce a
bistability in the dynamics (within a range of catalytic strength @xmath
) with ACS molecule concentrations being appreciable and much higher
than the background in one of the two stable fixed points (the ‘high’
fixed point), and being low and comparable to the background in the
‘low’ fixed point (Figs. 4.2 , 4.6 , 4.8 ). Bistability provides a crisp
criterion for ACS domination: If the reactor initially contains only the
monomers – the relevant condition for the origin of life problem under
consideration (or more generally, if the initial conditions are in the
basin of attraction of the low fixed point), ACS molecules will dominate
in the steady state only if @xmath . If the initial conditions are in
the basin of attraction of the high fixed point (and this means that the
concentration of the catalysts is already high), ACS molecules will
dominate when @xmath . We also show that for extremal ACSs (in which the
largest molecule is the catalyst of all the catalyzed reactions) the
‘maintenance threshold’ @xmath grows as a power of the size of the
catalyst, while the ‘initiation threshold’ @xmath grows exponentially
with the size of the catalyst (Fig. 5.1 , Eq. ( 5.2 )). This extends the
results of Ohtsuki and Nowak [ 169 ] to a much larger class of models.
Since @xmath characterizes the lower limit of catalytic strength needed
to get to the ‘high’ fixed point starting from an initial condition
containing only small molecules, the last result quantifies the
difficulty for large molecules to dominate in a prebiotic scenario via
the ACS mechanism, namely, the requirement of an unreasonably large
catalytic strength.

Under ( b ) we present a possible resolution to this problem via nested
ACSs. We show that if an ACS catalyzed by large molecules contains
within it (or partially overlaps with) a smaller ACS catalyzed by
smaller molecules (we refer to this as a ‘nested ACS’ structure), the
catalytic strength required for the large ACS to dominate comes down
drastically (Fig. 6.2 and the associated discussion). Effectively the
small ACS reinforces the larger one. We argue that this reinforcement
(as measured by a reduced @xmath of the large ACS) has its roots in the
population upliftment that the small ACS provides to its background
which includes the large catalyst. One can construct a cascade of nested
ACSs with each successive and larger ACS in the cascade lying in the
background of the smaller ACSs, thereby receiving reinforcement from
them and in turn providing reinforcement to the next larger ACS in the
cascade. We use this mechanism to construct several examples of cascaded
nested ACSs with moderate catalytic strengths in which large molecules
(containing upto several hundred monomers) are found to dominate
significantly over the background starting from only monomers in the
initial state(Figs. 7.1 , 7.3 , 7.4 . We show that even a @xmath growing
as slowly as a power of the catalyst size (Eq. ( 7.1 )) is enough to get
large molecule domination through the mechanism of nested ACSs. This is
a significant improvement over the exponentially growing requirement for
@xmath in part ( a ). We construct several examples including one in
which a large catalyst (with close to 450 monomers) arises with a
dominant population in the steady state starting from initial conditions
containing only the monomers. This catalyst has a reasonable catalytic
strength compared to enzyme catalysts (in the steady state it enhances
the rates of reactions that it catalyzes by a factor of less than @xmath
over the spontaneous rate).

Thus our work presents a possible resolution to the chicken and egg
problem in chemistry posited by the existence of large molecules. In the
context of the present model the appearance of large molecules is a
natural dynamical consequence of chemistry possessing the structure
described above – a cascading nested ACS structure (with a not very
demanding set of catalytic strengths) embedded in a spontaneous
chemistry – together with the buffered presence of the food set
molecules in a well stirred region of space. The mechanism is an
incremental one: to begin we require the small molecules that are built
by spontaneous reactions from the food set to have weak catalytic
properties, but after that we only require molecular properties ( i.e. ,
catalytic strength) that are an extension of existing molecular
properties; at no point do we require a molecular property that is a
radical departure from what already exists. Through the mechanism of
sequential population support to successively larger (and stronger)
catalysts from smaller (and weaker) ones, and the nonlinearity and
feedback inherent in autocatalytic systems, the large catalysts
effectively bootstrap themselves into existence.

### 8.2 Possible applications of the model to prebiotic scenarios

The kind of mathematical model we have studied, inspired by the work of
Bagley and Farmer, is quite abstract; its virtue is the economy of
assumptions that go into its structure. The main ingredients are that
objects can combine with each other in processes or ‘reactions’ to form
other objects and certain objects can facilitate certain processes, i.e.
, ‘catalyze’ certain reactions. The population dynamics implements a
simple scheme for how the abundances of the objects would change with
time assuming that the probability of objects combining is proportional
to their abundances. Such a generic scheme while it applies in detail to
no particular situation allows us to imagine mechanisms at a conceptual
level. It is significant that in this scheme an ACS can direct the flows
towards itself and cause a certain sparse subset of objects, including
some specific large composite ones, to capture a large fraction of the
chemical resources.

At this level of abstraction the model (or a variant with qualitatively
similar features) could apply to the peptide chemistry as well as an RNA
chemistry and to a prebiotic metabolism, as already noted by Bagley and
Farmer. Indeed it would be equally applicable if a prebiotic environment
actually had a mixture of ingredients from all these classes of
chemistries, a possibility that has been advocated in, e.g., [ 182 , 183
] . Copley, Smith and Morowitz [ 182 ] have proposed a scenario which
seeks to explain how the RNA world might have originated through a
series of incremental steps starting from a primitive metabolism. The
food sources for this supposed metabolism are @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , etc., in a hydrothermal vent. Their scenario envisages multiple
stages of increasing complexity which they refer to as ( i ) the monomer
stage, in which metabolism, possibly powered by an autocatalytic set
such as the reverse TCA cycle, produces nucleotides and simple amino
acids, ( ii ) the multimer stage, which produces dimers and small
cofactors, ( iii ) the micro-RNA stage, producing of oligonucleotides of
length 3-10, ( iv ) the mini-RNA stage, with 11-40mers, followed by ( v
) the macro-RNA stage, or the RNA world. In their scenario each
successive stage produced better catalysts that collectively catalyzed
not only their own production from the molecules of the previous stage,
but also the reactions of the lower stages. This structure is very
similar to the cascade of nested ACSs that we have discussed. A suitably
modified version of our model could be constructed to explore the
dynamics of this scenario in more detail. At a general level, in the
fact that the dynamics of our model results in the stable domination, or
concentrating, of the large catalysts, our mathematical work perhaps
lends support to the workability of such a scenario.

There is another level at which the present model (or its variants)
might talk to prebiotic chemistry. Morowitz [ 92 ] has suggested that
the metabolic network itself has a shell like structure which can
convert simple molecules like @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , etc., through
“a hierarchy of nested reaction networks involving increasing
complexity” into purines, pyrimidines, complex cofactors, etc. Reaction
sets created by our Algorithms 4 and 5 are reminiscent of this picture.
Missing from Morowitz’s picture is a catalyst assignment for each
reaction from among the molecules in the various shells or from among
other catalysts accessible prebiotically (e.g., surfaces in hydrothermal
vents). It might be worthwhile to attempt to add in that information for
a more complete scenario and for potential modeling.

### 8.3 Caveats and future directions

1.  We have studied the properties of autocatalytic systems, by choosing
    specific examples of ACS topology and special algorithms for
    constructing them. This has allowed us to systematically investigate
    the dynamical properties that ACSs offer. We believe that similar
    dynamical properties would hold for more general topological
    structures than we have considered. Nevertheless the question arises
    as to whether all these structures are very special structures and
    whether or not they are likely to arise within real chemistry and
    ‘generic’ artificial chemistries. ACSs have been shown to be quite
    generic in a large class of randomly constructed artificial
    chemistries [ 184 , 185 ] , and a similar analysis could be extended
    to cascading nested ACSs. This would help parametrize or
    characterize chemistries that would contain such structures and
    those that would not. In this context it would useful to go beyond
    the simple case we have considered in which a molecule is defined by
    the number of monomers of each type and not their sequence. It may
    also be interesting to look for structures similar to nested ACSs in
    real metabolic networks using methods similar to those in [ 186 ] .

2.  An important related question is one of side reactions (discussed in
    [ 187 , 62 ] ) which might destroy the efficacy of ACSs. In the real
    chemistry one expects that even if cascading nested ACSs exist,
    there would also exist other catalyzed reactions channelizing the
    ACS products into pathways leading in other directions. Whether
    substantial populations of large molecules in the nested ACSs can be
    maintained in the presence of such diversion is a question that
    remains to be systematically investigated. Our last example of
    cascading nested ACSs in fact has several side reactions and it may
    be noted that large ACSs still dominated in that case. We remark
    that while side reactions can drain resources from ACSs, they also
    help the system to explore new directions in chemical space in an
    evolutionary scenario.

3.  We have considered deterministic dynamics in this paper. Stochastic
    fluctuations are important when molecular populations are small and
    can have interesting effects on ACS dynamics [ 188 , 189 , 190 , 166
    ] . For a chemistry containing multiple ACSs, Bagley, Farmer and
    Fontana [ 160 ] used stochasticity to produce examples of
    trajectories that differed from each other in the sequence of ACSs
    that came to dominate the reactor. It would be interesting to
    explore such effects in the context of the present model.

4.  Another simplification we have made is that of homogeneous
    chemistries, wherein the rate constants of all spontaneous reactions
    have been taken to be the same, and even catalytic strengths, where
    variable, have been taken to be smooth functions of the length. We
    have also shown that introducing a small amount of heterogeneity or
    randomness in the rate constants does not change the qualitative
    behaviour significantly. However, the effect of cranking up the
    heterogeneity has not been studied. From studies of disordered
    systems in statistical mechanics and condensed matter physics it has
    become clear that such heterogeneity can lead to rugged landscapes,
    multiple attractors and timescales, and paths that are difficult to
    locate [ 191 ] . The dynamics of such systems when they are driven
    by a non-equilibrium flux or buffering of food set molecules is an
    open question. It is possible that the constraints placed by the
    ruggedness of the landscape will reduce the number of accessible
    paths. The populating of molecules at different levels in a nested
    hierarchy of ACSs is likely to happen in fits and starts on multiple
    timescales when heterogeneity is accounted for. It is perhaps in
    such a scenario that one should look for answers to the questions
    raised under (1), (2) and (3) above.

5.  The present model describes a population dynamics in a fixed
    environment. However the environment can change over a longer time
    scale leading to a complex evolutionary dynamics [ 163 , 164 ] . We
    remark that in the context of the present model, the exogenous
    supply or depletion of certain molecules may affect the dynamics and
    allow the system to explore other steady states. For example, the
    system in the lower attractor of the bistable region may get
    elevated to the higher attractor if the exogenously supplied
    molecules can move the system from the basin of the lower attractor
    to that of the higher attractor. A sudden flux out of the system,
    may deplete the system of some molecules; this may cause a
    transition from the higher to the lower attractor. It may be
    interesting to study the effect of exogenously supplied molecules as
    well as of the sudden removal of molecules from the system and
    eventually incorporate an evolutionary scenario in which a more
    realistic setting for the origin of life could be investigated.

6.  The model we have discussed has no spatial structures, i.e. , the
    dynamics of the system happen in a homogeneous well stirred region
    of a prebiotic niche. One of the important steps in the origin of
    life was the appearance of enclosures. One can consider a scenario
    in which one or more of the molecules produced in our chemistry can
    spontaneously aggregate to form vesicles thereby providing an
    enclosure to the ACS dynamics. Enclosures such as vesicles can
    selectively allow exchange of molecules with the environment,
    thereby allowing the system to access new steady states. An
    important body of work in this respect is the one that deals with
    the growth and evolution of protocells [ 192 , 110 , 116 , 114 , 193
    , 125 , 170 , 115 ] . In our model we have also excluded self
    replicating molecules. One can also think of scenarios in which one
    of the molecules produced in the chemistry has the property of
    template replication. While systems of replicators including those
    where the replicator is catalyzed have been extensively studied [
    194 , 195 , 168 , 196 , 169 ] . The dynamics of systems with
    replication reactions as well as catalyzed non-replication reactions
    may be interesting in its own right. Further these systems may exist
    in the presence of enclosures. It will be interesting to integrate
    these different approaches.

## Appendix A @xmath-independence of results at large @xmath

While the chemistry considered in this model is an infinite one,
numerical exploration requires us to work with a finite set of molecules
that participate in the chemistry. This introduces an additional
parameter @xmath , the size of the largest molecule produced in the
chemistry, in the model. Here we present evidence showing that certain
important properties of the model become @xmath -independent at large
enough @xmath . Specifically we show that the steady state profile of
concentrations become independent for @xmath for both uncatalyzed
chemistries (discussed in Chapter 3 ) and chemistries with ACS
(discussed in Chapter 4 ).

### a.1 Uncatalyzed chemistry

The steady state concentrations for an uncatalyzed chemistry can be
approximated by an exponential function, @xmath , where @xmath and
@xmath are constants (see Eq. ( 3.4 )). We calculate @xmath from the
slope of the straight line fit on the plot of the log of the steady
state concentrations, @xmath , versus length, @xmath . We found that for
sufficiently large @xmath , @xmath becomes independent of @xmath ; see
Fig. A.1 .

When @xmath , the concentrations of the large molecules are small. It is
evident that if the concentrations of the large molecules produced in
the chemistry are so small that their contributions to the dynamics of
the (relatively) smaller molecules is negligible, then, including
molecules larger than those already considered in such a chemistry would
cause no difference to the results.

### a.2 Catalyzed chemistry

For chemistries with catalyzed reactions, including ACSs, we find that
for sufficiently large @xmath , the numerical results are independent of
@xmath . In Fig. A.2 we show how the steady state concentrations in the
chemistry that includes ACS65 (defined by Eq. ( 4.1 )) depend upon
@xmath .

The results for the chemistry with @xmath were also found to be @xmath
-independent (for sufficiently large values of @xmath ). We find that
for @xmath the @xmath -independence is reached at much smaller values of
@xmath than for @xmath .

## Appendix B Model run at fixed input rate of monomer instead of
buffered concentration

In Section 2.5 we have discussed the differences between our model and
that studied by Bagley and Farmer [ 158 , 172 , 159 ] . One of the
differences is that of the boundary condition. In our model, we have
considered the food set molecules to be buffered, i.e. , their
concentrations remain constant in time. Whereas, Bagley and Farmer
consider a constant influx of the monomers; they consider the system as
a chemical reactor in a which a fixed supply of monomers enter per unit
time and a dilution flux takes away the products of the system. In this
Appendix we discuss our model with a fixed input rate of monomers
instead of buffered concentrations.

Consider the case of a fully connected and homogenous spontaneous
chemistry with @xmath . The rate equations for @xmath (for @xmath the
third term is absent) are given by (see Eq. ( 2.2 )),

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

And for the monomer,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where, @xmath , is the fixed rate at which the monomer enters the
system.

If @xmath is the molecular weight in atomic mass units (amu) of the
monomer molecules and @xmath the concentration of @xmath in moles per
unit volume, the total mass of the system is given by @xmath . All the
terms in Eqs. ( B ) and ( B.2 ) conserve mass except @xmath , that
corresponds to addition of new monomers to the system, and terms with
@xmath , which models the loss of monomers (as monomers as well as
larger molecules) from the system. Therefore, the rate of change of
total mass is given by,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

At steady state, the total mass of the system goes to a fixed point,
@xmath . Thus fixing @xmath and @xmath fixes the steady state value of
@xmath .

In this system we are able to reproduce the result of ACS domination,
which has been discussed for the buffered food set case in Chapter 4 .
For ACS65 (defined by Eqs. ( 4.1 )) we are able to see that the
molecules produced in ACS are able to dominate well above the background
as was the case in the buffered input system. We even find bistability
in the dynamics of the system as @xmath changes (see Fig. B.1 ). In the
lower attractor, most of the mass is accumulated in the small molecules,
whereas in the higher attractor the ACS molecules are able to dominate
over the background (see Fig. B.2 ).

## Appendix C Comparison with the model of Ohtsuki and Nowak

Ohtsuki and Nowak discussed a model of prelife catalysts [ 169 ] . They
consider two type of activated monomers: @xmath and @xmath , produced
spontaneously and abundantly in prebiotic chemistry. These monomers can
deactivate to produce inactivated monomers, 0 and 1. Activated monomers
can combine with inactivated molecules to produce larger molecules,
@xmath and @xmath . It is assumed that the molecules only grow from one
side by the addition of activated monomers. Therefore, each string
@xmath has a unique precursor, @xmath , and two followers, denoted
@xmath and @xmath ( i.e. , if @xmath ). The dynamics of the system are
given by,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath represent all binary strings, @xmath is the concentration
of sequence @xmath and @xmath is the rate constants for the reaction in
which @xmath is produced form @xmath . @xmath is the rate constant for
the reaction @xmath and @xmath the rate constant for the reaction @xmath
. It is assumed that the concentration of activated monomers is
buffered, and the rate constants subsume their concentrations in Eq. (
C.1 ). For production of deactivated monomers, 0 and 1, via reactions
@xmath and @xmath , the predecessors @xmath are @xmath and @xmath
respectively. @xmath is a loss rate at which the molecules are removed
from the system. Each sequence of strings, obtained by repeated addition
of 0s or 1s, is termed as a lineage, e.g., @xmath , or @xmath , etc. For
the case of ‘fully symmetric’ prelife, assume that @xmath and @xmath for
all other sequences, @xmath . In this case, all sequences of length
@xmath have the same steady state concentration and one may focus on a
particular lineage, which for convenience may be chosen to be @xmath .
Between them the reactions are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.2a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.2b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.2c)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.2d)
     @xmath               
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and the rate equations are given by,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.3a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.3b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.3c)
     @xmath               
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath is the concentration of @xmath . Let a sequence of length @xmath
be denoted as @xmath , then one may write the equations as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.4a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.4b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In their catalyzed prelife model, Ohtsuki and Nowak assume that some
strings can catalyze certain reactions. For example, if sequence @xmath
is a catalyst for the reaction @xmath , it enhances the rate of the
reaction from @xmath @xmath , where @xmath is the spontaneous reaction
rate and @xmath is the strength at which @xmath catalyzes the reaction.
They call a ‘perfect prelife catalyst’ as one which catalyzes all the
ligation reaction in its own lineage. In fully symmetric prelife with a
perfect catalyst of length 5 we can write following reactions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.5a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.5b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.5c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.5d)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.5e)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.5f)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.5g)
     @xmath                        (C.5h)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The rate equations for the system described by Eqs. ( C.5 ) are given
by,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.6a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.6b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.6c)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.6d)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.6e)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.6f)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.6g)
     @xmath               (C.6h)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

### c.1 Reducing our @xmath model to Ohtsuki and Nowak model

Consider the following forward reactions in our model,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.7a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.7b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.7c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.7d)
     @xmath                        
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

All other reactions are omitted from the chemistry by setting their
respective reaction rate constants equal to zero, @xmath for all @xmath
, @xmath for all @xmath pairs. Thus from Eq. ( 2.2 ) we get,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

We now make following relabeling of species in Ohtsuki and Nowak model
to compare it with our model, @xmath is now labeled as @xmath and @xmath
, the buffered activated monomer in the system, is now labeled @xmath .
Explicitly,

  -- -------- -------- -- --
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath               
  -- -------- -------- -- --

Comparing Eqs. ( C.8 ) and ( C.4 ) we get, @xmath for all @xmath , and
@xmath for all @xmath . Note, reaction ( C.7a ) is a bimolecular
reaction, where as reaction ( C.2a ) is a unimolecular reaction, but as
@xmath is a constant it can be absorbed in the rate constant. For a
catalysed reaction, @xmath . (Note that Ohtsuki and Nowak only consider
spontaneous transformation of activated monomers into deactivated ones,
thus reaction ( C.7a ) is not catalysed.)

With these transformations our model reduces exactly to the fully
symmetric prelife model with catalysis given by Ohtsuki and Nowak. All
their analytical results also apply to this (reduced) model. Numerically
we have been able to reproduce all their results. An example of steady
state concentration profile for a chemistry containing the following set
of catalyzed reactions is shown in Fig. C.1 .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.10a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.10b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.10c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.10d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In this reduced form of the model only the largest molecule produced in
catalyzed reactions dominates the population.

## Appendix D The origin of multistability in ACS65

In this appendix we attempt to give an intuitive understanding of why
ACS65 has a multistability in its dynamics, in particular the existence
of the third attractor with intermediate concentrations shown in Fig.
4.7 , The reason rests on the substructure of ACS65. Notice that any
catalyzed chemistries defined by a subset of the reactions given in Eqs.
4.1 (that define ACS65) is not an ACS. Thus our discussion naturally
leads to non-ACS catalyzed chemistries.

### d.1 Catalyzed chemistries not containing an ACS

A particularly interesting case of catalyzed chemistries that do not
contain an ACS arises when the set of catalyzed reactions form unbroken
pathways from the food set to higher molecules, but the catalysts are
not drawn from the product set of these reactions ( i.e. , the catalyzed
chemistry satisfies condition (b) for an ACS but not the condition (a);
see Section 4.1 ). In this case we again observe the domination of the
molecules produced by the catalyzed pathways, but this occurs at even
higher catalytic strengths than for the ACSs that include production for
these catalysts. The reasons are similar to those discussed above in
Section 4.2.1 in the context of the @xmath limit for ACSs (note that in
that limit the identity of the catalyst is irrelevant for the argument
as long as the catalyst has a nonzero concentration). We have also
observed bistability in these chemistries (an example is discussed
below) as well as a dependence on @xmath similar to the ACS case. In
general, catalyzed chemistries (with and without ACSs) seem to have a
rich and complex phase structure but more comprehensive investigations
than we have done are needed to nail down the possible range of
interesting behaviours.

Consider the following set of catalyzed reactions along with full
spontaneous chemistry. Notice that there is a continuous path from the
food set to @xmath . And the catalysts, namely, @xmath and @xmath , are
not produced in the catalyzed reactions themselves. This chemistry is in
fact a subset of ACS65, containing the first two catalyzed reactions of
the set.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D.1a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D.1b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The steady state concentration profile for this chemistry which we refer
to as C9 (as @xmath is the largest catalyst in this chemistry) is shown
in Fig. (a)a . As for an ACS, the molecules produced in the catalyzed
reactions, viz., @xmath and @xmath have much larger concentrations as
compared to other species in the chemistry. Fig. (b)b shows bistability
in the steady state concentrations as @xmath is varied. Note that the
initiation threshold happens to be the same as for ACS65 namely @xmath ,
but the maintenance threshold is now considerably higher.

### d.2 Reasons for multistability in dynamics of ACS65

The above example shows that bistability can arise even in a simple
catalyzed chemistry that has continuous catalyzed pathways originating
from the food source. This is in fact the origin of multistability in
dynamics of ACS65. Consider the case of ACS65 defined in Eqs. 4.1 , but
with reaction ( 4.1c ) deleted. Note that the resulting set of 7
catalyzed reaction pairs is no more an ACS, but merely a catalyzed
chemistry which we refer to as C65. The continuous catalyzed pathways
end at @xmath just as in C9 above. The catalyzed chemistry C65 with 7
catalyzed reaction pairs also shows a bistability (Fig. (a)a ). The
steady state concentration profile for the system in the upper attractor
is shown in Fig. (b)b .

The main point we wish to draw attention to is that the three catalyzed
chemistries C9, C65 and ACS65, all have been found empirically to have
bistability with the same value of @xmath . Since C9 is the smallest
catalyzed chemistry that is common to all three (note that as sets of
reactions, @xmath ), it is reasonable to suppose that it is the
structure of C9 that is determining the value of @xmath for all three.
That is, the additional catalyzed reactions in C65 and ACS65 do not seem
to matter as far as the value of @xmath is concerned.

Notice that the catalyst for reaction ( 4.1c ) in ACS65 is @xmath . As
@xmath a is considerably large molecule, its concentration in the lower
attractor is very small; the product @xmath is thus much smaller than 1.
That is, the rate of the catalyzed reaction ( 4.1c ) is much less than
the corresponding spontaneous reaction. For this reason, it can be
assumed that the catalyzed reaction ( 4.1c ) is absent in the range
where @xmath remains much less than 1 (see Section 4.2.1 and also 5.1.3
). Therefore ACS65 in this range also exhibits the same behaviour as
C65.

Now C65 has an upper attractor given by the upper red line in Fig. (a)a
. Therefore ACS65 also acquires this steady state. This adds an
additional stable state, inducing multistability, in the dynamics of
ACS65. The multistability curve for ACS65 is also shown in Fig. (a)a ,
where the intermediate steady state of ACS65, overlaps with higher
steady state of C65. The steady state profiles of C65 in its higher
attractor and ACS65 in its intermediate attractor, shown in Figs. (b)b
and (b)b , are essentially indistinguishable.

## Appendix E Effect of ACS topology on bistability

In Section 4.3 we have discussed how bistability arises in simple ACSs.
We extend the discussion to include how the assignment of catalysts to
the reactions of an ACS affects the dynamics, specifically the existence
and extent of bistability. The assignment of the catalysts to the
reactions of the ACS is an aspect of the topology of the ACS. ACSs with
the same set of reactions (and hence the same product set @xmath ) may
differ from each other in the assignment of catalysts to the reactions.
For example, consider following set of reactions comprising an ACS,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.1a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.1b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.1c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where, @xmath . This ACS has 27 possible topologies of catalyzed
reactions, enumerated by the values of @xmath . The list of topologies
and the @xmath and @xmath values for each topology assuming a
homogeneous catalyzed chemistry ( i.e. , all catalysts have the same
catalytic strengths) are listed in Table E.1 . For some cases, such as
whenever @xmath , i.e. , @xmath is the catalyst of the reaction ( E.1a
), we do not find bistability in the dynamics of the ACS (irrespective
of the values @xmath and @xmath take) for the value of @xmath studied;
recall from the discussion in the Section 4.3 that there exists a
critical length and a @xmath below which we do not see bistability. The
bistability may exist for some topologies for a higher value of @xmath ,
e.g., @xmath has a bistability at @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . In
general, the parameter region where bistability exists in the dynamics
depends upon @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We illustrate this in the
table below for a homogeneous chemistry.

## Appendix F List of reactions and their catalysts in ACS441

The table lists all the reactions with their respective catalysts in the
example of a catalyzed chemistry, discussed in Section 7.2 , containing
a cascade of nested ACSs for @xmath generated using Algorithm 4. The
steady state concentrations for this chemistry are displayed in Fig. 7.1
. This chemistry was generated with @xmath and @xmath .

Note that a general molecule for the @xmath case, represented by A(
@xmath ) in the main text, has been represented here by @xmath for
brevity.

The molecules in various generations are as follows: @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

The catalyst for a reaction listed under generation @xmath is added at
step @xmath of algorithm. It is apparent from the reaction table that
the ACSs are maximally overlapping, i.e. , any ACS of generation @xmath
contains all the reactions of generation @xmath .

## Appendix G List of reactions and their catalysts in ACS(36,28)

The table lists all the reactions with their respective catalysts in the
example of a catalyzed chemistry, discussed in Section 7.3 , containing
a cascade of nested ACSs for @xmath generated using Algorithm 4. The
steady state concentrations for this chemistry are displayed in Fig. 7.3
. This chemistry was generated with @xmath and @xmath .

The molecules in various generations are as follows: @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

The catalyst for a reaction listed under generation @xmath is added at
step @xmath of algorithm. It is apparent from the reaction table that
the ACSs are maximally overlapping, i.e. , any ACS of generation @xmath
contains all the reactions of generation @xmath .

## Appendix H List of reactions and their catalysts in ACS(18,27)

The table lists all the reactions with their respective catalysts and
catalytic strengths in the example of a catalyzed chemistry, discussed
in Section 7.3 , containing a cascade of partially overlapping ACSs for
@xmath generated using Algorithm 5. The steady state concentrations for
this chemistry are displayed in Fig. 7.4 .

The catalyzed chemistry contains 10 generations of ACSs of lengths 3, 6,
10, 15, 19, 25, 30, 35, 40, and 45.

## Appendix I Description of the programs used to generate the results
in the thesis.

This appendix discusses the programs used to generate various numerical
results in the thesis. The code source files can be downloaded from the
website:
http://sites.google.com/site/varungiri/research/phd-thesis .

The numerical work reported in this thesis was largely done using C
codes. For the numerical integration of differential equations these
codes use CVODE solver library of the SUNDIALS package v.2.3.0 [ 174 ]
which can be downloaded from
https://computation.llnl.gov/casc/sundials/download/download.html
(November 2006 release version). The list of programs is as follows:

##### Chapter 3

-                 spontaneous-f1.c, spontaneous-f2.c              :
    Constructs a fully connected spontaneous chemistry for @xmath
    (respectively) and integrates the system of differential equations
    to find steady state concentrations. This program produces the time
    courses and the steady state concentration values for a class of
    user specified initial conditions.

-                 spontaneous-sparse-f1.c, spontaneous-sparse-f2.c             
    : Constructs a sparse spontaneous chemistry with degree @xmath
    specified as a parameter to the program for @xmath (respectively)
    and produces the steady state concentration values.

-                 spontaneous-hetro-f1.c              : Constructs a
    fully connected spontaneous chemistry. It then assigns the rate
    constants for each reaction as described in Section 3.4 (for
    heterogeneous chemistries) and computes the steady state
    concentration values.

##### Chapter 4

-                 acs-f1.c              : Constructs the fully connected
    spontaneous chemistry for @xmath with catalyzed reactions defined by
    ACS65 (Eqs. ( 4.1 )) and computes the steady state concentrations.

-                 acs-f2.c              : Constructs the fully connected
    spontaneous chemistry for @xmath with catalyzed reactions defined by
    ACS(8,10) (Eqs. ( 4.2 )) and computes the steady state
    concentrations.

-                 ACS-2-4.ode              : Input file for XPPAUT for
    ACS4 (Eqs. ( 4.4 )).

-                 acs-sparse-f1.c              : Constructs a sparse
    spontaneous chemistry for @xmath with catalyzed reactions defined by
    ACS65 (Eqs. ( 4.1 )) and computes the steady state concentrations.

-                 acs-hetro-f1.c              : Constructs a fully
    connected spontaneous chemistry and assign rate constants for each
    reaction as described in Section 3.4 . It catalyzes the reactions as
    defined by ACS65 (Eqs. ( 4.1 )) and computes steady state
    concentration values.

These programs can be appropriately changed to study other ACSs. The
instructions to do so are included with the code.

##### Chapter 5

-                 algo1.c, algo2.c, algo3.c              : Constructs a
    fully connected spontaneous chemistry for @xmath with an ACS of
    length @xmath constructed using Algorithm 1, 2, or 3 (respectively)
    described in Section 5.1.1 .

##### Chapter 6

-                 acs-f1-ACS3_8.c              : Constructs a fully
    spontaneous chemistry for @xmath with a pair of nested ACSs defined
    by Eqs. ( 6.1 ) and ( 6.2 ) and computes the steady state
    concentration values.

-                 acs-f2-ACS4_8.c              : Constructs a fully
    spontaneous chemistry for @xmath with a pair of nested ACSs defined
    by Eqs. ( 6.4 ) and ( 6.7 ) and computes the steady state
    concentration values. The ACSs defined in this program can be
    modified to study the dynamics of the other ACSs mentioned in the
    text below Eq. ( 6.4 ).

##### Chapter 7

-                 algo4-1f.c, algo4-2f.c              : Constructs a
    sparse spontaneous chemistry for @xmath (respectively) with nested
    ACSs constructed using Algorithm 4 described in Section 7.1 , and
    computes steady state concentration values.

-                 algo5-2f.c              : Constructs a sparse
    spontaneous chemistry for @xmath with nested ACSs constructed using
    Algorithm 5 described in Section 7.1 , and computes steady state
    concentration values.