## Acknowledgements

I gratefully acknowledge an STFC Studentship, and the University of
Glasgow for the opportunity to undertake this PhD, and the Astro
department for suggesting a project which has taken me to some great
places and introduced me to great people. I also thank our group
secretary, Ms Rachael McLauchlan, for invaluable help with travel,
finances and admin.

To my supervisor Eduard, and to Nic Bian I shall be eternally grateful,
not only for the in-depth discussions of physics both in the office and
the pub, but for supererogatory support and guidance.

Significant parts of the Introduction were composed during the ISSI
international team meeting on X-ray and Radio Diagnostics of Energetic
Electrons in Solar Flares led by E.P. Kontar, and I thank all of the
team members, and a few in particular, for the enlightening discussions.

On a personal note, I am indebted to all the various friends and
colleagues, particularly the denizens of 604, who listened to a lot of
bad jokes, and answered many stupid questions. I owe much to the
Stevenson building for the powerlifting, and Colin, Gail, Michele and
Marina for the climbing and running that have kept me from going
completely mad.

Finally, I thank again my supervisor as this has certainly been an E.P.
i. K few years.

## Table of Symbols

## Chapter 1 Introduction

In this chapter, we first outline the structure of the Sun, focusing on
the solar corona and solar wind, and give a brief description of solar
flares. We then introduce some basic concepts and definitions from
plasma physics which are necessary to model these phenomena. We
summarise previous theoretical and simulation work on the propagation
and evolution of fast electron beams due to wave generation which is the
topic of Chapters 2 and 3 of this thesis, then discuss the radiation
which fast electrons produce in the corona and solar wind, in particular
hard X-rays and radio emission. The general nature of flare associated
radio emission is summarised, followed by a more detailed description of
the emission from beams propagating in the corona and solar wind, and a
description of the observations and emission mechanism behind
beam-generated radio emission at high frequencies, which forms the focus
of Chapter 4 .

### 1.1 The Sun

#### 1.1.1 Structure

The visible surface of the Sun is termed the photosphere, and is
relatively cool, with an average temperature of 5600 K. Above the
photosphere is the chromosphere, a plasma composed mostly of hydrogen
and some helium, with an average temperature of around @xmath K, rapidly
varying density (from approximately @xmath cm @xmath to @xmath cm @xmath
) and varying ionisation. It is approximately 2000 km thick, and named
for its appearance as a red flash at the beginning and end of solar
eclipses, due to the strong H @xmath emission line in its spectrum.
Between the chromosphere and the overlying corona is the very narrow
transition region, less than 300 km thick, over which the density drops
by several orders of magnitude, while the temperature rises to over
@xmath K. This temperature rise is still not fully understood, and the
coronal and chromospheric heating problem is the topic of much
speculation. The temperature and density of the corona mean it is almost
completely ionised.

The corona is in a constant state of outflow, forming the solar wind.
Open magnetic field lines, dragged by the solar rotation, spiral
outwards in a pattern known as the Parker Spiral. The solar wind has two
components: fast, with velocity around @xmath km s @xmath , arising from
regions of open magnetic field, where the field lines extend into space;
and slow, with velocity around @xmath km s @xmath , arising from regions
of closed magnetic field, which only connect to the heliosphere at much
higher altitudes. The influence of the outflowing solar wind extends to
the Earth and beyond, eventually terminating at the heliopause.

#### 1.1.2 Coronal Density Profiles

A simple model for the coronal density profile may be derived by
considering the case of hydrostatic equilibrium, in which the gas
pressure is balanced by the gravitational force, and the whole system is
unchanging in time. The resulting density profile as a function of
height can be easily derived (e.g. Aschwanden, 2006 ) and leads to an
exponential profile @xmath where @xmath is radial distance measured from
the reference point at density @xmath , and @xmath is the scale height,
typically around @xmath cm in the corona.

Measurements of the density have been performed using several methods.
The radio bursts know as Type III and described below (Section 1.5.4 )
are one, as their frequency traces the plasma frequency, and hence the
electron density. They are observed over a wide frequency, and therefore
density range (e.g. McLean & Labrum, 1985 ) , and so can be used to find
the plasma density from the corona to the Earth and beyond (e.g Leblanc
et al., 1998 ) . White light radiating from the corona, resulting from
Thomson scattering of photospheric radiation, and EUV or soft X-ray
observations can give line-of-sight integrated densities, while certain
emission lines can return an absolute density in some regions
(Aschwanden, 2006 ) .

Figure 1.1 shows a model of the temperature and density of the
chromosphere, transition region and low corona. The electron density is
roughly exponential between @xmath and @xmath km height. Various models
exist, from the original exponential profile of Newkirk ( 1961 ) to
several empirical power-law fits, such as the Baumbach-Allen (Allen,
1947 ) or Saito (Saito et al., 1977 ) models. In addition to this smooth
gradation, there may be large scale fibrous structuring, as the low
plasma-beta implies transport across field lines is inhibited; and also
discrete structures.

#### 1.1.3 The Solar Wind

While the hydrostatic approximation gives a reasonable density estimate
for the quiet corona, it was realised by Parker ( 1958 ) that the corona
could not be in equilibrium, and must instead be constantly streaming
outwards. For an isothermal ideal gas, assuming radial expansion
(expansion factor proportional to distance squared) the hydrodynamic
equations can be solved (e.g. Parker, 1958 ; Mann et al., 1999 ) , and
imply outwards flows of several hundred km/s, in good agreement with the
observed solar wind speeds. The solar wind model of Parker ( 1958 ) also
gives rise to the Parker spiral, as the Sun’s rotation drags the open
field lines into a spiral. The distance from the Sun to the Earth along
a magnetic field line is therefore approximately 1.2 AU.

#### 1.1.4 Density Fluctuations

Both the corona and the solar wind show local inhomogeneities on a
variety of scales. Interplanetary scintillation (IPS) measurements,
where a compact radio source is seen to “twinkle” due to density
fluctuations along the line of sight, have been used to measure these in
the solar wind (e.g. Cronyn, 1972 ; Smith & Sime, 1979 ) and closer to
the Sun (e.g. Coles & Harmon, 1989 ; Woo et al., 1995 ) . The density
dependence of radio-wave propagation velocity in plasma was used by
Celnikier et al. ( 1983 ) to find the density between two closely spaced
satellites in the solar wind and its variations over time, again giving
the spectrum of density fluctuations. In general, fractional density
fluctuations of up to around @xmath have been observed at scales down to
@xmath km, which will be considered in this thesis.

#### 1.1.5 Solar Activity

Solar activity follows an 11 year cycle, with the next maximum predicted
for late 2013. Sunspots, cooler darker areas of the photosphere with
strong magnetic fields, begin to occur after the minimum of the cycle,
drifting to smaller latitudes as the cycle proceeds. Every cycle, the
polarity of the global magnetic field of the Sun reverses.

Solar flares occur in sunspot groups because of their association with
complex magnetic field structure. Flares are transient brightenings,
lasting from tens of minutes to a few hours, and releasing enormous
amounts of energy, from @xmath to @xmath ergs or more depending on their
size. Historically, coronal mass ejections (CMEs), large clouds of
plasma released from the corona, were considered to be a separate
phenomenon from flares, but more recently their interconnectedness has
become clear. The term Solar Eruptive Event has been coined to tie
together both of these, and also the energetic particles that can result
from flare energy releases. Electromagnetic radiation, CMEs and
accelerated particles each carry significant fractions of the released
energy.

The standard flare classification uses the emission as measured by GOES
(the Geostationary Orbiting Environmental Satellite). The total flux in
soft X-Rays (wavelengths between 1 and 8 Å) is used, and the classes run
from A through C then M, X, X10, each with a flux 10 times that of the
previous class. In general the occurrence rate decreases as the class
increases, with X-class flares being relatively uncommon, while smaller
flares are observed far more often.

The electromagnetic emission produced in flares covers the entire
spectrum, from radio waves through the visible to X-Rays and gamma rays.
The bulk of this emission is in visible and UV wavelengths (Woods
et al., 2006 ) . Radio emission and hard X-ray emissions are produced by
fast electrons, while soft X-rays may be produced during the rise of a
flare due to plasma heating, although this “pre-heating” is not seen in
all events.

### 1.2 Essential Plasma Physics

Plasmas are the fourth and commonest state of ordinary matter in the
universe, and are characterised by collective effects over large spatial
scales, due to the ionisation of the constituent atoms. We consider here
fully ionised, single species plasma, consisting of protons and
electrons. This may be described using two temperatures, the electron
and the ion temperatures @xmath respectively. From these temperatures we
obtain two thermal speeds, @xmath and @xmath , and the sound speed
@xmath given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is Boltzmann’s constant and @xmath are the masses of an
electron and a proton respectively.

The characteristic frequency of electron oscillations is given by the
(electron) plasma frequency @xmath , and that for the ions by the ion
plasma frequency @xmath which are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the electronic charge and @xmath are the (number) density
of electrons and ions respectively. In magnetised plasma, electrons
gyrate around the magnetic field lines at a frequency given by the
electron cyclotron frequency

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the magnetic field strength, and @xmath the speed of
light. Finally, the (electron) Debye wavelength @xmath or its
reciprocal, the Debye wavenumber @xmath , are important as they give the
maximum spatial scale over which charge separation can occur.

#### 1.2.1 Langmuir Waves

Plasmas display quasineutrality , meaning there can be no charge
separation on scales larger than the Debye length, due to the
significant restoring force of the electric field. Because the ions are
much more massive than the electrons, the electrons can oscillate while
the ions remain stationary, giving the stationary version of a plasma
oscillation, or Langmuir wave, which has a frequency of @xmath . The
travelling version, with non-zero wavenumber @xmath , is ubiquitous in
plasma, giving its alternative name of “plasma wave”. These are weakly
dispersive, with @xmath , and so have frequencies very close to the
plasma frequency. Plasma waves at very different wavenumbers can
therefore have very similar energies. The group velocity of Langmuir
waves is @xmath , which is generally far less than the electron thermal
speed, so for many purposes their propagation can be neglected.

#### 1.2.2 Magnetoionic Modes

In plasma with an ambient magnetic field, electromagnetic waves have two
possible modes of circular polarisation, depending on whether the
electric field vector rotates in the same direction as an electron
spirals around the field lines (O-mode), or the opposite (X-mode) (e.g.
Ratcliffe, 1959 ) . Unpolarised radiation is the sum of these two
circular polarisation states. The O-mode propagates in plasma only above
@xmath , and has dispersion relation @xmath , identical to that of an
electromagnetic wave in unmagnetised plasma, while the X-mode cutoff is
at @xmath and the dispersion relation is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Because of the different group velocities, initially unpolarised
radiation can acquire a non-zero polarisation entirely due to
propagation, as waves in one mode arrive before the other.

In magnetised plasma, the Langmuir wave dispersion relation becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the angle between @xmath and the magnetic field. These
can be considered as modified Z-mode waves (e.g. Melrose, 1976 ) , which
are the lower-frequency ( @xmath ) branch of the X-mode waves just
discussed.

#### 1.2.3 Plasma Modelling

The self-consistent modelling of a plasma is a rather difficult problem.
Moving charged particles generate currents and thus electromagnetic
fields, which in turn act upon the particles, so the motions of the
particles and evolution of the fields must be considered in parallel.
Further complications arise due to collective effects over large
distances, which characterise the plasma state. Ignoring
self-consistency and using a single-particle description, i.e. following
the motion of a “test particle” in prescribed fields is helpful in some
cases, for example when deriving the trajectory of a particle in an
external magnetic field. In general however, we cannot follow the exact
motion of each particle, and must instead use a statistical description.
This is the basis of plasma kinetic theory.

The problem addressed in this work of an electron beam in unmagnetised
plasma is well described by quasilinear theory (e.g. Drummond & Pines,
1964 ; Vedenov et al., 1962 ) , which considers the particle and wave
distributions in the limit where the background plasma contains far more
energy than the beam. Non-linear effects may be easily included, and in
1-D these equations are straightforward to simulate. Such simulations
may be extended to large particle numbers and large spatial and time
scales without requiring excessive amounts of computing power, and so we
use this approach here.

On the other hand, particle-in-cell (PIC) simulations address the
problem of self-consistency directly, following the motion of the
particles in electromagnetic fields, and updating the fields according
to the particle motions. Macroscopic quantities, such as the electric
and magnetic field and the plasma density, are calculated on a discrete
grid, while the particles are tracked individually as they move through
this grid. Such methods are very demanding computationally, especially
for large space or time scales or large numbers of particles. However as
will be mentioned in Section 2.5.3 they are useful as confirmation of
the effects seen using our simulation method.

### 1.3 Reconnection and Particle Acceleration

#### 1.3.1 Acceleration Mechanisms

The reconfiguration of magnetic field to a lower energy state, which may
be facilitated by magnetic reconnection, is the source of the vast
amounts of energy released during solar flares, with perhaps @xmath of
the free magnetic energy being released (Emslie et al., 2004 ) . This
energy leads to particle acceleration, either in the energy release
region itself, or its vicinity.

DC electric field acceleration can occur in, for example, current
sheets. Wave turbulence, on the other hand, can also lead to
acceleration due to the oscillating electric fields of the waves. Wave
particle interactions, such as those discussed below, can transfer
energy to and from particles, and at particular velocities the particles
can experience a net energy gain (Hamilton & Petrosian, 1992 ) . The
interactions are resonant, and so high frequency waves such as Langmuir
waves or whistlers are required to accelerate electrons.

Shock acceleration may be either first order Fermi acceleration, usually
requiring multiple shock crossings to reach the high energies observed
(Toptygin, 1980 ) , or second order Fermi, if the particles are
reflected by stochastically moving magnetic mirrors, and statistically
more likely to gain energy than lose it. This is important in some
contexts, for example in association with the shocks preceding CMEs and
associated with radio bursts (e.g. Mann et al., 1998 ) .

#### 1.3.2 Acceleration Region Diagnostics

The acceleration region lies at a height of ten to a few tens of Mm
above the photosphere, in the cusp of the flaring loop in the corona.
Radio and HXR emission from accelerated electrons provides several
methods by which to derive this height and other parameters of the
acceleration region (reviewed by e.g. Aschwanden, 2002 ) .

##### Electron Time of Flight Inferences

For example, electrons at a range of velocities, simultaneously injected
into the loop from the acceleration region, will reach the footpoints of
the loop at different times. Assuming no time dependence of the
injection, the spectrum of the HXR emission produced at the footpoints
(discussed in the next section) can be used to infer the emitting
electron distribution, and therefore the arrival times of electrons at
different velocities, which can be used to find the distance travelled
by the electrons. Aschwanden et al. ( 1996 ) found heights of 40 Mm for
one flare event, known as the “Masuda flare”, after Masuda et al. ( 1994
) , and the first event in which HXR emission was directly observed
above the loop-top, now ascribed to emission from a trapped electron
population. The height of this emission was measured to be close to
20 Mm, suggesting this trapping is below the acceleration region and the
point of reconnection. This geometry also supports a stochastic
acceleration mechanism, rather than large scale electric fields.

##### Bidirectional Radio Bursts

Another extremely informative diagnostic of acceleration region height
is offered by bidirectional electron beams and their radio emission
(Section 1.5.4 ). Here the accelerated electrons propagate both upwards
along open field lines and downwards along the closed field lines (e.g.
Robinson & Benz, 2000 ) , and produce radio emission at the local plasma
frequency. The point at which the two bursts join is then the location
of the accelerating region.

##### Radio Hard X-ray Correlations

Finally, one-to-one associations between HXR emission and single Type
III bursts were seen by Kane et al. ( 1982 ) , with further studies
performed by e.g. Raoult et al. ( 1985 ) . It was concluded that the two
kinds of emission were produced by similar electron populations again
propagating upwards or downwards along magnetic field lines. Correlated
HXR and radio observations can therefore be used to deduce the height of
the acceleration region (Reid et al., 2011 ) . However, it should be
noted that while individual HXR and radio bursts may be correlated the
overall numbers do not match, with only around 1/3rd of observed HXR
events showing associated Type III emission (Benz et al., 2005 ) .

#### 1.3.3 X-Ray Emission

Hard X-Rays themselves account for only a small fraction of the energy
released during flares, but because of the relative simplicity of the
bremsstrahlung cross-section and the low optical depth of the solar
atmosphere at HXR wavelengths, they are a very powerful diagnostic for
accelerated electrons, which carry large amounts of energy. The recovery
of the electron spectrum from the observed emission is by no means a
simple procedure, but reasonable models now exist which allow this to be
done.

During flares, the HXR emission tends to follow a “soft-hard-soft”
evolution (Kane & Anderson, 1970 ) , where its spectral index evolves in
time: it is large (steep) in the initial phase of the flare, decreases
during the peak and then softens again in the decay phase. Occasionally
the pattern is rather “soft-hard-harder”. This evolution may be due to
particle trapping or to changes in the acceleration efficiency or
behaviour.

A large fraction of the released HXR energy is deposited in the
chromospheric plasma, leading to heating and therefore thermal
bremsstrahlung emission in soft X-rays (Emslie, 1989 ) . This is the
likely origin of the Neupert effect (Neupert, 1968 ; Dennis & Zarro,
1993 ) where the time-integral of the HXR emission follows the time
profile of the thermal SXR emission, because the coronal plasma
“integrates” the non-thermal energy deposition.

#### 1.3.4 Bremsstrahlung and the Thick Target Model

Bremsstrahlung emission by electrons in plasma is thermal when the
emitting electrons are at the ambient plasma temperature, and can also
be thick or thin target, a thick target being one in which the emitting
electron loses its entire energy collisionally while emitting. Thermal
bremsstrahlung can produce soft X-rays from very hot plasma, such as
that generated during the fast electron bombardment of the chromosphere
occurring during flares.

A comprehensive review of bremsstrahlung cross-sections was given by
Koch & Motz ( 1959 ) , including those for thick-target emission. The
application of the thick-target model to solar flare HXR emission was
considered by various authors, for example Arnoldy et al. ( 1968 ) and
was extended to include the effects of partial ionisation (e.g. Brown,
1973 ) , and additional evolution of the emitting electrons.

However, assuming the simple thick target model can lead to
overestimates of the required electron spectrum in order to produce the
observed HXR emission. In some large flares, this overestimate can be
particularly problematic as more electrons seem to be required than are
present in the entire acceleration region, with the discrepancy
historically referred to as the electron number problem .

It is clear that any processes which lead to additional energy losses
during beam propagation will increase the number of electrons that must
initially be accelerated. Langmuir wave generation by the beam
(discussed in the next section) was thought to fall into this category,
but simulations showed that the net effect of wave-generation on the
time-averaged electron flux was negligible (Hamilton & Petrosian, 1987 ;
McClements, 1987 ; Hannah et al., 2009 ; Hannah & Kontar, 2011 ) . In
Chapter 3 we will discuss one possible means for Langmuir wave
generation to instead reduce the required initial number of accelerated
electrons, due to interactions between the waves and ambient plasma
density fluctuations.

### 1.4 Electron Beam Propagation and Evolution

Once a fast electron population has been produced, the exact
acceleration mechanism remaining unimportant for our purposes, they must
propagate thorough the coronal plasma. For a relatively weak beam, the
magnetic field will guide this propagation, and the beam can remain
highly collimated (e.g. Muschietti, 1990 ) . However, its evolution due
to collisional energy loss and pitch angle scattering are important in
very dense plasma, along with such effects as wave-particle
interactions.

#### 1.4.1 Langmuir Wave Generation and Sturrock’s Dilemma

An electron population whose distribution has a positive velocity
gradient at some velocity ¹ ¹ 1 The “Penrose criterion” implies that
this must be @xmath or larger for instability. (a “bump”), will be
unstable to Langmuir wave generation (Section 2.2 ). We note that the
probability for this emission is independent of the magnetic field in
the weak field limit @xmath .

Historically, it was believed that the loss of energy to Langmuir waves
would cause an accelerated electron stream to decelerate within only a
few thousand metres (Sturrock, 1964 ) , yet these streams were known,
from observations of Type III radio bursts (Section 1.5.4 ), to
propagate over distances up to at least 1 AU. This apparent conflict was
known as Sturrock’s dilemma and appeared to be a significant problem.

Most solutions involved suppression of the beam-plasma instability
causing the wave generation (e.g. Grognard, 1985 ; Muschietti, 1990 ) ,
and effects such as wave-wave interactions or density gradients were
invoked in order to achieve this, including the example of elastic
angular scattering of the waves discussed in Chapter 2 . However for a
spatially limited electron beam, it was found that the waves emitted by
the electrons at the front of the beam could be reabsorbed by those at
the back, and energy loss would thus be limited (Magelssen & Smith, 1977
; Muschietti, 1990 ) .

The numerical simulations by Kontar et al. ( 1998 ); Mel’Nik et al. (
1999 ) showed that this indeed occurs, and such a beam propagates as a
“Beam-Plasma Structure” (BPS), where the electrons are accompanied by a
wave distribution, emitted at the front and absorbed at the back. Such a
structure has a fixed maximum propagation velocity (Mel’Nik, 2003 ) ,
dependent on density, and consistent with the observed velocities of
Type III radio burst producing streams (Section 1.5.4 ). Suppression of
the beam-plasma instability remains of critical importance in
considerations of the beam-plasma wave interactions, for example in the
theory of radio bursts, but is not required in order for the beam to
persist.

#### 1.4.2 Beam Propagation in Inhomogeneous Plasma

For a BPS propagating in inhomogeneous plasma, some of the waves will be
lost from resonance with the beam, and therefore not all of the energy
can be reabsorbed (Kontar, 2001a ) . Some energy will be left behind in
the form of Langmuir wave turbulence, which will damp collisionally, or
may interact with other wave modes, and can lead to electromagnetic
emission (specifically Type V bursts, see Section 1.5.5 ).

In addition, the simulations of Reid & Kontar ( 2010 , 2012 ) following
electron beams propagating from the Sun outwards into the solar wind,
found that wave particle interactions in inhomogeneous plasma could
substantially change the electron distribution found at 1 AU, with an
initially injected power law flattening at low velocities due to the
generation and subsequent evolution of the Langmuir waves. This was
considered also for a beam propagating downwards into the deep corona
and chromosphere by Hannah et al. ( 2013 ) who found that in this case
additional high energy electrons were produced, which could lead to
enhanced HXR emission at some energies. A similar effect will be shown
in Chapter 3 of this thesis for a beam evolving due to collisional
effects.

### 1.5 Radio Emission

Radio emission from the quiet Sun follows the Rayleigh Jeans law,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have taken the classical limiting case @xmath . The observed
whole Sun emission in Solar Flux Units (sfu, 1 sfu= @xmath erg s @xmath
cm @xmath Hz @xmath ) is shown in Figure 1.2 .

Many kinds of bursty radio emission are also seen in association with
solar flares and active events, many of which are signatures of fast
electron populations. An example of a radio dynamic spectrum is shown in
Figure 1.3 which displays many of these types simultaneously (Benz, 2004
) , discussed briefly in the following sections. The high frequency
(2-4 GHz) continuum is gyrosynchrotron emission, while the very faint
vertical stripes around 1-2 GHz at 9:34:00 are some form of
quasi-periodic pulsations. Groups of bright Type IIIs ² ² 2 Type
classifications are explained in Section 1.5.3 . occur at 9:35:00 and
9:36:20 between 300 and 600 MHz, and a reverse drift burst may be seen
at 9:35:20 around 2 GHz. At low frequencies the emission is a
combination of Type II (emission associated with shock accelerated
electron beams) and Type V (smooth, long duration emission which follows
Type III bursts), although these are indistinct in this figure. The
bright, short duration emission around 640 MHz at 9:34:20 may be radio
spikes.

In this work we focus on plasma emission at high frequencies from around
500 MHz up to several GHz. However, the Type III bursts are observed to
span the entire frequency range from several GHz down to low kHz, and
observations tend to focus on coronal (10 MHz to a few hundred MHz) and
Interplanetary (IP; kHz and low MHz) bursts, as bursts at higher
frequencies are much more infrequent. Important implications for the
higher frequency bursts are inferred from the lower frequency behaviour,
but the parameter regimes are very disparate and some features differ
significantly.

At metric and decimetric wavelengths, there are also multiple varieties
of short duration emission. Some of these may be ascribed to a
particular emission mechanism, but in many cases the only classification
is morphological. In general, the factors considered are the bandwidth,
duration, drift rate, substructures and general shape (Benz, 2004 ) .

#### 1.5.1 Coherent and Incoherent Emission

Incoherent emission refers to emission by individual particles
independently. The thermal free-free emission which produces the quiet
Sun background is of this type, as is another important mechanism,
gyrosynchrotron emission from mildly relativistic electrons (e.g. Dulk,
1985 ) . This is particularly important in regions of strong magnetic
fields, and at frequencies of a few to a few tens of GHz, as seen in
Figure 1.3 .

Coherent emission, in contrast, arises from plasma collective effects,
and therefore emission occurs at either the electron plasma frequency
@xmath , the electron cyclotron frequency @xmath , the ionic equivalents
@xmath , or their harmonics. The exciting waves are generally produced
due to a plasma instability, and so coherent emission indicates the
presence of fast electrons, shocks, etc. The high frequency cutoff for
observable coherent emission associated with flares is probably around
10 GHz (Benz, 2004 ) .

#### 1.5.2 The Plasma Emission Mechanism

Plasma emission is a coherent emission mechanism in which
electromagnetic radiation is produced from Langmuir waves, and is the
topic of Chapter 4 of this thesis. The key feature is the involvement of
Langmuir waves, generated by fast electrons, and so the emission occurs
at the plasma frequency or its second harmonic. The proposed plasma
emission mechanism is summarised in the books by Melrose ( 1980b );
Tsytovich ( 1995 ) , although refinements and modifications are being
continually suggested (e.g. Robinson et al., 1994 ; Melrose, 2009 ;
Tsiklauri, 2011 ) . Reviews of the currently accepted mechanism etc are
given by e.g. Dulk ( 1985 ); Bastian et al. ( 1998 ); Nindos et al. (
2008 ); Melrose ( 2009 ) .

The outline of the mechanism is summarised in the flowchart in Figure
1.4 . An electron beam propagating though the coronal or solar wind
plasma generates Langmuir waves, and these in turn evolve, either
decaying to ion-sound waves or scattering off plasma ions, both of which
generate backwards propagating (negative wavenumber) Langmuir waves.
These may then coalesce with a wave from the forwards spectrum to
produce an electromagnetic wave at twice the plasma frequency.
Alternatively, an ion sound wave and a Langmuir wave may coalesce, or a
Langmuir wave may be scattered by an ion directly into an
electromagnetic wave, both of which produce emission at the local plasma
frequency.

#### 1.5.3 Radio Burst Classifications

Historically, three types of bright, transient radio bursts were known,
and these were labelled Types I through III in order of increasing rate
of frequency drift @xmath . A schematic dynamic spectrum is shown in
Figure 1.5 , which also includes the later added Type IV and V bursts,
and some continuum emissions.

The origins of Type I emission are not yet certain, while Types II, III
and V are due to propagating accelerated electrons. The Type II exciting
beams are accelerated in shocks, so the emission drifts slowly as the
shock front moves. Type III exciting beams are accelerated in
association with flares and move very rapidly, giving fast drifting
bursts. Type V emission may be directly associated with a slow electron
beam, or may be due to Langmuir waves “left behind” after the beam has
passed (Kontar, 2001a ) . Type IV emission has several subtypes, all due
to emission from trapped electrons, either via the plasma mechanism or
incoherent gyrosynchrotron emission.

#### 1.5.4 Type III Bursts

Type III radio bursts are the classic example of plasma emission from a
propagating electron stream, and display many characteristic features,
which are discussed in the following sections. Figure 1.6 shows a radio
dynamic spectrum of a group of Type IIIs which displays several of these
features, and Figure 1.7 an expanded view of a Type III around 80 MHz
showing the frequency drift.

##### Frequency Drift

The electron beams which generate Type III bursts propagate at a
significant fraction of the speed of light, generally between 0.1 and
0.6 @xmath . The beam therefore encounters plasma with a density, and
hence plasma frequency, which is rapidly changing. An empirical relation
for the frequency drift rates of Type IIIs is @xmath for @xmath the
frequency in MHz and @xmath the drift in MHz s @xmath (Alvarez &
Haddock, 1973 ; McLean & Labrum, 1985 ) for bursts between 550 MHz and
74 kHz. This corresponds to a value of about 900 MHz s @xmath at 500 MHz
and 170 MHz s @xmath at 200 MHz.

##### Brightness

The classic Type III bursts are characterised by very high brightness
temperatures, with the maximum observed @xmath being of the order of
@xmath K and occurring at 1 MHz. For higher frequencies, typical
measured brightness temperatures at 40 MHz are @xmath K, dropping to
only @xmath K by 169 MHz, while the brightest are @xmath K and @xmath K
respectively. For lower frequency IP bursts typical brightnesses at
100 kHz are @xmath K and the brightest are around @xmath K (e.g. McLean
& Labrum, 1985 ) . At very high frequencies bursts are rarer and less
bright, reaching perhaps @xmath K at a few GHz.

##### Source Sizes

Source sizes steadily increase with decreasing frequency from a few
hundred MHz down to kHz frequencies, measuring around @xmath at 169 MHz,
@xmath at 43 MHz (e.g. McLean & Labrum, 1985 ) and around @xmath at
1 MHz and @xmath at 100 kHz (Steinberg et al., 1985 ) . At 432 MHz,
Saint-Hilaire et al. ( 2013 ) find sizes of @xmath .

##### Harmonic Structure

At frequencies in the MHz and kHz ranges, the bursts may be observed in
Fundamental-Harmonic (F-H) pairs, occurring very close to @xmath and
@xmath respectively. The exact observed F-H ratio is generally slightly
below @xmath , explained by the time delay of the fundamental due to its
lower group velocity. For example, Wild et al. ( 1954 ) found a ratio
between 1.85 and 2.0, while Stewart ( 1974 ) found a range from 1.6 to
2.0 with an average of @xmath . The F component is almost never observed
above @xmath MHz, and often has a lower starting frequency than the
harmonic, so that the ratio of their onset frequencies is closer to
@xmath or @xmath (Suzuki & Sheridan, 1977 ) .

##### Time Profile

This difference in starting frequency suggests that there are
significant differences in the emission mechanisms that produce the F
and H components, which is confirmed by measurements of their time
profiles and polarisation. At a single frequency, the emission shows a
characteristic rapid rise and slow fall off, with different time
constants for the fundamental and harmonic components. Originally, the
decay phase was thought to be due purely to the collisional damping of
the Langmuir waves. However, Aubier & Boischot ( 1972 ) studied the
rise-decay profiles of multiple bursts and found the two times were
correlated, implying that the excitation continues alongside the decay.

For the harmonic component, collisional decay of Langmuir waves may be
less important than their spectral evolution (Zhelezniakov & Zaitsev,
1975 ) , as the emission can only occur for waves with sufficiently
large wavenumber, and for fundamental emission involving ion-sound waves
the damping rate of these will also be important. Empirical estimates of
the decay rate were given by Alvarez & Haddock ( 1973 ) for kilometric
wavelengths and confirmed for higher frequencies by e.g. Benz et al. (
1992 ) .

##### Polarisation

Fundamental emission is observed to be O-mode polarised (see Section
1.2.2 ) with a degree of polarisation anywhere from 0 up to @xmath .
Polarisations below @xmath are rarer, and completely polarised emission
is never seen (e.g Suzuki & Sheridan, 1977 ; Dulk & Suzuki, 1980 ;
Wentzel, 1984 ) . The harmonic is generally weakly O-mode polarised,
between 0 and 30 @xmath and most commonly around 10 % (e.g. Suzuki &
Sheridan, 1977 ) . In F-H pairs the degrees of polarisation of the two
components are weakly correlated, with the harmonic always lower (e.g
Suzuki & Sheridan, 1977 ; Dulk & Suzuki, 1980 ) . The degree of
polarisation is not seen to correlate to the emission frequency, but
does vary with the source location on the solar disk (e.g. Suzuki
et al., 1980 ) .

##### Reverse Slope and U or J Type Bursts

In a normal Type III burst, the beam is accelerated and propagates along
an open magnetic field line outwards from the Sun, and therefore into
plasma of decreasing density. Reverse slope (RS) bursts arise when the
electron beam propagates downwards along a field line, and thus travels
into plasma of increasing density. More complicated magnetic structures
can produce J or U type bursts, as seen in Figure 1.8 , where the beam
travels along a closed loop and the plasma density gradient, and thus
the frequency drift, reverses (e.g. Labrum & Stewart, 1970 ) . N bursts,
named by Caroubalos et al. ( 1987 ) are also occasionally seen, when a
second reversal of the gradient occurs probably due to magnetic
mirroring in the loop footpoints, as seen in the beam simulations by
Karlicky et al. ( 1996 ) .

As noted in Section 1.3 the location of the acceleration region of the
generating electron beams can also be inferred from simultaneous
observations of normal and RS Type III bursts. Occasionally, false pairs
can arise due to observational effects, for example terrestrial
interference leading to a perfectly symmetric pair (Benz et al., 2001 )
. True pairs occur where two beams are produced, one moving upwards, the
other downwards, and the emission is observed with opposite drifts and
very similar starting frequency (e.g. Robinson & Benz, 2000 ) . The
exact background density of the acceleration region is then known, from
which the location can be found using a model density profile.

#### 1.5.5 Type V Bursts

At lower frequencies, 100 MHz and below, Type III bursts are often
followed by Type V emission, diffuse emission in the tail of the burst.
Dulk et al. ( 1980 ) summarise the observed properties of these bursts.
They are low frequency, rarely starting above 120 MHz, and long
duration, lasting around 200 seconds at 20 MHz. They generally have a
low degree of polarisation, below 10 @xmath , but in contrast to the
accompanying Type IIIs this is usually in the X-mode. The source sizes
are usually comparable to Type III sources, and increase rapidly as
frequency decreases, while the heights are also similar to those of Type
IIIs. However their locations are often, although not always, different.
Finally, their brightness temperatures are also comparable to the
accompanying Type III bursts. Plasma emission at the second harmonic
appears to be the origin of Type V bursts, with the difference in
polarisation between the Type Vs and the preceding Type IIIs explained
by differences in the emission geometry, as discussed in Section 4.4 and
Willes & Melrose ( 1997 ) .

### 1.6 Observations of High Frequency Plasma Radio Emission

At frequencies of a few hundred MHz or more, Type III bursts occur that
are similar in many respects to the bursts at lower frequencies. The
most significant difference is in respect to the harmonic structure,
with F-H pairs rarely observed above a few hundred MHz, and never above
500 MHz. However the differences in density and temperature, and
specifically the ratio of @xmath mean that the mechanism proposed for IP
bursts, and confirmed through observations of Langmuir, ion-sound and
electromagnetic waves, cannot simply be extrapolated to higher
frequencies (Benz, 2004 ) . In addition, there are several kinds of
short duration emission also ascribed to the plasma mechanism that show
important differences from the lower frequency observations.

In Chapter 4 of this thesis we consider the simulation of plasma
emission at GHz frequencies, and so in this section we give more
specific details of the features of GHz radio emission. We highlight
where this differs from that at lower frequencies, and what can be
inferred about the emission mechanism.

#### 1.6.1 Classic Type III Radio Bursts

The statistical study of Type III bursts extending above 1000 MHz by
Meléndez et al. ( 1999 ) is the most comprehensive of its type, and
provides key information about burst behaviour at high frequencies. 160
bursts were analysed, two-thirds of which had an RS component, and 5
@xmath of which were bidirectional (both normal and reverse drift
components). The peak fluxes were generally around 10 sfu (Solar Flux
Units, 1 sfu= @xmath erg s @xmath cm @xmath Hz @xmath ), and rarely over
100 sfu. By 7 GHz even the maximum fluxes are barely 100 sfu (e.g. Benz
et al., 1992 ) and the emission very rarely exceeds the background. The
durations, averaging a few 100 ms, were shorter than expected from the
extrapolation of the data for metric bursts, with correspondingly low
bandwidths of around 200 MHz.

Source sizes are difficult to obtain at the very high frequencies. At
432 MHz, Saint-Hilaire et al. ( 2013 ) find values of @xmath , and
extrapolating their observed trends in the size from 151 to 432 MHz
suggests sizes at 1 GHz of around @xmath . For comparison, the VLA
observations of Willson et al. ( 1990 ) of unclassified bursts at
1.4 GHz give source sizes around @xmath .

For comparison, bursts at 169 MHz have typical fluxes between 10 and a
few hundred sfu, which we note is significantly over the thermal level
due to the frequency dependence of this, shown in Figure 1.2 . They have
durations of a few seconds and source sizes around @xmath (Bougeret
et al., 1970 ) .

The empirical formula for the burst durations given by Alvarez & Haddock
( 1973 ) for kilometric wavelengths, and for higher frequencies by Benz
et al. ( 1992 ) was shown by Meléndez et al. ( 1999 ) not to apply at
very high frequencies. Instead the relation is given empirically by
@xmath for @xmath the duration in ms and @xmath the emitting frequency
in MHz. The relation found by Elgaroy & Lyngstad ( 1972 ) for bursts at
a few 100 MHz also overestimates the duration by a factor of 2 or more.

The lack of F-H pairs above 500 MHz and the difference in starting
frequency of the two components at lower frequencies suggest that that
there are significant differences in the emission mechanisms producing
the two components. Further evidence is offered by the polarisation of
the emission. Generally plasma emission occurs in regions where the
magnetic field is weak, and thus we can ignore its effects on the
emission rates. However, because in magnetised plasma the right and left
hand circular polarisations have different group velocities and
low-frequency cutoffs (see Section 1.2.2 ), polarised emission can be
generated due to propagation effects.

As noted in the previous section, fundamental emission is observed to be
O-mode polarised with a degree of polarisation anywhere from 0 up to
@xmath in some cases, while the harmonic is generally weakly O-mode
polarised, between 0 and 30 @xmath . Taking this together with the
polarisation statistics from Ma et al. ( 2012 ) in the range
600-1500 MHz which suggest average values of around 20 @xmath , suggests
that the only observed component at high frequencies is the harmonic.
This supports the discussion in Section 4.6.4 where it is found that
only harmonic emission is able to escape dense parts of the corona. A
final interesting feature of polarisation is a tendency at high
frequencies for polarisation degree to increase with frequency, which
can be explained by varying magnetic field strength (Mercier, 1990 ) .

#### 1.6.2 Other Plasma Emission

Various spike-type emissions, characterised generally by their short
duration and narrow bandwidths, are observed in the corona at high MHz
and GHz frequencies (e.g. Guedel & Benz, 1988 ; Allaart et al., 1990 ;
Isliker & Benz, 1994 ) . The emission mechanism is inferred from the
observed characteristics and their correlations with better known types
of emission. For example, one class of spikes at decimetric wavelengths
(DCIM), are ascribed to electron-cyclotron maser emission primarily on
the basis of their frequency and polarisation, and occasionally observed
harmonic structure (e.g. Guedel & Benz, 1990 ; Fleishman & Yastrebov,
1994 ; Bastian et al., 1998 ) .

Some of these spike events may be generated by plasma emission from
Langmuir waves, which provides another interesting direction for
simulations of plasma emission. Theoretically spikes are even more
challenging than Type III bursts due to their more complex structures.
On the other hand, if we have fast electrons and an instability to
Langmuir wave generation we may expect that we should observe plasma
emission, and can give analytical estimates of its minimum brightness.
The absence of emission is therefore also informative.

Two examples of high frequency, short duration emission which may be
easily ascribed to the plasma emission mechanism are given by the
“blips” of Benz et al. ( 1983 ) at frequencies from 500 MHz to the low
GHz range, which are similar in several respects to Type IIIs at MHz
frequencies and are now known as “Narrowband Type IIIs” (Guedel & Benz,
1988 ) , and the “microwave Type IIIs” observed at 3-5 GHz by Staehli &
Benz ( 1987 ) again similar to Type III emission. The latter have
durations of only 20-200 ms, which is however consistent with the
empirical result of Alvarez & Haddock ( 1973 ) when adjusted for
frequency. Both of these have similar bandwidths, polarisations and
frequency drifts.

Narrow-band Type IIIs at frequencies of 1-2 GHz were also studied by
Jiřička et al. ( 2001 ) . These have bandwidths of around 150 MHz and
total duration approximately 1 second, and are observed equally often as
single bursts or in groups. They are identical to Type IIIs in drift
rates, brightnesses, duration at a single frequency etc, differing only
in bandwidth and therefore total duration. The statistical study of
Meléndez et al. ( 1999 ) discussed above also includes these narrow
bandwidth emissions.

## Chapter 2 Langmuir Wave Diffusion in Inhomogeneous Plasma

### 2.1 Introduction

Fast electron beams occur in many plasma physics contexts, from lab
experiments to solar flares. These beams can become unstable to the
generation of Langmuir waves, in which case energy is transferred from
the beam into the waves and the instantaneous beam distribution will be
changed. If no other evolution occurs, these Langmuir waves are later
reabsorbed by electrons at the same velocity as they were emitted, so
there is no net effect on the particle distribution (Hamilton &
Petrosian, 1987 ; McClements, 1987 ) . However, as we will show in this
chapter and the next, redistribution of the Langmuir waves in wavenumber
space can act to redistribute energy between electrons at different
velocities, which can lead to electron acceleration.

In the Sun, the fast electron beams accelerated during reconnection in
solar flares are known to produce Langmuir waves if the distribution
attains a reverse-slope in velocity (see Section 1.4.1 ). Spectral
evolution of these Langmuir waves can occur due to density variations in
the plasma, due to either wavemodes with wavelengths comparable to the
Debye length (e.g Vedenov et al., 1967 ; Goldman & Dubois, 1982 ; Yoon
et al., 2005 ) , or longer wavelength inhomogeneities (e.g. Ryutov, 1969
; Nishikawa & Ryutov, 1976 ; Smith & Sime, 1979 ; Kontar, 2001a ; Kontar
et al., 2012 ) . Here we consider the treatment of the effects of long
wavelength plasma density fluctuations using a new method based on a
diffusion equation.

When an electron beam propagates into plasma of increasing or decreasing
density, the generated Langmuir waves will be shifted towards smaller or
larger wavenumbers respectively. A randomly fluctuating density will
lead to alternating shifts of the Langmuir waves to smaller and larger
wavenumbers, and as we will show, when this is averaged over the
ensemble of fluctuations it results in diffusion of the Langmuir waves
in wavenumber space.

In this chapter we develop a mathematical treatment of this diffusion
process in both one and three dimensions. We first show the derivation
of the diffusion equation and diffusion coefficients, then give examples
of their functional form for different density fluctuation spectra. We
end with a brief theoretical discussion of the effects of wavenumber
diffusion on the Langmuir waves and electrons. This work has been
published in Ratcliffe et al. ( 2012 ) .

### 2.2 Beam-Wave Interactions

In this work we address the problem of beam-plasma wave interactions in
the solar corona and wind. As discussed in Section 1.4.1 , the effects
of the magnetic field on the electron-wave interactions are negligible
as we are generally in the weak-field limit, @xmath , but the electron
beam must propagate along the magnetic field lines. Moreover, the beam
densities observed are often relatively small and so the situation is
handled well by the quasilinear approximation. We use equations based on
those given in e.g. Drummond & Pines ( 1964 ); Vedenov et al. ( 1962 );
Vedenov & Velikhov ( 1963 ); Vedenov et al. ( 1967 ); Tsytovich ( 1995 )
, and add the effects of collisions, and wave-wave interactions, as
necessary.

In this chapter, we will consider the Langmuir wave evolution in both
one and three dimensions. However, in our simulations of the beam-plasma
interaction we use a 1-dimensional model, and neglect the effects of
particle transport. The physical situations where this model is
applicable are discussed in Section 3.3 .

In this 1-dimensional model we write the electron distribution function
as @xmath [electrons cm @xmath (cm/s) @xmath ] and the spectral energy
density of Langmuir waves at wavenumber @xmath as @xmath [ergs cm @xmath
] respectively. These are normalised so that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath the plasma density in cm @xmath and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

the total energy density of the waves in erg cm @xmath . The equations
describing the electron-Langmuir wave interaction are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the local plasma frequency and @xmath the local plasma
density.

The two terms on the right-hand side of the second equation correspond
to spontaneous and stimulated emission of Langmuir waves respectively.
This emission (and the corresponding absorption) is resonant, meaning an
electron at velocity @xmath interacts only with a wave at wavenumber
@xmath , or alternately that the particle velocity @xmath and the phase
speed of the wave, given by @xmath , are equal. This is the Cerenkov or
Vavilov-Cherenkov condition, and the equations are derived in the limit
of a particle in constant rectilinear motion. We note that this requires
that the particles are unmagnetised, i.e the effects of magnetic field
on their motion are negligible.

In addition, we are restricted to the weak turbulence limit, where the
energy in Langmuir waves is far less than the energy of the background
plasma, i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

For beam generated Langmuir waves this leads to a restriction on the
beam density, but this is easily satisfied for the beam densities we
consider here.

It is easily seen that the electron distribution becomes unstable to the
generation of Langmuir waves when @xmath . This may occur due to time of
flight effects, where fast electrons overtake the slower ones, or it can
be due to collisional relaxation (discussed later in Section 3.3 ), as
the collision rate is roughly proportional to @xmath , and a “gap”
distribution (Melrose, 1975 ; Wentzel, 1985 ) can be produced from an
initially power-law beam (e.g. Emslie & Smith, 1984 ) .

The timescale for this beam-wave interaction can be found from Equation
2.4 , and is known as the quasilinear time. We use the condition @xmath
and approximate

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Assuming a Maxwellian beam, with velocity @xmath , width @xmath and
density @xmath , given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

we find @xmath and evaluate the equation for a velocity of @xmath . The
result is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

### 2.3 A Diffusion Treatment in 1-Dimension

The second term on the left-hand side of Equation 2.4 gives the effects
of density gradients on the Langmuir waves. In the case of a constant
density gradient (e.g. Kontar, 2001a ) this term becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the change in density over the scale length @xmath , and
the sign is positive for a decreasing density and negative for an
increasing one. We immediately see that an increasing gradient will
shift the Langmuir waves to smaller wavenumbers, and vice versa, while
alternating gradients will cause alternating shifts in wavenumber. In
the next section we will see that this leads to a diffusion of the
Langmuir waves in wavenumber space.

#### 2.3.1 The Diffusion Equation

We write the plasma density as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath the constant background density and @xmath the relative
density fluctuation. This relative fluctuation is assumed to be weak,
i.e. @xmath , and long wavelength, @xmath , conditions often satisfied
by the density perturbations the solar corona and the solar wind (see
Section 1.1.4 ).

The conditions of weak, long-wavelength fluctuations mean the fractional
change in Langmuir wavenumber is small,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

and so we can make the WKB, or geometric optics, approximation. The
long-wavelength condition also allows us to treat the Langmuir waves as
quasi-particles, averaging over their spatial and time scales, which are
far shorter than those for the density fluctuations. In this case, we
can describe the wave motion using standard equations of motion
describing their propagation and their momentum (equivalent to
wavenumber) change due to the action of a density gradient. These
equations are (e.g. Whitham, 1965 ; Vedenov et al., 1967 ; Zakharov,
1974 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Langmuir wavenumber, @xmath their group velocity,
given by @xmath and @xmath is the “force” acting on the waves due to the
density gradients, which for Langmuir waves is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

These equations are equivalent to the conservation equation describing
the evolution of the spectral energy density @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

As noted above, we neglect the effects of spatial transport, i.e. a term
@xmath . For convenience we also omit the source terms due to electrons
on the right-hand side (see Equation 2.4 ) during this derivation.

From Equation 2.12 we can see that a random force, as arises due to
random density fluctuations, will result in random changes in the
Langmuir wavenumber and subsequently a diffusion of the Langmuir waves
in wavenumber space. We can derive the equation describing this process
via standard procedures (e.g. Vedenov & Velikhov, 1963 ; Sturrock, 1966
) , the outline of which follows.

We decompose the spectral energy density of Langmuir waves @xmath into
the sum of its average and fluctuating parts @xmath and substitute this
expression into Equation 2.15 to obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

We then average this, and use the facts that, by assumption @xmath and
by definition @xmath . The result is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Subtracting this from Equation 2.16 gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

This becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

by neglecting the term containing the product of the fluctuation @xmath
and the force @xmath as these are both small. Neglecting these products
is the key feature of the quasilinear approximation.

Integrating the equation for the fluctuations, Equation 2.19 , gives

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.20)
  -- -- -- --------

which is substituted into Equation 2.17 to give the equation describing
the diffusion of wave energy in @xmath -space:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the diffusion coefficient. Now we may drop the notation
@xmath for the average, and instead write simply

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 2.3.2 The Diffusion Coefficient

The diffusion coefficient @xmath in Equation 2.22 is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the auto-correlation function of the force @xmath .
In practice it is often useful to express this in terms of the spectrum
of the density fluctuations that are producing the force.

To do this, we Fourier transform @xmath in the the auto-correlation
function,
@xmath , from space and time, @xmath , to wavenumber and frequency,
denoted @xmath , using the definition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

and find

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . We assume the force is stationary (auto-correlation does
not vary in time) and homogeneous (auto-correlation does not vary in
space), and so the auto-correlation can depend only on the differences
@xmath . We therefore require @xmath and so the spectrum of the force,
@xmath , must be given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the diffusion coefficient is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then using the definition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

this becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, we relate the spectrum of the force to the spectrum of density
fluctuations, @xmath . The force on Langmuir waves is @xmath and so its
correlation function, assuming @xmath from the conditions of
stationarity and homogeneity, is @xmath . Then using the Wiener
Khintchine theorem (a standard result in Fourier theory), which says
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

twice we find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The diffusion coefficient is therefore finally

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where by definition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The delta function, @xmath implies that this is a resonant interaction,
while the factor of @xmath means that fluctuations at large wavenumbers,
i.e. small spatial scales, will have a more significant effect than
those at longer wavelengths.

#### 2.3.3 Wave Modes

In the previous section we outlined a standard mathematical derivation
of a diffusion equation describing the effects of a fluctuating force
with arbitrary wavenumber and frequency, @xmath and @xmath respectively.
Now we develop this theory, firstly to consider fluctuations due to a
compressive wave mode, for which these must be related by the wave
dispersion relation, @xmath , and in the next section to find the
coefficient for specific fluctuation spectra. To incorporate the
restriction @xmath we define the spectrum as @xmath so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting this into Equation 2.32 then gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because of the delta function @xmath , we have some constraints on the
wave modes we can consider in this model. For example, ion-sound waves
have a dispersion relation which is approximately @xmath , which would
imply that the diffusion coefficient is non-zero only where @xmath , i.e
at a single value of the Langmuir wavenumber. However, other wave modes
may be of interest, as are fluctuations with arbitrary spectrum.

#### 2.3.4 The Diffusion Coefficient for Specific Spectra

Using Equation 2.32 we may evaluate the diffusion coefficient for some
common density fluctuation spectra, and examine how this affects its
functional form.

##### Random Fluctuations

If we assume fluctuations that are random in space and time, their
correlation function is Gaussian, and therefore from Equation 2.30 so is
the fluctuation spectrum. Taking a spectrum given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are characteristic wavenumber and frequency,
normalised so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

the diffusion coefficient reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the characteristic velocity of the fluctuations.

We see immediately that for these random fluctuations there will be two
distinct regimes of diffusion, depending on whether the density
fluctuation characteristic velocity @xmath is much larger than the
Langmuir wave group velocity @xmath or vice versa.

In the former case, i.e @xmath , the diffusion coefficient becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

and is independent of @xmath and therefore of the Langmuir wavenumber,
@xmath . This case of a constant diffusion coefficient drives the system
towards the steady state of a flat Langmuir wave spectrum.

In the other extreme, i.e. @xmath , the coefficient is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the diffusion is strongly dependent on the wavenumber @xmath .
Assuming that initially @xmath is not everywhere zero then the steady
state solution, @xmath is proportional to @xmath , with more wave energy
at large wavenumbers than the thermal case.

##### A Power-law Fluctuation Spectrum

Also of interest are fluctuations with a turbulent power-law spectrum in
wavenumber at a single characteristic frequency, @xmath with spectrum

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath and zero elsewhere, with spectral index @xmath . The lower
limit on @xmath is necessary for normalisation. Fluctuations of this
type have been observed in the solar wind (e.g. Cronyn, 1972 ; Celnikier
et al., 1983 ; Robinson, 1983 ) , with spectral index around @xmath ,
and were included in simulations of beam-wave interactions by Reid &
Kontar ( 2010 ) (see Section 1.4.2 ).

The diffusion coefficient is now

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

A power law index of @xmath will again lead to a constant diffusion
coefficient.

### 2.4 Diffusion in 3-Dimensions

In many cases we wish to consider density fluctuations which are
isotropic or angularly varying, and therefore we must treat the
situation in 3-D. In the 3-dimensional treatment the Langmuir wavenumber
becomes a wave vector , and the density fluctuation induced diffusion is
now able to change both its magnitude and orientation. The restrictions
on wave dispersion relation due to the condition @xmath found in 1-D are
relaxed in 3-D, allowing us to explicitly consider wave modes such as
ion-sound waves.

Previously, treatments of Langmuir wavenumber diffusion (e.g. Nishikawa
& Riutov, 1976 ) were restricted to elastic scattering, where the
fluctuation frequency is much less than the plasma frequency @xmath ,
and so is neglected. The Langmuir wave energy is conserved by the
scattering, and so the Langmuir wavevector can be modified only in
angle.

Here we derive the diffusion equation and coefficients for the general
case, and briefly discuss the differences between this and the elastic
scattering case. For very low frequency waves the modifications are
negligible, but they are important in some cases. For ion-sound waves
the corrections due to inelasticity are small but non-zero, while for
fluctuations with arbitrary frequency (rather than an explicit
dispersion relation, @xmath ) and high frequency components the
corrections may be large.

#### 2.4.1 The Diffusion Equation

The conservation equation for the 3-dimensional wave spectral energy
density @xmath [erg], analogous to Equation 2.15 is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the group velocity, and the total energy density of the
waves is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

We proceed as above, again neglecting the spatial transport term, to
find the 3-dimensional diffusion equation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

The coefficient is now a tensor, and is given in the general case by

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.46)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath is the spectrum of the density fluctuations. This spectrum
is normalised so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

For wave modes, with dispersion relation @xmath , we write @xmath and
find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here we have a dot product @xmath , and therefore additional freedom to
specify a dispersion relation and still satisfy the resonant condition
@xmath . So for example we may put @xmath as is the case for ion-sound
waves and still satisfy the condition @xmath for more than one value of
the group velocity. This may be contrasted with Section 2.3.3 where we
had @xmath which strongly restricted the possible wave dispersion
relations.

#### 2.4.2 Diffusion in Spherical Coordinates

In the elastic scattering approximation previously considered in the
literature (e.g. Nishikawa & Ryutov, 1976 ; Goldman & Dubois, 1982 ;
Muschietti et al., 1985 ) , diffusion occurs in angle only, and the
problem is very easily treated using spherical polar coordinates. In our
more general case the diffusion tensor will have additional angular and
magnitude components. However, for the problem of beam-wave
interactions, and many other cases of interest, we may assume azimuthal
symmetry, so there is no diffusion in azimuth and the spherical
coordinate expression remains a useful simplification.

We begin by defining two sets of coordinates, one Cartesian and one
spherical, as illustrated in Figure 2.1 . We can then transform the
diffusion equation and its coefficients. In Cartesian coordinates, we
define one axis to be parallel to the beam direction, labelled as @xmath
, and two mutually perpendicular axes labelled, @xmath , giving a
standard right-handed Cartesian coordinate system. In our spherical
coordinate system, @xmath is the angle to the beam direction, and @xmath
the azimuth, measured clockwise around the beam direction. We now have
the two equivalent representations of the Langmuir wavevector, namely
@xmath and @xmath .

##### The Diffusion Equation in Spherical Coordinates

Equation 2.45 can also be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the diffusion tensor and @xmath is the gradient
operator in @xmath space. Then using the definitions of @xmath and
@xmath in spherical coordinates, and the assumption of azimuthal
symmetry which implies there can be no diffusion in @xmath we find

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

##### The Components of @xmath

The diffusion coefficients @xmath in Equation 2.4.2 are derived from the
Cartesian components (Equation 2.46 or 2.48 ) using standard tensor
coordinate transforms. For a given Langmuir wavevector @xmath , using
the assumption of azimuthal symmetry, we may define coordinates such
that the azimuth of @xmath is zero. Then taking @xmath as an example, we
find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Comparing this with the Cartesian expression in Equation 2.46 , we see
that by defining the new quantities

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.52)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.53)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

we may write simply

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath stands for @xmath and @xmath .

##### Evaluating the Diffusion Coefficients

Equation 2.55 is entirely general, but in many cases cannot be
evaluated. One significant simplification is to introduce an isotropic
wave dispersion relation @xmath . The spectrum is then @xmath and
Equation 2.55 becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

In what follows, we introduce the notation @xmath to shorten the
equations. Again, we note that the azimuth of the Langmuir wavevector,
@xmath , is assumed to be zero. We evaluate the dot product,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

and use the delta function to integrate over @xmath . This gives us

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

subject to the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

or using Equation 2.57

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , and @xmath .

Using this we evaluate the components @xmath in Equations 2.52 - 2.54
finding

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.61)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.62)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and so the non-zero diffusion coefficients are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.64)
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the limits on the @xmath integrals are the solutions of @xmath i.e
@xmath (noting that @xmath ).

##### Isotropic Fluctuations

If we assume the fluctuations are isotropic, i.e. @xmath , then we can
evaluate the @xmath angular integral and obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the resonance condition we have @xmath and so @xmath is always
positive.

##### Elastic Scattering

We may recover the result for elastic scattering by setting @xmath ,
meaning there is no change in energy due to scattering, in Equations
2.66 and 2.67 , finding

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

as given by Muschietti et al. ( 1985 ) . Diffusion occurs in angle only,
at a rate independent of the angle @xmath . Therefore it will tend to
isotropise the Langmuir wave spectrum.

### 2.5 Effects of Diffusion on Waves and Electrons

The detailed evolution of the beam-wave system may only be explored
using simulations, but we may infer the general behaviour by considering
the form of the diffusion coefficients, and looking at the limiting
cases. We give here a brief theoretical discussion of the simplest
cases.

#### 2.5.1 1-Dimensional Diffusion

In 1-D the wave spectrum evolves according to Equation 2.4 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Considering only the diffusion term and assuming a constant diffusion
coefficient @xmath , it is clear that the steady state solution is a
flat Langmuir wave spectrum. The thermal level of Langmuir waves in
collisionless plasma (given by Equation 3.5 ) is plotted in Figure 2.2 .
Diffusion due to density fluctuations will then tend to increase the
Langmuir wave level at small wavenumbers. The analogous effect at large
wavenumbers will not be seen, as above @xmath the waves are very rapidly
Landau damped by the background electrons.

When we include an electron beam generating Langmuir waves, we expect to
see spreading of their spectrum in wavenumber and consequently spreading
of the beam in velocity space. The fraction of the waves which shift to
smaller wavenumbers will cause electron acceleration, which we
investigate in the next chapter using numerical simulations.

#### 2.5.2 Beam Aligned Fluctuations

The 1-dimensional case discussed previously can be derived from the
3-dimensional equations by a suitable choice of the density fluctuation
spectrum. We define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

with arbitrary frequency, and the components in Equations 2.53 and 2.52
become @xmath and @xmath and so the diffusion coefficients are, using
Equation 2.55 , @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

We may relate the 3-D spectrum to its 1-D counterpart via their
respective normalisations, Equations 2.33 and 2.47 , finding @xmath and
thus we recover the diffusion coefficient as given by Equation 2.32 and
the diffusion equation as in Equation 2.22 . This confirms that the
1-dimensional model discussed above exactly describes the case of beam
parallel density fluctuations.

#### 2.5.3 Angular Diffusion

For a well collimated electron beam, the Langmuir waves generated will
be confined to the region in wavenumber space given by @xmath . The
effects of inelastic scattering in 3-D can then be considered in 1-D by
rewriting Equation 2.4.2 in terms of the independent variables @xmath
and @xmath where @xmath is the component of the wavevector parallel to
the beam direction, given by @xmath , and taking the limit @xmath , or
equivalently @xmath , to obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first term here is a diffusion of waves in the parallel direction
due to the diffusion in magnitude of the wavenumber, while the second is
advection of the waves towards smaller parallel wavenumber caused by the
angular diffusion. This latter term will be advective only in the limit
@xmath , which becomes less applicable as angular diffusion proceeds.
However, while the Langmuir wave angular spread remains small, both
terms will lead to the transfer of energy from waves at larger parallel
wavenumbers to those at smaller parallel wavenumbers, and therefore
cause energy transfer from slower to faster electrons, leading to an
acceleration effect.

Angular diffusion due to elastic scattering (e.g. Nishikawa & Ryutov,
1976 ; Goldman & Dubois, 1982 ; Muschietti et al., 1985 ) has been shown
to lead to suppression of the beam plasma instability by moving waves
out of the resonant region in wavenumber space. In most treatments
however, the electron distribution is assumed to be fixed. The
combination of angular diffusion and wave absorption is treated as
simple absorption with a constant coefficient, and the energy
transferred to electrons due to this absorption is ignored.

From Equation 2.72 we may infer that in fact this energy reabsorption
can lead to electron acceleration and the formation of high energy tails
in the electron distribution. The 3-D PIC simulations by Karlický &
Kontar ( 2012 ) consider the effects of Langmuir wave scattering due to
wave-wave interactions, and confirm that in this case, the reabsorption
by the electrons of Langmuir waves at smaller wavenumbers indeed leads
to an acceleration effect.

We can compare the effects of magnitude and angular diffusion by
evaluating the diffusion coefficients in Equations 2.66 and 2.67 using a
simple example spectrum. We take

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.73)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath a constant giving proper normalisation, and a dispersion
relation @xmath . We find the ratio of the coefficients to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then for plasma with equal ion and electron temperatures, @xmath and
fluctuations with a velocity @xmath the sound speed, this ratio is
approximately @xmath for beam generated Langmuir waves at wavenumbers
around @xmath , and @xmath at @xmath . We therefore expect that
contributions from both effects may be visible even for relatively low
frequency fluctuations.

#### 2.5.4 Timescales

Finally, we may give some general predictions regarding when the
diffusion effects are important, and which effects may dominate. In all
cases, we have two competing processes in operation: the quasilinear
interaction between the electrons and waves, and the diffusive process
causing wave evolution. Clearly, the relative importance of these
processes will depend on their timescales. These are, for the former,
the quasilinear time (Equation 2.8 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

and for the latter, the diffusive time which may be approximated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath the characteristic Langmuir wavenumber and @xmath the
appropriate diffusion coefficient, either for 1-D diffusion (see
Equation 2.22 ), magnitude diffusion in 3-D (see Equation 2.72 ) or
convection due to angular diffusion in 3-D (see Equation 2.72 )
respectively.

We expect the diffusive process to be significant for @xmath in each
case, and suppression of the beam-plasma instability to occur if @xmath
for a process which causes the transfer of wave energy out of the
resonant region in @xmath space. We confirm this numerically for the 1-D
diffusion in Ratcliffe et al. ( 2012 ) , and the next chapter.

## Chapter 3 Quasilinear Simulations of Langmuir Wave Evolution

An accelerated electron population which propagates down to the solar
chromosphere can produce HXR emission via bremsstrahlung (see Section
1.3.4 ). However, as they propagate though the dense plasma, the
electrons can lose significant energy due to collisional effects and so
to obtain a given electron distribution in the emission region, far more
electrons may have to be accelerated. Previously, wave generation was
considered to be a pure energy loss process, and therefore expected to
only increase the initially required number of fast electrons. In
general however, observations of the HXR spectra can only reach down to
around @xmath keV and the spectrum below this is unrecoverable from HXR.
Therefore if we can transfer energy from energies below this into the
observable part of the spectrum, we will appear to have more energy in
the electrons.

In Section 2.5.2 we discussed the effects of beam parallel density
fluctuations, and suggested that these could lead to the acceleration of
beam electrons. In addition we concluded that 3-D diffusion due to, for
example, isotropic fluctuations would include a similar parallel
diffusion component, and thus give a similar effect. In this chapter we
investigate electron acceleration using the mathematical treatment
developed in Chapter 2 . We consider plasma similar to the solar corona,
with density fluctuations similar to those which have been observed, and
treat both a sample case of a Maxwellian beam, in order to investigate
the detailed effects, and the collisional relaxation of a power law
beam, to see the effects this acceleration may have in a physical
situations, and how it may be observed. A large part of this work has
been previously published in Kontar et al. ( 2012 ); Ratcliffe et al. (
2012 ) .

### 3.1 The Simulation Equations

In Section 2.2 we gave the quasilinear equations in homogeneous
collisionless plasma, Equations 2.3 and 2.4 , as originally derived by
Vedenov & Velikhov ( 1963 ); Vedenov et al. ( 1967 ) . However, in the
dense plasma of the solar corona, collisional effects are important for
both electrons and waves, and so we must add terms describing these. The
collisional operator for electrons is given by (e.g. Lifshitz &
Pitaevskii, 1981 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , with @xmath the Coulomb logarithm. For the temperatures
and densities of the corona and solar wind, the empirical formulae of
Sivukhin ( 1966 ) give values for @xmath of approximately 15-20. The
collisional damping rate for Langmuir waves is @xmath . For the
parameters we use below, the collisional time is @xmath s for electrons
at @xmath .

We include the diffusion operator describing the effects of beam-aligned
density fluctuations on the Langmuir waves from Equation 2.22 , and
obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The coefficient of diffusion, @xmath , is given by Equations 2.38 or
2.42 , depending on the density fluctuation spectrum assumed.

The initial value problem, which is sufficient to reproduce the physics
important here, is solved using finite difference methods, discussed in
general for partial differential equations in the books by e.g. Smith (
1985 ); Thomas ( 1995 ) , and for the specific case of beam-plasma
interaction in Takakura ( 1982 ); Kontar ( 2001b ) . We use explicit
finite difference schemes, first order in time and second order in
velocity, or equivalently wavenumber, space.

The code is written in FORTRAN 90, and based on that used in Kontar (
2001a ) with additional modifications from Kontar & Pécseli ( 2002 );
Hannah et al. ( 2009 ) describing collisional effects and the
interaction of Langmuir waves with ion-sound waves. In Chapter 4 we add
additional subroutines for the generation of electromagnetic emission.
We use a variable timestep according to the stability criterion for the
quasilinear equations. The accuracy of the numerical schemes used is
discussed in Kontar ( 2001b ) .

### 3.2 Simulations of a Maxwellian Beam

In order to illustrate the effects of Langmuir wave evolution it is
useful to first consider the simplest possible case of beam-wave
interaction, by assuming a Maxwellian electron beam. This case offers
three significant simplifications. Firstly, the timescale for beam-wave
interaction is @xmath s and so collisional effects are negligible for
electrons of velocity @xmath . Secondly, the condition @xmath for
Langmuir wave growth is immediately satisfied by such a beam, so waves
are rapidly produced. Finally, the plateau in the electron distribution
produced due to the energy transfer from electrons to waves (Melrose,
1980b ) does not significantly evolve in time, in contrast to the case
of a beam formed either due to transport effects (e.g. Ginzburg &
Zhelezniakov, 1958 ; Melrose, 1975 ) or collisional relaxation (e.g.
Emslie & Smith, 1984 , or Section 3.3 ) .

#### 3.2.1 Initial Conditions

The initial electron distribution function @xmath [electrons cm @xmath
(cm/s) @xmath ] is the superposition of a Maxwellian background and a
Maxwellian beam:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the beam density, @xmath its average velocity and @xmath
its velocity space width.

The initial spectral energy density of Langmuir waves @xmath [ergs cm
@xmath ] is set to the thermal level. This is found from the
simultaneous steady state solution of Equations 3.2 and 3.3 , ignoring
the collisional terms and is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

which agrees with the thermal level of plasma waves in a collisionless
Maxwellian plasma as given by (Kaplan & Tsytovich, 1973 ; Tsytovich,
1995 ) .

In our first set of simulations, we fix the parameters of the beam and
background plasma, and vary only those of the density fluctuations. We
consider plasma similar to that in dense coronal loops. The electron and
ion temperatures are approximately equal here, in contrast to solar wind
regions where generally the ion temperature is lower (e.g. Newbury
et al., 1998 ; Gurnett et al., 1979 ) , and we take @xmath MK. The
background density is relatively high, @xmath cm @xmath , which
corresponds to a local plasma frequency of @xmath GHz. We take a beam of
density @xmath , which as will be seen leads to high levels of Langmuir
waves, @xmath over the thermal level or more. The beam velocity is set
to @xmath cm s @xmath and @xmath , in the mid range of observed
velocities of solar fast electron beams.

We begin by considering random density fluctuations, with Langmuir
wavenumber diffusion coefficient @xmath given by Equation 2.38 . This
coefficient contains three free parameters, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
However @xmath appears only in the coefficient magnitude, arising due to
the normalisation of the RMS average density fluctuation. Qualitatively,
the effects of varying @xmath are therefore identical to those of
changing the RMS fluctuation level @xmath , so we may fix @xmath without
loss of generality. We set @xmath .

The magnitude of relative density fluctuations @xmath ranges between
@xmath and @xmath covering the range of values commonly observed in the
corona (Cronyn, 1972 ; Smith & Sime, 1979 ) . If we assume the
fluctuations are due to ion-sound waves, which may exist (subject to
@xmath ) in the corona at appropriate frequencies, the characteristic
velocity will be the sound speed, @xmath cm s @xmath for the plasma
parameters as stated, or approximately @xmath . We consider a range of
velocities around this, varying @xmath between @xmath and @xmath .

#### 3.2.2 Electron and Wave Distributions

Figure 3.1 shows the evolution of the electron and the wave
distributions during the initial quasilinear relaxation of the beam over
the first few quasilinear times, and the relaxed state reached at @xmath
. The top left panel shows the results in homogeneous density plasma.
Langmuir waves grow rapidly over the first few quasilinear times,
forming a flat plateau after around @xmath . For this beam velocity and
density, the plateau in the electron distribution spans from @xmath (
@xmath keV) to @xmath ( @xmath keV). This plateau remains at @xmath , as
shown by the red line, and will persist until collisional effects begin
to be important. Plateau destruction occurs on a timescale given by
@xmath where @xmath is the collisional rate. This is approximately 1
second at @xmath , of the order of @xmath or @xmath quasilinear times,
and is far longer than the duration of the simulations, so these effects
will not be seen.

##### Density Fluctuations

The other panels in Figure 3.1 show the electron and wave spectra in
plasma with fluctuating density. The bottom left panel, showing a
moderate level of fluctuations, @xmath , gives the best illustration of
these effects. The waves generated by the beam spread rapidly in
wavenumber space, with subsequent slight decrease of their peak
intensity. This spreading is mirrored in the electron distribution, and
formation of the plateau is slowed.

This may also be expressed as broadening the resonance between the waves
and electrons, since the process of generation of a wave at wavenumber
@xmath , its shift via diffusion to a new wavenumber @xmath , and
subsequent absorption at velocity @xmath can also be thought of as a
resonant interaction at @xmath and @xmath , but with finite width, as
opposed to the delta function resonance seen in the quasilinear
equations. Dupree ( 1966 ) originally showed this for the case of
particle diffusion in velocity, but Langmuir wavenumber diffusion
affects the resonance in a similar manner.

At large velocities we see an increase in the electron distribution
@xmath from the upper edge of the plateau to the highest velocities in
the simulation. In other words, electrons have been accelerated. Because
waves diffuse to both larger and smaller wavenumbers, we also see
changes in the electron distribution down to @xmath . Below this, the
energy in background electrons is significantly more than that in the
Langmuir waves (the weak turbulence assumption, defined in Equation 2.5
) and their effect is not visible.

The other two panels in Figure 3.1 show the effects of stronger and
weaker fluctuations. For very weak fluctuations, @xmath , there is
slight spreading of the Langmuir wave spectrum, giving a wider electron
plateau and therefore slight acceleration. Otherwise the relaxation
proceeds as in the homogeneous case.

When the inhomogeneity becomes very strong, as illustrated by the bottom
right panel where @xmath , diffusion transports the waves out of their
region of excitation in @xmath -space on a timescale which is much
smaller than their growth timescale, so the wave level is barely
increased above the thermal level. As we can see, by time @xmath the
electron distribution remains essentially unchanged from the initial
distribution. Waves are produced and reabsorbed, but the broadening of
their spectrum due to diffusion occurs so rapidly that this absorption
is mainly by the thermal electrons at a few @xmath , corresponding to
wavenumbers near @xmath , where there is far more energy than is in the
waves (see Equation 2.5 giving the limit of weak turbulence theory).
Thus we get suppression of the beam-plasma instability.

Elsewhere, the effects of suppression have been considered mainly in the
context of elastic angular scattering of Langmuir waves, as discussed in
Section 2.5.3 . Our treatment confirms a related suppression effect due
to diffusion in the Langmuir wavenumber magnitude, rather than a direct
shift @xmath . Moreover, although we have assumed here density
fluctuations aligned with the electron beam, as noted in Section 2.5.3
isotropic fluctuations, or indeed any angular distribution with
component along the beam propagation direction will lead to diffusion in
both angle and magnitude of the wavenumber. Our treatment of inelastic
scattering considers both possible effects simultaneously, allowing
their relative importance to be easily assessed.

#### 3.2.3 Parametrising the Effects of Diffusion

To find the timescale associated with wavenumber diffusion, we
approximate the diffusion equation, Equation 2.22 , as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath the shift of the Langmuir waves from the generation region
out of resonance with the beam, and @xmath evaluated at a characteristic
Langmuir wavenumber @xmath . For a Maxwellian electron beam centred at
@xmath , these can be evaluated using the resonance condition, @xmath
and are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The parameters @xmath and @xmath are given above, and the timescale is
therefore

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The other important timescale in the system is that for beam wave
interaction, namely the quasilinear time, @xmath . These two timescales
indicate the rates of energy transfer by the two processes and thus the
relative strength of wave generation and wave diffusion. Therefore it is
natural to consider their ratio

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

when discussing the strength of the wave diffusion rather than the
absolute magnitude of the diffusion coefficient.

In the electron distributions in Figure 3.1 we see three distinct
regions in velocity space, illustrated in Figure 3.2 . Below around
@xmath is the core region, where little or no effect from diffusion is
seen. From @xmath and up is the “beam” region, containing the beam
electrons. Above @xmath is the “tail” region, where we see the
accelerated electrons appearing. We set the upper limit in velocity at
@xmath . Thus the energy of the initial Maxwellian beam is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we define the total energy in beam electrons at time @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the tail electrons as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the homogeneous case at time @xmath , the beam energy is @xmath and
the tail energy @xmath respectively. Generally, although not always, a
beam energy greater than this implies slowed relaxation of the beam,
while an increased tail energy implies electron acceleration, and so the
ratios @xmath , @xmath can be used as a measure of the extent of
suppression and/or acceleration. Also of interest is the quantity @xmath
, the average energy of a single electron in the tail region, giving a
measure of the average energy gain of an individual tail electron. In
the homogeneous case this is @xmath keV.

In Figure 3.3 , we plot these ratios as functions of the parameter
@xmath for a range of values of @xmath and @xmath . The three cases of
diffusion in Figure 3.1 are marked by asterisks, and represent three
distinct regions in @xmath . In the strong inhomogeneity case, with
@xmath and @xmath , the beam-plasma instability is suppressed, so the
beam remains close to its initial Maxwellian form and we find @xmath and
@xmath , while the average tail electron energy is unchanged.

Very weak inhomogeneity, with @xmath and @xmath , has little effect on
the beam relaxation, so the beam energy is close to the homogeneous
value, but the tail energy is slightly increased due to the broadened
plateau, giving @xmath and @xmath . Comparing the total tail region
energy to the average tail electron energy suggests in this case we have
accelerated a reasonable number of electrons, but not to very large
velocities, as seen in Figure 3.1 . The intermediate case, with @xmath
and @xmath , gives @xmath and @xmath , and a significantly increased
average tail electron energy.

To summarise these findings, for @xmath the density fluctuations are
weak and relaxation proceeds as in homogeneous plasma with no change to
the beam energy and no electron acceleration. As the diffusion
coefficient is increased and @xmath approaches 1, we begin to see
substantial electron acceleration, quantified by the tail energy @xmath
, due to the energy transfer from slower to faster electrons through
Langmuir wave diffusion. Finally, when @xmath we have strong diffusive
broadening of the wave spectrum, and thus suppression of the beam-plasma
instability as wave energy is lost from the resonant region on a much
shorter timescale than @xmath . Moreover, in the region of strong
acceleration, the total tail electron energy is almost doubled, and is
increased by more than half over around 2 orders of magnitude in @xmath
around this.

#### 3.2.4 Effects of Fluctuation Characteristic Velocity

For random density fluctuations we saw in Section 2.3.4 that there are
two simple regimes of diffusion when @xmath or vice versa. However, the
values of @xmath of interest here lie primarily in the transitional
region where @xmath and thus the diffusion coefficient shape is strongly
dependent on this value. In Figure 3.4 we plot the diffusion coefficient
as a function of wavenumber @xmath for three values of the fluctuation
characteristic velocity, @xmath . Significant dependence is seen around
the main region of Langmuir wave excitation, @xmath (Equation 3.7 ),
which is largely accounted for in our definition of the diffusive
timescale, @xmath .

To confirm that this is so, we can minimise the diffusive timescale with
respect to @xmath , finding that this occurs at @xmath . Substituting
@xmath for our parameters, we find the maximum acceleration should occur
for @xmath . In Figure 3.5 we plot the total and average tail electron
energies as a function of @xmath for a fixed level of fluctuations,
@xmath , and see a clear peak at exactly this value of @xmath . The
dependence of the acceleration effect on characteristic velocity
therefore accounts for the vertical scatter of the points in Figure 3.3
, which is confirmed by comparing the range in 3.5 , approximately
@xmath and @xmath keV, to that in Figure 3.3 .

#### 3.2.5 Power-law Fluctuations

In Section 2.3.4 we calculated the diffusion coefficient for a turbulent
power-law spectrum of density fluctuations. This coefficient is given by
Equation 2.42 , and was seen to be similar in some respects to the
coefficient for random fluctuations given by Equation 2.38 . In Figure
3.6 we compare the acceleration effects due to these two coefficients
for a range of fluctuation parameters. We use power-law indices of
@xmath and @xmath , similar to those observed in the solar corona and
wind (e.g. Cronyn, 1972 ; Celnikier et al., 1983 ; Robinson, 1983 ) .
The effects of acceleration for the two fluctuation spectra are seen to
be similar for the parameters considered here, but it must be noted that
only a few test cases have been run.

#### 3.2.6 The Effects of Beam and Plasma Parameters

Thus far we have considered only the effects of changing the fluctuation
parameters, but we can expect the trends established for the chosen beam
and plasma parameters to hold true when these quantities are also
varied. The simulations presented in this section show that this is
indeed the case, but only within certain ranges.

Firstly, both of the relevant timescales, @xmath and @xmath , obey the
same relation with respect to the local plasma density, and thus varying
this has no effect on the parameter @xmath . We show two cases of
diffusion with @xmath MHz in Figure 3.7 , and confirm that the same
relationships with @xmath hold in this case.

The beam density, @xmath , controls the level of Langmuir waves
generated, and therefore could be expected to affect the acceleration
process. However, as shown in Figure 3.7 , the effect is almost entirely
accounted for by the dependence of @xmath on the timescale @xmath , and
the same regimes of acceleration and suppression are seen. On the other
hand, the results for a beam density of @xmath cm @xmath at 1 GHz (not
shown in the figure) do not behave as expected, showing neither
acceleration nor suppression. This is due partly to the influence of
collisional effects on the beam and waves over the longer timescale for
relaxation of such a weak beam, and also to the small level of Langmuir
waves such a beam can generate. The acceleration relies on the
redistribution of energy between different Langmuir wavenumbers, and is
thus limited by the amount of energy available in waves.

#### 3.2.7 Conclusions

To summarise this section, for the test case of a Maxwellian beam, we
have found that plasma density fluctuations can lead to a significant
electron acceleration or suppression of the beam-plasma instability.
These effects occur for broad range of beam, plasma and fluctuation
parameters. The details of the density fluctuations change the effects
in relatively small ways, but their extent is controlled almost entirely
by the single quantity @xmath , the ratio of the quasilinear and wave
diffusion timescales. When @xmath is small, the diffusion process
dominates, and the beam-plasma instability is suppressed. When @xmath is
close to 1, there is significant acceleration. When @xmath is much
larger than 1, there is no effect as the beam-plasma interaction is far
more rapid than the diffusion process. However, as the effect is due to
energy transfer between different velocities by means of Langmuir wave
evolution, a sufficiently large level of Langmuir waves must be
generated, and so we require a sufficiently dense beam.

### 3.3 Simulations of the Collisional Relaxation of a Power-Law Beam

In the previous section we looked in detail at the effects of Langmuir
wavenumber diffusion for a simple test case of a Maxwellian beam. This
served as a useful “shortcut” for the production of Langmuir waves, as
the initial beam distribution was already unstable to their generation.
However, in physical situations the accelerated electrons often obey a
power law distribution, with @xmath at all velocities, which only
becomes unstable to wave generation due to subsequent evolution.

In some situations, this instability arises due to “time-of-flight”
effects. The faster electrons outpace the slower ones, producing a
distribution with more electrons at high velocities than at lower ones
and therefore a reverse slope. Coronal electron beams typically have
very high velocities, between 0.1 and 0.6 @xmath . An electron beam
moving upwards from the acceleration region may be estimated to become
unstable after a minimum distance of approximately @xmath or @xmath cm
(Kane et al., 1982 ; Reid et al., 2011 ) . The timescale to become
unstable is then between @xmath s and a few seconds.

A reverse slope distribution can also be generated due to collisional
effects. The collisional term in Equation 3.2 is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is roughly proportional to @xmath , and so slower electrons will
lose energy more rapidly than faster ones. The result is called a “gap
distribution” (Melrose, 1975 ; Wentzel, 1985 ) . At a plasma frequency
of 2 GHz the collisional timescale for electrons around @xmath , which
is given by @xmath , is approximately @xmath s. A reverse slope can
therefore be generated at velocities around @xmath after at time of
@xmath or approximately @xmath s.

In dense plasma it can therefore be interesting to consider the
collisional relaxation of the beam, as the timescale for this is shorter
than that for transport effects to become important, especially for the
slightly slower beams. We use a 1-D model and consider the evolution at
a single spatial location. This provides a good model of, for example, a
very dense coronal loop. The results in this section have been published
in Kontar et al. ( 2012 ) : the discussion as presented here has been
written specifically for this thesis.

#### 3.3.1 Initial Conditions

We use the quasilinear equations, Equations 3.2 and 3.3 , as in the
previous section and a diffusion coefficient given by Equation 2.38 .
The initial electron distribution is now a Maxwellian background plasma
plus a power law beam smoothly fitted to this:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath denotes the gamma function and appears due to the
normalisation of the distribution, while @xmath is the power law index
for the energetic particles in energy space and @xmath the number
density of non-thermal electrons, @xmath .

This distribution is a power law @xmath at high velocities @xmath and
flattens below this. This helps to fit the beam smoothly to the
Maxwellian core, and also means that collisional relaxation can more
quickly lead to Langmuir wave generation, as there are less electrons at
low velocities than for a pure power law.

The initial electron distribution is normalised to the electron number
density [electrons cm @xmath ], so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The thermal level of Langmuir waves when collisions are included is
calculated as in Section 3.2.1 by finding the steady state solution of
Equation 3.3 . We ignore the beam electrons and consider only the
Maxwellian core to obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

as used in the previous simulations.

We consider again dense coronal regions, in this case a slightly larger
density of @xmath cm @xmath , corresponding to a local plasma frequency
of @xmath GHz. The electron and ion temperature are again equal, @xmath
MK. The power law index of the initial beam is @xmath , corresponding to
an index of 8 in velocity space.

During the collisional relaxation of the beam, a large fraction of the
initial energy will be lost. To obtain a sufficiently large reverse
slope @xmath , and therefore high levels of Langmuir waves, we must take
an initial beam density far higher than in the case of a Maxwellian
beam. We therefore take @xmath cm @xmath , which leads to Langmuir wave
levels of @xmath over thermal at their peak, sufficient for their
modification to have a strong effect on the beam evolution.

The simulations here require much longer run times than those in the
previous section as the evolution occurs on large multiples, several
thousand or so, of the collisional timescale. We therefore consider the
evolution over @xmath s which can require a simulation run-time of
several days, depending on which effects are considered. Thus we cannot
explore the parameter space in the same way as for the Maxwellian beam,
and instead present only a few sample cases. We begin with homogeneous
plasma, then add a constant plasma density gradient, then show a few
examples of the effects of Langmuir diffusion. Finally we directly
consider the effects of wave-wave interactions for which the
participating wavenumbers are approximately equal, in addition to the
diffusion caused by small wavenumber fluctuations.

#### 3.3.2 Homogeneous Plasma

When wave generation is ignored, the initial electron distribution of
Equation 3.14 will evolve due to collisions as shown in the left panel
of Figure 3.8 . The electrons lose energy, the beam distribution
decreases, and a reverse slope is generated over the first @xmath s. The
region of reverse slope gradually widens and moves to higher velocities
as time progresses, but at the same time the number density of electrons
in the reverse slope region decreases.

When we include the effects of wave generation, this reverse slope is
quickly flattened, as seen in the right panel of Figure 3.8 . The
collisional effects continually reform the reverse slope, generating
more Langmuir waves, and the combination gives a flat plateau and high
Langmuir wave level, with the plateau height gradually decreasing as
energy is lost due to collisions. At long times, the beam density
becomes so low that few waves are generated and eventually, on
timescales of several seconds, the wave level becomes so low that the
distribution returns towards that of the collisions only case. On even
longer time scales all energy is lost from the beam electrons, and the
distribution returns to a Maxwellian at a slightly higher temperature
than the initial distribution.

##### Time Integrated Electron Distribution

Because the slope in the electron distribution changes over time, and
the reverse slope region moves to higher velocity, we cannot define a
simple beam-wave interaction time like the quasilinear time in Equation
2.8 , as this will be time dependent. This makes it difficult to
quantify when the diffusion of Langmuir waves in wavenumber will lead to
electron acceleration, and how the density fluctuation parameters affect
this.

Instead we consider the time-averaged electron distribution as function
of energy, defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the electron distribution as a function of energy. Here we consider
the average over @xmath s. This time-averaged flux can be directly
related to the HXR emission from the electrons, as discussed later in
Section 3.5 . Here we simply note that changes in this flux due to
Langmuir wave evolution will be visible observationally via this HXR
emission.

In Figure 3.9 we show this time-averaged flux for the initial beam, and
for the collisional evolution with and without wave generation. The
latter are almost identical, confirming the results in Hamilton &
Petrosian ( 1987 ); McClements ( 1987 ); Hannah et al. ( 2009 ); Hannah
& Kontar ( 2011 ) that Langmuir wave generation only very weakly affects
the time integrated electron flux.

#### 3.3.3 A Constant Density Gradient

The role of a density gradient in electron self-acceleration was
originally considered by e.g. Breǐzman & Ryutov ( 1969 ); Ryutov ( 1969
) in order to explain experimental observations of electron acceleration
during beam relaxation. In the context of solar electron beams, the
recent 1-D simulations by Kontar & Pécseli ( 2002 ) found such an
electron acceleration effect due to an increasing plasma density. We
reproduce this case here as it is a useful test for our simulations, and
also calculate the time-averaged electron flux to compare to the
homogeneous case. It is also interesting to compare this density
gradient case to the fluctuating density considered in the next section.

Consider the Liouville equation, Equation 2.15 :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the case of an increasing density gradient we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the characteristic scale of density inhomogeneity. The fractional
change in Langmuir wavenumber @xmath due to the inhomogeneity must be
small, @xmath in order that we remain in the geometric optics (WKB)
approximation (e.g. Vedenov et al., 1967 ) .

The shift in wavenumber experienced by the Langmuir waves is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this we can estimate the required density gradient for a
significant shift in @xmath . For a timescale of the order of the
collisional time, @xmath s, and a plasma frequency of 2 GHz, taking
@xmath we find @xmath cm.

In Figure 3.10 we show the electron and wave spectra in plasma with a
constant density gradient of length scale @xmath cm, and also the
homogeneous case for comparison. Several interesting features may be
seen. Firstly, as expected we see the advection of Langmuir waves
towards smaller wavenumbers, and the consequent transfer of energy from
small to large velocities. The plateau in the electron distribution is
broadened. The rate of energy loss from the beam is also decreased, with
the widened plateau decreasing in height significantly slower than in
the homogeneous or collisions-only cases. Also of interest is the fact
that the increased electron number density seen between @xmath and
@xmath not only exceeds the number in the homogeneous case but also the
number in the initial power law beam. After @xmath s, at @xmath we have
a tenfold or more increase in the electron distribution above this
initial value.

In the left panel of Figure 3.11 we show the time averaged electron flux
for the homogeneous case and the case of a constant density gradient.
Again there are several features of interest. We see a clear increase in
electron flux between around @xmath and @xmath keV, reaching perhaps an
order of magnitude over the homogeneous case at its peak. The flux also
significantly exceeds that from the initial beam distribution. In
addition, there is a distinctive kink in the flux spectrum, which shows
a relatively linear distribution from 10 to 200 keV then drops sharply
back to be the same as in the homogeneous case.

We may conclude that the presence of a density gradient in the plasma is
able to produce electron self-acceleration in our simulation model, and
moreover that this change in the electron distribution has significant
effects on the time-averaged electron flux, and therefore the HXR
emission.

#### 3.3.4 Density Fluctuations

In the previous section we considered the effects of plasma density
fluctuations on a Maxwellian electron beam in detail, and saw a
significant electron acceleration effect, controlled primarily by the
parameter @xmath , the ratio of the beam-plasma interaction and Langmuir
wavenumber diffusion timescales. In the current case of a power-law beam
relaxing due to collisions, we cannot define a simple analog of the
beam-plasma interaction timescale found in Equation 2.8 , as the actual
Langmuir wave growth rate is the convolution of wave growth and the
growth of the reverse slope @xmath . However, we can still infer that
the maximum acceleration effect will occur when the two processes
operate at approximately equal rates.

In addition, we saw that the details of the density fluctuation spectrum
and parameters were comparatively unimportant. Therefore we consider
here only random fluctuations, with a diffusion coefficient given by
Equation 2.38 , assume as before that @xmath and take their
characteristic velocity to be @xmath cm s @xmath and the density
fluctuation magnitude to be @xmath . These parameters were found by a
few trials to lead to the most significant acceleration for these beam
parameters.

The resulting electron and wave distributions are shown in Figure 3.12 .
In comparison to the homogeneous or density gradient cases, we see that
a fluctuating density leads to spreading of the Langmuir waves to both
larger and smaller wavenumbers, with a consequent decrease in their peak
value. However, compared to the density gradient case, as expected, the
acceleration effect is neither as significant, nor as sharply cut off.
The time-averaged electron flux shown in the right panel of Figure 3.11
again shows a significant increase from around 20 keV up to 300 keV in
this example, with a kink around 200 keV, similar to the case of a
constant density gradient shown in the left panel.

One final point may be mentioned here. Because in this case the
condition for strong acceleration, @xmath , cannot be satisfied for the
entire beam relaxation process, it may be of interest to consider a
time-varying level of fluctuations. The density fluctuations will be
damped by their interaction with Langmuir waves, and therefore decay. A
self consistent treatment of the problem is possible in the framework in
the previous chapter, by including the evolution of the density
fluctuations. This has been done in the past by, for example, Vedenov
et al. ( 1967 ); Vedenov ( 1968 ) , and would be interesting to include
in future simulations.

#### 3.3.5 Wave-wave Interactions

Langmuir waves are subject to various scattering and decay processes and
can themselves excite other wave modes. For instance, scattering off
thermal ions can backscatter a Langmuir wave, or transform it into an
electromagnetic wave, as will be discussed in the next chapter.
Three-wave interactions of the form @xmath are the primary source of
ion-sound waves in the plasma, as their large damping rates mean they
cannot persist and must be rapidly generated. In general there are two
kinematically allowed processes which can generate an ion-sound wave
(denoted @xmath ) from a Langmuir wave (denoted @xmath ), decay to a
scattered Langmuir wave @xmath : @xmath and decay or coalescence giving
an electromagnetic wave (transverse, denoted @xmath ) @xmath .

The latter process will be considered in the following chapter as it is
an essential component in the plasma emission mechanism, but for the
parameters considered here may be shown to have negligible effect on the
Langmuir waves. For the former process, energy and momentum conservation
state that the parent Langmuir wave at wavenumber @xmath will scatter to
approximately the opposite wavenumber @xmath and produce an ion-sound
wave at wavenumber @xmath . More precisely, the scattered wavenumber is
decreased by a small increment @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

and so successive scatterings will lead to the generation of Langmuir
waves at smaller and smaller wavenumbers. Eventually this forms a
so-called Langmuir wave condensate (e.g. Ziebell et al., 2001 ; Kontar &
Pécseli, 2002 ; Ziebell et al., 2011 ) at very small wavenumbers.

For waves with comparable wavenumbers, the quasi-particle treatment of
Section 2.3.1 is no longer valid, and so we must consider these decays
individually, using the three-wave equations (e.g. Melrose, 1980b ;
Tsytovich, 1995 ) . In practise, these equations may be reduced to 1-D
in a similar manner to the quasilinear equations. Here we use an
implementation and simulation code as in Kontar & Pécseli ( 2002 ) . We
add a source term @xmath due to the decay @xmath to the right hand side
of Equation 3.3 and a new equation to the set describing the evolution
of the ion-sound waves, described by their spectral energy density
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the initial Langmuir wavenumber and @xmath is the
scattered wave.

The source term for the Langmuir waves is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we distinguish between @xmath and @xmath , and the constants
@xmath and the sound wave damping rate are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Prescribed Ion-sound Wave Level

We begin with the simple situation of a fixed level of ion-sound waves,
generated by some external source. We set this to the thermal level,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

and neglect its evolution.

The results are shown in Figures 3.13 and 3.14 . The strong variations
in Langmuir wave level at small wavenumbers are due to repeated
scatterings by the ion-sound waves, the thermal level of which is
relatively large at small wavenumbers. We see from Equation 3.23 that
the Langmuir wavenumber @xmath decreases by @xmath on each scattering.
As will be seen in the next subsection, when the ion-sound waves are
allowed to evolve self-consistently these strong variations are not
seen.

It should be noted that at the extreme high energies a relativistic
treatment is required, and so the effect above around 300 keV is not
meaningful. The most significant differences in the two cases are seen
at large energies, 100 to 300 keV, where we see significantly more
acceleration. The Langmuir wave scattering is particularly effective at
the small wavenumbers corresponding to these high velocities. The other
interesting feature of Figure 3.13 is the appearance of electrons at
negative velocities. These correspond to electrons accelerated by the
back-scattered Langmuir waves.

##### Self-Consistent 3-Wave Scattering

Fixing the level of ion-sound waves can lead to energy being gained by
the Langmuir waves and not lost from the sound waves, but as the energy
in sound waves is far less than that in Langmuir waves, this effect is
generally small. The self-consistent treatment does however lead to
slightly slower scattering because of the strongly peaked sound wave
spectrum, and the resulting Langmuir wave spectrum does not show as
clearly the successive scattering peaks. On the other hand, the main
features of the acceleration are preserved, although the exact spectral
shape can be altered.

An example of self-consistent ion-sound wave scattering with significant
density fluctuation induced wavenumber diffusion included is shown in
Figures 3.15 and 3.14 . The main differences between the fixed and self
consistent cases are seen to occur around very small wavenumbers, or
energies above 300 keV. In this regime, these simulations start to
become invalid due to relativistic effects, so the significance of this
is small.

#### 3.3.6 The Effects of Beam Density

As the acceleration effect we are considering relies on the transfer of
energy via Langmuir waves, we expect that a denser beam would allow more
acceleration to occur. This was confirmed already for the case of a
Maxwellian beam. In Figure 3.16 we show examples of the acceleration for
beam densities of @xmath cm @xmath and @xmath cm @xmath . In both cases,
the “most effective” acceleration was found by a few trials: as expected
from the Maxwellian case the corresponding fluctuation parameters depend
on beam density in order that the timescales for the processes are
comparable. We see that the acceleration in both cases occurs in a
similar region in energy: 20 to 200 keV in the weaker beam case and 20
to 300 keV in the stronger beam case, but the magnitude of the effect is
strongly dependent on the beam density.

### 3.4 Energy Transfer Due to Diffusion

The acceleration process which we discuss is due to energy transfer
between electrons at different velocities, with the total energy of the
system remaining constant. Therefore, if we sum the energy loss and gain
rate across electrons at all energies the result cannot be positive. In
the purely collisional case, the effective energy loss rate, @xmath can
be calculated analytically. This is done by assuming a single particle
evolution (e.g. Brown et al., 2009 ) , and writing a continuity equation
for the energy distribution function in Equation 3.18 . In Kontar et al.
( 2012 ) this is given as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

with solution in the purely collisional case

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can also calculate numerically the effective energy loss rates for
the various simulation models used. These are plotted in Figure 3.17 .

The changes in energy loss rate are consistent with the observed
acceleration. For purely collisional evolution, this is small and
negative, and varies slowly with energy. Once density variations are
considered, we see that the losses at small energy increase, but those
at larger energies decrease, and in fact become positive, i.e particles
at large energies are gaining energy. Density fluctuations lead to
increased energy in fast electrons, but net losses over the energy range
shown in the figure. Ion-sound wave interactions similarly show
significantly increased overall losses, partly due to energy transfer to
backwards propagating electrons.

### 3.5 Hard X-ray Flux

The electron flux averaged over the collisional lifetime of the
electrons, @xmath , is directly related to the observed HXR emission via
the cross-section for bremsstrahlung (Brown et al., 2003 ) , and
although recovering the electron flux from the photon distribution is
difficult mathematically, it requires no assumptions about the physical
processes which may cause evolution of the electron distribution. In the
previous few sections we have seen that the evolution of Langmuir waves
due to their interaction with plasma density fluctuations can
significantly affect this time-averaged electron flux, in contrast to
the situation in homogeneous plasma (Figure 3.8 ) where the changes are
negligible. We thus conclude that the Langmuir wave evolution will
affect the observed HXR emission.

Specifically, we see significant changes in the electron flux above
20 keV, up to around 200 keV. Below around 10-20 keV the HXR emission is
dominated by the thermal spectrum, and so this evolution transfers
energy from the unobservable part of the distribution to the observable
energies. Thus the energy and number of electrons required in the beam
as a whole is reduced when compared to the purely collisional case.
Stated another way, we may obtain more intense HXR emission above 20 keV
from a less dense initial beam. Therefore, the processes discussed here
are an important consideration when interpreting such HXR spectra.

### 3.6 Conclusions

For a collisionally relaxing electron beam, the generation of Langmuir
waves, and their subsequent evolution due to variations in the plasma
density, has been shown to lead to a significant electron acceleration
effect. This follows the conclusions for a Maxwellian beam, where
acceleration was also seen. We may extrapolate from the result in the
Maxwellian test case that the strongest acceleration occurs for @xmath
that smaller scale and or more intense density fluctuations will lead to
more acceleration.

In the power law beam case, we may expect suppression of the beam plasma
instability due to very rapid diffusion to lead to the return of the
electron spectrum to the collisions only case, which is
indistinguishable observationally from that of homogeneous plasma
including Langmuir wave generation.

Small wavenumber ( @xmath ) ion-sound waves are generated automatically
due to the presence of high levels of Langmuir waves, and cause
scattering of Langmuir waves to smaller wavenumbers and therefore a
similar acceleration effect. In this case the acceleration can reach
much larger velocities. However, in general, there is no significant
distinction observationally between the acceleration due to a density
gradient, a fluctuating density or ion-sound wave scattering, and the
differences are only in degree.

For the plasma density and beam parameters chosen, the acceleration
increases the time-averaged electron flux in exactly the important range
for observations, namely between 20 and 200 keV, and can increase the
flux by a few or perhaps ten times in the most effective cases. Finally,
we see that as the extent of acceleration is constrained by the level of
Langmuir waves generated, the acceleration will be more effective for
more intense beams. In other words, ignoring the effects of Langmuir
wave generation and evolution will lead to a significant overestimate of
the required number of initially accelerated electrons, and the
magnitude of the overestimate will be larger the more electrons there
are in the initial beam.

## Chapter 4 Simulations of Radio Emission from Dense Coronal Loops

The high levels of Langmuir waves which can be generated by a fast
electron beam can, as discussed in Section 1.5.2 , lead to intense radio
emission. The classic example of emission via this “plasma emission”
mechanism is given by the radio bursts known as Type IIIs. Their intense
brightnesses indicate a coherent emission mechanism, and their wide
frequency range, with bursts observed from the low kHz up to 500 MHz,
and occasionally up to a few GHz, means that this mechanism must operate
over a very broad range of parameters. For example, in a high frequency
coronal burst we may have a density around @xmath cm @xmath and a
temperature of 1 MK, while for an interplanetary burst at 1 MHz we have
a density of @xmath cm @xmath and a temperature of perhaps 10000 K.

Ginzburg & Zhelezniakov ( 1958 ) first proposed a mechanism by which
these bursts could be produced, and this has been subsequently discussed
and modified by various authors (e.g. Sturrock, 1964 ; Zheleznyakov &
Zaitsev, 1970 ; Smith, 1970 ; Smith et al., 1976 ; Melrose, 1980c ;
Goldman, 1983 ; Dulk, 1985 ; Melrose, 1987 ) . Yet in spite of the large
amounts of work invested in the problem, the exact details of their
production are still not fully understood. It is known that they occur
due to an accelerated electron beam propagating in the decreasing
density plasma of the corona and solar wind, which generates Langmuir
waves and subsequently electromagnetic emission at the plasma frequency.

There are thus three main factors which influence their production.
Firstly, the details of electron beam acceleration and propagation;
secondly, the production of the Langmuir waves and their spectral
evolution; and finally, the process of converting some fraction of the
Langmuir wave energy into electromagnetic emission. In addition to these
factors, when considering remotely observed radiation we must account
for the effects of propagation, such as time delay in the emission,
scattering and absorption.

In the solar wind it is possible to make in situ measurements of
electric field, and so infer the levels of Langmuir waves, and also to
measure the electron distribution function. Low frequency compressive
electrostatic modes are also found in association with these Langmuir
waves, which may be identified as ion-sound waves (e.g. Lin et al., 1986
; Gurnett & Anderson, 1977 ; Gurnett & Frank, 1978 ; Thejappa &
MacDowall, 1998 ) , and provide further evidence regarding the evolution
of the Langmuir waves, and the production of radio emission. However,
deeper in the corona, the observed radio emission is the primary
diagnostic of the Langmuir waves. Where such emission occurs, we can
find a lower limit on the Langmuir wave levels required, but in general
it is very difficult if not impossible to analytically relate the level
of Langmuir waves to the level of radio emission.

Simulations are therefore essential to address the details of the
Langmuir wave evolution, and the inclusion of radio emission in these is
necessary to relate this to observations. In this chapter, we first
develop a model of plasma radio emission, and subroutines allowing this
to be incorporated into our code from the previous chapter. We then
consider effects of plasma density inhomogeneities on radio emission due
to their effects on the Langmuir waves and electrons, for the model of a
collisionally relaxing electron beam in dense plasma.

### 4.1 The Plasma Emission Mechanism

The mechanism behind plasma emission was outlined in Section 1.5.2 . For
emission at GHz frequencies which we consider here, only harmonic
emission will be of interest. This is largely due to the very large
optical depth for fundamental emission (see Section 4.6.4 ), and also
the low efficiency of the fundamental emission mechanisms. Thus, the
processes of interest are the decay @xmath and scattering by ions @xmath
of Langmuir waves, and the coalescence of two Langmuir waves to produce
emission at twice the local plasma frequency, @xmath . The observational
features of the emission at these frequencies were outlined in Section
1.6 .

#### 4.1.1 Simulating Plasma Radio Emission

We know that the production of plasma radio emission depends intimately
on three related processes: the production and evolution of an electron
beam, the subsequent Langmuir wave generation and evolution, and the
final step of conversion into electromagnetic emission. Thus,
simulations of Type III bursts may approach the problem from several
perspectives. For example, considering only the beam transport allows us
to find the frequency drift of the burst, and explore how its
frequency-time profile depends on factors such as the beam velocity and
the geometry of the magnetic field lines along which the beam
propagates. This has been done by several authors and provides
interesting results (e.g. Karlicky et al., 1996 ; Robinson & Benz, 2000
; Ledenev et al., 2004 ) .

Considering Langmuir wave generation provides some additional
information on the brightness of the radio emission. However, in general
this depends on the exact spectrum of the Langmuir waves, and therefore
to see the details of the time profile at even a single frequency, and
explain the rise-decay profiles and the exact shape of the dynamic
spectrum, we must address all three factors simultaneously. On the other
hand treating any one possible effect in full is a significant
undertaking, both theoretically and from a computational perspective.
Therefore, there is a trade-off between the level of detail in any one
step, and the ability to consider the whole process for a variety of
parameters. Here we employ simple but well justified models of each
step, in order to investigate specifically the effects of plasma
inhomogeneity on the emission.

The most significant simplification, which we have discussed in previous
chapters, is to assume the dynamics of the electrons and Langmuir waves
lie along a single spatial dimension. Detailed simulations of beam
propagation and Langmuir wave production were performed by Kontar et al.
( 1998 ); Mel’Nik et al. ( 1999 ) and have recently been extended
(Kontar & Reid, 2009 ; Reid & Kontar, 2010 ) to follow a beam from the
sun all the way to 1AU. The evolution of the Langmuir waves due to
density fuctuations was shown to have significant effects on the
Langmuir wave spectrum. Similar effects for the downwards moving beams
which generate HXR emission were found by Hannah et al. ( 2013 ) .

For a weak beam, with a small initial angular spread, the magnetic field
of the corona and solar wind is sufficient to maintain a
quasi-one-dimensional beam (Muschietti, 1990 ) , as the electrons will
propagate along the field lines. In this case, the ion-sound waves
generated from Langmuir wave decays will also be restricted to this same
direction. However, the electromagnetic emission occurs primarily at a
significant angle to the parent Langmuir wave, specifically around
@xmath for harmonic and @xmath for the fundamental. Moreover, the
emission probabilities have strong angular dependence, as do the
participating wavenumbers. Our first step is therefore to define a model
of the emission geometry, and use this to derive a mathematical
treatment of the emission. This is the topic of the next section.

### 4.2 3-D Equations for Scattering and Decay

It is necessary to distinguish between processes described as
“scattering” and those described as “decay” or “coalescence”, the former
involving the interaction of a wave with an individual plasma particle,
either an electron or an ion, while the latter involve coherent motions
of the plasma, i.e another wave mode. The equations describing the
scattering and decay/fusion processes in 3-D are given in the books by
Melrose ( 1980b ); Tsytovich ( 1995 ) and are reproduced in the next
sections.

A weak magnetic field, where @xmath , has little or no effect on the
emission probabilities for plasma emission processes (e.g. Melrose & Sy,
1972 ) and so we use the equations for unmagnetised plasma. However, as
we will discuss in Section 4.4 , the field cannot be completely
neglected in plasma emission, as it affects the polarisation states of
the resulting waves.

#### 4.2.1 Ion Scattering Processes

Described by @xmath , where @xmath denote wave modes, these describe the
action of scattering by an individual plasma particle, for our purposes
an ion, @xmath , averaged over their distribution, which in this case is
thermal and described by a Maxwellian. The change in momentum of the
wave during scattering is absorbed by the ion, but this is small and so
we may neglect the evolution of the ion distribution, instead assuming
it very rapidly returns to thermal. The product wave can be of the same
species, or a different species.

Writing @xmath for the spectral energy density, wavevector and frequency
of wave type @xmath , the equations in 3-D describing the process @xmath
are:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The probability @xmath depends on the wave modes involved, but for
scattering of Langmuir waves it is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the constant

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath a unit vector in the direction of the electric field of the
wave mode @xmath . Langmuir waves are longitudinal so that @xmath ,
while electromagnetic waves are transverse so @xmath .

#### 4.2.2 3-wave Decays

Described by @xmath , the three wave processes describe either decay due
to the presence of another wave mode, or fusion of two existing wave
modes. We write @xmath for the spectral energy density, wavevector and
frequency of waves in mode @xmath . Then energy and momentum
conservation are described by the equations @xmath and @xmath and we
have

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the emission probability. The form of this depends
strongly on the wave modes involved, and again is dependent on their
electric field directions, @xmath . The probabilities for relevant
processes are given in the following derivations (Equations A.1 and 4.11
).

#### 4.2.3 Decay versus Scattering

Coherent oscillations of the plasma particles can exist only when their
damping rate is far less than their frequency. For ion-sound waves,
which are oscillations of the electrons and ions, the requirement that
@xmath requires that we have @xmath , and we cannot speak of a decay
process involving ion-sound waves unless this condition is satisfied. On
the other hand, scattering by individual ions, neglecting plasma
collective effects, is also important, and this is particularly
efficient when @xmath . The two processes are not entirely distinct:
both are scattering by plasma ions but the former involves collective
motion of these, and is therefore a resonant interaction. It turns out
that the effects of decay when @xmath and of scattering when @xmath are
very similar, to within a numerical factor of 4 or so (Tsytovich, 1995 )
.

In addition to this, when @xmath the wavenumber matching conditions for
decay may mean that this cannot proceed, and scattering may be
important, although its efficiency is small for this ratio. Thus, in
order to consider the full range of temperature ratios observed in the
solar corona and solar wind (e.g. Newbury et al., 1998 ; Gurnett et al.,
1979 ) , which range from @xmath to @xmath or even 2, we must consider
both the decay and scattering formulations, and employ the correct one
for the parameters chosen, to avoid overestimating the effects on
Langmuir waves.

### 4.3 A Model for Plasma Emission

#### 4.3.1 Langmuir Wave Evolution

In the previous chapters we described a model of Langmuir wave
generation from a collisionally relaxing beam including the effects of
ion-sound wave scattering, and perturbations in the ambient plasma
density. However, we focused on the effects on the beam-generated
Langmuir waves with @xmath and the consequent effects on the electron
distribution. For plasma emission, we are specifically interested both
in the backscattered Langmuir waves with @xmath and the exact spectrum
of ion-sound waves (when @xmath and these can exist).

Therefore, here we combine Equations 3.2 and 3.3 for the beam-wave
interactions including the effects of plasma density fluctuations, with
Equations 3.3.5 and 3.3.5 describing scattering by ion-sound waves, and
in addition consider a term in the Langmuir wave equation describing
scattering by individual ions. Beginning from Equation 4.1 , noting that
as @xmath and @xmath are the same species we sum the contributions from
the two equations, we substitute a 1-dimensional Langmuir wave spectrum,
which is non-zero only along the direction of the electron beam, given
by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then we have @xmath and the ion scattering is described by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

From a computational perspective, this equation is cumbersome to
simulate because of the remaining integral over @xmath . However, the
exponential factor means the integrand is sharply peaked around @xmath ,
which allows us to consider the integral over only a small range in
@xmath and thus speed this up considerably.

#### 4.3.2 Fundamental Emission

Fundamental emission at @xmath generally does not occur at frequencies
above a few hundred MHz. Our simulations consider the situations of
equal or almost equal electron and ion temperatures, where ion-sound
waves are strongly damped and thus contributions to the Langmuir wave
spectrum from the processes @xmath can be ignored. Direct scattering of
Langmuir waves into fundamental emission, @xmath also has negligible
effect on the Langmuir waves. An angle-averaged model for the radio
emission is given in Appendix A, as this will be important for future
work on lower frequency emission, but is omitted here for brevity.

#### 4.3.3 Harmonic Emission

We focus instead on the process of harmonic emission due to the
coalescence of two Langmuir waves, i.e @xmath . Writing the
participating wave vectors as @xmath for the Langmuir waves and @xmath
for the electromagnetic wave, and further writing @xmath , the general
equation for the process is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with probability

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the condition @xmath .

The “head-on-approximation” (HOA) where the coalescing Langmuir waves
are almost parallel was proposed in early models of plasma emission
(e.g. Melrose & Stenhouse, 1979 ) . This implies that @xmath , as @xmath
must be at a non-zero angle to the parent Langmuir wave or the emission
cannot occur. However, if we consider an electromagnetic wave at
approximately twice the local plasma frequency we have @xmath and
therefore the typical wavenumber is @xmath . For beam generated Langmuir
waves we have typical wavenumbers of @xmath , so for a typical beam
velocity of @xmath we have @xmath which is by no means small. Therefore
we wish to find a better approximation than the HOA.

##### An Approximate Emission Geometry

Firstly, we define the angle @xmath to be the angle between the forwards
Langmuir wave with wavenumber @xmath and the electromagnetic wave with
wavenumber @xmath , as shown in the vector diagrams in Figure 4.1 . The
complications then become clear if we consider the emission equation. In
the HOA we have to good accuracy that @xmath and also that @xmath , so
the entire angular dependence of the probability is via a term like
@xmath . Relaxing the HOA introduces additional angular dependence into
the probability because, as shown in Figure 4.1 , the solution for
@xmath from the wavenumber matching also depends on @xmath .

Taking the conservation conditions @xmath and @xmath we can find their
solutions as a function of @xmath . Then we can find the exact emission
probability from Equation 4.11 . In Figure 4.2 we plot this for several
values of the electromagnetic wavenumber @xmath , along with the
probability in the HOA approximation. In all cases the probability shows
quadrupolar forms, and the differences from the simple HOA solution
decrease as the electromagnetic wavenumber increases. Most importantly,
both the angle of the peak, and the width of the probability remain
similar. If we also consider the average of the two lobes, there is very
little difference from the simple HOA.

Therefore, it seems reasonable to assume, when solving the wavenumber
matching, that all emission occurs at @xmath , which is the angle of
maximum emission probability in the HOA and very close to it in the
exact solution. Then we independently calculate an angle-averaged
probability using these solutions. From the width of the emission
probability curves, it is reasonable to assume emission occurs only
within the angular range @xmath , which covers its
full-width-half-maximum (FWHM).

For a particular electromagnetic wavenumber there will be a range of
values for @xmath depending on the angle of emission @xmath , whereas
our approximation assumes that @xmath . We now calculate the size of the
variation in @xmath for emission within the angular range @xmath . In
Figure 4.3 we plot the difference in value at @xmath and @xmath ,
divided by the value at @xmath , i.e. @xmath , as a function of the
electromagnetic frequency. Clearly, for frequencies very close to @xmath
the similarity in magnitude of @xmath and @xmath means that the angular
effects become more important. However, above around @xmath we have a
reasonable approximation, with variation of less than @xmath in @xmath .
The ratio @xmath is even more dependent on the angle @xmath , but again,
above @xmath the variation is below @xmath .

The implications of this variation in @xmath may be summarised as
follows. We consider emission to come from Langmuir waves at a
wavenumber @xmath , where in fact the emission is from a weighted
average over a band of @xmath , the weighting in the average has a form
similar to @xmath , and @xmath is of the order @xmath or less. On the
other hand, for the purposes of our simulations, the average need only
be taken over two, or perhaps a few grid points. For example, for a
@xmath simulation grid of @xmath points covering @xmath from 0 to 0.4
@xmath we require averaging over only @xmath grid points at @xmath and
for a slightly more coarse gridding no averaging is needed at all.

The final consideration relates to the angular distribution of the
Langmuir waves. In the previous paragraphs we assumed that a wave
existed at the calculated wavevector @xmath , regardless of the angle
between @xmath and @xmath . At a value of @xmath and @xmath , the angle
between @xmath and @xmath is @xmath and at @xmath this has decreased to
less than @xmath . Thus, provided we have Langmuir waves with an angular
spread of half-angle at least @xmath there are waves with the necessary
wavevectors for coalescence to proceed.

To further account for these angular effects, we can calculate the
fraction of the waves within the angular spread that can take part in
the coalescence, which will depend on the assumed angular spread, and
the required angle between @xmath and @xmath , and therefore the
electromagnetic frequency @xmath . This is plotted in Figure 4.4 for
various values of the angles involved. Above @xmath this fraction is
above approximately @xmath for the values considered, so a half angle of
at least @xmath in the Langmuir waves is sufficient to ensure our
estimate is within a factor of around 2 of the true value.

Taking all this into account, we can say that the approximation of
taking @xmath for energy and momentum conservation and using an angular
averaged probability as found in the next section, we will obtain a good
agreement in magnitude with the angular averaged true 3-D emission
provided that the emission frequency is above approximately @xmath , the
Langmuir wave spectrum does not contain very narrow spikes, of width
@xmath in Langmuir wavenumber, and the Langmuir waves are fairly
isotropic over an angular spread with half angle at least @xmath . The
second two conditions are generally satisfied for our purposes as we
consider the presence of ambient plasma density fluctuations, which will
tend to smooth out any spikes and produce an angular spread, as
described in Section 2.5.3 .

##### Harmonic Emission Equations

Now we use the geometry just described to derive angle-averaged
equations for the coalescence process. For clarity, we label the
Langmuir wave spectrum with wavenumbers parallel to the beam direction
as the forwards spectrum, and those antiparallel as backwards. We assume
these both cover a small angular spread @xmath , with a half angle of at
least @xmath . Then we define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

within @xmath , and zero elsewhere, while the electromagnetic emission
is assumed to cover a cone of half angle @xmath in each lobe of the
emission probability, and therefore a solid angle of @xmath , so we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we proceed exactly as for the case of fundamental emission, by
defining the angle averaged probability as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and substituting the definitions in Equations 4.12 and 4.13 then
considering in turn each term in the square brackets in Equation 4.3.3 .

The result is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          (4.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The final integral over @xmath is evaluated using the delta function
@xmath , which leads to a factor of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

As a simple approximation to the probability, we can take the value
assuming @xmath to solve for the @xmath values, and then take the peak
value of the probability multiplied by its fractional FWHM, which is
@xmath . Taking @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Combining all of these factors we finally obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          (4.17)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which describes electromagnetic emission due to Langmuir wave
coalescence in our approximation, with the angle-averaged spectral
energy densities given by Equations 4.12 and 4.13 .

### 4.4 Polarisation and the Weak Field Limit

In the preceding discussion we neglected the magnetic field, because in
the weak field limit, @xmath , the emission probabilities are
effectively the same as in the unmagnetised case. However, as we briefly
mentioned earlier, even a weak magnetic field has significant effects on
the polarisation of the electromagnetic emission.

For fundamental emission, it was originally proposed that the
polarisation should be 100 @xmath in the O-mode, because the X-mode has
a cutoff at @xmath . Considering the intrinsic bandwidth of the emission
due to the dispersion, the necessary magnetic field strength to obtain
100 @xmath polarised emission can be estimated, and at 100 MHz this
value is well below the inferred fields (e.g Melrose, 1980b ) .

The observed polarisation values for lower frequency fundamental Type
III emission of between 30 and 70 @xmath (Section 1.6.1 ) therefore
require explanation. Scattering during propagation is certainly able to
reduce the degree of polarisation, but cannot explain why fully
polarised emission is never seen. Wentzel ( 1984 ) therefore proposed
that the emission was depolarised to some extent within the source
region itself, and that this was inherent to the emission process.
Further change during scattering can then explain the range of observed
values.

The case of harmonic emission is more complicated. Melrose & Sy ( 1972
); Melrose et al. ( 1978 ) and the correction by Melrose et al. ( 1980 )
treated the case of head-on Langmuir wave coalescence, and found that
the angular spectrum of the Langmuir waves dictates whether the emission
is O or X-mode. However, as was shown by Willes & Melrose ( 1997 ) ,
when the HOA is relaxed the percentage polarisation is very different,
and when the difference in forwards and backwards Langmuir wavenumbers
are accounted for, emission tends to favour the O-mode. However the
Langmuir wavenumber and angular distributions are essential to decide
both the mode and the degree of polarisation. While some geometries of
harmonic emission may allow weakly X-mode polarised emission to be
produced, very strong X-mode polarisation is not possible. On the other
hand, for emission occurring at an angle of @xmath to the ambient
magnetic field, as we assume in the model of the previous section, the
results of Willes & Melrose ( 1997 ) suggest polarisation of around 10
to 15 % in the O-mode, consistent with the observations.

#### 4.4.1 Polarisation Change During Transport

We also note that further changes in the degree of polarisation can
occur during propagation from source to observer. For example, mode
coupling due to magnetic fields (e.g. Zheleznyakov & Zlotnik, 1964 ) ,
and scattering due to low-frequency waves (Wentzel, 1984 ; Melrose, 1989
) , or kinetic Alfven waves (Sirenko et al., 2002 ) have all been
considered, and can all lead to significant changes in polarisation
degree.

### 4.5 Thermal Emission

In thermal plasma, there will be electromagnetic emission due to thermal
bremsstrahlung, giving a thermal source term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

(e.g. Melrose, 1980a , Equation 3.81) , for the power radiated per unit
volume, per unit frequency over all angles. Now for electromagnetic
waves we have @xmath and in plasma we can approximate @xmath from
quasineutrality. We have, assuming @xmath is isotropic,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

and so with @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, assuming isotropy, we can change this to an angle-averaged
spectral energy density by multiplying by @xmath , finding

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now by Kirchoff’s law, in optically thick plasma in thermal equilibrium
the emission must be balanced by an absorption with coefficient @xmath
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

As expected we then have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e. the emission and absorption are in equilibrium for the thermal
spectrum. We add these two terms to our equations for electromagnetic
evolution: a thermal source term @xmath given by 4.21 and a damping term
@xmath .

### 4.6 Observed Fluxes

In order to relate the results of our simulations to observed emission,
we must first convert the angle-averaged spectral energy densities into
fluxes, which requires that we specify the size of the emitting source.
Then we must add the effects of absorption or scattering in the source
and during propagation. For harmonic emission these effects are smaller
than for the fundamental, and the time delay experienced by the
radiation during propagation is also less, but these effects cannot be
neglected.

#### 4.6.1 Conversion of Energy Density to Flux

The total flux is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the energy density of the source, @xmath its area,
@xmath its length (along the direction of the beam) and @xmath is its
distance from the observer, and @xmath is the group velocity of the
radiation. The flux as a function of frequency @xmath is then given by
@xmath . The energy density @xmath relates to the angle-averaged
spectral energy density by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

For emission at GHz frequencies the source is small (see Section 4.6.2
), and located at approximately 1 AU from the observer, so we may apply
the small angle approximation and find @xmath where @xmath is the
half-angle of the source in radians. In this case we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 4.6.2 Source Size

Source size measurements were discussed in Section 1.6.1 where it was
concluded that sizes observed at 1 GHz are around @xmath . We can also
make a reasonable estimate of the linear size of the emitting region,
and calculate the angular size. This is sufficiently accurate for the
purposes of estimating the observed flux from our simulations. Taking a
linear size of @xmath cm, located at a distance of 1 AU, and using the
small angle approximation we obtain an angular extent of @xmath , in
reasonable agreement with the measurements, as some angular scattering
may be expected.

#### 4.6.3 Propagation Losses

Langmuir waves have a very small group velocity, and so the loss of
waves from the emission region due to propagation is negligible.
However, electromagnetic radiation has a group velocity given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the frequency of the emission and @xmath the local
plasma frequency, and this approaches @xmath for @xmath .

For radiation in plasma of changing density this becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the frequency of the original emission, and @xmath is
the local plasma frequency, which depends on position.

We model the effects of radiation escape by adding a term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the size of the emitting region, to our equation for the
evolution of the electromagnetic wave spectral energy densities.

#### 4.6.4 Collisional Damping

In the corona, inverse bremsstrahlung is a significant cause of
attenuation of electromagnetic radiation, with damping rate as given in
Equation 4.23 , namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

which depends on position via the local plasma frequency. Assuming
isothermal plasma between the radiation source and the observer ¹ ¹ 1 As
will be seen, given an exponential density profile, the damping is only
significant for a relatively short fraction of the total path length,
and therefore this assumption is in general reasonable. and writing the
frequency and wavenumber of the emission at the source as @xmath ,
@xmath , we have the group velocity as in the previous section, and an
optical depth given by definition as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting the expression for @xmath the optical depth becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Clearly this diverges as @xmath because the group velocity goes to zero.

Now the plasma frequency relates to the density via

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

and so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we assume an exponential density profile with a fixed scale height
@xmath , so that @xmath where @xmath is the density at the source, and
find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Figure 4.5 we plot the optical depth as a function of frequency for a
given scale height, @xmath cm, and also the optical depth as a function
of scale height for a frequency of 1 GHz. Clearly, at frequencies much
above 0.6 GHz there can be no escaping fundamental emission for this
choice of scale height @xmath , and at 1 GHz no escape of fundamental
emission for any reasonable choice of @xmath . For the harmonic the
situation is better, but there will still be significant collisional
damping, and at frequencies much larger than 1 GHz the escape fraction
is rather small.

A similar conclusion was reached by e.g. Benz et al. ( 1992 ) and
Karlicky ( 1998 ) for an exponential density profile, who suggest that
harmonic emission can be the only escaping component, and moreover even
this likely requires fibrous structures in the corona, with emission
occurring in dense areas with small cross sectional area and escaping
through the less dense surrounding plasma.

For our purpose, which is an estimation of the observed flux due to a
given spectral energy density of emission, this exponential density
profile, with fixed scale length, is sufficient. For the corona,
reasonable values of @xmath are around 1 to @xmath cm.

#### 4.6.5 Time Delay

The time delay experienced by electromagnetic emission in propagating
from where it is emitted to where it is observed also depends on
frequency

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the distance from the source to the observer.
Substituting for the group velocity gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again assuming an exponential density profile @xmath , we use the
substitution, @xmath . Then @xmath with @xmath . Now we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

This may be evaluated using partial fractions. We assume

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

and find the constants @xmath , which gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Performing this integral gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now the distance @xmath for a coronal source is approximately 1AU and
much larger than @xmath , and so we can apply the binomial expansion to
the upper limit,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

and use this in the argument of @xmath .

The time delay is therefore finally

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.46)
  -- -- -- --------

with @xmath the frequency of the emission and @xmath the local plasma
frequency in the emitting region.

#### 4.6.6 Angular Scattering

Radio observations at microwave and decimetre wavelengths rarely show
fine structure on spatial scales below around @xmath at 1.5 GHz and
around @xmath at 300 MHz, which can be explained by angular scattering
of the radiation during propagation (Bastian, 1994 ) . Density
fluctuations on a variety of scales have been measured in the corona at
a few solar radii by various techniques (e.g. Coles & Harmon, 1989 ;
Spangler et al., 1996 ; Grall et al., 1997 ) , and in the solar wind
(e.g. Cronyn, 1972 ; Celnikier et al., 1983 ; Robinson, 1983 ) . Various
analytical (e.g. Bastian, 1994 ; Cairns, 1998 ; Arzner & Magun, 1999 )
and numerical (e.g. Riddle, 1972 ; Itkina & Levin, 1992 ) treatments of
their effects have been attempted, with the general conclusion that at
high MHz and GHz frequencies, scattering will produce sources of size at
least @xmath to @xmath . The extent of this effect is far larger for
emission at the fundamental, and tends to increase at lower frequencies,
becoming very significant for IP bursts, where the source size can be
approximately doubled (Steinberg et al., 1985 ) .

However, for harmonic radiation the effects of angular scattering are
likely to be small with respect to the size of the source itself,
although any spatial structure within the source will be smeared out.
Angular scattering is therefore unimportant for our purposes, although
it will certainly occur due to the small-scale density fluctuations
which we consider in our emission model.

### 4.7 Simulations of 2 GHz Plasma Emission

Combining the model for plasma radio emission derived in the previous
sections with the model of beam-wave interactions used in Chapters 2 and
3 , we now simulate the radio emission from a collisionally relaxing
beam in inhomogeneous plasma. This work is currently begin prepared for
publication as Ratcliffe & Kontar ( 2013 ) . As discussed in Section 3.3
, the formation of a reverse slope in the electron distribution will be
mainly due to collisional effects for the case of dense plasma,
considered over short spatial scales. Because of the high density we
consider, the emission is purely at the harmonic, with the fundamental
component produced inefficiently and unable to escape.

The effects of plasma density fluctuations on the Langmuir waves in this
model were considered in the previous chapter. In general, we found a
decrease in the peak wave level, but significant increases at small
wavenumbers. We also saw that collisional relaxation leads to a Langmuir
wave spectrum which drifts to smaller wavenumbers over time. As
mentioned in Section 1.5.4 and by e.g. Zhelezniakov & Zaitsev ( 1975 )
the spectral evolution of the Langmuir waves is a significant factor in
the rise and decay of the harmonic emission due to the strong
constraints on participating wavenumber. We therefore expect the
spectral evolution due to density fluctuations will play an important
role in the emission.

#### 4.7.1 Complete Simulation Model

##### Equations for Electron and Wave Evolution

We state here the entire set of equations which we simulate, dropping
the superscripts @xmath as all spectral energy densities are now
angle-averaged . Only plasma emission at the harmonic is considered,
because the fundamental is very weak, and cannot escape from plasma of
such high density (see Section 4.6.4 ).

For the electrons we have (Equation 3.2 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

while for the Langmuir waves we have (Equation 3.3 )

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with the coefficient of diffusion, @xmath , given by Equation 2.38 . The
source term due to ion scattering is (Equation 4.3.1 )

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and that due to ion-sound wave decays is (Equation 3.3.5 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we distinguish between @xmath and @xmath . For the ion-sound waves
(where these can exist) we have (Equation 3.3.5 )

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the initial Langmuir wavenumber and @xmath is the
scattered wave and the constants @xmath and the sound wave damping rate
are given by (Equations 3.26 and 3.27 respectively):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the harmonic emission we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the collisional damping rate (Section 4.6.4 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

the thermal emission is (Section 4.5 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the term @xmath , where @xmath is the size of the emitting region,
accounts for propagation losses (Section 4.6.3 ). The source term is
given by 4.3.3 :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

##### Initial Conditions

We take a plasma density of @xmath cm @xmath , corresponding to a plasma
frequency of @xmath GHz.

The initial beam and Langmuir wave distributions are as in Section 3.3 ,
namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the initial radio spectral energy density @xmath is set to the
thermal level, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Propagation Effects and Observed Fluxes

From the angle-averaged spectral energy density @xmath for harmonic
emission, we can estimate an observed flux, given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the frequency, @xmath , @xmath is the observed angular
extent of the source, which we take as @xmath (see Section 4.6.2 ) and
@xmath is the optical depth from Equation 4.38 . The density scale
height is @xmath cm, as in Table 4.1 .

#### 4.7.2 Scattering by Ions

We begin by considering the emission in plasma with equal ion and
electron temperatures, @xmath MK. In this case, ion-sound wave
interactions cannot occur, and the generation of backscattered Langmuir
waves is due to scattering by individual ions, given by Equation 4.7.1 .
We take a beam density of @xmath cm @xmath , a velocity of @xmath cm s
@xmath and a velocity space power law index of @xmath . Collisional
relaxation proceeds as in the previous chapter on the collisional
timescale @xmath , and we consider the evolution over one to two
thousand @xmath , after which the levels of backscattered Langmuir waves
have decreased and the radio emission peaked.

In Figure 4.6 we show the electron distribution, the Langmuir wave
spectral energy density and the harmonic radiation brightness
temperature for the case of homogeneous plasma. The exponential factor
in the backscattering probability in Equation 4.7.1 means that only
wavenumbers of magnitude close to the wavenumber under consideration can
contribute to the backscattering. Spontaneous scattering, described by
the first two terms in square brackets in Equation 4.3.1 , proceeds
fairly slowly, and gives a smooth backwards Langmuir wave spectrum. Once
a small level of backscattered waves is present, stimulated emission can
occur, as given by the third term in square brackets, involving the
product @xmath . This proceeds much more rapidly but because of the
factor of @xmath in this term, only regions with a locally positive
gradient @xmath can contribute. The resulting backscattered Langmuir
wave spectrum is therefore irregular.

This effect is seen clearly in the plots of the Langmuir wave spectral
energy density and radio flux shown in Figure 4.8 , giving the observed
radio emission in sfu calculated using Equation 4.61 with parameters as
in Table 4.1 . The calculated fluxes of a few to a few hundred sfu in
the strongest case are in good agreement with the observed fluxes of
high frequency plasma emission (Section 1.6.1 ). On the other hand, we
note that these fluxes are calculated assuming a simple exponential
density profile, which for the parameters chosen gives a factor @xmath
of approximately @xmath . More efficient escape can therefore lead to
fluxes up to @xmath times larger.

In Figure 4.8 we show three cases of density fluctuations, chosen using
the results of the previous chapter, as well as the homogeneous case.
The characteristic velocity and wavenumber of the fluctuations are fixed
at @xmath cm s @xmath and @xmath respectively. For the RMS fluctuation
magnitude, “weak” diffusion has @xmath , “moderate” diffusion has @xmath
and “strong” diffusion has @xmath . Although this range is small, it
covers the interesting cases for these beam and plasma parameters.

As the strength of the Langmuir wavenumber diffusion increases we see
more and more smoothing of the backscattered emission, and a reduction
in its peak magnitude. At the same time, the removal of waves from the
forwards spectrum is also suppressed, and the levels of emission
significantly reduced.

To quantify the reductions, we calculate the non-thermal energy in the
Langmuir waves, backwards Langmuir waves and electromagnetic emission,
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.63)
  -- -- -- --------

We plot these in Figure 4.9 . The saw-tooth oscillations seen around 0.3
to 0.4 s are a numerical effect due to the finite wavenumber grid used
in the simulations. The relation between the harmonic emission and the
backscattered Langmuir waves is clearly seen, as the rise of @xmath
closely tracks @xmath . However, at later stages, the drift of the
maximum Langmuir wave level towards smaller wavenumbers, where the
conversion to harmonic emission occurs more rapidly, can become
important and the emission level can increase despite continuing
decrease of the total and backwards Langmuir wave energy. This is
clearly seen around 0.15 to 0.3 s for fluctuations of weak or moderate
strength.

On the other hand, for the strongest fluctuations shown, we see that the
onset of rapid stimulated scattering is strongly suppressed and the
level of backwards waves is decreased by more than an order of
magnitude. Figure 4.10 shows the peak energy in backscattered waves as a
function of the RMS fluctuation magnitude, and displays a very sharp
reduction for a level of @xmath . The energy in radio emission is
similarly decreased, and remains above the thermal level for only a very
short time, in contrast to the 0.4 s or more duration in the less
inhomogeneous cases. Thus, despite having the same energy in initial
electrons, and a very similar energy in the forwards Langmuir waves, the
Langmuir wavenumber diffusion can suppress the backscattering and
therefore the emission.

Finally we note that the intrinsic band width of the emission due to
ion-scattering is rather large, 50 MHz at 1 GHz plasma frequency, and
the emission shows an intrinsic frequency drift due to the drift of the
Langmuir wave peak to lower frequencies during the collisional
relaxation process.

#### 4.7.3 Wave-wave Interactions

For plasma with a larger electron temperature than ion temperature, the
backscattering of Langmuir waves can occur due to interactions with ion
sound waves. We consider here a temperature ratio of @xmath , for which
ion-sound waves are still heavily damped, but the 3-wave decay process
are allowed. The decay @xmath gives more efficient Langmuir wave
backscattering than the ion-scattering process and so for simplicity we
switch off the latter and consider only the former.

In Figures 4.11 and 4.12 we show the resulting electron distributions,
and the Langmuir, ion-sound and electromagnetic wave distributions over
time for a beam density of @xmath cm @xmath , including the effects of
decay @xmath , for plasma inhomogeneities of RMS magnitude @xmath and
@xmath respectively. As before, we see a slow drift of the Langmuir wave
peak from large to small wavenumbers due to the collisional relaxation,
but now there is additional scattering of the Langmuir waves to small
wavenumbers. The Langmuir waves backscatter to smaller wavenumbers,
@xmath (see Section 3.3.5 ) and so the radio emission occurs for
slightly smaller wavenumbers, giving an intrinsic bandwidth of only
about 25 MHz, half that seen in the ion-scattering case.

On the other hand, for ion-sound wave decays, even much stronger
inhomogeneity, with @xmath , does not drastically decrease the
backscattering, and we obtain emission reaching a brightness temperature
of @xmath K, corresponding to a flux of around 20 sfu.

### 4.8 Conclusions

A collisionally relaxing electron beam of initial density @xmath or
@xmath cm s @xmath will produce harmonic radio emission due to the
plasma mechanism. Our simulations show emission at a single value of the
local plasma frequency with brightness and duration in good agreement
with observations. The above quoted fluxes are derived by assuming a
simple model for the escape of emission, and so could be increased by up
to perhaps 10 times if the escape were more efficient. Using the results
of Willes & Melrose ( 1997 ) we infer the emission will be weakly O-mode
polarised, up to around 15 %, also in good agreement with observations.

For equal temperature plasma, @xmath , the only source of backscattered
Langmuir waves is the process of scattering by plasma ions. Spontaneous
scattering is a slow process, but stimulated scattering can occur
rapidly. However, as we have seen, plasma density fluctuations lead to
the diffusion of the Langmuir waves in wavenumber space, and can prevent
the onset of rapid stimulated scattering. In this case, very few
backscattered Langmuir waves are produced and consequently very little
radio emission. This is seen to occur for a very low level of
fluctuations, @xmath for the parameters considered here.

The magnitude of relative density fluctuations @xmath commonly observed
in the corona and solar wind range from @xmath and @xmath (e.g. Cronyn,
1972 ; Smith & Sime, 1979 ; Coles & Harmon, 1989 , and Section 1.1.4 ) .
Assuming equal ion and electron temperatures, we infer that only in the
least inhomogeneous case will radio emission be seen. Clearly this is
only proven in cases where our model of a collisionally relaxing beam
adequately captures the Langmuir waves dynamics: however the effects of
density inhomogeneity on the onset of stimulated ion scattering may
extrapolate to other situations.

On the other hand, if @xmath we can consider scattering due to ion-sound
waves, which occurs much more rapidly, and is less affected by
inhomogeneities. However, the ion temperature in the corona at the
frequencies we consider is generally thought to be equal to the electron
temperature, and so the ion sound waves cannot exist and scattering must
be due to ions.

Thus, in the case where @xmath , our model suggests that it is possible
to obtain a large number of Langmuir waves at positive wavenumbers, but,
due to their diffusion in wavenumber caused by plasma inhomogeneity, not
obtain very high levels of waves at negative wavenumber and thus not
produce visible levels of harmonic radio emission.

## Chapter 5 Conclusions

During solar flares, vast amounts of energy are released from the Sun’s
magnetic field, a fraction of which goes into accelerating electrons.
This thesis has considered the propagation of such a fast electron beam
in the plasma of the solar corona, and its visible signatures in the
form of hard X-ray and radio emission. When a beam propagates along a
magnetic field line downwards into the dense chromosphere, it can
produce hard X-rays via bremsstrahlung, and the spectrum of these will
be affected by the evolution of the electron distribution during
transport. Radio emission can be produced during propagation via the
generation of Langmuir waves, and the spectrum of this will therefore
depend strongly on the electron and Langmuir wave distributions.

It has long been known that a propagating beam can become unstable to
the generation of high levels of Langmuir waves, either due to transport
effects, where faster electrons outpace slower ones, or to collisional
effects due to the velocity dependence of the collisional operator. It
is also well known that Langmuir waves are strongly affected by density
inhomogeneities, and that this can potentially lead both to
electron-self acceleration in certain experimental setups, and to
suppression of the beam-plasma instability, and thus the relaxation of
the electron beam to a plateau.

##### Langmuir Wavenumber Diffusion

We have considered here primarily the effects of a fluctuating plasma
density, with long wavelength and small relative density change, such as
is observed in the solar corona and solar wind. Chapter 2 outlined the
development of a mathematical model for the interaction of such
fluctuations with Langmuir waves, previously published in Ratcliffe
et al. ( 2012 ) , both in the full 3-D treatment of inelastic
scattering, an extension of the previously considered elastic scattering
treatment in the literature, and also for the 1-D situation of beam
aligned density fluctuations.

We found that the Langmuir waves will diffuse in wavenumber space. In
3-D this wavenumber diffusion occurs both in angle, as for the elastic
scattering case, and also in magnitude, resulting in a significant
modification of the parallel wavenumber, that is the wavenumber
projected onto the beam direction. When the back reaction of Langmuir
waves on the beam electrons is considered, this will result in electron
acceleration.

##### Electron Acceleration

We also expect to see an electron acceleration effect due to
beam-aligned density fluctuations. Chapter 3 presented quasi-linear
simulations of the beam-Langmuir wave interactions, including the
Langmuir wavenumber diffusion, and confirmed that this indeed occurs. We
considered first the test case of a Maxwellian initial beam, as in
Ratcliffe et al. ( 2012 ) , where the beam distribution is given by
@xmath with @xmath the beam velocity and @xmath its width. This is
unstable to Langmuir wave generation and thus quickly relaxes to form a
plateau. We simulated the effects of Langmuir wavenumber diffusion over
a very broad range of parameters for the beam, the background plasma,
and the density fluctuations, and considered both random fluctuations,
and those obeying a power-law distribution with wavenumber, as observed
in the corona.

Overall, we found that the acceleration depends primarily on the ratio
of the timescales for the wavenumber diffusion and for the beam-plasma
interaction, with most effect when these are approximately equal. When
the wavenumber diffusion is the faster process, we see suppression of
the beam-plasma instability, as the waves are removed very rapidly from
resonance with the beam electrons, and so no acceleration can occur. The
exact spectral shape of the density fluctuations and their
characteristic velocity, @xmath , were found to have small additional
effects on the extent of the electron acceleration. For example, for a
given level of fluctuation intensity, the strongest acceleration occurs
when @xmath . These effects are not accounted for simply by the ratio of
the diffusion and beam-wave interaction timescales.

##### Beam Generated Hard X-Ray Emission

Next, we considered the case of a power-law electron beam, relaxing due
to collisional interactions, as in Kontar et al. ( 2012 ) . In very
dense plasma, this relaxation can produce instability to Langmuir wave
generation significantly more rapidly than the electron time-of-flight
effects that dominate in less dense plasma. Our model therefore applies
to, for example, a beam in a very dense coronal loop, with background
plasma density @xmath cm @xmath , over timescales of around 0.1 s or so.
Langmuir waves are generated by the beam, but later reabsorbed, and so
the electron distribution averaged over the electron’s collisional
lifetime is unaffected.

However, when the evolution of the Langmuir waves due either to a
density gradient, a fluctuating plasma density, or to wave-wave
interactions is considered, the time-averaged electron flux is strongly
affected. Energy is shifted from electrons at energies below around
20 keV to the region between 20 and 200 keV. Above 200 keV the effects
are small. The time-averaged electron flux is directly related to the
hard X-ray emission generated by the beam, which is generally observed
only above around 20 keV, as thermal emission dominates below this
energy. Thus, the Langmuir wave evolution is seen to shift significant
numbers of electrons in energy space from the unobservable part of the
distribution to the HXR emitting part.

The time-averaged electron flux can be increased by an order of
magnitude or more at around 100 keV. Thus if we ignore the effects of
Langmuir wave generation and evolution and assume an accelerated
electron beam evolving purely collisionally, the number of initially
accelerated electrons derived from hard X-ray observations will be
overestimated by up to this amount. Moreover, it was found that the
acceleration effect was strongly dependent on the initial beam density,
and so this overestimate is more significant the more electrons there
are in the initial beam.

##### Radio Emission

The high levels of Langmuir waves generated by fast electron beams in
plasma can also lead to very bright radio emission. The mechanism for
this was discussed in the Introduction, and in Chapter 4 we developed a
simulation model for this emission at the second harmonic of the local
plasma frequency. Emission also occurs at the plasma frequency, but in
dense plasma, as considered here, this is generated inefficiently, and
cannot escape as the optical depth is very large.

Emission at the second harmonic relies on the generation of an initial
Langmuir wave population by the electron beam, and the subsequent
backscattering of these to negative wavenumbers. A wave from the
forwards and backwards population may then coalesce to produce radio
emission. However, the emission probability is strongly angularly
dependent, and so we must average over assumed distributions of the
angles of the Langmuir wavenumbers to the direction of beam propagation.
The processes may then be included in our simulations from Chapter 3 .

We used this model to simulate the radio emission at 2 GHz for a
collisionally relaxing beam in very dense plasma, considering both the
backscattering of Langmuir waves due to individual plasma ions, which is
important in plasma of equal ion and electron temperatures, and also the
decay of a Langmuir wave to an ion-sound wave and a backscattered
Langmuir wave, as in Chapter 3 . This work is currently being prepared
for publication (Ratcliffe & Kontar, 2013 ) .

We found that the brightness and duration of the simulated radio
emission for both homogeneous and weakly inhomogeneous plasma are in
good agreement with observations, and moreover the theoretical
predictions for the polarisation of the emission in our model also agree
well with observed values for high frequency plasma emission.

However, the process of scattering by plasma ions was seen to be
strongly affected by the wavenumber diffusion of Langmuir waves due to
plasma density inhomogeneities. Significant suppression of the
backscattering, and consequently the radio emission, was seen to occur
for fluctuations of very low magnitude. The observed strengths of
inhomogeneity in the corona often exceed this limit, and in this case
our simulations suggest it is possible to have high levels of beam
generated Langmuir waves without generating significant radio emission,
as the backscattered wave population remains small.

On the other hand, when the assumption of equal temperatures is relaxed,
the additional backscattering process due to the decay to ion-sound
waves can operate, and this leads to high levels of backwards Langmuir
waves even in strongly inhomogeneous plasma, and corresponding levels of
radio emission.

##### Closing Remarks

To conclude, we have considered the effects of plasma density
inhomogeneities on Langmuir waves, and consequently on propagating fast
electron beams, and their hard X-ray and radio emission. Strong effects
of electron acceleration and enhancement of the hard X-ray emission were
seen. We have also simulated beam-generated radio emission, finding
results that are in good agreement with observations. The inclusion of
density inhomogeneities in these simulations show that in inhomogeneous
plasma, this radio emission can be suppressed, despite the presence of
high levels of Langmuir waves. Density inhomogeneities are generally
agreed to commonly exist in the corona, and so the generation of
Langmuir waves by fast electrons and their subsequent evolution have
been shown to be vitally important considerations in the evolution of
coronal fast electron beams and their emission.
