This thesis considers the propagation of accelerated electron beams in
plasma. We consider the wave particle interactions these undergo which
cause their evolution, the effects of plasma density inhomogeneities on
these interactions, and the effects this may have on the production of
hard X-ray and radio emission by the beam.

CGS units are used throughout.

Chapter 1 introduces the important background material on the Sun and
solar flares, and some basic plasma physics. We discuss the acceleration
and propagation of electrons beams and their production of hard X-ray
emission, and the various observed types of radio emission from the Sun.
We end by discussing details of the mechanism by which radio emission
can be produced by beam generated Langmuir waves at GHz frequencies.

Chapter 2 contains the mathematical derivation of the effects of plasma
density fluctuations on Langmuir waves. This is found to be described by
a diffusion of the waves in wavenumber space. We consider the situation
in both one and three dimensions, for elastic and inelastic scattering
of the Langmuir waves, discussing how our model expands on that
previously considered in the literature, and develop a model for the
fluctuations applicable to the electron beams we consider in this
thesis. We derive the relevant diffusion coefficients for a few commonly
observed density fluctuation spectra, then end with a brief discussion
of the expected effects of the Langmuir wavenumber diffusion on the
waves and electrons for a few representative cases.

Chapter 3 uses the model derived in Chapter 2 in quasi-linear
simulations of electron beam evolution. We consider two initial electron
beam distributions, either a Maxwellian or a power law, and simulate the
Langmuir wave generation and evolution, and the back-reaction of this on
the electron beam. We find an electron acceleration effect to occur, and
explore the parameters for which this is strongest. In addition we
consider the production of hard X-ray emission from an initially power
law beam, and the effects of the electron acceleration on this.

Chapter 4 considers the radio emission from an electron beam via the
generation of Langmuir waves. We first derive an angle-averaged model
for emission at the second harmonic of the plasma frequency, and combine
this with the simulations from the previous chapters. We include the
effects of density fluctuations on the Langmuir waves, and discuss how
this affects the radio emission produced.

Chapter 5 concludes the thesis with a summary of the effects of density
inhomogeneity on Langmuir waves, and consequently on fast electron beams
and their hard X-ray and radio emissions in the solar corona.

Appendix A contains the derivation of a mathematical model for radio
emission from an electron beam at the fundamental of the local plasma
frequency, which is unimportant in the parameter ranges considered in
Chapter 4 , but essential for radio bursts in the higher corona and
solar wind.
