## 3.4 general introduction to accretion-induced field evolution

In the previous section we have seen that observational facts and
statistical analyses of the existing data clearly relate the evolution
of magnetic field of neutron stars with binary interaction. In the next
chapter we shall address three different aspects of such binary-induced
field evolution. We investigate the underlying physical mechanisms that
take place in the interior of the star, changing the currents that are
flowing to maintain the observable field. We would interest ourselves
with a neutron star that is in active interaction with its binary
companion. This companion could be a main sequence star affecting the
neutron star through its wind. Alternatively, it could be a giant or a
super giant, in which case heavy mass transfer may take place through
Roche-lobe overflow [ Bhattacharya & van den HeuvelBhattacharya & van
den Heuvel1991 , King et al.King et al.1995 ] . In either of these
cases, there are some basic changes that the neutron star undergoes.
These changes in various physical parameters are responsible for a
change in the magnetic field. So, here is a brief resume of how the
process of accretion affects a neutron star.

-   The process of accretion mainly changes three parameters of the
    star, the total mass, the total angular momentum and the total
    energy. The change in energy comes about when the potential energy
    of the accreting particles get converted into random kinetic energy
    of the system and is then manifested as an increase in temperature.

-   Models of field evolution have been proposed using the changes in
    each of these quantities, namely relating the change in the
    observable field @xmath to @xmath (change in mass), @xmath (change
    in angular momentum) and @xmath (change in temperature). In this
    connection it should be mentioned that earlier attempts to show a
    proportionality between @xmath and @xmath have recently been
    challenged [ WijersWijers1997 ] .

-   The change in angular momentum has been exploited in models which
    assume an initial field confined to the superconducting core of the
    star. In particular, a rapid slow-down ( @xmath ) experienced by the
    neutron star during the ‘propeller phase’ causes the core field to
    be expelled to the crust, where it could undergo subsequent ohmic
    dissipation.

-   Ultimately most of the accretion-related models depend on the ohmic
    dissipation of currents in the crust for a permanent decrease in the
    field. The rapidity of such dissipation depends on a decrease of the
    electrical conductivity, caused by an increase in the temperature (
    @xmath ).

-   Another important factor influencing the field evolution is the
    hydrodynamic mass motion in the star. Near the surface the material
    flow is lateral, moving from polar (magnetic) to equatorial region.
    But interchange instabilities appear to prevent the screening of the
    field due to such hydrodynamic motions (chapter [4] of this thesis).

-   Deep inside the star the material movement is a simple radial
    inflow, due to the compression of the star as a result of an
    increase in the total mass. The material movement is, evidently, a
    direct effect of the change in mass ( @xmath ), with the actual flow
    dynamics determined by the rate of such change, i.e., the rate of
    mass accretion, , on the star. This radially inward motion in the
    deeper layers helps to advect crustal currents to more dense layers,
    ultimately stabilizing the field in such cases.

From the above discussion, we see that processes of both macroscopic and
microscopic nature are active in the interior of an accreting neutron
star. The change in angular momentum induces a large scale flux movement
whereas a change in total mass gives rise to large scale material
movement. Both these cause macroscopic restructuring of the current
pattern. On the other hand, a change in temperature induces the
microscopic process of ohmic dissipation, by which the energy stored in
the large scale field is transferred to the random kinetic energy of the
particles. In the following sections, we shall see how these two
mechanisms complement each other in the problems addressed by us.

## Chapter 4 effect of diamagnetic screening

### 4.1 introduction

First proposed by \citeN bisn74, the idea of a possible screening of the
magnetic field of a neutron star by accreting material onto it, has been
a recurrent theme in the field-evolution scenario. This suggestion was
substantiated by the work of \citeN taam86 in which they indicated that
the accreted matter, which is completely ionized plasma and hence
diamagnetic in nature, might screen the pre-existing field reducing the
strength of the surface field. Later \citeN blnd79 proposed a possible
mechanism for such a screening. They suggested that the material
accreting onto the poles of a magnetized neutron star will be confined
by the strong magnetic stresses near the surface of the star. At low
accretion rates the material sinks below the stellar surface until the
hydrostatic pressure of the stellar material is as large as the magnetic
pressure. The plasma then flows sideways giving rise to horizontal
components of the magnetic field. The creation of this horizontal
component comes at the expense of the vertical field and may result in a
decrease in the observed field strength. This work, however, did not
provide any quantitative details of the mechanism.

Later it was shown by \citeN wosl82 and \citeN hame83 that the accretion
column is actually like a small mountain on the polar cap rather than
being subsurface. The accreting material is mostly ionized hydrogen and
hydrogen has a smaller mean molecular weight per electron, @xmath , than
the iron crust of the star. Since most of the pressure in the accreted
layer comes from the electrons, hydrogen tends to float over the
underlying iron layer - if no material displacement perpendicular to the
magnetic field is possible. A hydrogen mountain then forms at the
surface of the neutron star. The height of this mountain depends on the
density at which the transmutation of hydrogen (by electron capture on
protons) takes place. When the material pressure in this accretion
column becomes much larger than the magnetic pressure then the material
starts flowing sideways giving rise to horizontal field components
reducing the external dipolar field strength.

The first quantitative calculations of diamagnetic screening of neutron
star magnetic field were performed by \citeN roma90. It was shown in
this work that hydrodynamic flows in the surface layers may bury the
field to deeper layers effectively reducing the surface strength. In a
later article [ RomaniRomani1995 ] in continuation to the earlier work,
various time-scales, relevant for an effective screening of the surface
field, were estimated. It was also shown here how the depth and density
at which the field might get buried depend on the strength of the
initial surface field.

In the present work, we investigate the effectiveness of diamagnetic
screening as a possible mechanism for a permanent reduction in the
surface field strength of the neutron stars. In particular, we shall try
to answer the following questions :

1.  Are diffusive time-scales, in the layers where the field is expected
    to be buried, long enough to allow screening to be an effective
    mechanism for long-term field reduction ?

2.  Is it at all possible to bury the field or create horizontal
    components at the expense of the vertical one against
    Rayleigh-Taylor overturn instability ?

Recently, calculations of screening have been performed assuming the
accreting material to be ferromagnetic [ Zhang, Wu, & YangZhang
et al.1994 , ZhangZhang1998 ] . Such an assumption of extremely large
magnetic permeability makes it possible to reduce the surface field by
about four orders of magnitude. In our work though, we regard the
accreting material to be completely ionized plasma (mainly hydrogen) and
therefore to be diamagnetic in nature.

The layout of the chapter is in the following form. In section [ 4.2 ]
we have discussed the nature of the material flow in an accreting
neutron star. In section [ 4.3 ] we discuss the actual mechanism of the
diamagnetic screening and the various relevant time-scales. And finally
in section [ 4.4 ] we present our conclusions.

### 4.2 accretion and material flow

For a neutron star with a strong magnetic field, the flow of the
accreting material outside the star is completely determined by the
field. The material flows in along open field lines and hits the surface
within the polar cap region. The area of this polar cap region is
determined by the rate of accretion and the strength of the magnetic
field [ Shapiro & TeukolskyShapiro & Teukolsky1983 ] . In all our
subsequent discussions we shall assume a situation where the magnetic
axis and the rotation axis are aligned. Even though that is hardly ever
the case in reality, this assumption does not affect the general
conclusions much.

The polar cap area, region constrained by open field lines on the
surface of the star, is given by,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where, @xmath is the radius of the star and @xmath is the angle the last
open field line makes with magnetic axis. This limiting field line is
the one which goes through the Alfvén radius, @xmath , in the equatorial
plane. Therefore, using the equation for the dipole field lines one
finds @xmath , so that the polar cap area is given by,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the limit @xmath (which is a reasonable approximation for the range
of field strength and accretion rate we consider), the above expression
reduces to the following simple form :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Alfvén radius of an accreting system is determined by the condition
that at this radius the ram pressure of the in-falling material equals
the pressure of the magnetic field. The ram pressure at the Alfvén
radius is :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the density and @xmath is the velocity of the accreting
material at Alfvén radius. In an accretion disc material rotates with
Keplerian velocity at every radius. Therefore, the velocity of the
material at Alfvén radius is given by,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The density of the accreting material at Alfvén radius is :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where, the dependence on the rate of mass accretion is quite obvious. As
the field is dipolar in nature, the field strength at the Alfvén radius
is,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where, @xmath stands for the strength of the field at the surface of the
neutron star. Equating the ram pressure and the magnetic pressure, one
obtains the following expressions for the Alfvén radius and the polar
cap area respectively,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The density profile within the accretion column is described by an
‘atmosphere’ solution [ Bildsten & CutlerBildsten & Cutler1995 ] . The
pressure in the column, due to the relativistic degenerate electrons and
the ions, is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number density of electrons (ions) and @xmath is the
electron mass. @xmath is the relativity parameter defined as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.11)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the Fermi momentum of the electrons, @xmath correspond
to the atomic number and mass number of the dominant ion species and
@xmath is density in units of @xmath . The scale height of the accretion
column is given by @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are the density and
pressure respectively at the base of the accretion column and @xmath is
the acceleration due to gravity at the surface of the state. Using the
above equation of state the scale height, for a @xmath star, is
approximately found to be :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

As long as the pressure in the accretion column is much smaller than the
magnetic pressure there can not be any material movement across the
field lines so the accreted material remains confined to the polar cap.
This kind of polar cap accretion causes transverse pressure gradients
that are balanced by the curvature of the magnetic field. An order of
magnitude estimate by Hameury et al. \citeN hame83 shows that in order
to create a significant distortion of the field lines due to the
overpressure of the accretion column the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

should be satisfied. Here, @xmath and @xmath stand for pressure due to
the material in the accretion column and due to the magnetic field
respectively. @xmath is the radius of the polar cap and @xmath is the
density scale height of the accretion column. For a given value of the
crustal field and a given rate of accretion, the density at which the
material starts flowing sideways, obtained from the condition given by
equation [ 4.13 ], is :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the field strength in units of @xmath Gauss and @xmath
is the accretion rate in units of @xmath M @xmath yr @xmath . This
condition is, of course, only valid in absence of any interchange
instabilities about which we shall discuss later. In figure [ 4.1 ] we
plot the variation of the flow density with the field strength for
various values of the accretion rate.

### 4.3 physics of diamagnetic screening

We shall, as has been mentioned above, work under the assumption of a
flux-frozen situation. This basically amounts to assuming an effectively
infinite conductivity. Admittedly, even though large, the actual value
of conductivity is finite. But the large values of conductivity in crust
provide for extremely long diffusive time-scales. In this case, the
assumption of ‘flux-freezing’ is a valid one since the flow time-scales
are much smaller compared to this diffusive time-scale (to be discussed
in the next section).

Therefore a reduction in the surface field is obtained due to the
combined effect of i) flux freezing and ii) hydrodynamic flow of the
material. Due to flux-freezing the total flux contained within an amount
of material remains constant. And when this material flows and spreads
out covering a larger area, the field gets adjusted to keep the flux
conserved. Say, the total flux contained within the polar cap at time
@xmath is @xmath . Conservation of flux then implies that we have,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore the change in the field strength is related to the change in
the area of the original polar cap surface due to material flow during
accretion. Assuming that the flow of material is such that at each
instant the amount accreted equals the amount flowing out from under the
accretion column one obtains the following relation between the change
in the polar cap area and the rate of mass accretion given by,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, @xmath is the change in the polar cap area in time @xmath .
@xmath is the density where the flow takes place and @xmath is the
effective height of the accretion column, which hereafter we take
roughly to be equal to the density scale height @xmath . Integrating
equation [ 4.16 ] above the time variation of the polar cap area is
obtained in the following form -

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, @xmath is the original area of the polar cap. Then equation [
4.15 ] implies the following time dependence of the surface field :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have defined the screening time-scale by the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the time in which the original field reduces to half of its
original value. It should be noted here that \citeN shib89 obtained an
expression for the decay of magnetic field due to accretion very similar
to equation [ 4.15 ] from purely phenomenological considerations. Here
we have arrived at the above relation from a more physical point of
view.

To find the effectiveness of the screening we need to compare this
time-scale to the diffusive time-scale over which the field may
re-emerge by ohmic diffusion through the overlaying layers. The
diffusive time-scale is defined by,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, @xmath is the electrical conductivity which is a function of the
density and the crustal temperature. We shall show later that if one
ignores interchange instabilities, then the flow time scale is much
smaller than diffusion time scale, and therefore field would remain
frozen and be dragged. Reconnection will then occur on the equatorial
plane and that will bury the field. Before this field can diffuse out
more matter will come and spread on top of it, and drive the field
deeper. So the eventual re-emergence time scale is set not by the
initial depth at which it was buried but the final depth to which it is
driven by continuous accretion. This can be very deep and the field can
even reach the core and therefore never get out again. But for the
moment, we take the burial depth to be equal to the scale height of the
density. For the screening time-scale this, of course, is the actual
length-scale. For the diffusive case we find the time-scale at the depth
where the field gets buried to begin with. We have not considered the
case of deep burial mentioned above, since from the subsequent
discussion that will prove to be unnecessary.

The point to be noted here is that for the screening mechanism described
above the important factor is the anisotropic material flow through the
polar cap. The area of polar cap increases with increasing rate of
accretion. Hence, for low rates of accretion, the flow is maximally
anisotropic. For high values of accretion rate, the polar cap could
cover a large fraction of the stellar surface area. The effect of
anisotropic material flow would not be very severe in that case. Also as
mentioned earlier, the temperatures are higher for higher values , a
lower value of conductivity and therefore a smaller diffusive time.
Hence, situations with low values of has better chance of screening the
field.

In all of the above discussion, the implicit assumption has been that it
is possible to create a horizontal component of the magnetic field, at
the expense of the vertical component, as a result of material flow in a
‘flux-frozen’ condition. But this mechanism is not viable against the
Rayleigh-Taylor instability. This instability arises due to magnetic
buoyancy. As the accreting material slowly builds up in a column, the
field lines tend to spread out due to the diamagnetic property of the
material. At the base of the accretion column, the field lines are
firmly anchored to the solid crust. Therefore material flow at the base
of the accretion column stretches the field lines out horizontally. This
creates horizontal components of the field giving rise to a screening of
the external dipole. We have seen earlier that the pressure of the
accretion column is much larger than the pressure of the magnetic field
in this region. Under such a condition the field lines re-organize
themselves into flux tubes as that is the minimum energy configuration.
These flux tubes move upward due to magnetic buoyancy and thereby
destroy the horizontal component of the field (see \citeNP spru83 and
references therein).

In a tube in pressure equilibrium with its surroundings the pressure is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

However at the base of the accretion column @xmath and the above
relation simplifies to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the gas pressure within a flux tube is smaller than the gas
pressure outside. Then from equation [ 4.10 ] we find the following
relation between internal and external densities :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the density deficit within the flux tubes. This density
deficit makes the flux tube move upward under the force of buoyancy. The
upward velocity @xmath of the flux tubes is given by the equality of the
buoyancy force with the aerodynamic drag force per unit area of the flux
tube :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the characteristic radius of the flux tube and @xmath is
the acceleration due to gravity. Therefore, the velocity is :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the time-scale required for a flux-tube to traverse the density
scale-height is :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

It should be noted that the characteristic scale length of the flux
tubes is again that of the density scale-height, and therefore,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The time-scale for the reconnection of the field lines, on the other
hand, is typically given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.29)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where, @xmath are the Alfvén and the sound speed, respectively. @xmath
is the length-scale of the instability which is again of the order of
the density scale height in the accretion column. Within the accretion
column the sound speed is always much greater than the Alfvén velocity
and therefore only the top expressions of the above equations are
relevant here. At the flow density, the Alfvén velocity is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the expressions for the reconnection time-scale is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

For the screening to be effective, the total time taken to create a loop
of field lines by turn-over instability and to destroy the loop by
reconnection has to be much larger than the screening time-scale defined
above. So we define an instability time-scale as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

which should be compared with @xmath . It must be noted here that we use
the ‘pressure scale-height’ and ‘density scale-height’ interchangeably
in the above discussion since for barotropic (atmospheric) equation of
state (as is the case here) a pressure gradient implies the same density
gradient.

Therefore the three relevant time-scales of the problem are :

-   screening time-scale - given by equation [ 4.19 ];

-   diffusive time-scale - given by equation [ 4.20 ]; and

-   instability time-scale - given by equation [ 4.33 ].

In figure[ 4.2 ] we plot all the time-scales as functions of surface
field strength and the accretion rate.

### 4.4 discussion and conclusions

Looking at the figures plotted above, obtained for a range of values for
the accretion rate and the surface field strength, we find that,

1.  The density of flow increases with an increase in the field
    strength. The larger the field, the deeper and denser it gets buried
    (see figure [ 4.1 ]). The flow density also has a mild positive
    dependence on the rate of mass accretion. But even for very large
    values of the surface field strength the flow does not occur at
    densities beyond @xmath . That means the flow always takes place
    within the liquid layer. And the earlier contentions of a burial
    within the solid layer does not really happen.

2.  As the screening time-scales are always much smaller than the
    diffusive time-scales a condition of flux-freezing prevails and
    material movement indeed should proceed dragging the field lines
    along.

3.  But, since the instability time-scale (sum of the overturn and the
    re-connection time-scales) is much too smaller than the other two
    time-scales of the problem, any stretching of field line is quickly
    restored (over the instability time-scale) and the material
    effectively flows past the field lines without causing any change.

We find that the time-scale of overturn and reconnection is so much
smaller than any other time-scale of the problem that it is not at all
possible to create horizontal field components at the cost of vertical
ones and effect a screening. Therefore, it is not possible to screen the
magnetic field of a neutron star by the accreting material in order to
reduce the magnitude of the external dipole observed.

## Chapter 5 evolution of crustal magnetic field in an accreting neutron
star

### 5.1 introduction

It has been discussed in chapter [ 3 ] that observations suggest a
connection between the low magnetic field of binary and millisecond
pulsars and their being processed in binary systems, indicating
accretion-induced field decay in such systems. A possible mechanism for
such decay is understood to be the rapid ohmic dissipation of the
currents in the accretion heated crust (see section [ 3.3 ] for
details). In this work we explore models that primarily depend on this
microscopic process of ohmic decay for a permanent reduction in the
observed field strength, and also on the large scale material movement
for the final stabilization of the field. Here we shall investigate a
model based on the assumption that the current loops responsible for the
magnetic field are initially confined entirely within the crust. This
situation is likely to be the result of a generation of the field due to
thermo-magnetic instabilities after the birth of the star (see section [
3.2 ] for details). If the initial field resides mainly in the
superconducting core then our scenario would apply only after most of
this flux has been expelled into the crust, a situation which will be
treated in chapter [7].

The crustal field undergoes ohmic diffusion due to the finite electrical
conductivity of the crustal lattice, but the time-scale of such decay is
very long under ordinary conditions [ Sang & ChanmugamSang &
Chanmugam1987 , Urpin & MuslimovUrpin & Muslimov1992b ] . The situation
changes significantly when accretion is turned on. The heating of the
crust reduces the electrical conductivity by several orders of
magnitude, thereby reducing the ohmic decay time-scale. As the mass
increases, a neutron star becomes more and more compact and the mass of
the crust actually decreases by a small amount (see section [ 2.2 ]). So
the newly accreted material forms the crust and the original crustal
material gets continually assimilated into the superconducting core
beneath. The original current carrying layers are thus pushed into
deeper and more dense regions as accretion proceeds. This compression
results in a decrease of the effective length scale of the current loops
which makes a fast dissipation possible [ Konar, Bhattacharya, &
UrpinKonar et al.1995 ] . But the higher conductivity of the denser
regions would progressively slow down the decay winning over the effect
of a decrease in the length scale, till the current loops are completely
inside the superconducting region where any further decay is prevented.

The organization of the chapter is as follows. In section [ 5.2 ] we
discuss the physics of the field reduction in an accreting neutron star,
computational details are discussed in section [ 5.3 ]. Finally in
section [ 5.4 ] we present our results and draw the conclusions in
section [ 5.5 ].

### 5.2 physics of the mechanism

The evolution of the crustal field as a result of ohmic diffusion and
material motion has been discussed by a number of authors [ Wendell, van
Horn, & SargentWendell et al.1987 , Sang & ChanmugamSang & Chanmugam1987
, Geppert & UrpinGeppert & Urpin1994 ] and essentially concerns the
solution of the following equation [ JacksonJackson1975 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the velocity of material movement and @xmath is the
electrical conductivity of the medium. As in previous studies we solve
this equation by introducing the vector potential @xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where, @xmath . This choice of the vector potential ensures a poloidal
geometry for @xmath . In particular, we choose

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath being the spherical polar co-ordinates. Here we work in the
lowest order of multipole, obtaining the following dipolar form of the
magnetic field :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.4)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The magnitude of the field is given by,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore, at the pole ( @xmath , @xmath ) the magnitude is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is simply proportional to the value of the Stokes’ function there.
We shall use this fact to obtain the evolution of the surface field with
time.

The underlying current distribution corresponding to the above field is
obtained by using Maxwell’s equation :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.7)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

#### 5.2.1 ohmic diffusion

In order to understand the ohmic dissipation of the field strength, let
us consider equation [ 5.1 ] without the first term on the right hand
side. The first term corresponds to the convective transport, which we
shall discuss later. Without this term equation [ 5.1 ] takes the
following form,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the moment, let us consider the conductivity to be a constant,
without any dependence on space. Then, the above equation takes the form
of a pure diffusion equation (by virtue of the divergence-free condition
for the magnetic fields), given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The diffusion constant for the above equation is @xmath . One can define
a time-scale characteristic of the diffusion process :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the length-scale associated with the underlying current
distribution supporting the field.

It is clear from equation [ 5.10 ] that the rate of ohmic diffusion is
determined mainly by the electrical conductivity of the crust which is a
steeply increasing function of density (see figures in section [ 2.4 ]).
As density in the crust spans eight orders of magnitude with a very
large radial gradient the conductivity changes sharply as a function of
depth from the neutron star surface. Thus the deeper the location of the
current distribution, the slower is the decay. We have discussed, in
detail, the effects of temperature and that of impurity concentration on
the conductivity in section [ 2.4 ], also about the change in the
thermal behaviour in presence of accretion in a neutron star in section
[ 2.3 ]. The increase in temperature of an accretion-heated crust lowers
the conductivity and therefore the time-scale for the diffusion
decreases. In other words, the transfer of the energy of the systematic
motion of the charge carriers (the electrons) within the current loops
into the random kinetic energy of the electrons proceed at a faster rate
at a higher temperature. For the models we are considering now, it has
been assumed in the literature that the impurity strength @xmath lies in
the range 0.01 - 0.1. The effect of impurities is most important at
lower temperatures and higher densities (see figures [ 2.21 ] and [ 2.22
]). Therefore the field evolution does not show any significant
dependence on impurity strength for this range of @xmath in an
accretion-heated crust. We therefore restrict our computations to the
@xmath case. However, the impurity strength will still play an important
role in field decay during the pre-accretion phase when the crustal
temperatures can be quite low.

#### 5.2.2 accretion and material transport

In a neutron star, for a given equation of state, the mass of the crust
is uniquely determined by the total mass of the star (see section [ 2.2
]). And this crustal mass remains effectively constant for the accreted
masses of the order of 0.1 M @xmath with a slight decrease as the total
mass increases (see figures [ 2.14 ], [ 2.15 ] and [ 2.16 ]). For
example, for the equation of state that we have used (see section [ 2.1
] for details) the accretion of 0.1 M @xmath on the star causes a change
in the crustal mass of only 0.004 M @xmath . As a result, accretion
causes continuous assimilation of material from the bottom of the crust
into the core. At the same time the upper layers of the original crust
are pushed to deeper and denser regions, leading to extreme squeeze of
this material. This also causes the current distribution embedded in
this material to be sharpened, reducing the effective length scale of
the system.

The change in the crustal mass and the crustal density profile is
negligible for the amount of mass accretion we consider. We therefore
take the mass flux to be the same throughout the crust, equal to its
value at the surface. Assuming the mass flow to be spherically symmetric
in the crustal layers of interest, one the obtains the following
condition for the equality of mass flux at all densities within the
crust,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where is the rate of mass accretion and @xmath is the density as a
function of radius @xmath . The above equation defines @xmath - the
velocity of radial material flow at a given radius in the crust. It
should be noted here that the material flow is radially inwards, hence
writing the flow velocity in its full vectorial form we have,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The result of accretion on the magnetic field evolution therefore
manifests itself as a combination of three effects: transport of the
current distribution to regions of higher density and hence higher
conductivity, reduction of conductivity due to heating and change in the
effective length scale of the current distribution (see \citeNP db95a
for a detailed discussion). We find that the overall effect turns out to
be a rapid initial decay followed by a leveling off when an amount of
mass equivalent to about 10% of the original crust has been accreted. By
this time the current loops reach the regions of very high density and
consequently of extremely large conductivity where the diffusion
time-scales are much too long. As further accretion proceeds the
original crust is assimilated into the superconducting interior freezing
the currents there. Following \citeN baym69b we assume that the newly
formed superconducting material retains the magnetic flux through it in
the form of Abrikosov fluxoids rather than expelling it through the
Meissner effect.

#### 5.2.3 the field evolution equation

We use the form of @xmath given by equation [ 5.4 ] and the form of
@xmath given by equation [ 5.12 ] to cast equation [ 5.1 ] in terms of
the Stokes’ function.

1.  The left hand side –

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.13)
                           @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

2.  The first term in the right hand side –

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.14)
                           @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

3.  The second term in the right hand side –

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.15)
                           @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Incorporation of the expressions [ 5.13 ], [ 5.14 ] and [ 5.15 ] in the
equation[ 5.1 ] then leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The results of this chapter will be based on numerical solutions of the
equation [ 5.16 ].

### 5.3 computations

The aim of our computations is to solve equation [ 5.16 ] to obtain
@xmath using the following boundary conditions valid for all times (see,
e.g., Geppert & Urpin 1994):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is radius of the star and @xmath is that radius to which
the original boundary between the core and the crust is pushed to, due
to accretion, at any point of time. The first condition matches the
interior field to an external dipole configuration. The second condition
indicates that as accretion proceeds along with the crustal material the
frozen-in flux moves inside the core, but the field can not diffuse
through the original crust-core boundary. To simulate an effectively
infinite conductivity in the region between the bottom of the crust and
the original boundary between the crust and the core, we set @xmath in
this region. As mentioned before, we take into account the combined
effects of accretion driven material motion and ohmic diffusion. We
construct the density profile of a neutron star as described in section
[ 2.2 ] for an assumed mass of 1.4 . This star has a total crustal mass
of 0.044 and we restrict our evolutionary calculations to a maximum net
accretion of this additional amount on the star, because an accretion of
that amount of material pushes the original crust completely within the
core. The change in the crustal density profile resulting from this
additional mass is negligible. Hence we work with an invariant crustal
density profile throughout our calculation.

We assume that the matter settling onto the star does so uniformly
across the entire surface. This allows us to use the expression of
@xmath as in equation [ 5.11 ]. When the surface magnetic field is
strong this is a poor approximation very close to the surface (see the
discussion about anisotropic material transport in section [ 4.2 ]
However in deeper layers ( @xmath ) which we are mainly concerned with,
the material motion is essentially dictated by the added weight and is
going to be more or less isotropic.

We further assume that the incoming matter fully threads the existing
magnetic field before settling onto the surface. In other words we allow
for no reduction of the external magnetic field arising out of
diamagnetic screening by the incoming material. We adopt this scheme to
ensure that the effects under investigation here, namely diffusion and
convection, do not get masked by other effects such as screening. In the
light of the results obtained in the previous chapter regarding
diamagnetic screening, we are quite justified in making such an
assumption.

We assume that during the phase of mass accretion the temperature in the
crust is uniform and remains constant in time. This ignores an initial
short phase in which both the rate of accretion and the temperature of
the crust show time evolution. The rate of accretion stabilizes in a few
thousand years [ SavonijeSavonije1978 ] and the temperature within
@xmath yrs [ Miralda-Escude, Paczynski, & HaenselMiralda-Escude
et al.1990 ] . Computations by \citeN urpn96 show that the decay during
this initial phase is insignificant. The temperature that the crust will
finally attain in the steady phase has been computed by \citeN fuji84,
\citeN mira90 and \citeN zdun92. However, these computations are
restricted to limited range of mass accretion and also do not yield the
same crustal temperature under similar conditions. The results obtained
by \citeN zdun92 for the crustal temperatures for a given accretion rate
in the range @xmath M @xmath yr @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath M
@xmath yr @xmath could be fitted to the equation [ 2.12 ]. But
extrapolation of this fit to higher rates of accretion gives extremely
high temperatures which may not be sustainable for any reasonable period
due to rapid cooling by neutrinos at those temperatures. We have
therefore restricted our computations to a maximum accretion rate of
@xmath M @xmath yr @xmath and for @xmath in the range @xmath – @xmath M
@xmath yr @xmath , we have explored a range of constant crustal
temperatures between @xmath and @xmath K.

In a series of papers \citeN gepp94, \citeN urpn95, \citeN urpn96 and
\citeN gepp96 have considered evolution of crustal magnetic field for
accretion rates in the range @xmath M @xmath yr @xmath . In this work we
too consider accretion rates covering much of the above range. The
difference between our computations and those in the above papers lies
in the range of total mass accretion and the treatment of the inner
boundary condition. Our computations proceed to a maximum net accretion
of @xmath M @xmath whereas the computations by other authors are
restricted to that of the order of @xmath M @xmath . Our choice of the
range of accretion rates also facilitates the comparison of our results
with those available in the literature, over the range of overlap in the
net mass accreted. At accreted masses @xmath , the inward convection of
currents into the core becomes significant. As computations by previous
authors do not allow for this possibility, our results begin to diverge
from theirs for high values of accreted mass.

#### 5.3.1 numerical scheme

We solve the equation [ 5.16 ] in terms of fractional radius, @xmath ,
instead of the radius. Re-writing this equation in terms of the
fractional radius, we obtain,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

To solve the above equation we use a modified Crank-Nicholson scheme.
Since the conductivity is a function of density and hence of radius, it
has been necessary to incorporate the space dependence of conductivity
in the standard Crank-Nicholson scheme of differencing. In addition we
also allow for a pre-accretion phase where the neutron star undergoes
normal cooling. This introduces a time-dependence in the temperature and
hence in the diffusion-constant as well. The overall effect is to
consider an explicit space-time dependence of the function @xmath which
is a pre-factor to the diffusion term. We introduce the convection term
into the computation through upwind differencing and operator splitting
of the full differential equation [ Press et al.Press et al.1988 ] .

Using the method of operator splitting, we first find out the
differenced form of the equation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

by upwind differencing , to obtain,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, @xmath and @xmath represent the time interval and the size of the
space-grid. The superscript @xmath stand for the @xmath -th time-step
and the subscript @xmath stand for the @xmath -th space-grid of
integration. Similarly, for the diffusive part, given by,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

we use Crank-Nicholson scheme to obtain,

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.25)
  -- -- -- --------

where the various symbols have the same meaning as in equation [ 5.23 ].
To incorporate the time-dependence of @xmath without making the
differencing scheme too complicated, we use the time-averaged (over two
neighbouring intervals) value of the function at each time-step. This
does not introduce too much error as the function is slowly-varying over
the time-intervals typically chosen for our integrations. In the end we
combine the schemes in the following manner,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.26)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

to obtain the final differenced form of the equation [ 5.16 ] which is
used in the numerical code.

In connection with the numerical code an important point needs to be
mentioned. It is imperative, before it is used to obtain results, to
check for the stability of the numerical scheme employed. The
Crank-Nicholson scheme of differencing is unconditionally stable for any
size of the temporal or spatial grid. Hence any instability in our
scheme arises from the convective part for which the scheme used (upwind
differencing) is, unlike the other scheme, not stable for all
combinations of the spatial and temporal intervals. The stability of
this scheme depends on whether the Courant condition is satisfied or
not. This condition demands that the inequality

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

be satisfied at all grid points and at all points of time. Using
equations [ 5.11 ] and [ 5.21 ] to arrive at the values of @xmath for a
given rate of accretion and for a space-grid of 100 points we find that
for an accretion rate of @xmath M @xmath yr @xmath (which is roughly the
Eddington rate of accretion for a 1.4 neutron star) the maximum
time-interval allowable by the Courant condition is @xmath years. This
of course places a severe constraint on computational resources in terms
of run-time.

In equation [ 5.16 ] above, the convective and the diffusive terms
dominate the evolution in different density ranges. To illustrate this
fact, similar to the diffusive time-scale defined in equation [ 5.10 ],
we define a convective time-scale :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the system size as before. In figure [ 5.1 ] we plot the
relative magnitude of these two time-scales defined by the coefficient,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

This plot is made for an assumed accretion rate of @xmath M @xmath yr
@xmath . It is clear from this figure that both in the low density
regions near the surface and in the deep high density regions it is the
diffusive term that is more important. Only in the intermediate regions
the effect of convection becomes significant.

### 5.4 results and discussions

The results are summarized in a series of figures.

Figure [ 5.2 ] shows the distribution of the @xmath -function and figure
[ 5.3 ] the toroidal currents, @xmath , assumed at the starting point of
the field evolution.

Field decay due to pure diffusion in an isolated neutron star is shown
in figures [ 5.4 ] and [ 5.6 ]. In computing this, neutron star cooling
according to the results of van Riper \citeyear ripe91a,ripe91b
(reproduced here in figure [ 5.5 ]) for normal matter in 1.4 M @xmath
Friedman & Pandharipande \citeyear frie81 model star has been used. It
is to be noted that our adopted equation of state, namely, that of
\citeN wiri88 is an updated version of Friedman & Pandharipande equation
of state with only minor differences. Among the published cooling curves
this is the nearest to that appropriate to our adopted neutron star
model. Computations similar to the one displayed in figures [ 5.4 ] and
[ 5.6 ] have been made by \citeN urpn92a and our result matches very
closely with theirs. It is evident from the figure [ 5.6 ] that the net
decay decreases with the increasing density at which the initial current
configuration is centred at. This is expected as the diffusive
time-scales are larger at higher densities owing to larger
conductivities there.

Figure [ 5.7 ] displays the result of the convection due to material
movement alone. We obtain this by setting the conductivity @xmath to an
artificially high value of @xmath s @xmath in our code. It shows the
migration of @xmath -profile to regions of higher density (and
consequent sharpening of the profile). The field at the surface ( @xmath
) remains constant under pure convection according to our assumptions.

Figure [ 5.8 ] shows the results of the combined effects of convection
and diffusion on the @xmath -function, in other words the full evolution
described by equation [ 5.16 ], for a particular value of the accretion
rate.

In section [ 5.2.2 ] we have mentioned that accretion induces
compression of the crustal layers and hence effect a reduction of the
effective length-scale of the current profile. In figures [ 5.4 ], [ 5.7
] and [ 5.8 ] we have seen how the @xmath -profile evolves due to pure
diffusion, pure convection and a combination of both. Here, in figure [
5.9 ] we plot the change of the length-scale of the @xmath -profile with
time in each of the above-mentioned cases. As an estimate of the
effective length-scale of the current distribution we use the width
(defined as the separation between the peak of the distribution and a
point which has 1% of the peak magnitude) of the @xmath -profile. Though
this is but a crude estimate, it nevertheless serves the purpose of
illustrating the qualitative nature of the change of the length-scale.
The curves for pure diffusion and pure convection show monotonous
increase and decrease respectively. Even though the curve for the case
of actual accretion (where both diffusion and convection are present)
the nature is again that of a monotonic increase in length scale similar
to the case of pure diffusion, it rises comparatively slowly initially.
This is due to the fact that the convective compression slows the
diffusive spreading. Of course, in the end the diffusive spreading
becomes faster than the case of pure diffusion due to heating which
lowers the conductivity.

In figure [ 5.10 ] we display the evolution of the surface field for
different values of @xmath , with temperatures obtained from equation [
2.12 ] over its validity range and for three different assumed
temperatures at the highest accretion rate. All the curves in this
figure refer to an initial @xmath -profile that is centred at a density
of @xmath . In figures [ 5.11 ], [ 5.12 ], [ 5.13 ] and [ 5.14 ] we plot
similar curves for different densities at which the initial current
profiles are centred. In figure [ 5.15 ] we display the final surface
field values obtained as a function of the rate of accretion for
different values of initial current concentration densities.

The following features emerge from the behaviour displayed in these
figures:

1.  The general nature of the decay corresponds to an initial rapid
    phase exhibiting a power law behaviour for the most part with an
    index ranging from 0.1 to 0.46 (i.e., @xmath ), followed by a short
    exponential phase and then a freezing, which stabilizes the surface
    field. This stability is the result of the current distribution
    responsible for the field moving to highly conducting parts of the
    star, much of it migrating into the core. According to our adopted
    scenario, the ohmic time scale in the core is much longer than the
    Hubble time and hence the surface field at this stage will
    essentially be stable forever. We refer to this surface field as the
    ‘residual field’ .

2.  The duration of the exponential phase and consequently the value of
    the magnetic field at which freezing occurs is a strong function of
    the accretion rate. The higher the accretion rate the sooner the
    freezing sets in resulting in a higher value of the ‘residual
    field’. This effect can be understood as follows. As explained by
    Bhattacharya \citeyear db95a the decay behaviour turns from a power
    law to an exponential, once the diffused @xmath -distribution
    reaches nearly the bottom of the crust. The transition from there to
    the frozen state happens by further accretion of matter which pushes
    the crustal material into the core. The time required for this final
    transition is of course dependent on the accretion rate and the
    higher the accretion rate the smaller it is. For a rate of accretion
    of @xmath M @xmath /yr, this exponential phase is nearly absent.

3.  The dependence of the decay on the crustal temperature is as
    expected, namely, the decay proceeds faster at a higher temperature.

4.  In figure [ 5.15 ] we have plotted the final ’frozen field’ for
    different rates of accretion corresponding to different densities at
    which the initial current profile is centred at. It is clearly seen
    from this figure that the lower the rate of accretion, the lower is
    the final ‘frozen in’ field.

5.  In figure [ 5.16 ] the evolution of the surface magnetic field as a
    function of total accreted mass has been plotted for different rates
    of accretion. Corresponding to a given accretion rate the crustal
    temperature has been obtained from equation [ 2.12 ]. It is observed
    that the freezing in of the field occurs for larger accreted mass
    for higher rates of accretion. The high accretion rate also ensures
    quicker material transport to higher densities, causing the field
    strength to level off at a higher value. Another important point to
    note here is that unlike what is assumed in heuristic evolutionary
    models [ Taam & van de HeuvelTaam & van de Heuvel1986 , Shibazaki
    et al.Shibazaki et al.1989 , van den Heuvel & Bitzarakivan den
    Heuvel & Bitzaraki1995 ] the amount of field decay is dependent not
    only on the total mass accreted but also on the accretion rate
    itself. Once the accreted mass exceeds @xmath M @xmath , the final
    magnetic field strength is decided only by the rate at which this
    mass was accreted. Whereas figure [ 5.16 ] correspond to an initial
    profile centred at @xmath , in the figures [ 5.17 ], [ 5.18 ], [
    5.19 ] and [ 5.20 ] we plot similar curves for different densities.

6.  In practice a neutron star will often undergo a non-accreting phase
    of considerable duration before accretion can begin on its surface.
    During this initial phase its magnetic field will evolve as in an
    isolated neutron star, namely according to the evolution shown in
    figure [ 5.6 ]. This has important physical consequences for the
    evolution in the accretion phase. The diffusion in the pre-accretion
    phase causes the currents to already penetrate to deeper and denser
    regions of high conductivity. As a result the net decay achieved
    during subsequent accretion is lower. Figure [ 5.21 ] compares the
    evolution of the surface field without and with the pre-accretion
    phase lasting a billion years. It should also be noted that for
    accretion-induced field decay with an effectively isolated
    pre-accretion phase, the impurity concentration plays an important
    role too. Though the actual final field values obtained is lower for
    large @xmath , the decay experienced in the accretion phase is
    significantly less in such cases and the ‘ freezing ’ sets in much
    faster.

7.  As mentioned before, the range of conditions explored by us overlap
    with those in the work of \citeN urpn95, \citeN urpn96, \citeN
    gepp96 and goes beyond. We have performed detailed comparisons of
    our results with theirs in the overlap range. The agreement in
    general is found to be excellent giving us confidence in the
    validity of our approach.

To summarize, we have explored accretion-driven evolution of crustal
magnetic fields over a range of conditions not previously attempted in
the literature. The new behaviour revealed by these computations include
a near exponential decay of the surface field after the initial power
law phase and most importantly an eventual freezing. The ‘residual
field’ corresponding to this frozen state is a function of the accretion
rate and the temperature during the evolution. It is interesting to note
that for near-Eddington accretion rates, applicable to Roche-lobe
overflow phase in real binaries, the ‘residual field’ lies between
@xmath – @xmath of the original value. So, if the neutron star
originally started with a field strength of the order of @xmath G, this
would mean a final post-accretion field strength of @xmath – @xmath G,
exactly as observed in most recycled pulsars. Unfortunately, we have not
been able to treat accretion rates equal to or larger than Eddington in
the present work due to lack of knowledge about the crustal temperatures
at those accretion rates. But judging by the dependence of the behaviour
on accretion rates (see figure 5.15 ]) it appears that even somewhat
higher post-accretion field strengths might be possible under such
conditions. Recycled pulsars with the strongest magnetic fields, namely
PSR 0820+02 and PSR 2303+46 have, according to evolutionary scenarios [
Bhattacharya & van den HeuvelBhattacharya & van den Heuvel1991 ] ,
undergone super-Eddington mass transfers. Their field strengths would
therefore be in agreement with the trend described above.

### 5.5 conclusions

In this chapter we have explored the evolution of the crustal magnetic
field of accreting neutron stars. The combination of enhanced ohmic
diffusion due to crustal heating and the transport of current-carrying
layers to higher densities due to the accreted overburden, causes the
surface field strength to exhibit the following behaviour:

1.  An initial rapid decay (power law behaviour followed by exponential
    behaviour) followed by a leveling off (freezing),

2.  Faster onset of freezing at higher crustal temperatures and at a
    lower final value of the surface field,

3.  Lower final fields for lower rates of accretion for the same net
    amount of accretion,

4.  The longer the duration of the pre-accretion phase the less the
    amount of field decay during the accretion phase, and

5.  The deeper the initial current loops are the higher the final
    surface field.

## Chapter 6 comparison with observations

### 6.1 introduction

In the previous chapter we have discussed a model for the evolution of
the magnetic field in accreting neutron stars, assuming an initial
crustal flux. It has been borne out by our calculations that the model
possesses some essential features required to explain the origin of the
observed low-field pulsars. But in a broader perspective it is also
necessary for a model to explain the present paradigm of the field
evolution in its entirety. The astronomical objects that have so far
been unambiguously identified with neutron stars can be divided into two
distinct classes :

-   the radio pulsars, and

-   the X-ray binaries containing a neutron star.

Interestingly, observations suggest that a class of radio pulsars
descend from X-ray binaries, and neutron stars in X-ray binaries
themselves represent an evolutionary state beyond that of isolated radio
pulsars (see \citeNP db95b, \citeNP db96a, \citeNP heuv95, \citeNP
verb95 and references therein). Therefore the present belief is that
this evolutionary link can be understood within an unified picture of
evolution of their spin as well as the magnetic field. The
spin-evolution of the neutron stars in binary systems have been
investigated following the detailed binary evolution assuming some
simple model for the field evolution (see \citeNP verb95 (1995) and
references therein). In the present work we concentrate on the details
of the evolution of the magnetic field. We apply the model of field
evolution to isolated neutron stars as well as to those that are members
of binaries. Comparison of these results with observations allows us to
test the validity of the field evolution model.

Radio pulsars can be classified into two groups, namely the solitary
pulsars and the binary pulsars. The binary pulsars are again of two
types - the high mass binary pulsars and the low mass binary pulsars,
the reference to the masses being to those of the companions. It has
been suggested by recent statistical analyses that the fields of the
isolated neutron stars do not undergo any significant decay [
RudermanRuderman1991a , RudermanRuderman1991b , RudermanRuderman1991c ,
Bhattacharya & SrinivasanBhattacharya & Srinivasan1991 , Ding, Cheng, &
ChauDing et al.1993 , Jahan Miri & BhattacharyaJahan Miri &
Bhattacharya1994 , Jahan MiriJahan Miri1996 ] . On the other hand almost
all binary pulsars possess field values that are smaller than the
canonical field values observed in isolated pulsars. Usually the high
mass binary pulsars, of which the Hulse-Taylor pulsar is one famous
example, have field strengths in excess of @xmath Gauss, whereas the low
mass binary pulsars include both high-field pulsars and very low-field
objects like the millisecond pulsars. It must be noted here that when we
talk about the solitary pulsars we mean high-field solitary pulsars
without any history of binary association. The millisecond pulsars and
pulsars with obvious or suspected binary history are discussed along
with their binary counterparts for the sake of convenience. The present
belief regarding the evolutionary history of the binary pulsars is that
the high mass binary pulsars come from systems similar to the high mass
X-ray binaries whereas the low mass binaries are the progenies of the
low mass X-ray binaries. In the following table we present this
evolutionary scenario.

  ---------------- ----------------------- ----------------------------- ------------------------------
  systems          solitary pulsars        high mass                     low mass
                   (millisecond pulsars)   binary pulsars                binary pulsars
                   excluded)                                             
  companion                                neutron stars,                low mass stars
                                           massive ( @xmath M @xmath )   low mass ( @xmath M @xmath )
                                           white dwarfs                  white dwarfs
  magnetic field   @xmath Gauss            usually @xmath Gauss          @xmath Gauss
  progenitors                              high mass                     low mass
                                           X-ray binaries                X-ray binaries
  ---------------- ----------------------- ----------------------------- ------------------------------

Even though the millisecond pulsars fall in the broader category of low
mass binary pulsars, we shall mention them separately due to their
unique characteristic features. The rotation powered radio pulsars
separated out into two distinct classes with the discovery of the 1.6 ms
pulsar, PSR 1937+21 [ Backer et al.Backer et al.1982 ] .In accordance
with the extremely small rotation periods ( @xmath ms) of this new
variety they came to be known as Millisecond Pulsars as opposed to the
population of normal pulsars that have longer rotation periods. Loosely,
the term millisecond pulsar refers to the class of pulsars with rotation
periods less than 20 ms. This definition, though somewhat ad-hoc,
actually serves the purpose of classification rather well. In other
words, all the members of the class of millisecond pulsars show
remarkable similarity in several of their characteristic physical
properties (listed below), which also serve to distinguish them from the
rest of the pulsar population.

The characteristic features of the millisecond pulsars could be
summarized as follows.

1.  fast rotation – P 20 ms;

2.  extremely small magnetic fields (three to four orders of magnitude
    smaller than the canonical field values observed in normal pulsars)
    – B @xmath G;

3.  binary association – 90% of the disc population and 50% of the
    Globular Cluster population of the millisecond pulsars have low-mass
    binary companions, with most probable mass of the companion @xmath ,
    in nearly circular orbits;

4.  old age – age determination from the presence in the Globular
    Cluster or from the surface temperature measurements of a white
    dwarf companion (e.g., for PSR 1855+09) indicate a lifetime of
    @xmath years or more [ Hansen & PhinneyHansen & Phinney1997 ] .

It has been shown that a total mass of @xmath is required to be accreted
to achieve millisecond period through accretion induced spin-up. Present
theories of binary evolution predict that the only systems capable of
supporting mass-transfer long enough (about @xmath years at the
Eddington rate of accretion) to allow the neutron stars to accrete
@xmath are the ones with low-mass ( @xmath ) donors (the Low Mass X-ray
Binaries or LMXBs in short). Hence, it is generally believed that the
evolutionary link between a normal radio pulsar and its millisecond
counterpart is through a phase of binary processing in LMXBs. In general
the companion of a binary pulsar is indicative of the system from which
it originated. A pulsar with neutron star or a massive ( @xmath ) white
dwarf companion is understood to have come from a system containing a
massive ( @xmath ) donor. Similarly, a pulsar with a low mass ( @xmath )
white dwarf companion must originate in a low mass X-ray binary. All the
binary millisecond pulsars have low mass companions, indicating their
origin in low-mass systems.

At this stage, it becomes imperative that the models for evolution of
the magnetic field be consistent with the spin-evolution scenario. There
is, as yet, no consensus about the models of field evolution or about
those of the origin and structure of the field. Based on the two
theories of field generation and the corresponding internal structures
(see section [ 3.2 ]) one can broadly classify the models of field
evolution into two categories. The original theory of recycling assumed
a spontaneous ohmic decay of magnetic field with age, which according to
the present evidence, appears unlikely. For a magnetic flux confined to
the core, the model of spindown-induced flux expulsion has been explored
[ Jahan Miri & BhattacharyaJahan Miri & Bhattacharya1994 , Jahan
MiriJahan Miri1996 , Bhattacharya & DattaBhattacharya & Datta1996 ] , We
shall discuss this model in the next chapter.

In this chapter, we confront the field evolution model of chapter [5],
namely that of assuming an initial crustal flux, with observations of
both isolated neutron stars and neutron stars in binary systems. In
particular, we address the question of millisecond pulsar generation
purely from the point of view of the field evolution. Our results are
consistent with the general view that millisecond pulsars come from low
mass x-ray binaries. We also find that the neutron stars processed in
high mass x-ray binaries would retain fairly high field strengths in
conformity with what is observed in high mass radio pulsars.

In section [ 6.3 ] we discuss the nature of field evolution of a neutron
star vis-a-vis the binary evolution of the system which it is a member
of. Section [ 6.4 ] elaborates the computational details. We present our
results in section [ 6.5 ] and the conclusions in section [ 6.6 ].

### 6.2 field evolution in solitary neutron stars

According to modern statistical analyses the isolated neutron stars do
not undergo any significant field reduction over their active pulsar
life time [ Bhattacharya et al.Bhattacharya et al.1992 , Wakatsuki
et al.Wakatsuki et al.1992 , Hartman et al.Hartman et al.1997 ] . In an
isolated neutron star the field decreases due to pure ohmic dissipation
of the current loops in the crust. We have already mentioned that the
diffusive time-scale is dependent on three factors, namely

-   the density at which the initial current loops are located,

-   the impurity content of the crust, and

-   the temperature of the crust.

We shall look at the effect of all these factors and determine the
acceptable ranges for these parameters for which the final field
strengths are within the limits of statistical uncertainty.

An isolated neutron star cools down after its birth chiefly by copious
neutrino emission. It has recently been shown (see Page, 1998 and
references therein for details) that there are lots of uncertainties in
this regard. The data could be made to fit both the ‘standard’ cooling
and the ‘accelerated’ cooling with appropriate assumptions regarding the
state of the stellar interior. Therefore, for the sake of completeness,
we have looked at both the cases - with standard and accelerated
cooling. The actual behaviour of the system is most likely to be
something in between. We have used data from Urpin & van Riper (private
communication) for both standard and accelerated cooling. In figure [
6.1 ] the two cooling curves have been shown for a comparison.

### 6.3 field evolution in neutron stars with binary companions

#### 6.3.1 binary and spin evolution

From the point of view of the interaction between the two stars, the
binaries, in general, go through three distinct phases of evolution as
detailed below.

1.  The Isolated Phase - Though the stars are gravitationally bound,
    there is no mass transfer. Therefore both the spin and the magnetic
    field evolve as they would in an isolated pulsar. The spin undergoes
    a pure dipole slow-down during this phase.

2.  The Wind Phase - The interaction is through the stellar wind of the
    companion which is likely to be in its main-sequence. In this phase
    the interaction of the wind material with the magnetosphere of the
    neutron star proceeds in two distinct sequences. In the early stages
    of the wind phase the magnetospheric interaction brings about a
    spin-down of the neutron star in the following manner. In the
    accretion disc the matter rotates with a Keplerian velocity at every
    point within the disc. When the matter arrives at the magnetospheric
    boundary of the star (determined roughly by the Alfvén radius where
    the magnetic pressure equals the ram pressure of the incoming
    material) the magnetic field starts controlling the material flow
    dynamics. This point onwards the field forces the material to
    co-rotate with the star. If the Keplerian velocity of the incoming
    material is smaller than the co-rotation velocity at the Alfvén
    radius then the material, in being forced to co-rotate with the star
    there, extracts angular momentum from the star thereby slowing it
    down. This material then gets expelled from the magnetosphere which
    has given this situation the name propeller phase . For ‘spin-down
    induced flux expulsion’ models the ‘propeller phase’ is the most
    crucial for the field evolution because it is in this phase that a
    significant flux expulsion is achieved due to a rapid spin-down of
    the star. Once the star has been spun-down sufficiently the
    Keplerian velocity at Alfvén radius becomes larger than the
    co-rotation velocity. In this case the accreting material loses
    angular momentum as it reaches Alfvén radius, spinning the star up.
    This material eventually reaches the polar cap of the star by moving
    along the field lines and gets deposited there. Therefore, this is
    the phase in which there is actual mass accretion by the star. An
    equilibrium is reached when the co-rotation speed equals the
    Keplerian speed at the magnetospheric boundary, i.e, at the Alfvén
    radius. This equilibrium condition then determines the maximum
    spin-up for a given rate of accretion and a given strength of the
    surface field, through the following relation [ Alpar et al.Alpar
    et al.1982 , Chen & RudermanChen & Ruderman1993 ]

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (6.1)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where @xmath is the surface field in @xmath Gauss, @xmath is the
    mass of the star, is the rate of accretion and @xmath is the radius
    of the star in units of 10 km. Therefore, the wind phase has two
    distinct sub-phases, namely - the propeller phase and the phase of
    actual wind accretion. It must be noted here that the duration of
    these two sub-phases vary widely from system to system and the phase
    of actual wind accretion may not at all be realized in some cases.
    For models based on an initial crustal field configuration, the
    phase of wind accretion and the subsequent phase of Roche contact
    play the all-important role.

3.  The Roche-contact Phase - When the companion of the neutron star
    fills its Roche-lobe a phase of heavy mass transfer ( @xmath )
    ensues. Though short-lived in case of HMXBs ( @xmath years), this
    phase can last as long as @xmath years for LMXBs. Consequently, this
    phase is very important for field evolution in LMXBs.

The nature of the binary evolution is well studied in the case of the
LMXBs where the mass transfer proceeds in a controlled manner. The same
is true for the wind phase in the HMXBs. But the exact nature of mass
transfer in the common-envelope phase, due to Roche-lobe overflow, has
not been studied in any detail yet. Still, due to the short-lived nature
this phase does not affect the field evolution significantly and
therefore the lack of precise knowledge does not affect our calculations
much. On the other hand, not much attention has been paid to the
evolution of the intermediate systems with companion masses in the range
@xmath 2 - 5 M @xmath . They are most likely to have an intermediate
nature in that the wind phase is prolonged and the accretion rates are
similar to those in the wind phase of low-mass systems, whereas, the
Roche-contact phase is perhaps similar to that in HMXBs. In either of
the phases it would be difficult to observe these systems, owing to the
low luminosity in the wind phase and due to the short-lived nature of
the Roche-contact phase. Moreover, in HMXBs and intermediate mass
binaries Roche-contact would usually lead to a common-envelope
evolution. In this phase the neutron star is engulfed by the common
envelope and the X-ray flux is hidden from the view. So far no
intermediate-mass system has been observed in the X-ray phase. As for
the pulsars processed in them, there are perhaps three examples PSR
B0655+64, PSR J2145-0750 and PSR J1022+1001 [ Camilo et al.Camilo
et al.1996 ] . But because of the uncertainties surrounding their mass
transfer history we exclude this kind of binaries from the present
discussion.

### 6.4 computations

Using the methodology developed in chapter [ 5 ] we solve equation [
5.16 ] following the mass-transfer history on neutron stars n high-mass
and low-mass binary systems. For the case of isolated pulsars we solve
the following equation,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

For all of the above cases we shall assume an initial crustal current
configuration (the kind that has been used in chapter [ 5 ]).

#### 6.4.1 binary parameters

The binary evolution parameters for the LMXBs and the HMXBs used by us
are as follows [ VerbuntVerbunt1990 , Bhattacharya & van den
HeuvelBhattacharya & van den Heuvel1991 , van den Heuvel & Bitzarakivan
den Heuvel & Bitzaraki1995 , King et al.King et al.1995 ] -

1.  Low Mass X-ray Binaries -

    1.  Isolated phase - Though binaries with narrow orbits may not have
        too-long-lived a phase of completely detached evolution, long
        period binaries (like the progenitor system of PSR 0820+02 with
        @xmath 250 day orbital period \citeNP verb95) may spend longer
        than @xmath years before contact is established. In general, the
        isolated phase lasts between @xmath years.

    2.  Wind phase - This phase again lasts for about @xmath years with
        attendant rates of accretion ranging from about @xmath M @xmath
        yr @xmath to @xmath M @xmath yr @xmath .

    3.  Roche-contact phase - In this phase, the mass transfer rate
        could be as high as the Eddington rate ( @xmath M @xmath yr
        @xmath for a 1.4 neutron star), lasting for @xmath years. But
        there has been recent indications that the low-mass binaries may
        even spend @xmath years in the Roche-contact phase with a
        sub-Eddington accretion rate [ Hansen & PhinneyHansen &
        Phinney1997 ] . For wide binaries, however, the contact phase
        may last as little as @xmath years. We have investigated the
        cases with accretion rates of @xmath M @xmath yr @xmath and
        @xmath M @xmath yr @xmath . With a higher accretion rate the
        material movement is faster and therefore the ‘freezing-in’
        takes place earlier (see figure [ 5.10 ]. Moreover, the equation
        [ 2.12 ], used by us to find the crustal temperature for a given
        rate of accretion, gives temperatures that are too high for
        accretion rates above @xmath M @xmath yr @xmath . The neutrino
        cooling is likely to prevent the temperature from reaching such
        large values and therefore for high rates of accretion probably
        the crustal temperature would reach a maximum saturation value.
        In our calculations we assume that the temperature that could be
        attained by accretion-induced heating is @xmath K for an
        accretion rate of @xmath M @xmath yr @xmath . For reasons noted
        in the previous chapter we are unable to make detailed
        calculations for @xmath M @xmath yr @xmath .

2.  High Mass X-ray Binaries -

    1.  Isolated phase - This phase is short in binaries with a massive
        companion and may last as little as ten thousand years.

    2.  Wind phase - This phase is also relatively short (compared to
        the low-mass systems), lasting not more than @xmath years
        (equivalent to the main-sequence life time of the massive star),
        with accretion rates ranging from @xmath M @xmath yr @xmath to
        @xmath M @xmath yr @xmath .

    3.  Roche-contact phase - A rapid phase of Roche-lobe overflow
        follows the wind phase. The rate of mass shedding by the
        companion could be as high as one tenth of a solar mass per
        year, of which a tiny fraction is actually accreted by the
        neutron star (the maximum rate of acceptance being presumably
        equal to the Eddington rate). The duration of this phase is
        @xmath years.

We must mention here about the Globular Cluster binaries though we have
not performed any explicit calculations for such systems. The duration
and the rates of mass accretion vary widely depending on how the mass
transfer phase ends in such binaries. The mass transfer may end through
binary disruption, by the neutron star spiraling in or through a slow
turn off.

#### 6.4.2 thermal behaviour

The thermal behaviour of isolated pulsars and of those accreting
material from their binary companions differs from each other
significantly (for details see section[ 2.3 ]. Since crustal temperature
is one of the major factors controlling field evolution we need to
consider the thermal behaviour with some care. For a neutron star that
is a member of a binary, the thermal behaviour will be similar to that
of an isolated neutron star before the advent of actual mass transfer.
Therefore through the isolated and the propeller phase the neutron star
cools like an isolated one. In particular, in the low-mass systems the
duration of the isolated phase and the propeller phase could be quite
long and therefore is rather important in affecting the subsequent
evolution of the surface field. We have shown in the previous chapter
that a phase of field evolution in the isolated phase modifies the
subsequent evolution considerably. Therefore, it is necessary to take
into account the proper cooling history of the neutron star prior to the
establishment of contact with its binary companion. As mentioned before,
we investigate both the cases - with standard and accelerated cooling.
Of course, the isolated phase itself is of importance only in case of an
initial crustal field configuration, the topic of our discussion in the
present chapter. For initial currents supported in the superconducting
core, the crustal physics of the star is mostly irrelevant as the field
has not yet been expelled to the crust. When, in the course of binary
evolution, the neutron star actually starts to accrete mass - the
thermal behaviour changes from that characteristic of an isolated phase.
The crustal temperature then settles down to a steady value determined
by the accretion rate as given in equation [ 2.12 ].

#### 6.4.3 crustal physics

We have seen in chapter [ 5 ] that the field evolution stops as the
field freezes in when about 10% of the original crustal mass is
accreted. This happens due to the fact that by then the current loops
reach the regions of extremely high electrical conductivity. The mass of
the crust of a 1.4 neutron star, with our adopted equation of state, is
@xmath . Therefore, in the present investigation we stop our
evolutionary code when @xmath is accreted. From our results (presented
in section [ 6.5 ]) it is evident that the field evidently shows signs
of ‘freezing in’ when we stop our calculation. Of course, as we have
mentioned earlier, to achieve millisecond period about 0.1 solar mass
requires to be accreted. But once the field attains its ‘frozen-in’
value subsequent accretion does not affect it in any way. Therefore, the
final spin-period is determined by this value of the surface field in
accordance with equation [ 6.1 ].

### 6.5 results and discussions

#### 6.5.1 solitary neutron stars

Figure [ 6.2 ] shows the evolution of the surface field in an isolated
neutron star due to pure ohmic decay, for different densities at which
the initial current distribution is concentrated. We have seen it before
too, that the lower the density of current concentration the more rapid
is the decay of the field. This figure refers to a situation where the
impurity strength has been assumed to be zero. In figure [ 6.3 ] we plot
similar curves for the evolution of the surface field with an assumed
@xmath = 0.05. In this case the final field values are too small to be
consistent with the indication from the statistical analyses. We find
that the maximum value of @xmath that can be allowed is about 0.01 if
allow for a maximum decay by two orders of magnitude within solitary
pulsar active lifetime. In figures [ 6.4 ] and [ 6.5 ] we plot similar
curves assuming a fast cooling process for the thermal behaviour of the
star. It is seen that the decay is evidently much less than in the case
of the standard cooling. But even in this case the maximum @xmath value
permissible is about 0.05. This we shall see later that is in
contradiction with the requirements of a spin-down induced flux
expulsion model.

#### 6.5.2 high mass binaries

Figures [ 6.6 ] to [ 6.15 ] show the evolution of the surface field in
the HMXBs; for different values of the density at which the initial
current profile is centred at. Figures [ 6.6 ] to [ 6.10 ] correspond to
computations with standard cooling in the isolated phase, whereas
figures [ 6.11 ] to [ 6.15 ] correspond to calculations with an
accelerated cooling in the isolated phase. For all of these cases we
have assumed a Roche-contact phase lasting for @xmath years with an
uniform rate of accretion of @xmath M @xmath yr @xmath . Since the
Roche-contact phase is extremely short-lived, the actual field decay
takes place in the wind phase. In fact, the decay attained in the
Roche-contact phase is insignificant and is not quite visible in figures
[ 6.6 ] to [ 6.15 ]. In figure [ 6.16 ] we show an expanded version of
figure [ 6.6 ] highlighting this final phase.

From these figures it is evident that if the initial current
distribution is located at high densities the objects from high-mass
systems will retain fairly large final fields. Even for low density
current distributions, if the duration of the wind phase is not too long
- again high-field objects are produced. We expect these objects to show
up as recycled pulsars with relatively high fields and long periods like
PSR B1913+16 or PSR B1534+12. On the other hand, if the wind phase lasts
for about @xmath years, it is possible to obtain a significant field
decay for higher rates of accretion in that phase. But as the total mass
and hence the total angular momentum accreted is not sufficient to spin
the star up to very short periods, these systems probably would not
produce millisecond pulsars. In other words these so-called ‘recycled’
pulsars would have small magnetic fields with relatively long
spin-periods and therefore may not at all be active as pulsars. We make
an estimate of the actual spin-up for objects processed in high-mass
systems to check this fact.

The spin-up of a neutron star, in a binary system, is caused by the
angular momentum brought in by the accreted matter. In magnetospheric
accretion matter accretes with angular momentum specific to the Alfvén
radius. Therefore, the total angular momentum brought in by accretion is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the total mass accreted. @xmath and @xmath are the
Alfvén radius and Keplerian velocity at that radius given by equations [
4.9 ] and [ 4.5 ]. The final period of the neutron star then is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the moment of inertia of the neutron star. In figure [
6.18 ] we have indicated the possible location of the ‘recycled’ pulsars
originating in HMXBs. We find that for sufficiently low field strengths
( @xmath Gauss) the recycled pulsars indeed will be beyond the death
line. And active pulsars with slightly higher fields will lie very close
to the death line. Comparing this figure with the field-period diagram
of the observed pulsars (figure [ 6.17 ]) one does find pulsars like PSR
0655+64 to fall in this category. The cases of high-field pulsars well
above death line are also quite evident from this figure.

It should also be noted here that even though the nature of field
evolution is very different in the isolated phase for standard and
accelerated cooling, the final surface field values at the end of the
wind phase are not very different. This is due to the fact that the
nature of the field evolution is significantly influenced by previous
history. We have already seen in chapter [5] (see figure [ 5.21 ]) that
subsequent decay is slowed down in a system with a history of prior
field decay than in systems without any. The decay in the isolated phase
is less for accelerated cooling, but in the subsequent wind accretion
phase the field decays more rapidly in such systems than in those
starting with standard cooling. We shall see a more dramatic
manifestation of this fact in LMXBs where the duration of the isolated
phase is much longer.

#### 6.5.3 low mass binaries

Figures [ 6.19 ] to [ 6.30 ] show the evolution of the surface field in
LMXBs. In figures [ 6.19 ] and [ 6.20 ] we plot the complete evolution
of the surface field for two values of the accretion rate in the wind
phase and five values of the density at which currents are initially
concentrated, assuming standard cooling in the isolated phase. But in
these figures, the wind and Roche-contact phases are not clearly
distinguishable. Therefore we have plotted the expanded versions of
these figures to highlight the individual phases. Figures [ 6.21 ] and [
6.22 ] are for the wind-phase whereas figures [ 6.23 ] and [ 6.24 ] are
for the Roche-contact phase corresponding to those plots. In figures [
6.27 ] to [ 6.30 ] we plot the corresponding figures with an accelerated
cooling in the isolated phase.

It is seen from these figures that the surface field drops by half to
one order of magnitude in the wind phase of the binary evolution. When
the system is in contact through Roche-lobe overflow the field decay
depends very much on the rate of accretion. A difference in the
accretion rate in this phase shows up as a difference in the final value
of the surface field, which freezes at a higher value for higher rates
of accretion. The total decay in the Roche-contact phase may be as large
as two to three orders of magnitude with respect to the magnitude of the
field at the end of the wind phase.

We have mentioned before that the phase of wind accretion may not be
realized in some of the cases at all. In figures [ 6.31 ] to [ 6.34 ] we
have plotted the evolution of the surface field for such cases, both for
the standard and the accelerated cooling. We find that the final field
strengths achieved without a phase of wind accretion is not very
different from the cases where such a phase does exist. This again is
indicative of the fact that a prior phase of field decay slows down the
decay in the subsequent phase. And therefore the final result from both
the cases become similar.

There are several interesting points to note here. Figures [ 6.23 ], [
6.24 ],[ 6.29 ], and [ 6.30 ] shows that for higher values of accretion
rate in the Roche-contact phase the final field values are higher. We
have not explored the case of accretion with an Eddington rate in this
phase. From the trends observed in our calculation it is evident that
with such high rate of accretion the final field value may remain fairly
large. Under such circumstances it will be possible to have ‘recycled’
pulsars of high surface magnetic field (and therefore long spin-period)
from low mass binaries and pulsars like PSR 0820+02 will fit in with the
general scenario quite well. Then, of course, we do find significant
amount of field decay with lower rates of accretion in the Roche-contact
phase. Such low surface fields combined with the provision of maximal
spin-up would then produce millisecond pulsars.

Figures [ 6.6 ] to [ 6.30 ] then indicate that the model of field
evolution assuming an initial crustal field configuration is quite
consistent with the present scenario of field evolution. The LMXBs will
produce high-field, long-period pulsars in addition to the expected crop
of millisecond pulsars. Whereas the only kind of recycled pulsars that
are expected from the HMXBs would be of the relatively high-field,
long-period variety.

In the course of our investigations in this chapter we have seen that
there is a positive correlation between the rate of accretion with that
of the final field strength, namely, the higher the rate of accretion
the higher is the final field. There has already been a mention of such
a correlation in connection with the Z and Atoll sources [ Hasinger &
van der KlisHasinger & van der Klis1989 ] . It was suggested that the
difference between these two classes of sources in regard to their
fluctuation spectra is not only due to a difference in the accretion
rate but also due to a difference in the magnetic field. And there has
been indication from the study of the radiation spectra of these sources
that the accretion rate and the magnetic field strength are positively
correlated. Recently, \citeN lamb98 on the basis of LMXB spectra and
\citeN whit97 on the basis of the properties of the kilohertz QPOs have
indicated the existence of such a correlation. Consider figure [ 6.35 ]
- the top and the middle panels are taken from \citeN bitz95 and the
bottom panel is made using the data from \citeN verb95. The middle panel
shows the variation of the magnetic field with the orbital period for
some of the low mass binary pulsars whereas the bottom panel shows the
rate of mass accretion with the orbital period in low-mass X-ray binary
systems. For longer periods the surface field increases with period. In
the bottom panel the rate of accretion shows a similar increase with the
orbital period. Therefore we see that for longer orbital periods higher
rates of accretion and higher values of surface field are positively
correlated. This is another observational indication that for higher
rates of accretion the magnetic field strengths tend to be higher.

### 6.6 conclusions

In this chapter, we have looked at one of the model of magnetic field
evolution assuming an initial crustal field configuration to check the
consistency with the overall scenario of field evolution for isolated as
well as binary pulsars. We find that the model can explain almost all
the features that have been observed to date. And our conclusions can be
summarized as follows :

-   for this model to be consistent with the statistical analyses
    performed on the isolated pulsars at the most a maximum value of
    0.05 for the impurity strength can be allowed;

-   HMXBs produce high-field long period pulsars provided the duration
    of the wind accretion phase is short or the initial current
    distribution is located at higher densities;

-   Relatively low-field ( @xmath Gauss) objects near death-line
    (low-luminosity pulsars) are also predicted from HMXBs;

-   LMXBs will produce both high-field long period pulsars as well as
    low-field short period pulsars inclusive of millisecond pulsars in
    the later variety; and

-   a positive correlation between the rate of accretion and the final
    field strength is indicated that is supported by observational
    evidence.

## Chapter 7 spin-down induced flux expulsion and its consequences

### 7.1 introduction

Almost all models of field evolution depend on the mechanism of ohmic
decay of the underlying current loops for a permanent decrease in the
field strength. It has been mentioned earlier (chapters [ 3 ] and [ 5 ])
that such ohmic dissipation is possible only if the current loops are
situated in the crust where the electrical conductivity is finite. Any
flux that may reside in the superconducting core of the star would
remain unchanged forever unless this flux is brought out to the crust.

Models that assume an initial core-field configuration, therefore,
require a phase of flux expulsion from the core. This expelled flux then
undergoes ohmic dissipation in the crust decreasing the surface field
strength. One such model uses the spin-evolution to achieve this - that
of the ‘spin-down induced flux expulsion’ [ SrinivasanSrinivasan1989 ,
Srinivasan et al.Srinivasan et al.1990 ] . The core of the neutron star
is believed to contain two superfluids - the neutral neutron superfluid
and the charged proton superconductor. Whereas the rotation of the star
is supported by creation of vortices in the neutron superfluid, the
magnetic flux is sustained by Abrikosov fluxoids in the proton
superconductor [ Bhattacharya & SrinivasanBhattacharya & Srinivasan1995
] . Spinning down of the star requires a decrease in the number of
vortices in the superfluid core. Therefore as a result of spin-down the
vortices move out towards the core-crust boundary of the star. An
inter-pinning between the vortices and the magnetic fluxoids make the
fluxoids move outwards too, reducing their number in the core. A
decrease in the number of fluxoids in the core reduces the field
strength there. The nature of such flux expulsion as a result of
spin-evolution has been investigated in detail for both isolated pulsars
(undergoing pure dipole spin-down) and for the neutron stars that are
members of binaries (undergoing major spin-down in the ‘propeller
phase’) [ Ding, Cheng, & ChauDing et al.1993 , Jahan Miri &
BhattacharyaJahan Miri & Bhattacharya1994 , Jahan MiriJahan Miri1996 ] .

In this chapter we look at the ohmic decay of such expelled field in the
crust of an isolated as well as that of an accreting neutron star. Some
of the earlier investigations in this direction assumed an uniform ohmic
decay time-scale in the crust irrespective of the accretion rate [ Jahan
Miri & BhattacharyaJahan Miri & Bhattacharya1994 , Jahan MiriJahan
Miri1996 ] . The only detailed work in this context has been by \citeN
bhat96 where they incorporated the crustal micro-physics into their
calculation for the evolution of the expelled field. However this work
did not include the material movement that takes place in the crust as a
result of accretion. In the present work we incorporate the material
movement too and look at the evolution of an expelled field in the crust
of an accreting neutron star using the methodology developed in chapter
[ 5 ].

In the previous chapter we have discussed the overall scenario for the
evolution of the neutron star magnetic field - encompassing both
isolated neutron stars and those that are members of binary systems. In
this chapter we investigate the consequences of the model of ‘spin-down
induced flux expulsion’ in the above mentioned systems. We try to judge
whether this model, too, is consistent with the overall field scenario
and under what conditions. In section [ 7.2 ] we shall discuss the
results of our computations and conclude in section [ 7.3 ].

### 7.2 results and discussions

Using the methodology developed in chapter [ 5 ] we solve the equation [
5.16 ] for an initial flux just expelled at the core-crust boundary due
to spin-down. Such an expelled flux is deposited at the bottom of the
crust and we start our calculation with such a field configuration.
Figure [ 7.1 ] shows the distribution of the @xmath -function and figure
[ 7.2 ] the toroidal currents, @xmath , assumed at the starting point of
our evolution.

#### 7.2.1 ohmic decay in isolated pulsars

The cause of flux expulsion is the spinning down of the pulsar.
Therefore, for isolated pulsars too, experiencing a pure dipole
slow-down, there would be some flux expulsion. The extent of such flux
expulsion has been worked out by \citeN miri96 and it has been shown
there that the flux expulsion is most effective for pulsars with large
values of magnetic field strength. Before discussing the field evolution
in neutron stars in binary systems, we first look at the ohmic decay of
such an expelled field in isolated pulsars. We consider the isolated
neutron star to undergo standard cooling, in order to find the maximum
extent of field reduction in this case. But by the time significant
flux-expulsion is achieved, the crustal temperature goes down to very
low values for an isolated neutron star. In such a situation the
conductivity would be mainly determined by the scattering of the
conduction electrons by the impurities. To see the effect of that we
have considered here several values of impurity strength @xmath (see
section [ 2.4 ] for details).

In figures [ 7.3 ] and [ 7.4 ] we have plotted the time evolution of the
@xmath -profile for two values of the impurity strength. In figure [ 7.5
] the corresponding evolution of the surface fields for five values of
the impurity strength are plotted. It is seen very clearly that the
surface field actually increases when the expelled flux diffuses
outwards before finally decaying down to smaller values. It is to be
noted that even for a very large value of the impurity strength ( @xmath
= 0.4) the surface field shows significant decay only over a time-scale
of @xmath years. The active lifetime of an isolated radio pulsar is
@xmath years. Therefore, an isolated radio pulsar would experience
little field decay over its active lifetime, consistent with the
indications from statistical analyses. So we conclude that with an
expelled flux there is provision for large values of @xmath to exist in
the crust of the neutron star. In fact, we shall see later that in this
model large @xmath is a necessary requirement for millisecond pulsar
generation.

#### 7.2.2 field evolution with accretion

Before looking into the nature of field evolution in various binary
systems, we first investigate the evolution of the surface field under
accretion, assuming the @xmath -profile plotted in figure [ 7.1 ] as the
initial condition. In figure [ 7.6 ] we plot the evolution of the
surface field for different values of the accretion rate and in figure [
7.7 ] we plot the evolution for different values of the impurity
strength. We find that the field strengths go down by about only one and
a half order of magnitude even for a fairly large value of the impurity
strength. Therefore, even higher values of impurity strength will be
required for a larger reduction in the field strength. We shall see
later that for certain cases the required impurity strength is much
larger than that considered by us here (we have considered a maximum
@xmath value of 0.4) to achieve millisecond pulsar field values. The
characteristic features of field evolution are then as follows.

1.  An initial rapid decay (neglecting the early increase) is followed
    by a slow down and an eventual freezing .

2.  The onset of ‘freezing’ is faster with higher rates of accretion,
    i.e., at higher values of crustal temperature.

3.  Lower final ‘frozen’ fields are achieved for lower rates of
    accretion.

4.  To achieve a significant reduction in the field strength, very large
    values of the impurity strength are required.

It is clear from these features that the general nature of field
evolution in the case of an expelled flux is qualitatively similar to
that in the case of an initial crustal flux. This indicates that the
behaviour of the field evolution in different kinds of binaries will
again be similar to what we have found in the case of an initial crustal
flux, discussed in chapter [6].

#### 7.2.3 field evolution in binaries

In section [ 6.3 ] we have outlined the three phase of binary evolution,
namely - the isolated, the wind and the Roche-contact phase. In the wind
phase there are two distinct possibilities of interaction between the
neutron star and its main sequence companion. If the system is in the
‘propeller phase’ then there is no mass accretion. But the importance of
this phase is that the star rapidly slows down to very long periods and
as a result a significant flux-expulsion is achieved. From the point of
view of flux expulsion, therefore, we assume the flux to be completely
contained within the superconducting core (neglecting the small
flux-expulsion caused by the dipole spin-down in the isolated phase)
prior to this phase. Therefore, the ohmic decay of this flux will take
place only after this phase is over - that is in the phase of
wind-accretion and most-importantly in the phase of Roche-contact. It
has already been noted that, in case of low mass X-ray binaries, it is
not very clear as to how long the phase of wind-accretion lasts or
whether such a phase is at all realized after the ‘propeller phase’ is
over. Therefore, in our calculations we have considered cases with and
without a phase of wind accretion, as before.

##### 7.2.3.1 high mass binaries

Figures [ 7.8 ] and [ 7.9 ] show the evolution of the surface field in
high mass X-ray binaries for different values of the impurity strength
in the crust. The parameters for the high mass X-ray binary evolution
are as before. The surface field shows a clear initial increase followed
by a sharp decay. The decay in the Roche-contact phase is very small and
is almost invisible in the above-mentioned plots. In figure [ 7.10 ] we
have expanded the Roche-phase corresponding to the figure [ 7.8 ] to
highlight this phase. For the impurity strengths considered by us, the
field decreases by about an order of magnitude.

##### 7.2.3.2 low mass binaries

Figures [ 7.11 ] and [ 7.12 ] show the evolution of the surface field in
the low mass X-ray binaries; for different values of the impurity
concentration in the crust. The two figures correspond to two different
values of accretion rate in the wind phase. It should be noted that this
difference in the wind accretion rate does not manifest itself in either
the nature of the field evolution or the final field strengths. However,
a difference in the accretion rate in the Roche-contact phase shows up
very clearly in figures [ 7.13 ] and [ 7.14 ] where the Roche-contact
phases, corresponding to the figures [ 7.11 ] and [ 7.12 ], have been
expanded. Comparing the different curves (for different values of the
impurity parameter) we see that a large value of impurity strength gives
rise to a rapid decay and therefore a low value of the final surface
field.

In figure [ 7.15 ] we have plotted the evolution of the surface field
assuming the wind accretion phase to be absent. Once again we find that
for higher rates of accretion higher final field values are obtained. It
should be noted here that the final field values obtained now are only
about an order and a half of magnitude lower than the original surface
field strengths. Even though the impurity strengths assumed now are much
higher than those assumed when we investigated the field evolution in
low mass X-ray binaries with a phase of wind-accretion. In absence of a
prior phase of wind accretion the flux does not have enough time to
diffuse out to low density regions when the Roche-contact is
established. Therefore here the role of accretion, in the Roche-contact
phase, is mainly to push the currents in rather than to enhance ohmic
decay rate. Evidently, much larger impurity strength is required to be
assumed in order that the final field values could be reduced by three
to four orders of magnitude. Unfortunately, due to numerical
instabilities it becomes very difficult to explore situations with even
higher values of @xmath . But the above-mentioned figure clearly
establishes a trend as to how the final field values behave with @xmath
and it is evident that we need @xmath values much larger than those
considered here to get down to millisecond pulsar field strengths.

The most important point to note here is the fact that again, similar to
an initial crustal field configuration, the amount of field decay is
much larger than that achieved in the case of high mass X-ray binaries.
Although, in low mass X-ray binaries with higher values of impurity
strength the surface field does go down by three to four orders of
magnitude from its original value, the final field strength could remain
fairly large if the impurity strength is small. But if the
wind-accretion phase is absent in these systems then to achieve large
amount of reduction in the field strengths much larger value of the
impurity strength will be required. Therefore, the ‘spin-down induced
flux expulsion model’ will be consistent with the overall scenario of
field evolution and in particular millisecond pulsars can be produced in
low mass X-ray binaries provided the impurity strength in the crust of
the neutron stars is assumed to be extremely large.

### 7.3 conclusions

In this chapter we have investigated the consequences of ‘spin-down
induced flux expulsion’. So far, the general nature of field evolution
seem to fit the overall scenario. The nature of field evolution is quite
similar to that in case of a purely crustal model of field evolution
though the details differ. Most significantly, this model has the
requirement of large values of the impurity strength @xmath in direct
contrast to the crustal model. To summarize then :

-   The field in isolated neutron stars do not undergo any significant
    decay, over the active lifetime of the pulsar, conforming with the
    statistical analyses.

-   The field values in the high mass X-ray binaries can reaming fairly
    large for a moderate range of impurity strength.

-   A reduction of three to four orders of magnitude in the field
    strength can be achieved in the low mass X-ray binaries provided the
    impurity strength is as large as 0.5.

-   If the wind accretion phase is absent then to achieve millisecond
    pulsar field values, impurity strength in excess of unity is
    required.

## Chapter 8 conclusions

In this final chapter we shall summarize the main conclusions of our
investigations. For our work we have drawn upon many results which are
not entirely free of uncertainties. We shall also mention here such
uncertainties that are likely to affect our results. And lastly we shall
indicate the future directions of work in this context.

1.   Generic Features of Field Evolution in the Crust – In this thesis
    we have mainly investigated two models of field evolution that of an
    initial crustal current supporting the field and the model of
    spin-down induced flux expulsion. The qualitative features of field
    evolution are same for both the models. We have also looked at the
    effect of diamagnetic screening in an accreting neutron star. The
    nature of this screening is such that an assumption regarding a
    particular model of field configuration is unnecessary and the
    results of this investigation are model-independent. Therefore, we
    have the following general conclusions regarding the nature of field
    evolution in the crust.

    -   Pure Ohmic Decay in Isolated Neutron Stars :

        1.  A slow cooling of the star gives rise to a fast decay and
            consequent low final field. The opposite happens in case of
            an accelerated cooling.

        2.  An initial crustal current distribution concentrated at
            lower densities again gives rise to faster decay and low
            final surface field. Whereas if the current is located at
            higher densities the decay is slow resulting in a higher
            final surface field.

        3.  A large value of impurity strength implies a rapid decay and
            low final field. If the crust behaves more like a pure
            crystal the decay slows down considerably.

    -   Accretion-Induced Field Decay in Accreting Neutron Stars :

        1.  In an accreting neutron star the field undergoes an initial
            rapid decay, followed by slow down and an eventual freezing
            .

        2.  A positive correlation between the rate of accretion and the
            final field strength is observed, giving rise to higher
            final saturation field strengths for higher rates of
            accretion.

        3.  An expected screening of the surface field by the
            diamagnetic accreting material is rendered ineffective by
            the interchange instabilities in the liquid surface layers
            of the star.

2.   Nature of Field and Spin Evolution in Real Systems – In the next
    phase of our investigation we have applied the models of field
    evolution to real systems - isolated neutron stars as well as to
    those in binaries. The paradigm of field evolution that have emerged
    out of various observations, statistical analyses and theoretical
    expectations have been summarized in the following flow-diagram. The
    arrows indicate the expected evolutionary link between X-ray
    binaries and binary radio pulsars. The following table summarizes
    the results of our investigations.

      ------------------------------------- ------------------------- ------------------------------------
      Evolution of a Purely Crustal Field                             
      Our Results                                                     
      system                                final field and period    comment
      isolated                              high field, long period   no significant field decay
      radio pulsars                                                   in @xmath years
      HMXB                                  high field, long period   high-mass binary pulsars
                                                                      and solitary counterparts
                                            low field, long period    not active as pulsars
      LMXB                                  high field, long period   high field low-mass binary pulsars
                                                                      and solitary counterparts
                                            low field, short period   low field low-mass binary pulsars
                                                                      and solitary counterparts,
                                                                      millisecond pulsars
      ------------------------------------- ------------------------- ------------------------------------

    It is evident that the results obtained from the field evolution
    models agree well with the observational paradigm. The nature of
    field evolution is similar for the model of spin-down induced flux
    expulsion. Though there is one major difference. To produce
    millisecond pulsars in LMXBs in spin-down induced flux expulsion
    model very large values of impurities are required. This makes the
    surface field go down to very low values in @xmath years in isolated
    pulsars in contrast to a purely crustal model.

3.   Ranges of Physical Parameters – In the following table we summarize
    the constraints on various physical parameters in the field
    evolution models placed by the requirement to match observed
    properties in a variety of systems. The parameters discussed here
    are - the density at which the initial crustal current distribution
    is located ( @xmath ), the impurity strength in the crust ( @xmath
    ), the duration of wind-accretion phase in different binary systems
    and the rate of accretion in the Roche-contact phase for LMXBs.

      ------------------------------------ --------- -------------- -------------------- ---------------------
      Constraints on Physical Parameters                                                 
      parameter                            model     system         requirement          parameter range
      @xmath                               crustal   hmxb           high field           high @xmath
      @xmath                               crustal   isolated       no field decay       @xmath for
                                                     radio pulsar   over active          standard cooling,
                                                                    pulsar life-time     @xmath for
                                                                                         accelerated cooling
                                           core      LMXB           millisecond pulsar   @xmath with
                                                                    generation           wind accretion,
                                                                                         @xmath without
                                                                                         wind accretion
      duration of                          crustal   HMXB           high field           short
      wind accretion                                                                     
      @xmath in                            crustal   LMXB           high field           Eddington rate
      Roche-phase                                                                        
      ------------------------------------ --------- -------------- -------------------- ---------------------

4.   Uncertainties – The results and conclusions stated above suffer
    from a number of uncertainties regarding the micro-physics of the
    neutron star, as listed below.

    -   Thermal Behaviour -

        1.  Isolated Phase - The present date can be made to fit
            scenarios with both a slow or an accelerated cooling. Hence
            it is not clear which is the correct cooling behaviour of an
            isolated neutron star.

        2.  Accreting Phase - the crustal temperature corresponding to a
            given rate of accretion has not been determined with any
            certainty. Also, the existing results are limited in their
            scope and there is no agreement between various authors.

        3.  Post-Accretion Phase - No calculation exists for the thermal
            behaviour of this phase at all.

    -   Transport Properties - There are several factors, the effects of
        which have not been incorporated yet, namely those of

        1.  the change in the chemical composition due to a) accretion
            and b) spin-down; and

        2.  the dislocations, defects etc. of the crustal lattice.

    -   Equation of State - Apart from the uncertainties already
        existent for a cold equation of state, the change in the
        chemical composition due to accretion introduces change in the
        equation of state and hence in a) the structure of the star and
        its b) transport properties.

    -   All of our investigation has been based on an assumption of a
        pure dipolar model for the magnetic field. The validity of these
        results requires to be checked by including higher order
        multi-poles for the field.

5.   Future Directions – One of the most important questions in the
    context of the evolution of magnetic fields in neutron stars is
    regarding the models of field generation (and therefore of the
    internal field configuration). There is no consensus as to which one
    is actually realized. Our calculations clearly point out that the
    models have very different requirements for the impurity strength in
    the crust. Possible ways of resolving this dilemma then could be the
    following.

    -   Theoretical - A better many-body calculations may determine the
        state of matter in the crust accurately in regard to its
        impurity content.

    -   Observational Prediction - An old solitary radio pulsar will
        have a very low field if the impurity content of the crust is
        very large. The detection of such a pulsar accreting matter from
        the interstellar matter will therefore immediately indicate the
        impurity content of the crust. The results of our investigation
        clearly indicate that the both the models place very stringent
        limits on the impurity strength and the limits from the
        different models are quite incompatible. Therefore such an
        observation will immediately determine the viability of one
        model or the other - predictably providing an answer to this
        question.