In this thesis, I show my Ph.D. work on event-by-event hydrodynamic
simulations for relativistic heavy-ion collision. I show that
event-by-event hydrodynamic simulations have become an indispensable
tool for studying relativistic heavy-ion collisions and how it can be
used to explain many phenomena.

In Chap. 2 , I compare the previously dominating single-shot
hydrodynamics with event-by-event hydrodynamic simulations which are now
becoming mainstream. The event-by-event simulations are more realistic,
but they are also very time consuming; the single-shot simulations are
economical, but then the question arises as to whether they can be used
as a sufficiently precise replacement for event-by-event simulations. I
will compare these two simulation types for two popular initial
condition models.

I show that for the event averages of the multiplicity and elliptic and
triangular flows, the time consuming event-by-event hydrodynamic
simulations can, to a good approximation, be replaced by single-shot
ones, when using properly constructed initial conditions. For
higher-order flows such as @xmath the single-shot simulations are shown
to be incapable of reproducing those from event-by-event simulations.

In Chap. 3 , we show that the elliptic and triangular flow data measured
by the ALICE collaboration at the LHC prefer a small specific shear
viscosity close to @xmath , when considering the MC-Glauber and MC-KLN
models. In order to allow for a much larger @xmath value, the initial
condition model must feature triangularity values @xmath larger than the
ones provided by the MC-Glauber and MC-KLN models.

Chap. 4 focuses on correlations between event-plane angles. We show that
the event-plane angle correlation measurements by the ATLAS
collaboration can be explained by hydrodynamic simulations. The same
correlation patterns cannot be explained directly from the initial
conditions.

In Chap. 5 , we show that including only @xmath out of @xmath carefully
chosen resonances can already yield spectra and flow results within
@xmath relative error. Such a treatment can be used to shorten the
currently lengthy ( @xmath 3 hours) resonance decay calculations by a
factor of ten.

Chap. 6 focuses on various ways of calculating and measuring anisotropic
flows, and their comparisons. We point out that the event planes angle
@xmath fluctuates from event to event, and that the differential
event-plane angle @xmath also fluctuates from event to event. We show
that traces of such angular fluctuations can be measured experimentally,
and explain how such measurements allow the study of the fluctuation of
the flow orientations in addition to the fluctuation of the flow
magnitudes.

In Chap. 7 we give a thorough description of the general sampling
methodology, and show that it can be applied in an efficient way to
sample particles whose emission is determined by the Cooper-Frye
formula, using the simplification of longitudinal boost invariance.
