##### Acknowledgements. I am indebted to my thesis supervisors, Dr.
Bhabani Prasad Mandal, for introducing the subject to me and guiding me
throughout my Ph.D. carrier. Without his guidance and persistent help
this thesis would not have been possible. I express the great honor
towards my family members, on whose consistent encouragement and love I
have relied throughout my life. I am indebted to my parents Mr. Gauri
Shanker Upadhyay and Mrs. Madhuri Devi, brother Deepu, and sisters Anita
and Alka, for their loving care, blessings and patience shown during the
course of my research work and I hope to continue, in my own small way,
the noble missions to which they expect from me. I dedicate this thesis
to them. We gratefully acknowledge the financial support from University
Grant Commission (UGC), Department of Science and Technology (DST), and
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), New Delhi, at
various stages of my research carrier. I would like to thank our group
mates, Sumit Kr. Rai, Ananya Ghatak, Rajesh Kr. Yadav, Brijesh Kr.
Maurya and Manoj Kr. Dwivedi, for their kind supports. I also take this
opportunity to express my gratitude towards Dr. Raka D. Ray Mandal and
loving brother Satyajay Mandal for their inspirational and moral
support. I extend my sincere thanks to all my friends, specially Manoj,
Sudhir, Charu, Anand and their family members, for kind help in many
respects during the stay in Varanasi. It is pleasure to acknowledge all
the faculty members, research scholars, laboratory staff members, of the
high energy physics group and the DRC members for helping me throughout
my research work. Last but not the least I thank the almighty for
bringing all the above people into my life and thus guiding me as an
invisible, silent but steady friend, mentor and guardian. (Sudhaker
Upadhyay)

###### Contents

-    1 On-shell finite field dependent BRST (FFBRST) transformation
    -    1.1 Evaluation of Jacobian
-    2 Batalin-Vilkovisky (BV) formalism
-    3 Batalin-Fradkin-Vilkovisky (BFV) formulation
-    4 FFBRST transformation for Faddeev-Popov (FP) effective theory:
    short survey
-    5 Off-shell nilpotent FFBRST transformation
    -    5.1 Connecting YM theory in Lorentz gauge to the same theory in
        axial gauge
    -    5.2 Relating theories in Coulomb gauge and Lorentz gauge
    -    5.3 FFBRST transformation to link FP effective action in
        Lorentz gauge to quadratic gauge
    -    5.4 FP action to the most general BRST/anti-BRST invariant
        action
-    6 Finite field dependent anti-BRST (FF-anti-BRST) formulation
    -    6.1 FF-anti-BRST transformation to change the gauge parameter
        @xmath
    -    6.2 Lorentz gauge to axial gauge theory
    -    6.3 Lorentz gauge and Coulomb gauge in YM theory
    -    6.4 FP theory to most general BRST/anti-BRST invariant theory
-    7 Off-shell nilpotent FF-anti-BRST transformation
    -    7.1 YM theory in Lorentz gauge to Coulomb gauge
    -    7.2 Lorentz gauge to axial gauge theory
    -    7.3 Lorentz gauge theory to most general BRST/anti-BRST
        invariant theory
-    8 Conclusions
-    9 Preliminary: gauge theory of Abelian rank-2 antisymmetric tensor
    field
-    10 FFBRST formulation of Abelian rank 2 anti-symmetric tensor field
-    11 FFBRST transformation in 2-form gauge theory: examples
    -    11.1 Effective theory in axial gauge
    -    11.2 Effective theory in Coulomb gauge
-    12 FF-anti-BRST transformation in 2-form gauge theories
    -    12.1 Lorentz to axial gauge theory using FF-anti-BRST
        formulation
-    13 Field/Antifield formulation of Abelian rank-2 antisymmetric
    tensor field theory
-    14 Conclusions
-    15 GZ theory: brief introduction
-    16 The nilpotent BRST transformation of GZ action
-    17 FFBRST transformation in Euclidean space
-    18 A mapping between GZ theory and YM theory
-    19 Connecting GZ theory and YM theory in BV formalism
-    20 Conclusions
-    21 The infinitesimal mixed BRST (MBRST) transformation
-    22 Construction of finite field dependent MBRST (FFMBRST)
    transformation
-    23 Method for evaluating the Jacobian
-    24 Examples
    -    24.1 Bosonized chiral model
    -    24.2 Maxwell’s theory
    -    24.3 Non-Abelian YM theory in Curci-Ferrari-Delbourgo-Jarvis
        (CFDJ) gauge
-    25 FFMBRST symmetry in BV formulation
    -    25.1 Bosonized chiral model in BV formulation
    -    25.2 Maxwell’s theory in BV formulation
    -    25.3 Non-Abelian YM theory in BV formulation
-    26 Conclusions
-    27 The theories with constraints: examples
    -    27.1 Theory for massive spin 1 vector field
        -    27.1.1 Proca model
        -    27.1.2 Stueckelberg theory
    -    27.2 Theory for self-dual chiral boson
        -    27.2.1 Gauge variant theory for self-dual chiral boson
        -    27.2.2 Gauge invariant theory for self-dual chiral boson
-    28 Relating the first-class and second-class theories through
    FFBRST formulation: examples
    -    28.1 Connecting Stueckelberg and Proca theories
    -    28.2 Relating gauge invariant and the gauge variant theory for
        chiral boson
-    29 First-class and second-class theories: FF-anti-BRST formulation
    -    29.1 Relating Stueckelberg and Proca theories
    -    29.2 Mapping between the gauge invariant and the gauge variant
        theory for chiral boson
-    30 Conclusions
-    31 Self-dual chiral boson: preliminary idea
    -    31.1 Wess-Zumino term and Hamiltonian formulation
-    32 BFV formulation for model of self-dual chiral boson
-    33 Nilpotent symmetries: many guises
    -    33.1 Off-shell BRST and anti-BRST Symmetry
    -    33.2 Co-BRST and anti-co-BRST symmetries
    -    33.3 Bosonic symmetry
    -    33.4 Ghost and discrete symmetries
-    34 Geometrical cohomology
    -    34.1 Hodge-de Rham decomposition theorem and differential
        operators
    -    34.2 Hodge-de Rham decomposition theorem and conserved charges
-    35 Conclusions
-    A FFBRST in Axial gauge
-    B FFBRST in Coulomb gauge

## Chapter \thechapter Introduction

Due to the lack of hard empirical data, symmetry principles have been
proved to be the most invaluable tools in describing physical
phenomenon. Gauge field theories (based on the local gauge invariance of
the Lagrangian density of the theories) have enormous importance in
describing all the fundamental interactions of nature and play the
central role in understanding the present state of the art of modern
particle physics. The standard model of particle physics which describes
strong, weak and electromagnetic interactions on the same footing is a
non-Abelian gauge theory (Yang-Mills theory) [ 1 ] .

However, one faces various problems to develop the quantum version of
such theories with local gauge invariance consistently. In particular,
the generating functional, @xmath , for such gauge theories becomes
ill-defined due to the over counting of physically equivalent gauge
configuration. This in turn leads to the ill-defined Green’s functions
of these theories. Therefore, it is necessary to eliminate the redundant
degrees of freedom from the functional integral representation of the
generating functional @xmath . This can be achieved by adding a gauge
variant term, called as gauge-fixing term, to the Lagrangian density
@xmath of the theory. The generating functional is made well-defined in
the cost of the gauge symmetry. The gauge-fixing was achieved by adding
an extra term consisting of arbitrary function of the gauge field and
arbitrary gauge parameter. This of course solves the problem of over
counting but the physical theory now depends on arbitrary function of
gauge field and/or arbitrary parameter which is not desirable for any
physical theory. Faddeev-Popov (FP) resolved this problem by introducing
unphysical ghost fields which are scalars but behave like Grassmannian [
2 ] . These unphysical fields compensate the effect of arbitrary
function and in term preserves the unitarity of the theory. Various
difficulties in different situations occur due to the gauge
non-invariance of the theory; For example, the choices of the counter
terms in the renormalization program in such theories are no more
restricted to the gauge invariant terms as the gauge invariance is
broken.

C. Becchi, A. Rouet and R. Stora and independently I. V. Tyutin came to
resolve the situation by discovering a new symmetry of the FP effective
theory known as BRST symmetry [ 3 , 4 ] . This BRST transformation is
characterized by (i) infinitesimal, (ii) global (i.e. does not depend on
the space-time) and (iii) anticommuting parameter. Such BRST
transformation leaves the effective action, including gauge-fixing and
ghost parts, invariant and is nilpotent in nature. Sometimes the
nilpotency is proved using equation of motion of one or more fields then
it is referred as on-shell nilpotent. However, BRST transformation can
be made off-shell nilpotent by introducing Nakanishi-Lautrup type
auxiliary fields to the theory. BRST symmetry is extremely useful in
quantizing different gauge field theoretic models and the
renormalization program is greatly facilitated by the use of such
symmetry [ 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 ] .

To cover the wider class of gauge theories, including open or reducible
gauge theories, a powerful technique was introduced by I. A. Batalin and
G. A. Vilkovisky [ 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 ] , known as field/antifield (or
BV) formulation. The main idea of this formulation is to construct an
extended action by introducing the antifields for each fields in the
theories. The antifields satisfy the opposite statistics corresponding
to that of fields and have the ghost number equal to @xmath , where
@xmath is the ghost number of the fields. However, the extended action
satisfies the certain rich mathematical formula known as quantum master
equation which reflects the gauge symmetry in the zeroth order of
antifields and in the first order of antifields it reflects the
nilpotency of BRST transformation. These extended theories work
extremely well in the frame of gauge theories which are always endowed
with first-class constraints in the language of Dirac’s constraints
analysis [ 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 ] . The systems with second-class
constraints are quantized by converting these to a first-class theory in
an extended phase space [ 3 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 14 ] . This procedure has
been introduced by I. A. Batalin, E. S. Fradkin and I. V. Tyutin [ 15 ,
16 ] and has been applied to the various models [ 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21
] . Another way of approaching the problem, which is very different from
the Dirac’s method, is the BFV (due to I. A. Batalin, E. S. Fradkin and
G. A. Vilkovisky) quantization [ 5 , 22 , 23 ] . The main features of
BFV approach are as follows: (I) it does not require closure off-shell
of the gauge algebra and therefore does not need an auxiliary fields,
(II) this formalism relies on BRST transformation which is independent
of gauge-fixing condition and (III) it is also applicable to the first
order Lagrangian. Hence it is more general than the strict Lagrangian
approach.

In all these approaches of studying gauge theories the main ingredient
is the underlying BRST symmetry of the FP effective theory. Therefore,
any modification or reformulation or generalization of BRST
transformation is extremely important in the study of fundamental
interactions which are described by gauge theories. With various
motivations and goals, BRST transformation has been generalized in many
different ways. M. Lavelle and D. Mcmullan had found a generalized BRST
symmetry adjoint to usual BRST symmetry in the case of QED which is
nonlocal and noncovariant [ 24 ] . The motivation behind the emergence
of this symmetry was to refine the characterization of physical states
given by the BRST charge. Later, Z. Tang and D. Finkelstein had found
another generalized BRST symmetry which is nonlocal but covariant [ 25 ]
. Such a BRST symmetry is not nilpotent generally and additional
conditions are required in auxiliary field formulation to make them
nilpotent. H. S. Yang and B. H. Lee had presented a local and
noncovariant BRST symmetry in the case of Abelian gauge theories [ 26 ]
. Finite field dependent BRST (FFBRST) transformation, where the
parameter is finite and field dependent but still anticommuting in
nature, is the most important among the generalizations of BRST symmetry
which was developed by S. D. Joglekar and B. P. Mandal for the first
time in 1995 [ 27 ] . They had shown that the usual infinitesimal,
global BRST transformation can be integrated out to construct the FFBRST
transformation [ 27 ] . The parameter in such a transformation is
anticommuting, finite in nature, depends on the fields, and does not
depend on space-time explicitly. FFBRST transformation is also the
symmetry of the effective theories and maintains the on-shell nilpotency
property. Moreover, FFBRST transformation is capable of connecting the
generating functionals of two different effective field theories with
suitable choice of the finite field dependent parameters [ 27 ] . For
example, this transformation was used to connect the FP effective action
in Lorentz gauge with a gauge parameter @xmath to (i) the most general
BRST/anti-BRST symmetric action in Lorentz gauge [ 27 ] , (ii) the FP
effective action in axial gauge [ 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 , 32 ] , (iii) the
FP effective action in Coulomb gauge [ 33 ] , (iv) FP effective action
with another distinct gauge parameter @xmath [ 27 ] and (v) the FP
effective action in quadratic gauge [ 27 ] . The FFBRST transformation
was also used to connect the generating functionals corresponding to
different solutions of the quantum master equation in field/antifield
formulation [ 34 ] . The choice of the finite parameter is crucial in
connecting different effective gauge theories by means of the FFBRST
transformation. The path integral measure in the expression of
generating functional is not invariant under FFBRST transformation. The
nontrivial Jacobian of such FFBRST transformation is the source for new
results. The FFBRST formulation has many applications [ 28 , 29 , 30 ,
31 , 32 , 35 , 36 , 37 , 38 , 39 , 40 , 41 ] on the gauge theories. A
correct prescription for the poles in the gauge field propagators in
noncovariant gauges has been derived by connecting effective theories in
covariant gauges to the theories in noncovariant gauges by using FFBRST
transformation [ 37 ] . The divergent energy integrals in the Coulomb
gauge are regularized by modifying the time like propagator using FFBRST
transformation [ 33 ] . The FFBRST transformation, which is discussed so
far in literature, is only on-shell nilpotent [ 27 , 28 , 29 , 36 ] .

In this thesis, we would like to address different issues of BRST
transformation, its generalizations and applications to different gauge
field theoretic models. We further generalize the FFBRST transformation
and find new applications. We develop the off-shell nilpotent FFBRST
transformation by introducing a Nakinishi-Lautrup type auxiliary field
and show that such transformation is more elegant to use in certain
specific cases [ 42 ] . The anti-BRST transformation, where the role of
ghost and antighost fields are interchanged with some coefficients, does
not play as fundamental role as BRST symmetry itself but it is a useful
tool in geometrical description [ 43 ] of BRST transformation, in the
investigation of perturbative renormalization [ 44 ] . We develop both
the on-shell and off-shell nilpotent finite field dependent anti-BRST
(FF-anti-BRST) transformations for the first time which play similar
role as FFBRST transformation [ 42 ] .

We study these transformations in the context of higher form gauge
theories [ 45 ] . The gauge theories of Abelian rank-2 antisymmetric
tensor field play crucial role in studying the theory for classical
strings [ 46 ] , vortex motion in an irrotational, incompressible fluid
[ 10 , 47 ] and the dual formulation of the Abelian Higgs model [ 48 ,
49 ] . Abelian rank-2 antisymmetric tensor fields are also very useful
in studying supergravity multiplets [ 50 ] , excited states in
superstring theories [ 51 , 52 ] and anomaly cancellation in certain
superstring theories. Geometrical aspects of Abelian rank-2
antisymmetric tensor fields are studied in a U(1) gauge theory in loop
space. We extend the FFBRST formulation to study Abelian rank-2 tensor
field theories. We establish the connection between different effective
2-form gauge theories using the FFBRST and FF-anti-BRST transformations.
The FF-anti-BRST transformation plays similar role to connect different
effective theories. We further extend these FFBRST and FF-anti-BRST
transformations to the field/antifield formulation of 2-form gauge
theory [ 45 ] .

In non-Abelian gauge theories even after gauge-fixing the redundancy of
gauge fields is not completely removed in certain gauges for large gauge
fields (Gribov problem) [ 53 ] . The Yang-Mills (YM) theories in those
gauges contain so-called Gribov copies. Gribov copies play a crucial
role in the infrared (IR) regime while it can be neglected in the
perturbative ultraviolet (UV) regime [ 53 , 54 , 55 ] . This topic has
become very exciting currently due to the fact that color confinement is
closely related to the asymptotic behavior of the ghost and gluon
propagators in deep IR regime [ 56 ] . In order to resolve the Gribov
problem, Gribov and Zwanziger (GZ) proposed a theory, which restricts
the domain of integration in the functional integral within the first
Gribov horizon [ 54 ] . This restriction to first Gribov horizon is
achieved by adding a nonlocal term, commonly known as horizon term, to
the YM action [ 54 , 55 , 57 ] . But the YM action restricted in Gribov
region (i.e. GZ action) does not exhibit the usual BRST invariance, due
to the presence of the nonlocal horizon term [ 58 ] . The famous
Kugo-Ojima (KO) criterion for color confinement [ 12 ] is based on the
assumption of an exact BRST invariance of YM theory in the manifestly
covariant gauge. Recently, a nilpotent BRST transformation which leaves
the GZ action invariant has been obtained and can be applied to KO
analysis of the GZ theory [ 59 ] . The BRST symmetry in presence of the
Gribov horizon has great applicability in order to solve the
nonperturbative features of confining YM theories [ 60 , 61 ] , where
the soft breaking of the BRST symmetry exhibited by the GZ action is
converted into an exact invariance [ 62 ] . We consider FFBRST
transformation in Euclidean space to show the mapping between the
generating functional of GZ theory to that of YM theory [ 63 ] . Such a
mapping is also shown to exists in field/antifield formulation of GZ
theory [ 64 ] .

So far we have seen that FFBRST and FF-anti-BRST transformations are
symmetry of the effective action but do not leave the generating
functionals invariant. The Jacobians of the path integral measure in the
expression of generating functional are not unity as these
transformations are finite in nature. We address the important question
whether it is possible to develop a finite nilpotent symmetry for both
effective action as well as the generating functional? In search of
answer to this question, we propose the finite version of mixed BRST
(combination of BRST and anti-BRST) transformation. Such a finite mixed
BRST (FFMBRST) transformation is shown to be nilpotent as well as the
symmetry of both the effective action and the generating functional [ 65
] . Our results are established with the help of several explicit
examples. This formulation is further extended to field/antifield
formulation [ 65 ] .

In another problem, we study the systems with constraints in the
framework of FFBRST transformation. The gauge variant model for the
single self-dual chiral boson in (1+1) dimensions (2D) is well known
example of the second-class theory [ 66 , 67 , 68 , 69 , 70 , 71 , 72 ]
. This model was made gauge invariant by adding the Wess-Zumino (WZ)
term and had been studied using BFV formulation [ 73 , 74 ] . Such a
model is very useful in the study of certain string theoretic models [
75 ] and plays a crucial role in the study of quantum Hall effect [ 76 ]
. The Proca model in (1+3) dimensions (4D) for massive spin 1 vector
field also is another example of a system with the second-class
constraint as the gauge symmetry is broken by the mass term of the
theory. However, Stueckelberg converted this theory to a first-class
theory by introducing a scalar field [ 77 , 78 , 79 ] . Such a gauge
invariant description for massive spin 1 field has many applications in
gauge field theories as well as in string theories [ 80 , 81 , 82 ] . We
establish the connection between the generating functionals for the
first-class theories and the generating functionals for the second-class
theories using FFBRST transformation [ 83 ] . The generating functional
of the Proca model is obtained from the generating functional of the
Stueckelberg theory for massive spin 1 vector field using FFBRST
transformation with appropriate choice of the finite parameter. In the
other example we relate the generating functionals for the gauge
invariant and the gauge variant theory for self-dual chiral boson by
constructing suitable FFBRST transformation. Thus, the complicated
nonlocal Dirac bracket analysis in the study of the second-class
theories is avoided in our formulation.

In a different problem, we study the analogy between the conserved
charges of different BRST and co-BRST symmetry transformations with
exterior and co-exterior derivatives [ 73 ] . In the BRST formulation of
gauge theories one requires that the physical subspace of total Hilbert
space of states contains only those states that are annihilated by the
nilpotent and conserved BRST charge @xmath i.e. @xmath [ 13 , 84 ] . The
nilpotency of the BRST charge ( @xmath ) and the physicality criterion (
@xmath ) are the two essential ingredients of BRST quantization. In the
language of differential geometry defined on compact, orientable
Riemannian manifold, the cohomological aspects of BRST charge is
realized in a simple, elegant manner. The nilpotent BRST charge is
connected with exterior derivative (de Rham cohomological operator
@xmath with @xmath ) [ 85 , 86 , 87 , 88 , 89 , 90 , 91 , 92 , 93 , 94 ]
. It has been found that the co-BRST transformation which is also the
symmetry of the action and leaves the gauge-fixing part of the action
invariant separately. The conserved charge corresponding to the co-BRST
transformation is shown to be analog to the co-exterior derivative (
@xmath with @xmath ) [ 92 ] .

This thesis is divided into following nine chapters. The detail contents
of these chapters are given below.

General introductions to i) BRST transformation, its generalizations and
applications, ii) basic techniques of field/antifield formulation and
BFV formulation are presented in chapter one. We brief the contents of
the different chapters of the thesis.

In Chapter two, we provide the different mathematical techniques which
will be used to construct the thesis. In particular FFBRST
transformation, BV formulation and BFV technique are discussed in brief.

In chapter three, we formulate the FFBRST transformation in auxiliary
field formulation to make it off-shell nilpotent [ 42 ] . We consider
several examples to demonstrate that the off-shell nilpotent FFBRST
transformation also leads to similar results in connecting the different
generating functionals. We further construct the finite field dependent
anti-BRST (FF-anti-BRST) transformation analogous to the FFBRST
transformation by integrating infinitesimal anti-BRST transformation. By
considering several choices of finite field dependent parameter in
FF-anti-BRST transformation we show that FF-anti-BRST transformation
also plays the same role as FFBRST transformation in connecting
different effective theories but with different parameters. Finally, we
consider the formulation of FF-anti-BRST transformation in auxiliary
field formulation also to make it off-shell nilpotent.

In chapter four, we study the quantization of the Abelian rank-2
antisymmetric tensor field by using the FFBRST transformation [ 45 ] .
We show that it is possible to construct the Abelian rank-2 tensor field
theory in noncovariant gauges by using FFBRST transformation. In
particular, we show that the generating functional for Abelian rank-2
tensor field theory in covariant gauges transformed to the generating
functional for the same theory in a noncovariant gauges for a particular
choice of the finite parameter in FFBRST transformation. The new results
arise from the nontrivial Jacobian of the path integral measure under
such finite BRST transformation. The connections between the theories in
two different noncovariant gauge, namely axial gauge and Coulomb gauge
are also established explicitly. Further, we consider the
field/antifield formulation of Abelian rank-2 tensor field theory by
introducing the antifield @xmath corresponding to each field @xmath with
opposite statistics to study the role of FFBRST transformation in such
formulation. We show that the FFBRST transformation changes the
generating functional corresponding to one gauge-fixed fermion to the
generating functional to another gauge-fixed fermion. Thus, the FFBRST
transformation connects the different solutions of the master equation
in field/antifield formulation. We show this by considering explicit
examples.

Chapter five is devoted for the construction of FFBRST transformation in
Euclidean space to study the GZ theory [ 63 , 64 ] . By constructing an
appropriate finite field dependent parameter we show that such FFBRST
transformation relates the generating functional for GZ theory to the
generating functional in YM theory. Thus, we are able to connect the
theories with and without Gribov copies.

In chapter six, we construct the finite version of MBRST transformation
having finite and field dependent parameters [ 65 ] . The usual FFBRST
and FF-anti-BRST transformations are the symmetry transformations of the
effective action only but do not leave the generating functional
invariant as the path integral measure in the definition of generating
functional transforms in a nontrivial manner [ 27 , 42 ] . Unlike the
usual FFBRST and FF-anti-BRST transformations, this finite field
dependent MBRST (FFMBRST) transformation is shown to be the symmetry of
the both effective action as well as the generating functional of the
theory. We construct the finite parameters in the FFMBRST transformation
in such a way that the Jacobian contribution due to FFBRST part
compensates the same due to FF-anti-BRST part. Thus, we are able to
construct the finite nilpotent transformation which leaves the
generating functional as well as the effective action of the theory
invariant. We further show that the effect of FFMBRST transformation is
equivalent to the effect of successive operations of FFBRST and
FF-anti-BRST transformations. Our results are supported by several
explicit examples. First of all we consider the gauge invariant model
for single self-dual chiral boson in (1+1) dimensions [ 66 , 67 , 73 ]
to show our results. (1+3) dimensional Abelian as well as non-Abelian YM
theory in the Curci-Ferrari-Delbourgo-Jarvis (CFDJ) gauge [ 95 , 96 , 97
] are also considered to demonstrate the above finite nilpotent
symmetry. To study the role of FFMBRST transformation in field/antifield
formulation we consider the same three simple models in BV formulation.
We show that the FFMBRST transformation does not change the generating
functional written in terms of extended quantum action in BV
formulation. Hence the FFMBRST transformation leaves the different
solutions of the quantum master equation in field/antifield formulation
invariant.

In chapter seven, we study the theories with constraints in the context
of FFBRST transformation [ 83 ] . Theories with first-class constraints
are shown to be related to the theories with second-class constraints
through FFBRST transformation. The generating functional of Stueckelberg
theory for massive spin 1 vector field is related to the generating
functional of Proca model for the same theory through FFBRST and
FF-anti-BRST transformations. Similar relationship is also established
between the gauge invariant and gauge variant models for single
self-dual chiral boson through FFBRST and FF-anti-BRST formalism.

In chapter eight, we present BFV formulation for the model of single
self-dual chiral boson [ 73 ] . Along with the usual nilpotent BRST
symmetry, anti-BRST, co-BRST and anti-co-BRST symmetries are
investigated in this framework. The generators of all these continuous
symmetry transformations are shown to obey the algebra of de Rham
cohomological operators of differential geometry. The Hodge
decomposition theorem in the quantum Hilbert space of states is also
discussed. We show that the classical theory for a self-dual chiral
boson is a field theoretic model for Hodge theory.

The last chapter is devoted for summary and conclusion.

## Chapter \thechapter The mathematical basis

The aim of this chapter is to provide the basic techniques and
mathematical tools to prepare the necessary background relevant to this
thesis. In particular, we briefly outline the basic ideas of the
on-shell finite field dependent BRST transformation, BV formulation of
gauge theories and BFV technique. We start with on-shell FFBRST
transformation in the next section.

### 1 On-shell finite field dependent BRST (FFBRST) transformation

We begin with the on-shell FFBRST formulation of pure gauge theories [
27 ] . The usual BRST transformation for the generic fields @xmath of an
effective theory is defined compactly as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the BRST variation of the fields with infinitesimal,
anticommuting and global parameter @xmath . Such transformation is
on-shell nilpotent, i.e. @xmath , with the use of some equation of
motion for fields and leaves the FP effective action invariant. It was
observed by Joglekar and Mandal [ 27 ] that @xmath needs neither to be
infinitesimal, nor to be field-independent to maintain the symmetry of
the FP effective action of the theory as long as it does not depend
explicitly on space-time. They made it infinitesimally field dependent
and then integrated the infinitesimal field dependent BRST
transformation to construct FFBRST transformation which preserves the
same form as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is an @xmath -independent functional of fields @xmath .

We briefly mention the important steps to construct FFBRST
transformation. We start with the fields, @xmath , which are made to
depend on some parameter, @xmath , in such a manner that @xmath is the
initial field and @xmath is the transformed field. The infinitesimal
parameter @xmath in the BRST transformation is made field dependent and
hence the BRST transformation can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is an infinitesimal field dependent parameter. By
integrating these equations from @xmath to @xmath , it has been shown [
27 ] that the @xmath are related to @xmath by the FFBRST transformation
as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is obtained from @xmath through the relation [ 27 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath is given by @xmath This transformation is nilpotent and
symmetry of the effective action. The generating functional, defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

is not invariant under such FFBRST transformation as the Jacobian in the
above expression is not invariant under it. Under FFBRST transformation
Jacobian changes as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

It has been shown [ 27 ] that under certain condition this nontrivial
Jacobian can be replaced (within the functional integral) as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is some local functional of @xmath . The condition for
existence of @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath depends on the finite field dependent parameter. Therefore, the
generating functional corresponding to the two different effective
theories can be related through FFBRST transformation with appropriate
choices of finite parameters. The FFBRST transformation has also been
used to solve many of the long outstanding problems in quantum field
theory [ 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 , 32 , 45 , 35 , 36 , 37 , 38 ] . For
example, the gauge field propagators in noncovariant gauges contain
singularities on the real momentum axis [ 30 ] . Proper prescriptions
for these singularities in gauge field propagators have been found by
using FFBRST transformation [ 33 ] .

#### 1.1 Evaluation of Jacobian

Due to the finiteness of FFBRST transformation the Jacobian is not unity
and hence it is important to consider the Jacobian contribution. In this
subsection we present the general method to evaluate the nontrivial
Jacobian of path integral measure for FFBRST transformation. Here we
utilize the fact that FFBRST transformation can be written as a
succession of infinitesimal transformation given in Eq. ( 2.3 ). Now,
one defines the path integral measure as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the transformation @xmath to @xmath is an infinitesimal one, then
the equation reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath sums over all fields in the measure and @xmath refers to
whether @xmath is bosonic or fermionic field. Using the Taylor’s
expansion in the above equation, the expression for infinitesimal change
in Jacobian is obtained as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The nontrivial Jacobian is the source of new results in the FFBRST
formulation.

### 2 Batalin-Vilkovisky (BV) formalism

The BV formulation (also known as field/antifield formulation) is a
powerful technique in the Lagrangian framework to deal with more general
gauge theories. This method is applicable to gauge theories with both
reducible/open as well as irreducible/close algebras [ 6 , 7 , 8 ] . The
basic idea in this approach is to introduce the so-called antifield (
@xmath ) for each field ( @xmath ) in the theory. The antifields satisfy
opposite statistics with ghost number @xmath , where @xmath is ghost
number of field @xmath .

The effective action @xmath is then extended with the antifields as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is gauge invariant action. The antifields @xmath are
obtained from gauge-fixing fermion @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The extended effective action is then written in terms of @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The effective action @xmath satisfies certain rich mathematical relation
which is known as ‘quantum master equation’ as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the antibracket of effective action, @xmath , is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is defined with left and right differentials ( @xmath and
@xmath respectively) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Usually it is easy to construct an action that satisfies the ‘classical
master equation’

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The generating function given in Eq. ( 2.6 ) can also be written in
compact form as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an extended action satisfying following ‘quantum master
equation’ [ 6 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The quantum master equation in the zeroth order of antifields gives the
condition of gauge invariance. On the other hand it reflects the
nilpotency of BRST transformation in the first order of antifields. We
will be using this formulation in the framework of FFBRST formulation in
different contexts.

### 3 Batalin-Fradkin-Vilkovisky (BFV) formulation

We briefly mention the BFV formalism [ 5 , 22 ] which is applicable for
the general theories with first-class constraints. This formalism is
developed on an extended phase space with finite number of canonically
conjugate variables. The basic features of this approach are as follows:
i) it does not require closure off-shell of the gauge algebra and
therefore does not need an auxiliary field, ii) heavily relies on BRST
transformation which is independent of the gauge condition and iii) it
is even applicable to Lagrangian which are not quadratic in velocities
and hence is more general than the strict Lagrangian approach. The
action, in terms of canonical Hamiltonian density @xmath and first-class
constraints, @xmath , can be written in this formalism as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where ( @xmath ) are the canonical variables and @xmath are the Lagrange
multiplier associated with first-class constraints. In this method, the
Lagrange multipliers @xmath are treated as the canonical variables.
Therefore, one introduces its canonical conjugate momenta @xmath , where
@xmath further imposes new constraints such that the dynamics of the
theory must not be changed. In order to make the extended theory to be
consistent with the initial theory a pair of canonically conjugate
anticommuting ghost coordinate and momenta @xmath is introduced for each
constraint. These canonically conjugate ghosts satisfy the following
anticommutation relation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath have ghost number @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. The generating functional for this extended theory is then
defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the path integral measure and the effective action
@xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is the extended Hamiltonian and is written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the gauge-fixing fermion and @xmath is the nilpotent
BRST charge which has the following general form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath is a structure constant.

The BRST symmetry transformation for fields @xmath can be calculated
with BRST charge @xmath using the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath signs, respectively, denote anticommutator and
commutator for the fermionic and bosonic nature of fields @xmath .

In this chapter we have provided the basic mathematical techniques which
are relevant for the later part of the thesis. In the next chapter we
would like to deal with the off-shell FFBRST and FF-anti-BRST
transformations.

## Chapter \thechapter Off-shell nilpotent FFBRST transformation

The FFBRST transformation which have been discussed in the previous
chapter is on-shell nilpotent. In this chapter we extend this
formulation using auxiliary fields to make FFBRST transformation
off-shell nilpotent [ 42 ] . Several explicit examples of off-shell
nilpotent FFBRST transformation are considered. We further construct
both on-shell and off-shell nilpotent FF-anti-BRST transformations and
show that such transformations also play the similar role.

### 4 FFBRST transformation for Faddeev-Popov (FP) effective theory:
short survey

Let us now briefly review the FFBRST formulation, particularly, in case
of FP effective theory as an example of pure gauge theories [ 27 ] . In
this case the Jacobian of the path integral measure changes the
generating functional corresponding to FP effective theory to the
generating functional for a different effective theory. The meaning of
these field transformations is as follows. We consider the vacuum
expectation value of a gauge invariant functional @xmath in some
effective theory,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is generic notation for all fields and the FP effective
action is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the pure YM action ¹ ¹ 1 Here we adopt the following
notations throughout the thesis. The @xmath dimensional metric tensor in
Minkowski space-time is defined as @xmath and the quantity @xmath is a
Lorentz scalar. We always use the small letters (a,b,c,…) in superscript
to denote the group indices. This should not be confused with the small
letters (b, ab, d, ad,…) used in subscript which denote the different
forms of BRST transformations (e.g. BRST, anti-BRST, co-BRST,
anti-co-BRST,…).

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the gauge-fixing and ghost part of the effective action in Lorentz
gauge are given as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The covariant derivative is defined as @xmath .

Now we perform the FFBRST transformation @xmath given by Eq. ( 2.4 ).
Then we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

on account of BRST invariance of @xmath and the gauge invariance of
@xmath . Here @xmath is the Jacobian associated with FFBRST
transformation and is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that unlike the usual infinitesimal BRST transformation, the
Jacobian for FFBRST is not unity. In fact, this nontrivial Jacobian is
the source of the new results in this formulation. As shown in Ref. [ 27
] for the special case @xmath , the Jacobian @xmath can always be
replaced by @xmath , where @xmath is some local functional of the fields
and can be added to the action at @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, the FFBRST transformation changes the FP effective action of the
theory [ 37 ] .

### 5 Off-shell nilpotent FFBRST transformation

In this section, we intend to generalize the FFBRST transformation in an
auxiliary field formulation. We only mention the necessary steps of the
FFBRST formulation in presence of auxiliary field. For simplicity, we
consider the case of pure YM theory described by the effective action in
Lorentz gauge

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

This effective action is invariant under an off-shell nilpotent usual
BRST transformation with infinitesimal parameter. Following the
procedure outlined in the previous chapter, it is straightforward to
construct FFBRST transformation under which the above @xmath remains
invariant. The transformation is as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The finite parameter, @xmath depends also on the auxiliary field @xmath
and hence the nontrivial modification arises in the calculation of
Jacobian for this FFBRST in an auxiliary field formulation. The Jacobian
is defined as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.39)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The transformation from @xmath to @xmath is an infinitesimal one and one
has, for its Jacobian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath sums over all the fields in the measure @xmath and the
@xmath sign refers to the cases of fields @xmath being bosonic or
fermionic in nature. We evaluate the right hand side as

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (3.41)
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

dropping those terms which do not contribute on account of the
antisymmetry of structure constant. We calculate the infinitesimal
change in Jacobian, as mentioned in [ 27 ] , as ² ² 2 The small letter
(b) used in the subscript of Eq. (3.13), which denotes BRST, should not
be confused with the group index which is always written in the
superscript.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Further, it can be shown that the Jacobian in Eq. ( 3.39 ) can be
expressed as @xmath if it satisfies the condition given in Eq. ( 2.9 )

Now, we consider different choices of the parameter @xmath (which is
related to @xmath through the relation in Eq. ( 2.5 )) to show the
connection between different pairs of effective theories.

#### 5.1 Connecting YM theory in Lorentz gauge to the same theory in
axial gauge

To show the connection between YM theories in Lorentz gauge and axial
gauge we start with the Lorentz gauge YM theory in the auxiliary field
formulation, described by the effective action given in Eq. ( 3.37 ) and
choose the infinitesimal field dependent parameter as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath are arbitrary constants and @xmath is a gauge
parameter. Using Eq. ( 3.42 ), we calculate the change in the Jacobian
of such transformation as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . We further make an ansatz for @xmath in this
case as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.45)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The constants @xmath depend on @xmath explicitly and satisfies the
following initial condition:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Eq. ( 2.3 ) we calculate

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.47)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

From the condition mentioned in Eq. ( 2.9 ), we obtain

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (3.48)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

The last two terms in the integrand of Eq. ( 3.48 ) depend on @xmath in
a local fashion. The contribution of these terms vanish by antighost
equation of motion [ 27 , 37 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

This can only happen if the ratio of coefficients of the two terms is
identical to the ratio of coefficients of @xmath and @xmath in @xmath .
This requires that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

The nonlocal @xmath dependent terms are canceled by converting them to
local terms using antighost equation of motion [ 37 ] . This can only
work if the two @xmath dependent terms in a certain manner, depending
again on the ratio of coefficients of @xmath and @xmath in terms in
@xmath . This requires that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

When the above two equations ( 3.50 ) and ( 3.51 ) are satisfied, the
nonlocal @xmath dependent terms get converted to local terms. The
coefficients of local terms @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath , independently, vanish and are giving rise to following
differential equations, respectively:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

The above equations can be solved for various @xmath using the boundary
conditions given by Eq. ( 3.46 ) and the solutions ( @xmath ) are given
as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Putting the above values in Eq. ( 3.45 ), we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

FFBRST transformation in Eq. ( 3.38 ) with the parameter given in Eq. (
3.43 ) connects the generating functional in Lorentz gauge,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

to the generating functional corresponding to the effective action

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.56)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is nothing but FP effective action in axial gauge with the
gauge parameter @xmath .

#### 5.2 Relating theories in Coulomb gauge and Lorentz gauge

We again start with Lorentz gauge theory given in Eq. ( 3.37 ) and
choose another parameter

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

to show the connection with theory in the Coulomb gauge. The change in
the Jacobian due to this FFBRST transformation is calculated using Eq. (
3.42 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . We try the following ansatz for @xmath for this case:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.59)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Now, using the condition Eq. ( 2.9 ) for replacing the Jacobian as
@xmath and following the similar procedure as discussed in the previous
case, we obtain exactly same solutions as given in Eq. ( 3.53 ) for the
coefficients @xmath . Putting these solutions in Eq. ( 3.59 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

The transformed effective action

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.61)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

which is the FP effective action in Coulomb gauge with gauge parameter
@xmath .

Thus, FFBRST transformation with parameter given in equation ( 3.57 )
connects the generating functional for YM theories in Lorentz gauge to
the generating functional for the same theory in Coulomb gauge.

#### 5.3 FFBRST transformation to link FP effective action in Lorentz
gauge to quadratic gauge

Next we consider theories in quadratic gauges which are often useful in
doing calculations [ 98 ] . The effective action in quadratic gauge in
terms of auxiliary field can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.62)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is structure constant symmetric in @xmath and @xmath . This
effective action is invariant under the FFBRST transformation mentioned
in Eq. ( 3.38 ).

For this case, we start with the following choice of the infinitesimal
field dependent parameter:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

We calculate the Jacobian change as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

We make an ansatz for @xmath for this case as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

The unknown coefficients @xmath are determined by using the condition in
equation ( 2.9 ) and the initial condition in equation ( 3.46 ), to get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath , which is effective action in quadratic gauge as given in
Eq. ( 3.62 ) with gauge parameter @xmath .

Thus, the FFBRST transformation with parameter given in equation ( 3.63
) connects Lorentz gauge theory to the theory for quadratic gauge.

#### 5.4 FP action to the most general BRST/anti-BRST invariant action

The most general BRST/anti-BRST invariant action for YM theories in
Lorentz gauge is given as [ 99 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.67)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This effective action has the following global symmetries.
BRST:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.68)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Anti-BRST:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The above most general BRST/anti-BRST effective action can be
re-expressed in the auxiliary field formulation as,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.70)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The off-shell nilpotent, global BRST/anti-BRST symmetries for this
effective action are given as
BRST:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.71)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Anti-BRST:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.72)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

To obtain the generating functional corresponding to this theory, we
apply the FFBRST transformation with the finite field parameter
obtainable from

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

on the generating functional given in Eq. ( 3.55 ). Using Eq. ( 3.42 ),
change in Jacobian can be calculated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

We further make an ansatz for @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

The condition given in equation ( 2.9 ), then be written for this case
as

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (3.76)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

We look for a special solution corresponding to the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

Comparing the different coefficients, we get the following differential
equations for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

Solutions of the above equations subjected to the initial condition
given in Eq. ( 3.46 ) are,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

These solutions are consistent with condition in Eq. ( 3.77 ). Since
@xmath is arbitrary, we choose @xmath to get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.80)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

which is the same effective action as mentioned in Eq. ( 3.70 ), where
@xmath is the gauge parameter.

Thus, even in the auxiliary field formulation the different generating
functionals corresponding to the different effective theories are
connected through off-shell nilpotent FFBRST transformation with
different choices of the finite parameter which also depends on the
auxiliary field.

### 6 Finite field dependent anti-BRST (FF-anti-BRST) formulation

In this section, we construct the FF-anti-BRST transformation analogous
to FFBRST transformation. For simplicity, we consider the pure YM theory
in Lorentz gauge described by the effective action in Eq. ( 3.31 ) which
is invariant under the following on-shell anti-BRST transformation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.81)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is infinitesimal, anti commuting and global parameter. This
anti-BRST transformation is special case @xmath of general anti-BRST
transformation given in Eq. ( 3.69 ). Following the procedure similar to
the construction of FFBRST transformation as outlined in the chapter 2,
we can easily construct the FF-anti-BRST transformation for the pure YM
theory as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.82)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is finite, field dependent and anticommuting parameter.

In FF-anti-BRST formulation, the infinitesimal change in fields @xmath
is written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is anti-BRST variation of fields @xmath and @xmath is an
infinitesimal field dependent parameter which is related with finite
field dependent parameter @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is given by @xmath

In FF-anti-BRST formulation, we use the following relation to calculate
the infinitesimal change in Jacobian:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, we would like to investigate the role of such transformation by
considering different infinitesimal field dependent parameters @xmath

#### 6.1 FF-anti-BRST transformation to change the gauge parameter
@xmath

We consider a very simple example to show that a simple FF-anti-BRST
transformation can transfer the generating functional corresponding to
YM effective action in Lorentz gauge with a gauge parameter @xmath to
the generating functional corresponding to same effective action with a
different gauge parameter @xmath . We start with the Lorentz gauge
effective action given in Eq. ( 3.37 ) with the gauge parameter @xmath
and consider

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath as arbitrary parameter.

Using Eq. ( 3.85 ), we calculate the infinitesimal change in Jacobian as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

We choose

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

The condition, for replacing the Jacobian of the FF-anti-BRST
transformation with parameter given in Eq. ( 3.86 ) as @xmath , is given
in Eq. ( 2.9 ) and is calculated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last term of above equation gives no contribution due to dimensional
regularization and we can substitute [ 27 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, the L.H.S. of Eq. ( 3.89 ) is vanish iff

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

We solve this equation subjected to the initial condition given in Eq. (
3.46 ) to obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, at @xmath the extra term in the net effective action from the
Jacobian is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

The new effective action becomes @xmath . In this case,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is effective action in Lorentz gauge with gauge parameter @xmath .
Thus, the FF-anti-BRST transformation in Eq. ( 3.82 ) with parameter
given in Eq. ( 3.86 ) connects two effective theories which differ only
by a gauge parameter.

#### 6.2 Lorentz gauge to axial gauge theory

In this subsection we show that FF-anti-BRST transformation plays
exactly same role of FFBRST transformation in connecting different
effective theories. For this purpose we consider same pair of theories
which were connected by FFBRST transformation. The effective action in
Lorentz gauge given in Eq. ( 3.31 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have interchanged the position of @xmath in the ghost term for
the seek of convenience. This action is invariant under anti-BRST
transformation given in Eq. ( 3.81 ). Similarly, the effective action in
axial gauge can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is invariant under the following anti-BRST symmetry
transformation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, we show that the generating functionals corresponding to these two
effective action are related through FF-anti-BRST transformation.

To show the connection, we choose

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

We calculate the change in Jacobian corresponding to this FF-anti-BRST
transformation using Eq. ( 3.85 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.99)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We make an ansatz for @xmath as the following:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.100)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath are parameters to be determined. The condition mentioned in
Eq. ( 2.9 ) to replace the Jacobian as @xmath for this case is

  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------
           @xmath            (3.101)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------

The last four terms in the integrand of Eq. ( 3.101 ) are dependent on
@xmath in a local fashion. The contribution of these terms can possibly
vanish by ghost equation of motion [ 27 , 37 ] .

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This can only happen if the ratio of coefficients of the four terms is
identical to the ratio of coefficients of @xmath and @xmath in @xmath .
This requires that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The nonlocal @xmath dependent terms are cancelled by converting them to
local terms using ghost equation of motion [ 37 ] . This occurs only if
the two @xmath dependent terms combine in a certain manner, depending
again on the ratio of coefficients of @xmath and @xmath in terms in
@xmath . i.e.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.104)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Comparing the coefficients of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath respectively, we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.105)
     @xmath      (3.106)
                 (3.107)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The solutions of the above equations ( 3.105 ) to ( 3.108 ) (for @xmath
) are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.109)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Putting these in the expression for @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.110)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The new effective action becomes @xmath . In this case,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.111)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

which is nothing but the FP effective action in axial gauge.

Thus, the generating functional corresponding to Lorentz gauge and axial
gauge can also be related by FF-anti-BRST transformation. We observe
FF-anti-BRST transformation plays exactly the same role as FFBRST
transformation in this example.

#### 6.3 Lorentz gauge and Coulomb gauge in YM theory

To show the connection between generating functional corresponding to
the effective action in Lorentz gauge to that of the effective action in
Coulomb gauge through FF-anti-BRST transformation, we choose the
parameter,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Using equation ( 3.85 ), we calculate the change in Jacobian as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.113)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath .

We make an ansatz for @xmath looking at the different terms in the
effective action in Lorentz gauge and Coulomb gauge as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.114)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

@xmath will be the part of the new effective action if and only if the
condition in Eq. ( 2.9 ) is satisfied. The condition in this particular
case reads as

  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------
           @xmath            (3.115)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------

Following the similar procedure as in the previous subsection, we obtain
@xmath at @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.116)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Adding this part to @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.117)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

which is effective action in Coulomb gauge. Thus, the generating
functionals corresponding to Lorentz gauge and Coulomb gauge can also be
related by FF-anti-BRST transformation.

#### 6.4 FP theory to most general BRST/anti-BRST invariant theory

In all previous examples we consider the effective theory in different
gauges. However, similar to FFBRST transformation, FF-anti-BRST
transformation can also relate the different effective theories. In
order to connect two different theories viz. YM effective action in
Lorentz gauge and the most general BRST/anti-BRST invariant action in
Lorentz gauge, we consider infinitesimal field dependent parameter as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then, corresponding to the above @xmath the change in Jacobian, using
the Eq.( 3.85 ), is calculated as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Looking at the kind of terms present in the FP effective action in
Lorentz gauge and in the most general BRST/anti-BRST invariant effective
action in Lorentz gauge, we try an ansatz for @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath can be expressed as @xmath iff it satisfies the condition
mentioned in Eq. ( 2.9 ). The condition for this case is calculated as

  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------
           @xmath            (3.121)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------

We look for a special solution corresponding to the condition

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.122)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The coefficient of @xmath and @xmath gives respectively

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.123)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.124)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For a particular @xmath , the solutions of above two equations are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

At @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Hence,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.128)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

which is most general BRST/anti-BRST invariant effective action.

Thus, the generating functional corresponding to most general effective
actions in Lorentz gauge can also be related through FF-anti-BRST
transformation. We observe that FF-anti-BRST transformation plays the
same role as of the FFBRST transformation but with different parameters.

### 7 Off-shell nilpotent FF-anti-BRST transformation

The FF-anti-BRST transformation, we have constructed in previous
section, is on-shell nilpotent. In this section, we construct
FF-anti-BRST transformation which is off-shell nilpotent. For this
purpose, we consider the following effective action for YM theories in
auxiliary field formulation in Lorentz gauge

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.129)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

This effective action is invariant under anti-BRST transformation
mentioned in Eq. ( 3.72 ). Following the procedure outlined in the
section 3.2, we obtain the FF-anti-BRST transformation in auxiliary
field formulation as,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.130)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

which also leaves the effective action in Eq. ( 3.129 ) invariant. Now,
we consider the different choices of the parameter @xmath in auxiliary
field formulation to connect different theories. We redo the same
examples using off-shell FF-anti-BRST transformation.

#### 7.1 YM theory in Lorentz gauge to Coulomb gauge

The effective action for YM theory in Coulomb gauge can be written after
rearranging the ghost term as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.131)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

To show the connection of this theory with the theory in Lorentz gauge,
we choose the following infinitesimal field dependent parameter:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.132)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Using the above @xmath , we find the change in Jacobian as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.133)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

We make an ansatz for @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.134)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The essential requirement for replacing the Jacobian as @xmath mentioned
in Eq. ( 2.9 ) is satisfied iff

  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------
           @xmath            (3.135)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------

The last two terms in the integrand of Eq. ( 3.135 ) are dependent on
@xmath in a local fashion. The contribution of these terms can possibly
vanish by ghost equation of motion given in Eq. ( 3.102 ), This can only
happen if the ratio of coefficients of the two terms is identical to the
ratio of coefficients of @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . The nonlocal
terms become local, only if, it satisfy the following conditions:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.136)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.137)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We further obtain equations for the parameter @xmath by vanishing the
coefficient of different independent terms in the L.H.S. of the Eq. (
3.135 ) as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.138)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We determine the parameter @xmath subjected to the initial condition in
Eq. ( 3.46 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.139)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Using the above solutions for @xmath , we write @xmath at @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.140)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Now, when this @xmath is added to the effective action @xmath , it
provides effective action in Coulomb gauge as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.141)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

which is the effective action in Coulomb gauge with gauge parameter
@xmath .

Thus, FF-anti-BRST in auxiliary field formulation produces the same
result as expected, even though the finite finite parameter is
different.

#### 7.2 Lorentz gauge to axial gauge theory

We repeat the same steps as in the previous subsection again for this
case, with a different finite field dependent parameter obtainable from

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.142)
  -- -------- -- ---------

using Eq. ( 3.84 ) and consider the ansatz for @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.143)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The condition for which the Jacobian of FF-anti-BRST transformation in
auxiliary field formulation corresponding to the parameter given in Eq.
( 3.142 ) can be replaced as @xmath is,

  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------
           @xmath            (3.144)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------

Following the previous subsection, we solve the differential equations,
which are obtained from the above condition, to calculate the values of
parameters @xmath .

After calculating the exact values of @xmath , the extra piece of the
action @xmath becomes as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.145)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Now,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.146)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the effective action in axial gauge with gauge parameter
@xmath .

This implies off-shell nilpotent FF-anti-BRST also produces the same
result even though calculations are different.

#### 7.3 Lorentz gauge theory to most general BRST/anti-BRST invariant
theory

We consider one more example in FF-anti-BRST formulation using auxiliary
field. We show that the most general BRST/anti-BRST invariant theory can
be obtained from FP theory in Lorentz gauge. The most general effective
action which is invariant under BRST/anti-BRST transformation in
auxiliary field is given in Eq. ( 3.70 ). We choose

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.147)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and make an ansatz for @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.148)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The condition in Eq. ( 2.9 ) leads to

  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------
           @xmath            (3.149)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------

Using the same procedure we obtain the solutions for the parameter
@xmath , exactly same as in Eq. ( 3.79 ). Even if the finite parameter
is different in FFBRST and FF-anti-BRST, we obtain the same contribution
from Jacobian in this case as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.150)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now, @xmath which is nothing but most general BRST/anti-BRST invariant
effective action with gauge parameter @xmath mentioned in Eq. ( 3.80 ).
In all three cases we show that off-shell nilpotent FF-anti-BRST
transformation plays exactly same role as on-shell nilpotent
FF-anti-BRST transformation but with different finite parameters.

### 8 Conclusions

In this chapter we have reformulated the FFBRST transformation in an
auxiliary field formulation where the BRST transformation is off-shell
nilpotent. We have considered several examples with different choices of
finite parameter to connect the different effective theories. Most of
the results of the FFBRST transformation are also obtained in auxiliary
field formulation. We have further introduced and developed for first
time the concept of the FF anti-BRST transformation analogous to the
FFBRST transformation. FF-anti-BRST transformation is also used to
connect the different generating functionals corresponding to different
effective theories. Several examples have been worked out explicitly to
show that the FF-anti-BRST transformation also plays the same role as of
FFBRST transformation but with different finite parameters. Lastly, we
consider the FF-anti-BRST transformation in auxiliary field formulation
to make it off-shell nilpotent. The overall multiplicative antighost
fields in the finite parameters of the FFBRST transformation are
replaced by ghost fields in case of the FF-anti-BRST transformation.
Even though the finite parameters and hence the calculations are
different, the same results are also produced in an auxiliary field
formulation of the FF-anti-BRST transformation. The BRST and the
anti-BRST transformations are not independent transformations in the YM
theories. We observe that the FF-anti-BRST transformation plays exactly
the same role in connecting theories in 1-form gauge theory as expected.
In 2-form gauge theories the BRST and anti-BRST transformations play
some sort of independent roles. Therefore, it will be interesting to
study the finite field dependent BRST and anti-BRST transformations in
2-form gauge theories [ 45 ] , which we will discuss in the next
chapter.

## Chapter \thechapter FFBRST formulation in 2-form gauge theory

In this chapter we extend FFBRST formulation to Abelian 2-form gauge
theories and show that it relates generating functional corresponding to
different effective theories [ 45 ] . We further construct FF-anti-BRST
transformation for such theories to show that it plays same role as in
the case of 1-form gauge theories. Field/antifield formulation of 2-form
gauge theories are also studied in the context of FFBRST transformation.

### 9 Preliminary: gauge theory of Abelian rank-2 antisymmetric tensor
field

We consider the Abelian gauge theory for rank-2 antisymmetric tensor
field @xmath defined by the action

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.151)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath This action is invariant under the gauge transformation
@xmath with a vector gauge parameter @xmath .

To quantize this theory using BRST transformation, it is necessary to
introduce the following ghost and auxiliary fields: anticommuting vector
fields @xmath and @xmath , a commuting vector field @xmath ,
anticommuting scalar fields @xmath and @xmath , and commuting scalar
fields @xmath and @xmath . The BRST transformation is then defined for
@xmath by replacing @xmath in the gauge transformation by the ghost
field @xmath .

The complete effective action for this theory in covariant gauge, using
the BRST formulation, is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.152)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with the gauge-fixing and ghost term

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.153)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are gauge parameters. This effective action is
invariant under following BRST and anti-BRST symmetries.

BRST:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.154)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

anti-BRST:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.155)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the BRST parameter @xmath is global, infinitesimal and
anticommuting in nature. The anti-BRST transformation is similar to the
BRST transformation, where the role of ghost and antighost field is
interchanged with some modification in coefficients. The generating
functional for this Abelian rank 2 antisymmetric tensor field theory in
a covariant gauge is defined as,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.156)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the generic notation for all the fields ( @xmath ).

The BRST and anti-BRST transformations in Eqs. ( 4.154 ) and ( 4.155 )
respectively leave the above generating functional invariant as, the
path integral measure @xmath is invariant under such transformations.

### 10 FFBRST formulation of Abelian rank 2 anti-symmetric tensor field

To generalized the BRST transformation for this theory we follow the
method outlined in chapter 2. We start by making the infinitesimal BRST
parameter field dependent by introducing a parameter @xmath . All the
fields @xmath dependent on @xmath in such a way that @xmath and @xmath ,
the transformed field. It can easily be shown that such off-shell
nilpotent BRST transformation with finite field dependent parameter is
symmetry of the effective action in Eq. ( 4.152 ). However, the path
integral measure in Eq. ( 4.156 ) is not invariant under such
transformation as the BRST parameter is finite.

The Jacobian of the path integral measure for such transformations can
be evaluated for some particular choices of the finite field dependent
parameter, @xmath , as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.157)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The Jacobian, @xmath can be replaced (within the functional integral) as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.158)
  -- -------- -- ---------

iff the condition given in Eq. ( 2.9 ) is satisfied. However, the
infinitesimal change in the @xmath can be calculated using Eq. ( 2.13 ).

By choosing appropriate @xmath , we can change @xmath either to another
effective action for same theory or to an effective action for another
theory. The resulting effective action also be invariant under same BRST
transformation.

### 11 FFBRST transformation in 2-form gauge theory: examples

In this section, we would like to show explicitly that the FFBRST
transformation interrelates the different effective 2-form gauge
theories. In particular, we are interested to obtain the effective
theories for Abelian rank-2 tensor field in noncovariant gauges by
applying FFBRST transformation to the effective theories in covariant
gauge.

#### 11.1 Effective theory in axial gauge

We start with the generating functional corresponding to the effective
theory in Lorentz gauge given in Eq. ( 4.156 ), where the Lorentz gauge
effective action @xmath is invariant under following FFBRST:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.159)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a finite, anticommuting BRST parameter depends on the
fields in global manner.

To obtain the effective theories in axial gauge we choose the finite
parameter obtainable from

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.160)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are arbitrary parameters (depend on @xmath ) and
@xmath is arbitrary constant four vector. Now we apply this FFBRST
transformation to the generating functional @xmath given in Eq. ( 4.156
). The path integral measure is not invariant and give rise a nontrivial
functional @xmath (explicitly shown in Appendix A), where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.161)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Now, adding this @xmath to @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.162)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.163)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

is the effective action in axial gauge with new gauge parameters @xmath
and @xmath . Thus, the FFBRST transformation with the finite parameter
given in Eq. ( 4.159 ) takes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.164)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The effective theory of Abelian rank-2 antisymmetric field in axial
gauge is convenient in many different situations. The generating
functional in axial gauge with a suitable axis is same as the generating
functional obtained by using Zwanziger’s formulation for electric and
magnetic charges [ 54 , 100 ] . Using the FFBRST transformation with the
parameter given in Eq. ( 4.160 ) we have linked generating functionals
corresponding to the effective theories in covariant and noncovariant
gauges.

#### 11.2 Effective theory in Coulomb gauge

The generating functional for the effective theories in Coulomb gauge is
also obtained by using the FFBRST transformation with a different
parameter

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.165)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The effective action in Lorentz gauge, @xmath as given in Eq. ( 4.152 )
is invariant under FFBRST transformation in Eq. ( 4.159 ) corresponding
to above mentioned finite parameter. Now we consider the effect of this
FFBRST transformation on the generating functional in Lorentz gauge.

In Appendix A, it has been shown that the Jacobian for the path integral
measure corresponding to this FFBRST transformation is replaced by
@xmath , where @xmath is the local functional of fields calculated as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.166)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

and this extra piece of the action can be added to the effective action
in covariant gauge to lead a new effective action

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.167)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

which is an effective action in Coulomb gauge for Abelian rank 2 tensor
field. Thus, we study the Abelian 2-form gauge theory in Coulomb gauge
more rigorously through its connection with Lorentz gauge via finite
BRST transformation.

### 12 FF-anti-BRST transformation in 2-form gauge theories

In this section, we consider the generalization of anti-BRST
transformation following the similar method as discussed in section 2
and show it plays exactly similar role in connecting the generating
functionals in different effective theories of Abelian rank-2
antisymmetric tensor field.

#### 12.1 Lorentz to axial gauge theory using FF-anti-BRST formulation

For sake of convenience we recast the effective action in covariant
gauge given in Eq. ( 4.152 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.168)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

which is invariant under following FF-anti-BRST transformation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.169)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is finite field dependent anti-BRST parameter.

To obtain the generating functional in axial gauge using FF-anti-BRST
transformation we choose,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.170)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

This parameter is similar to @xmath in Eq. ( 4.160 ) except the
(anti)ghost and ghost of (anti)ghost fields are replaced by their
antighost fields respectively.

Similar to FFBRST case, this FF-anti-BRST transformation changes the
Jacobian in the path integral measure by a factor @xmath , where @xmath
is a local functional of fields and is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.171)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

It is easy to verify that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.172)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

which is the action in axial gauge in 2-form gauge theory. Thus, the
FF-anti-BRST transformation with the finite parameter given in Eq. (
4.169 ) takes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.173)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which shows that the FF-anti-BRST transformation plays the similar role
as FFBRST transformation in 2-form gauge theory but with different
finite field dependent parameter.

### 13 Field/Antifield formulation of Abelian rank-2 antisymmetric
tensor field theory

In this section we construct field/antifield formulation for Abelian
rank-2 antisymmetric tensor field theory to show that techniques of
FFBRST formulation can also be applied in this modern approach of
quantum field theory. For this purpose we express the generating
functional in Eq. ( 4.156 ) in field/antifield formulation by
introducing antifield @xmath corresponding to each field @xmath with
opposite statistics as,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.174)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

This can be written in compact form as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.175)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is an extended action for 2-form gauge theory in Lorentz
gauge corresponding the gauge-fixed fermion @xmath having Grassmann
parity 1 and ghost number -1. The expression for @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.176)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The generating functional @xmath does not depend on the choice of
gauge-fixed fermion. This extended quantum action, @xmath , satisfies
the quantum master equation given in Eq. ( 2.22 ). The antifields @xmath
corresponding to each field @xmath for this particular theory can be
obtained from the gauge-fixed fermion as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.177)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Now we apply the FFBRST transformation with the finite parameter given
in Eq. ( 4.160 ) to this generating functional in Lorentz gauge. But the
path integral measure is not invariant under such a finite
transformation and give rise to a factor which can be written as @xmath
, where the functional @xmath is calculated in Appendix A and also given
in Eq. ( 4.161 ). The transformed generating functional

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.178)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The generating functional in axial gauge

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.179)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The extended action @xmath for 2-form gauge theory in axial gauge also
satisfies the quantum master equation given in ( 2.22 ). The gauge-fixed
fermion for axial gauge

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.180)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and corresponding antifields are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.181)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Thus, the FFBRST transformation with finite parameter given in Eq. (
4.160 ) relates the different solutions of quantum master equation in
field/antifield formulation.

### 14 Conclusions

The usual BRST transformation has been generalized for the Abelian
rank-2 antisymmetric tensor field theory by making the parameter finite
and field dependent. Such FFBRST transformation is nilpotent and leaves
the effective action invariant. However, being finite in nature such
transformations do not leave the path integral measure invariant. We
have shown that for certain choices of finite field dependent parameter,
the Jacobian for the path integral of such FFBRST transformation always
can be written as @xmath , where @xmath is some local functional of
fields and depends on the choice of the finite BRST parameter. @xmath
can be added with @xmath to produce the new effective action. Thus, the
generating functional corresponding to one effective theory is then
linked to the generating functional corresponding to another effective
theory through the FFBRST transformation. In this present work we have
shown that the generating functional corresponding to covariant gauge
viz. Lorentz gauge is connected to the generating functional in
noncovariant gauges viz. axial gauge and Coulomb gauge. Thus, the
generalized BRST transformation is helpful in the study of Abelian
rank-2 antisymmetric tensor field theory in noncovariant gauges, which
is very useful in certain situation [ 100 ] . We further have considered
the generalization of anti-BRST transformation and show that even
FF-anti-BRST transformation can connect generating functionals for
different effective theories. The FFBRST transformation is also very
useful in modern approach of quantum field theory, namely
field/antifield formulation. With the help of an explicit example we
have shown that the different solutions of the master equation are
related through FFBRST transformation in the field/antifield formulation
of Abelian 2-form antisymmetric tensor field theory.

## Chapter \thechapter FFBRST formulation for Gribov-Zwanziger (GZ)
theory

In this chapter, we develop the FFBRST formulation for the
multiplicatively renormalizable GZ theory which is free from Gribov
ambiguity. The mapping between GZ theory and Yang-Mills (YM) theory,
which contains the Gribov copies, is established in Euclidean space [ 63
] . We further extend this formulation using BV techniques [ 64 ] .

### 15 GZ theory: brief introduction

In YM theories even after gauge-fixing the redundancy of gauge fields is
not completely removed in certain gauges for large gauge fields (Gribov
ambiguity) [ 53 ] . In order to resolve such problem, Gribov and
Zwanziger proposed a theory, which restricts the domain of integration
in the functional integral within the first Gribov horizon [ 54 ] . It
has been shown in Ref. [ 55 ] that the restriction to the Gribov region
@xmath (defined in such a way that the Faddeev-Popov (FP) operator is
strictly positive. i.e.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.182)
  -- -------- -- ---------

can be imposed by adding a nonlocal term @xmath to the standard YM
action

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.183)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the kinetic part and @xmath is the ghost and
gauge(Landau gauge)-fixing part of the YM action respectively,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.184)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

and the nonlocal horizon term in @xmath -dimensional Euclidean space is
written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.185)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the integrand @xmath is called the horizon function. There exist
many different choices for the horizon function in literature [ 59 ] .
One such horizon term is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.186)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath is the inverse of the Faddeev-Popov operator @xmath . The Gribov
parameter @xmath can be obtained in a consistent way by solving a gap
equation (also known as horizon condition) [ 54 , 55 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.187)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the number of colors. Another horizon term which gives
the correct multiplicative renormalizability of the GZ theory is given
as [ 59 ]

  -- -- -- ---------
           (5.188)
  -- -- -- ---------

The nonlocal term ( 5.185 ) corresponding to the horizon function (
5.188 ) can be localized as [ 54 , 55 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.189)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.190)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where a pair of complex conjugate bosonic field @xmath and anticommuting
auxiliary fields @xmath , with composite index @xmath , have been
introduced. As at the level of the action, total derivatives are always
neglected, @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.191)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here it is concluded that at the local level horizon functions ( 5.186 )
and ( 5.188 ) are same. So that the localized GZ action becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.192)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Thus, the local action @xmath and the nonlocal action @xmath are related
as the following:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.193)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath and @xmath . By differentiating Eq. ( 5.193 ) with respect
to @xmath and noting @xmath , the horizon condition in Eq. ( 5.187 ) is
recast as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.194)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The horizon condition can further be written as [ 59 , 62 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.195)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath , the quantum action defined as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.196)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We see that the horizon condition ( 5.195 ) is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.197)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which, owing to the discrete symmetry of the action @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.198)
  -- -------- -- ---------

becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.199)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Further, the constant term @xmath is introduced in @xmath , to
incorporate the effect of horizon condition in the action as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.200)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

For the GZ action to be renormalizable, it is crucial to shift the field
@xmath , [ 55 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.201)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so that the complete GZ action becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.202)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

which has been shown to be multiplicative renormalizable [ 59 ] .

### 16 The nilpotent BRST transformation of GZ action

The complete GZ action after localizing the nonlocal horizon term in D
dimensional Euclidean space can be recast as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.203)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath , the BRST exact action and @xmath , the action for horizon
term, defined as [ 59 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.204)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The conventional BRST transformation for all the fields is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.205)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is usual infinitesimal BRST parameter. But one can check
that the BRST symmetry is broken softly for the GZ action [ 54 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.206)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

the breaking is due to the presence of @xmath dependent term, @xmath .

To discuss the renormalizability of @xmath , @xmath is embedded into a
larger action with 3 doublets of sources @xmath and @xmath as [ 59 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.207)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

whereas the sources involved @xmath are commuting and @xmath are
fermionic in nature. The above action is invariant under following BRST
transformation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.208)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Therefore, the BRST symmetry has been restored at the cost of
introducing new sources. The different quantum numbers (to study the
system properly) of fields and sources, involved in this theory, are
discussed in Ref. [ 59 ] . However, we do not want to change our
original theory ( 5.204 ) and therefore we choose the sources to have
the following values at the end:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.209)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

It follows that @xmath .

The generating functional for the effective GZ action in Euclidean space
is defined as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.210)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is generic notation for all fields used in GZ action.

### 17 FFBRST transformation in Euclidean space

The Jacobian, @xmath , of the path integral measure (as given in Eq. (
2.7 ) in the Euclidean space can be replaced (within the functional
integral) as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.211)
  -- -------- -- ---------

iff the following condition is satisfied [ 35 ] :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.212)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is local functional of fields. The infinitesimal change in
the @xmath can be calculated using Eq. ( 2.13 ).

Now, we generalize the BRST transformation given in Eqs. ( 5.205 ) and (
5.208 ) by making usual BRST parameter finite and field dependent as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.213)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is finite, field dependent, anticommuting and space-time
independent parameter. One can easily check that the above FFBRST
transformation is also symmetry of the effective GZ action ( @xmath ).

### 18 A mapping between GZ theory and YM theory

In this section we establish the connection between the theories with GZ
action and YM action by using finite field dependent BRST
transformation. In particular, we show that the generating functional
for GZ theory in path integral formulation is directly related to that
of YM theory with proper choice of finite field dependent BRST
transformation. The nontrivial Jacobian of the path integral measure is
responsible for such a connection. For this purpose we choose a finite
field dependent parameter @xmath obtainable from

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.214)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

using Eq. ( 2.5 ). The infinitesimal change in Jacobian for above @xmath
using Eq. ( 2.13 ) is calculated as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.215)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Now, the Jacobian for path integral measure in the generating functional
( 5.210 ) can be replaced by @xmath iff condition ( 5.212 ) is
satisfied. We consider an ansatz for @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.216)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath are arbitrary constants which depend on the parameter
@xmath and satisfy following initial conditions:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.217)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The condition ( 5.212 ) with the above @xmath leads to

  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------
           @xmath            (5.218)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------

where prime denotes the differentiation with respect to the parameter
@xmath . Equating the coefficient of terms @xmath @xmath , @xmath
@xmath and @xmath from both sides of above condition, we get following
differential equations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.219)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The @xmath dependent terms will be cancelled separately and comparing
the coefficients of @xmath dependent terms, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.220)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The particular solution of Eq. ( 5.219 ) subjected to the condition (
5.217 ) and Eq. ( 5.220 ) is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.221)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Therefore, the expression for @xmath in term of @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.222)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The transformed action is obtained by adding @xmath to @xmath as,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.223)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We left with the YM effective action in Landau gauge.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.224)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note the new action is independent of horizon parameter @xmath , and
hence horizon condition @xmath leads trivial relation for @xmath . Thus,
using FFBRST transformation we have mapped the generating functionals in
Euclidean space as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.225)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the generating functional for Yang-Mils action @xmath .

### 19 Connecting GZ theory and YM theory in BV formalism

The generating functional of YM theory in the BV formulation can be
written by introducing antifields @xmath corresponding to the all fields
@xmath with opposite statistics as,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.226)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This can further be written in a compact form as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.227)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the expression for gauge-fixing fermion is given as @xmath . The
generating functional does not depend on the choice of gauge-fixing
fermion [ 5 ] . The extended quantum action, @xmath , satisfies the
quantum master equation given in Eq. ( 2.22 ).

The antifields can be evaluated from @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.228)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Similarly, the generating functional of GZ theory in BV formulation can
be written as,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.229)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

This can further be written in compact form using gauge-fixed fermion (
@xmath ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath                     (5.230)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The antifields are obtained from @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.231)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To connect these two theories we construct the following finite field
dependent parameter @xmath :

  -- -- -- ---------
           (5.232)
  -- -- -- ---------

The Jacobian of path integral measure in the generating functional (
5.230 ) for the FFBRST with this parameter can be replaced by @xmath iff
condition ( 5.212 ) is satisfied. To find @xmath we start with an ansatz
for @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.233)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are arbitrary but @xmath -dependent constants and satisfy
the following initial conditions: @xmath These constants are calculated
using Eq. ( 5.212 ) subjected to the initial condition to find the
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.234)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By adding @xmath to @xmath , we get @xmath Hence,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.235)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Thus, using FFBRST transformation we connect the GZ theory to YM theory
in BV formulation.

### 20 Conclusions

The GZ theory which is free from Gribov copies as the domain of
integration is restricted to the first Gribov horizon, is not invariant
under usual BRST transformation due to the presence of the nonlocal
horizon term. Hence the KO criterion for color confinement in a
manifestly covariant gauge fails for GZ theory. A nilpotent BRST
transformation which leaves GZ action invariant was developed recently
and can be applied to KO analysis for color confinement. This nilpotent
BRST symmetry is generalized by allowing the transformation parameter
finite and field dependent. This generalized BRST transformation is
nilpotent and symmetry of the GZ effective action. We have shown that
this nilpotent BRST with an appropriate choice of finite field dependent
parameter relates the GZ theory with a correct horizon term to the YM
theory in Euclidean space where horizon condition becomes a trivial one.
We have shown the same connection in BV formulation also by considering
the appropriate finite parameter. Thus, we have shown that the theory,
free from Gribov copies (i.e. GZ theory with proper horizon term), is
related through a nilpotent BRST transformation with a finite parameter
to a theory with Gribov copies (i.e. YM theory in Euclidean space). The
nontrivial Jacobian of such finite transformation is responsible for
this important connection. This implies our formulation is very useful
for the better understanding of Gribov ambiguity.

## Chapter \thechapter Finite nilpotent symmetry for gauge theories

Earlier it was shown that FFBRST and FF-anti-BRST transformations are
symmetry of the effective action but not of the generating functional.
In this chapter we construct a nilpotent finite BRST transformation
which leaves both the effective action and generating functional
invariant [ 65 ] . To construct such a finite transformation we combine
usual BRST and anti-BRST transformations with finite parameters. The
field/antifield (or BV) formulation in the context such transformation
is also studied in this chapter.

### 21 The infinitesimal mixed BRST (MBRST) transformation

The generating functional for the Green’s function in an effective
theory described by the effective action @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.236)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.237)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the generic notation for all fields involved in the
effective theory. The infinitesimal BRST ( @xmath ) and anti-BRST (
@xmath ) transformations are defined as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.238)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.239)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are infinitesimal, anticommuting but global
parameters. Such transformations leave the generating functional as well
as effective action invariant, separately, as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.240)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.241)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This implies that the effective action @xmath and the generating
functional are also invariant under the MBRST ( @xmath ) transformation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.242)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Further such MBRST transformation is nilpotent because,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.243)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now, in the next section we construct the finite version of the
following infinitesimal MBRST symmetry transformation:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.244)
  -- -------- -- ---------

### 22 Construction of finite field dependent MBRST (FFMBRST)
transformation

To construct the FFMBRST transformation, we follow the similar method of
constructing FFBRST transformation [ 27 ] . However, in this case unlike
FFBRST transformation we have to deal with two parameters, one for the
BRST transformation and the other for anti-BRST transformation. We
introduce a numerical parameter @xmath @xmath and make all the fields (
@xmath ) @xmath -dependent in such a way that @xmath and @xmath , the
transformed field. Further, we make the infinitesimal parameters @xmath
and @xmath field dependent as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.245)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.246)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the prime denotes the derivative with respect to @xmath and @xmath
are infinitesimal field dependent parameters. The infinitesimal but
field dependent MBRST transformation, thus can be written generically as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.247)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Following the work in Ref. [ 27 ] it can be shown that the parameters
@xmath @xmath contain the factors @xmath @xmath which are considered to
be nilpotent. Thus @xmath dependency from @xmath and @xmath can be
dropped. Then Eq. ( 6.247 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.248)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The FFMBRST transformation with the finite field dependent parameters
then can be constructed by integrating such infinitesimal
transformations from @xmath to @xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.249)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.250)
  -- -------- -- ---------

are the finite field dependent parameters with @xmath .

Therefore, the FFMBRST transformation corresponding to MBRST
transformation mentioned in Eq. ( 6.244 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.251)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It can be shown that above FFMBRST transformation with some specific
choices of the finite parameters @xmath and @xmath is the symmetry
transformation of the both effective action and the generating
functional as the path integral measure is invariant under such
transformation.

### 23 Method for evaluating the Jacobian

To show the invariance of the generating functional we need to calculate
the Jacobian of the path integral measure in the expression of
generating functional. The Jacobian of the path integral measure for
FFMBRST transformation @xmath can be evaluated for some particular
choices of the finite field dependent parameters @xmath and @xmath . We
start with the definition,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.252)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Now the transformation from @xmath to @xmath is infinitesimal in nature,
thus the infinitesimal change in Jacobian can be calculated as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.253)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath sums over all fields involved in the path integral measure
and @xmath sign refers to whether @xmath is a bosonic or a fermionic
field. Using the Taylor expansion we calculate the above expression as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.254)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The Jacobian, @xmath , can be replaced (within the functional integral)
as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.255)
  -- -------- -- ---------

iff the following condition is satisfied:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.256)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are some local functionals of fields and satisfy
the initial condition

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.257)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The finite parameters @xmath and @xmath are arbitrary and we can
construct them in such a way that the infinitesimal change in Jacobian
@xmath (Eq. ( 6.254 )) with respect to @xmath vanishes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.258)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore, with the help of Eqs. ( 6.256 ) and ( 6.258 ), we see that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.259)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It means the @xmath is independent of @xmath (fields) and must vanish to
satisfy the initial condition given in Eq. ( 6.257 ) satisfied. Hence
the generating functional is not effected by the Jacobian @xmath as
@xmath . The nontrivial Jacobian arising from finite BRST parameter
@xmath compensates the same arising due to finite anti-BRST parameter
@xmath . It is straightforward to see that the effective action @xmath
is invariant under such FFMBSRT transformation.

### 24 Examples

To demonstrate the results obtained in the previous section we would
like to consider several explicit examples in 1D as well as in 4D. In
particular we consider the bosonized self-dual chiral model in 2D,
Maxwell’s theory in 4D, and non-Abelian YM theory in 4D. In all these
cases we construct explicit finite parameters @xmath and @xmath of
FFMBRST transformation such that the generating functional remains
invariant.

#### 24.1 Bosonized chiral model

We start with the generating functional for the bosonized self-dual
chiral model as [ 66 , 67 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.260)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the path integral measure in generic notation. The
effective action @xmath in 2D is given as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.261)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where the fields @xmath and @xmath are the self-dual field, Wess-Zumino
field, multiplier field, auxiliary field, ghost field and antighost
field, respectively. The nilpotent BRST and anti-BRST transformations
for this theory are

BRST:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.262)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

anti-BRST:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.263)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are infinitesimal, anticommuting and global
parameters. Note that @xmath and @xmath are absolutely anticommuting
i.e. @xmath . In this case the MBRST symmetry transformation ( @xmath ),
as constructed in section II, reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.264)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The FFMBRST transformation corresponding to the above MBRST
transformation is constructed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.265)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are finite field dependent parameters and are
still anticommuting in nature. We construct the finite parameters @xmath
and @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.266)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.267)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is an arbitrary parameter.

Using Eq. ( 6.254 ), the infinitesimal change in Jacobian for the
FFMBRST transformation given in Eq. ( 6.265 ) is calculated as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.268)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The contributions from second and third terms in the R.H.S. of Eq. (
6.254 ) cancel each other. This implies that the Jacobian for path
integral measure is unit under FFMBRST transformation. Hence, the
generating functional as well as the effective action are invariant
under FFMBRST transformation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.269)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now, we would like to consider of the effect of FFBRST transformation
with finite parameter @xmath and FF-anti-BRST transformation with finite
parameter @xmath independently. The infinitesimal change in Jacobian
@xmath for the FFBRST transformation with the parameter @xmath is
calculated as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.270)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To write the Jacobian @xmath as @xmath in case of BRST transformation,
we make the following ansatz for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.271)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are arbitrary @xmath -dependent constants and satisfy the
initial conditions @xmath .

The essential condition in Eq. ( 6.256 ) satisfies with Eqs. ( 6.270 )
and ( 6.271 ) iff

  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------
           @xmath            (6.272)
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------

where prime denotes the derivative with respect to @xmath . Equating the
both sides of the above equation, we get the following equations:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.273)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The solution of above equations satisfying the initial conditions is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.274)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then, the expression for @xmath in terms of @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.275)
  -- -------- -- ---------

On the other hand the infinitesimal change in Jacobian @xmath for the
FF-anti-BRST parameter @xmath is calculated as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.276)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Similarly, to write the Jacobian @xmath as @xmath in the anti-BRST case,
we make an ansatz for @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.277)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where arbitrary @xmath -dependent constants @xmath have to be
calculated.

The essential condition in Eq. ( 6.256 ) for the above Jacobian @xmath
and functional @xmath provides

  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------
           @xmath            (6.278)
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------

Comparing the L.H.S. and R.H.S. of the above equation, we get the
following equations:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.279)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Solving the above equations, we get the following values for the @xmath
’s:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.280)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Putting these values in expression of @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.281)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Thus, under successive FFBRST and FF-anti-BRST transformations the
generating functional transformed as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.282)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note, for the particular choices of @xmath and @xmath , the @xmath and
@xmath cancel each other. Hence @xmath remains invariant under
successive FFBRST and FF-anti-BRST transformations. It is interesting to
note that the effect of FFMBRST transformation is equivalent to
successive operation of FFBRST and FF-anti-BRST transformations.

#### 24.2 Maxwell’s theory

We consider FFMBRST transformation here for a more basic model. The
generating functional for Maxwell theory, using Nakanishi-Lautrup type
auxiliary field ( @xmath ), can be given as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.283)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the effective action in covariant (Lorentz) gauge with the ghost
term is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.284)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The infinitesimal off-shell nilpotent BRST and anti-BRST transformations
under which the effective action @xmath as well as generating functional
@xmath remain invariant, are given as

BRST:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.285)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Anti-BRST:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.286)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The nilpotent BRST transformation ( @xmath ) and anti-BRST
transformation ( @xmath ) mentioned above are absolutely anticommuting
in nature i.e. @xmath . Therefore, the sum of these two transformations
( @xmath and @xmath ) is also a nilpotent symmetry transformation. Let
us define MBRST transformation ( @xmath ) in this case, which is
characterized by two infinitesimal parameters @xmath and @xmath , as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.287)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The FFMBRST symmetry transformation for this theory is then constructed
as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.288)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are finite, field dependent and anticommuting
parameters. We choose particular @xmath and @xmath in this case as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.289)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.290)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is an arbitrary parameter. The infinitesimal change in
Jacobian using Eq. ( 6.254 ) for the FFMBRST transformation with the
above finite parameters vanishes. It means that the path integral
measure and hence the generating functional is invariant under FFMBRST
transformation.

Now, the infinitesimal change in Jacobian for the FFBRST transformation
with the parameter @xmath is calculated as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.291)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To write the Jacobian @xmath as @xmath in the BRST case, we make the
following ansatz for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.292)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The essential condition in Eq. ( 6.256 ) is satisfied subjected to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.293)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the prime denotes the derivative with respect to @xmath . Equating
the both sides of the above equation, we get the following:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.294)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The solution of above equations satisfying the initial conditions @xmath
is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.295)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Putting these value in Eq. ( 6.292 ), the expression of @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.296)
  -- -------- -- ---------

However, the infinitesimal change in Jacobian @xmath for the
FF-anti-BRST transformation with the parameter @xmath is calculated as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.297)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Similarly, to write the Jacobian @xmath as @xmath in the anti-BRST case,
we make the following ansatz for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.298)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The essential condition in Eq. ( 6.256 ) for Eqs. ( 6.297 ) and ( 6.298
) provides

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.299)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Comparing the L.H.S. and R.H.S. of the above equation we get the
following equations:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.300)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Solving the above equations, we get the following values for the @xmath
’s:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.301)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Plugging back these value of @xmath in Eq. ( 6.298 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.302)
  -- -------- -- ---------

From Eqs. ( 6.296 ) and ( 6.302 ), one can easily see that @xmath .
Therefore, under successive FFBRST and FF-anti-BRST transformations with
these particular finite parameters @xmath and @xmath , respectively, the
generating functional transformed as

  -- -- -- ---------
           (6.303)
  -- -- -- ---------

Hence, the successive operations of FFBRST and FF-anti-BRST
transformations also leave the generating functional @xmath . This
reconfirms that FFMBRST transformation has same effect on both the
effective action and the generating functional as the successive FFBRST
and FF-anti-BRST transformations.

#### 24.3 Non-Abelian YM theory in Curci-Ferrari-Delbourgo-Jarvis (CFDJ)
gauge

The examples studied so far were Abelian gauge theories. We now consider
an example with non-Abelian gauge theory. CFDJ gauge is a standard
gauge-fixing which has been studied extensively in non-Abelian gauge
theories [ 101 ] . The generating functional for non-Abelian YM theory
in CFDJ gauge is written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.304)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is generic notation for all the fields in the effective
action @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.305)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

with the field strength tensor @xmath and @xmath is the
Nakanishi-Lautrup type auxiliary field. The effective action as well as
the generating functional are invariant under the following
infinitesimal BRST and anti-BRST transformations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.306)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are infinitesimal, anticommuting and global
parameters. The infinitesimal MBRST symmetry transformation ( @xmath )
in this case is written as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.307)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Corresponding FFMBRST symmetry transformation is constructed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.308)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

with two arbitrary finite field dependent parameters @xmath and @xmath .
The generating functional @xmath is made invariant under the above
FFMBRST transformation by constructing appropriate finite parameters
@xmath and @xmath . We construct the finite nilpotent parameters @xmath
and @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.309)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.310)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is an arbitrary parameter. Following the same method
elaborated in the previous two examples, we show that the Jacobian for
path integral measure due to FFMBRST transformation given in Eq. ( 6.308
) with finite parameters @xmath and @xmath becomes unit. It means that
under such FFMBRST transformation the generating functional as well as
effective action remain invariant. The Jacobian contribution for path
integral measure due to FFBRST transformation with parameter @xmath
compensates the same due to FF-anti-BRST transformation with parameter
@xmath . Therefore, under the successive FFBRST and FF-anti-BRST
transformations the generating functional remains invariant as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.311)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Again we see the equivalence between FFMBRST transformation and
successive operations of FFBRST and FF-anti-BRST transformations.

We end up the section with conclusion that in all the three cases the
FFMBRST transformation with appropriate finite parameters is the finite
nilpotent symmetry of the effective action as well as the generating
functional of the effective theories. Here, we also note that the
successive operations of FFBRST and FF-anti-BRST also leave the
generating functional as well as effective action invariant and hence
equivalent to FFMBRST transformation.

### 25 FFMBRST symmetry in BV formulation

In this section, we consider the BV formulation using MBRST
transformation. Unlike BV formulation using either BRST or anti-BRST
transformation, we need two sets of antifields in BV formulation for
MBRST transformation. We construct FFMBRST transformation in this
context. The change in Jacobian under FFBRST transformation in the path
integral measure in the definition of generating functional is used to
adjust with the change in the gauge-fixing fermion @xmath [ 64 ] .
Hence, the FFBRST transformation is used to connect the generating
functionals of different solutions of quantum master equation [ 45 ] .
However, in case of BV formulation for FFMBRST transformation we need to
introduce two gauge-fixing fermions @xmath and @xmath . We construct the
finite parameters in FFMBRST transformation in such a way that
contributions from @xmath and @xmath adjust each other to leave the
extended action invariant. This implies that we can construct
appropriate parameters in FFMBRST transformation such that generating
functionals corresponding to different solutions of quantum master
equations remain invariant under such transformation. These results can
be demonstrated with the help of explicit examples. We would like to
consider the same examples of previous section for this purpose.

#### 25.1 Bosonized chiral model in BV formulation

We recast the generating functional for (1+1) dimensional bosonized
chiral model given in Eq. ( 6.260 ) using both BRST and anti-BRST exact
terms as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.312)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Here, the Lagrange multiplier field @xmath is considered as dynamical
variable and expression for gauge-fixing fermions for BRST symmetry (
@xmath ) and anti-BRST symmetry ( @xmath ), respectively, are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.313)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.314)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The effective action @xmath is invariant under combined BRST and
anti-BRST transformations given in Eq. ( 6.264 ). The generating
functional @xmath can be written in terms of antifields @xmath and
@xmath corresponding to all fields @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.315)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath is a generic notation for antifields arising from
gauge-fixing fermions @xmath . The above relation can further be written
in compact form as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.316)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is an extended action for the theory of self-dual chiral
boson corresponding the gauge-fixing fermions @xmath and @xmath .

This extended quantum action, @xmath satisfies certain rich mathematical
relations commonly known as quantum master equation [ 6 ] , given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.317)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The generating functional does not depend on the choice of gauge-fixing
fermions [ 5 ] and therefore extended quantum action @xmath with all
possible @xmath are the different solutions of quantum master equation.
The antifields @xmath corresponding to each field @xmath for this
particular theory can be obtained from the gauge-fixed fermion @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.318)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Similarly, the antifields @xmath can be calculated from the gauge-fixing
fermion @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.319)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Now, we apply the FFMBRST transformation given in Eq. ( 6.265 ) with the
finite parameters written in Eqs. ( 6.266 ) and ( 6.267 ) to this
generating functional. We see that the path integral measure in Eq. (
6.316 ) remains invariant under this FFMBRST transformation as the
Jacobian for path integral measure is @xmath . Therefore,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.320)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Thus, the solutions of quantum master equation in this model remain
invariant under FFMBRST transformation as well as under consecutive
operation of FFBRST and FF-anti-BRST transformations. However, the
FFBRST (FF-anti-BRST) transformation connects the generating functionals
corresponding to the different solutions of the quantum master equation
[ 34 ] .

#### 25.2 Maxwell’s theory in BV formulation

The generating functional for Maxwell’s theory given in Eq. ( 6.283 )
can be recast using BRST and anti-BRST exact terms as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.321)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the expressions for gauge-fixing fermions @xmath and @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.322)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The generating functional for such theory can further be expressed in
fields/antifields formulation as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.323)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the compact form above generating functional is written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.324)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is an extended action for Maxwell’s theory corresponding to
the gauge-fixing fermions @xmath and @xmath .

The antifields for gauge-fixed fermion @xmath are calculated as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.325)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The antifields @xmath can be calculated from the gauge-fixed fermion
@xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.326)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Now, implementing the FFMBRST transformation mentioned in Eq. ( 6.288 )
with parameters given in Eqs. ( 6.289 ) and ( 6.290 ) to this generating
functional we see that the Jacobian for the path integral measure for
such transformation becomes unit. Hence, the FFMBRST transformation
given in Eq. ( 6.288 ) is a finite symmetry of the solutions of quantum
master equation for Maxwell’s theory.

Now, we focus on the contributions arising from the Jacobian due to
independent applications of FFBRST and FF-anti-BRST transformations. We
construct the finite parameters of FFBRST and FF-anti-BRST
transformations in such a way that Jacobian remains invariant.
Therefore, the generating functional remains invariant under consecutive
operations of FFBRST and FF-anti-BRST transformations with appropriate
parameters as

  -- -- -- ---------
           (6.327)
  -- -- -- ---------

It also implies that the effect of consecutive FFBRST and FF-anti-BRST
transformations is same as the effect of FFMBRST transformation on
@xmath .

#### 25.3 Non-Abelian YM theory in BV formulation

The generating functional for this theory can be written in both BRST
and anti-BRST exact terms as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.328)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with the expressions of gauge-fixing fermions @xmath and @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.329)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We re-write the generating functional given in Eq. ( 6.304 ) using
field/antifield formulation as,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.330)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

This generating functional @xmath can be written compactly as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.331)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is an extended quantum action for the non-Abelian YM theory
in CFDJ gauge.

The antifields are calculated with the help of gauge-fixed fermion
@xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.332)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The explicit value of antifields can be calculated with @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.333)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We observe here again that the Jacobian for path integral measure in the
expression of generating functional @xmath arising due to FFMBRST
transformation and due to successive operations of FFBRST and
FF-anti-BRST transformations remains unit for appropriate choice of
finite parameters. Thus, the consequence of FFMBRST transformation given
in Eq. ( 6.308 ) with the finite parameters given in Eqs. ( 6.309 ) and
( 6.310 ) is equivalent to the subsequent operations of FFBRST and
FF-anti-BRST transformations with same finite parameters.

### 26 Conclusions

FFBRST and FF-anti-BRST transformations are nilpotent symmetries of the
effective action. However, these transformations do not leave the
generating functional invariant as the path integral measure changes in
a nontrivial way under these transformations. We have constructed
infinitesimal MBRST transformation which is the combination of
infinitesimal BRST and anti-BRST transformations. Even though
infinitesimal MBRST transformation does not play much significant role,
its finite version has very important consequences. We have shown that
it is possible to construct the finite field dependent MBRST (FFMBRST)
transformation which leaves the effective action as well as the
generating functional invariant. The finite parameters in the FFMBRST
transformation have been chosen in such a way that the Jacobian
contribution from the FFBRST part compensates the same arising from
FF-anti-BRST part. We have considered several explicit examples with
diverse character in both gauge theories as well as in field/antifield
formulation to show these results. It is interesting to point out that
the effect of FFMBRST transformation is equivalent to successive
operations of FFBRST and FF-anti-BRST transformations. We have further
shown that the generating functionals corresponding to different
solutions of quantum master equation remain invariant under such FFMBRST
transformation whereas the independent FFBRST and FF-anti-BRST
transformations connect the generating functionals corresponding to the
different solutions of the quantum master equation. It will be
interesting to see whether this FFMBRST transformation puts further
restrictions on the relation of different Green’s functions of the
theory to simplify the renormalization program. In particular, such
FFMBRST transformation may be helpful for the theories where BRST and
anti-BRST transformations play independent role.

## Chapter \thechapter FFBRST transformation and constrained systems

This chapter is devoted to study the different class of constraints
theories in the framework of FFBRST transformation. Here we develop the
FFBRST and FF-anti-BRST transformations for first-class theories [ 83 ]
. Then we show that such generalization helps to connect first-class
theories to second-class theories. The results are established with the
help of two explicit examples.

### 27 The theories with constraints: examples

In the various field theories, all the dynamical phase space variables
are not independent rather some of the variables satisfy the constraints
emerging from the structure of the theories. In other words, the
relations between various dynamical variables are known as constraints
of the theories. The usual Poisson brackets may not represent the true
brackets as they need not to satisfy the constraints of the theories in
such constrained systems. A system is said to be first-class constrained
system if all the Poisson brackets among the constraints vanish weakly.
On the other hand, if there exists at least one non-zero Poisson bracket
among the constraints then the theory is called as second-class. In this
section, we briefly outline the essential features of second-class and
first-class theories. In particular, we discuss the Proca theory for
massive spin 1 vector field theory and gauge variant theory for the
self-dual chiral boson, which are second-class theories. Corresponding
first-class theories i.e. the Stueckelberg theory for massive spin 1
vector fields and gauge invariant theory for the self-dual chiral boson
are also outlined in this section.

#### 27.1 Theory for massive spin 1 vector field

##### 27.1.1 Proca model

We start with the action for a massive charge neutral spin 1 vector
field @xmath in 4D

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.334)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the Lagrangian density is given as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.335)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The field strength tensor is defined as @xmath We recall the convention
for @xmath , i.e., @xmath diagonal @xmath , where @xmath . The
canonically conjugate momenta for @xmath field is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.336)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This implies that the primary constraint of the theory is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.337)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The Hamiltonian density of the theory is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.338)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The time evolution for the dynamical variable @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.339)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the Hamiltonian @xmath . The constraints of the theory should be
invariant under time evolution and using ( 7.339 ) we obtain the
secondary constraint

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.340)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The constraint @xmath contains @xmath which implies that @xmath Hence,
the Proca theory for massive spin 1 vector field is endowed with the
second-class constraint.

The propagator for this theory can be written in a simple manner as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.341)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that the propagator in this theory does not fall rapidly for large
values of the momenta. This leads to difficulties in establishing
renormalizability of the (interacting) Proca theory for massive photons.
Hence the limit @xmath of the Proca theory is clearly difficult to
perceive.

The generating functional for the Proca theory is defined as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.342)
  -- -------- -- ---------

##### 27.1.2 Stueckelberg theory

To remove the difficulties in the Proca model, Stueckelberg considered
the following generalized action

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.343)
  -- -------- -- ---------

by introducing a real scalar field @xmath .

This action is invariant under the following gauge transformation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.344)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.345)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the gauge parameter. For the quantization of such theory
one has to choose a gauge condition. By choosing the ’t Hooft gauge
condition, @xmath where @xmath is any arbitrary gauge parameter, it is
easy to see that the propagators are well behaved at high momentum. As a
result, there is no difficulty in establishing renormalizability for
such theory. Now we turn to the BRST symmetry for the Stueckelberg
theory. Introducing a ghost @xmath and an antighost field @xmath the
effective Stueckelberg action can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.346)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

This action is invariant under the following on-shell BRST
transformation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.347)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is an infinitesimal, anticommuting and global parameter.
The generating functional for the Stueckelberg theory is defined as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.348)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the generic notation for all fields involved in the
theory. All the Green functions in this theory can be obtain from @xmath
.

#### 27.2 Theory for self-dual chiral boson

A self-dual chiral boson can be described by the gauge variant as well
as the gauge invariant model. The purpose of this section is to
introduce such models for a self-dual chiral boson.

##### 27.2.1 Gauge variant theory for self-dual chiral boson

We start with the gauge variant model [ 66 ] in 2D for a single
self-dual chiral boson. The effective action for such a theory is given
as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.349)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where over dot and prime denote time and space derivatives respectively
and @xmath is the Lagrange multiplier. The field @xmath satisfies the
self-duality condition @xmath in this case. We choose the Lorentz metric
@xmath with @xmath . The associated momenta for the field @xmath and the
Lagrange multiplier are calculated as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.350)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which show that the model has the following primary constraint: @xmath
The Hamiltonian density corresponding to the above Lagrangian density
@xmath in Eq. ( 7.349 ) is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.351)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Further, we can write the total Hamiltonian density corresponding to
@xmath by introducing the Lagrange multiplier field @xmath for the
primary constraint @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.352)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Following the Dirac prescription [ 13 ] , we obtain the secondary
constraint in this case as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.353)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The constraints @xmath and @xmath are of second-class as @xmath . This
is an essential feature of a gauge variant theory.

This model is quantized by establishing the following commutation
relations [ 66 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.354)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.355)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where prime denotes the space derivative. The rest of the commutator
vanishes.

The generating functional for the gauge variant theory for a self-dual
chiral boson is defined as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.356)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the path integral measure and @xmath is the effective
action for a self-dual chiral boson.

##### 27.2.2 Gauge invariant theory for self-dual chiral boson

To construct a gauge invariant theory corresponding to the gauge
non-invariant model for chiral bosons, one generally introduces the WZ
term in the Lagrangian density @xmath . For this purpose we need to
enlarge the Hilbert space of the theory by introducing a new quantum
field @xmath , called the WZ field, through the redefinition of fields
@xmath and @xmath as follows [ 21 ] : @xmath .

With this redefinition of fields the modified Lagrangian density becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.357)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the WZ term

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.358)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The above Lagrangian density in Eq. ( 7.357 ) is invariant under
time-dependent chiral gauge transformation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.359)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is an arbitrary function of the space and time.

The BRST invariant effective theory for the self-dual chiral boson [ 73
] can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.360)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.361)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

@xmath and @xmath are ghost and antighost fields respectively. The
corresponding generating functional for the gauge invariant theory for
the self-dual chiral boson is given as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.362)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is generic notation for all fields involved in the
effective action. The effective action @xmath and the generating
functional @xmath are invariant under the following nilpotent BRST
transformation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.363)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the infinitesimal and anticommuting BRST parameter.

### 28 Relating the first-class and second-class theories through FFBRST
formulation: examples

In this section, we consider two examples to show the connection between
the generating functionals for theories with first-class and
second-class constraints. First we show the connection between the
Stueckelberg theory and the Proca theory for massive vector fields. In
the second example we link the gauge invariant and the gauge variant
theory for the self-dual chiral boson.

#### 28.1 Connecting Stueckelberg and Proca theories

We start with the linearized form of the Stueckelberg effective action (
7.346 ) by introducing a Nakanishi-Lautrup type auxiliary field @xmath
as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.364)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

which is invariant under the following off-shell nilpotent BRST
transformation:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.365)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The FFBRST transformation corresponding to the above BRST transformation
is constructed as,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.366)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is an arbitrary finite field dependent parameter but still
anticommuting in nature. To establish the connection we construct a
finite field dependent parameter @xmath obtainable from

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.367)
  -- -------- -- ---------

via Eq. ( 2.5 ), where @xmath is an arbitrary parameter.

Using Eq. ( 2.7 ) the infinitesimal change in nontrivial Jacobian is
calculated for this finite field dependent parameter as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.368)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the equation of motion for the antighost field, @xmath , has been
used.

We now make the following ansatz for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.369)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are arbitrary @xmath dependent parameter and satisfy the
following initial conditions: @xmath . Now, using the relation in Eq. (
2.3 ) we calculate @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.370)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where prime denotes the differentiation with respect to @xmath . The
Jacobian contribution can be written as @xmath if the essential
condition in Eq. ( 2.9 ) is satisfied. This leads to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.371)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Equating the coefficients of terms @xmath and @xmath from both sides of
the above condition, we get the following differential equations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.372)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

To obtain the solution of the above equations we put @xmath without any
loss of generality. The solutions satisfying initial conditions are
given as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.373)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The transformed action can be obtained by adding @xmath to @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.374)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now the generating functional under FFBRST transforms as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.375)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Integrating over the @xmath and @xmath fields, the above expression
reduces to the generating functional for the Proca model upto some
renormalization constants as follows:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.376)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.377)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Thus, by constructing appropriate finite field dependent parameter
(given in Eq. ( 7.366 )) we have shown that the generating functional
for Stueckelberg theory is connected to the generating functional for
the Proca theory through FFBRST transformation. This indicates that the
Green functions in these two theories are related through FFBRST
formulation.

#### 28.2 Relating gauge invariant and the gauge variant theory for
chiral boson

To see the connection between the gauge invariant and variant theories
for chiral boson, we start with the effective action for the gauge
invariant self-dual chiral boson theory as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.378)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where we have linearized the gauge-fixing part of the effective action
by introducing the extra auxiliary field @xmath . This effective action
is invariant under the following infinitesimal BRST transformation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.379)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Corresponding FFBRST transformation is written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.380)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is arbitrary finite field dependent parameter, which we
have to constructed. In this case we construct the finite field
dependent BRST parameter @xmath obtainable from

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.381)
  -- -------- -- ---------

using Eq. ( 2.5 ) and demand that the corresponding BRST transformation
will lead to the gauge variant theory for self-dual chiral boson.

To justify our claim we calculate the change in Jacobian, using equation
of motion for antighost field, as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.382)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We make an ansatz for local functional @xmath as,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.383)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The change in @xmath with respect to @xmath is calculated as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.384)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now, the necessary condition in Eq. ( 2.9 ) leads to the following
equation:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.385)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Equating the coefficients of terms @xmath and @xmath from both sides of
above condition, we get following differential equations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.386)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The solutions of above equations are @xmath where we have taken the
parameter @xmath . The transformed action is obtained by adding @xmath
to @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.387)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Now the transformed generating functional becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.388)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Performing integration over fields @xmath and @xmath , the above
generating functional reduces to the generating functional for the self
dual chiral boson upto some constant as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.389)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.390)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Thus, the generating functionals corresponding to the gauge invariant
and gauge non-invariant theory for self-dual chiral boson are connected
through the FFBRST transformation given in Eq. ( 7.380 ).

We end up this section by making conclusion that using FFBRST
formulation the generating functional for the theory with second-class
constraint can be achieved by generating functional for theory with
first-class constraint.

### 29 First-class and second-class theories: FF-anti-BRST formulation

In this section, we consider FF-anti-BRST formulation to show the same
connection between the generating functionals for theories with
first-class and second-class constraints with same examples. The
FF-anti-BRST transformation is also developed in same fashion as FFBRST
transformation, the only key difference is the role of ghost fields are
interchanged with antighost fields and vice-versa.

#### 29.1 Relating Stueckelberg and Proca theories

We start with anti-BRST symmetry transformation for effective action
given in Eq. ( 7.364 ), as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.391)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is infinitesimal, anticommuting and global parameter. The
FF-anti-BRST transformation corresponding to the above anti-BRST
transformation is constructed as,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.392)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is an arbitrary finite field dependent parameter but still
anticommuting in nature. To establish the connection we choose a finite
field dependent parameter @xmath obtainable from

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.393)
  -- -------- -- ---------

using Eq. ( 3.84 ), where @xmath is an arbitrary parameter.

Using Eq. ( 3.85 ) the infinitesimal change in nontrivial Jacobian can
be calculated for this finite field dependent parameter as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.394)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

To Jacobian contribution can be expressed as @xmath . To calculate
@xmath we make following ansatz:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.395)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are arbitrary @xmath dependent parameter and satisfy
following initial conditions: @xmath . Now, infinitesimal change in
@xmath is calculated as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.396)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where prime denotes the differentiation with respect to @xmath .

Putting the expressions ( 7.394 ) and ( 7.396 ) in the essential
condition given in Eq. ( 2.9 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.397)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Equating the coefficients of terms @xmath and @xmath from both sides of
above condition, we get following differential equations:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.398)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The solutions of the above differential equation for @xmath are @xmath
The transformed action can be obtained by adding @xmath to @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.399)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We perform integration over @xmath and @xmath fields to remove the
divergence of the transformed generating functional @xmath and hence we
get the generating functional for the Proca model as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.400)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore, @xmath Thus, by constructing the appropriate finite field
dependent parameter (given in Eq. ( 7.392 )), we have shown that the
generating functional for the Stueckelberg theory is related to the
generating functional for the Proca theory through the FF-anti-BRST
transformation also. However, the finite field dependent parameter is
different from that one involved in the FFBRST transformation. This
indicates that the Green functions in these two theories are related
through the FFBRST and the FF-anti-BRST transformations.

#### 29.2 Mapping between the gauge invariant and the gauge variant
theory for chiral boson

To connect the gauge invariant and gauge variant theories for the chiral
boson through the FF-anti-BRST transformation, first of all we write the
anti-BRST transformation for effective action ( 7.378 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.401)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The corresponding FF-anti-BRST transformation is written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.402)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the arbitrary finite field dependent parameter. In this
case, we construct the finite field dependent anti-BRST parameter @xmath
obtainable from

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.403)
  -- -------- -- ---------

using Eq. ( 3.84 ) and demand that the corresponding anti-BRST
transformation will lead to the gauge variant theory for the self-dual
chiral boson.

We make an ansatz for local functional @xmath in this case as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.404)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Now, the necessary condition in Eq. ( 2.9 ) leads to the following
equation:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.405)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Equating the coefficients of different terms on both sides of the above
equation, we get the following differential equations:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.406)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The solutions of above equations are @xmath where the parameter @xmath .
The transformed action can be obtained by adding @xmath to @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.407)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

After functional integration over fields @xmath and @xmath in the
expression of transformed generating functional, we get the generating
functional as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.408)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore, @xmath Thus, the generating functionals corresponding to the
gauge invariant and the gauge non-invariant theory for the self-dual
chiral boson are also connected through the FF-anti-BRST transformation
given in Eq. ( 7.402 ).

We end up this section by making comment that the generating functional
for the theory with the second-class constraint can be obtained from the
generating functional for theory with the first-class constraint using
both FFBRST and FF-anti-BRST transformations. The finite parameters
involved in the FFBRST transformation, which are responsible for these
connection, are different from the parameters in FF-anti-BRST
transformation.

### 30 Conclusions

The Stueckelberg theory for massive spin 1 field and the gauge invariant
theory for the self-dual chiral boson are the first-class theories. On
the other hand, the Proca theory for massive spin 1 field and the gauge
variant theory for the self-dual chiral boson are theories with the
second-class constraint. We have shown that the FFBRST transformation
relates the generating functionals of second-class theory and
first-class theory. The path integral measure in the definition of
generating functional is not invariant under such FFBRST transformation
and is responsible for such connections. The Jacobian for path integral
measure under such a transformation with an appropriate finite parameter
cancels the extra parts of the first-class theory. Our result is
supported by two explicit examples. In the first case we have related
the generating functional of the Stueckelberg theory to the generating
functional of the Proca model and in the second case the generating
functionals corresponding to the gauge invariant theory and the gauge
variant theory for the self-dual chiral boson have linked through FFBRST
transformation with appropriate choices of the finite field dependent
parameter. The same goal has been achieved by using the FF-anti-BRST
transformation. These formulations can be applied to connect the
generating functionals for any first-class and second-class theories
provided appropriate finite parameters are constructed. The complicacy
arises due to the nonlocal and field dependent Dirac brackets in the
quantization of second-class theories can thus be avoided by using
FFBRST/FF-anti-BRST formulations which relate the Green functions of
second-class theories to the first-class theories. These formulations
can be applied to connect the generating functionals for any first-class
(e.g. non-Abelian gauge theories) and second-class theories provided
appropriate finite parameters are constructed.

## Chapter \thechapter Hodge-de Rham theorem in the BRST context

In this chapter we study the different forms of BRST symmetry [ 73 ] .
In particular we investigate co-BRST and anti-co-BRST along with usual
BRST and anti-BRST symmetries. The nilpotent conserved charges for all
these symmetries are calculated and have shown to satisfy the algebra
analogous to the algebra satisfied by de Rham cohomological operators.
These results are shown in a particular model namely (1+1) dimensional
theory for a self-dual chiral boson.

### 31 Self-dual chiral boson: preliminary idea

We start with the gauge non-invariant model [ 66 ] in (1+1) dimensions
for a single self-dual chiral boson. The Lagrangian density for such a
theory is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.409)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where overdot and prime denote time and space derivatives, respectively,
and @xmath is a Lagrange multiplier. The field @xmath satisfies the
self-duality condition @xmath in this case. We choose the Lorentz metric
@xmath where @xmath . The associated momenta for the field @xmath and
Lagrange multiplier are calculated as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.410)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which shows that the model has following primary constraint

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.411)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The expression for Hamiltonian density corresponding to above Lagrangian
density @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.412)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Further we write the total Hamiltonian density corresponding to this
@xmath by introducing Lagrange multiplier field @xmath for the primary
constraint @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.413)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Following the Dirac prescription [ 13 ] , we obtain the secondary
constraint in this case as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.414)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The Poison bracket for primary and secondary constraint is nonvanishing,
@xmath . This implies the constraints @xmath and @xmath are of
second-class, which is an essential feature of a gauge variant theory
(model).

This model is quantized by establishing the commutation relation [ 66 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.415)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.416)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

and the rest of the commutators vanish.

#### 31.1 Wess-Zumino term and Hamiltonian formulation

To construct a gauge invariant theory corresponding to this gauge
non-invariant model for chiral bosons, one generally introduces the
Wess-Zumino term in the Lagrangian density @xmath . For this purpose one
has to enlarge the Hilbert space of the theory by introducing a new
quantum field @xmath , called as Wess-Zumino field, through the
redefinition of fields @xmath and @xmath in the original Lagrangian
density @xmath [Eq. ( 8.409 )] as follows [ 21 ] :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.417)
  -- -------- -- ---------

With these redefinition of fields the modified Lagrangian density
becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.418)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.419)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is the Wess-Zumino part of the @xmath . It is easy to check that the
above Lagrangian density is invariant under time-dependent chiral gauge
transformation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.420)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is an arbitrary function of the space and time. The
canonical momenta for this gauge-invariant theory are calculated as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.421)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

This implies the theory @xmath possesses a primary constraint

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.422)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The Hamiltonian density corresponding to @xmath is then given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.423)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The total Hamiltonian density after the introduction of a Lagrange
multiplier field @xmath corresponding to the primary constraint @xmath
becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.424)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Following the Dirac method of constraint analysis we obtain the
secondary constraint

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.425)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In Dirac’s quantization procedure [ 13 ] , we have to change the
first-class constraints of the theory into second-class constraints. To
achieve this we impose some additional constraints on the system in the
form of gauge-fixing conditions @xmath ( @xmath and @xmath ) [ 102 ] .
With the above choice of gauge-fixing conditions the extra constraints
of the theory are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.426)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now, the total set of constraints after gauge fixing are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.427)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The nonvanishing commutators of gauge invariant theory are obtained as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.428)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.429)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.430)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.431)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We end up the section with the conclusion that the above relations (
8.428 )-( 8.431 ), together with @xmath [Eq. ( 8.424 )], reproduce the
same quantum system described by @xmath under the gauge condition (
8.426 ). This is similar to the quantization of a gauge invariant chiral
Schwinger model (with an appropriate Wess-Zumino term) [ 102 ] .

### 32 BFV formulation for model of self-dual chiral boson

In the BFV formulation of self-dual chiral boson, we need to introduce a
pair of canonically conjugate ghosts @xmath with ghost numbers 1 and
@xmath respectively, for the first-class constraint @xmath , and another
pair of ghosts @xmath with ghost number @xmath and 1, respectively, for
the secondary constraint, @xmath . The effective action for this @xmath
dimensional theory with a single self-dual chiral boson in this extended
phase space then becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.432)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath is the BRST charge and @xmath is the gauge-fixed fermion.

The generating functional, for any gauge invariant effective theory
having @xmath as a gauge-fixed fermion, is defined as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.433)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is generic notation for all the dynamical field involved in
the effective theory. The BRST symmetry generator for this theory is
written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.434)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The canonical brackets are defined for all dynamical variables as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.435)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

and the rest of the brackets are zero. The nilpotent BRST
transformation, using Eqs. ( 2.29 ) and ( 8.434 ), is then explicitly
calculated as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.436)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In BFV formulation the generating functional is independent of the
gauge-fixed fermion [ 5 , 6 ] , hence we have the freedom to choose it
in the convenient way as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.437)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is arbitrary gauge parameter.

Putting the value of @xmath in Eq. ( 8.432 ) and using Eq. ( 8.434 ), we
get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.438)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The generating functional for this effective theory is then expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.439)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Performing the integration over @xmath and @xmath in the above
functional integration we further obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.440)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath is the path integral measure for effective theory when
integrations over fields @xmath and @xmath are carried out. Taking the
arbitrary gauge parameter @xmath and performing the integration over
@xmath , we obtain an effective generating functional as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.441)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath denotes the measure corresponding to all the dynamical
variable involved in this effective action. The expression for effective
action in the above equation is exactly same as the BRST invariant
effective action in Ref. [ 103 ] . The BRST symmetry transformation for
this effective theory is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.442)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

which is on-shell nilpotent. Antighost equation of motion (i.e. @xmath )
is required to show the nilpotency.

### 33 Nilpotent symmetries: many guises

In this section we study the different forms of the nilpotent BRST
symmetry of the system of single self-dual chiral boson. In particular,
we discuss co-BRST anti-co-BRST, bosonic and ghost symmetries in the
context of self-dual chiral boson.

#### 33.1 Off-shell BRST and anti-BRST Symmetry

To study the off-shell BRST and anti-BRST transformations we incorporate
Nakanishi-Lautrup type auxiliary field @xmath to linearize the
gauge-fixing part of the effective action written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.443)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.444)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

This effective theory is invariant under the following off-shell
nilpotent BRST transformation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.445)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The corresponding anti-BRST symmetry transformation for this theory is
written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.446)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The conserved BRST and anti-BRST charges @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively, which are the generator of the above BRST and anti-BRST
transformations, are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.447)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.448)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Further by using the equations of motion

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.449)
  -- -------- -- ---------

it can be shown that these charges are constant of motion i.e. @xmath
and satisfy the relations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.450)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To arrive at these relations, we have used the canonical brackets [Eq. (
8.435 )] of the fields and the definition of canonical momenta,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.451)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We come to the end of this section with the remark that the condition
for the physical states @xmath and @xmath leads to the requirement that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.452)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.453)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This implies that the operator form of the first-class constraints
@xmath and @xmath annihilate the physical state of the theory. Thus, the
physicality criterion is consistent with the Dirac method [ 84 ] of
quantization.

#### 33.2 Co-BRST and anti-co-BRST symmetries

In this subsection we investigate the nilpotent co-BRST and anti-co-BRST
(alternatively known as dual and anti-dual-BRST respectively)
transformations which are also the symmetry of the effective action.
Further these transformations leave the gauge-fixing term of the action
invariant independently and the kinetic energy term (which remains
invariant under BRST and anti-BRST transformations) transforms under it
to compensate the terms arises due to the transformation of the ghost
terms. The gauge-fixing term has its origin in the co-exterior
derivative @xmath , where @xmath represents the Hodge duality operator.
The @xmath signs is dictated by the dimensionality of the manifold [ 85
] . Therefore, it is appropriate to call these transformations a dual
and an anti-dual-BRST transformation.

The nilpotent co-BRST transformation ( @xmath ) and anti-co-BRST
transformation ( @xmath ) which are absolutely anticommuting ( @xmath )
are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.454)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.455)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The conserved charges for the above symmetries are obtained using
Noether’s theorem as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.456)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.457)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath and @xmath generate the symmetry transformations in Eqs. ( 8.454
) and ( 8.455 ), respectively. It is easy to verify the following
relations satisfied by these conserved charges:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.458)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

These relations reflect the nilpotency and anticommutativity property of
@xmath and @xmath (i.e. @xmath and @xmath ).

#### 33.3 Bosonic symmetry

In this subsection we construct the bosonic symmetry out of different
nilpotent BRST symmetries of the theory. The BRST ( @xmath ), anti-BRST
( @xmath ), co-BRST ( @xmath ) and anti-co-BRST ( @xmath ) symmetry
operators satisfy the following algebra:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.459)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.460)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.461)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The anticommutators in Eq. ( 8.461 ) define the bosonic symmetry of the
system. Under this bosonic symmetry transformation the field variables
transform as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.462)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

However, the symmetry operator @xmath is not an independent bosonic
symmetry transformation as shown by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.463)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Now, it is easy to see that the operators @xmath and @xmath satisfy the
relation @xmath . This implies, from Eq. ( 8.461 ), that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.464)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is clear from the above algebra that the operator @xmath is the
analog of the Laplacian operator in the language of differential
geometry and the conserved charge for the above symmetry transformation
is calculated as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.465)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Using the equation of motion, it can readily be checked that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.466)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Hence @xmath is the constant of motion for this theory.

#### 33.4 Ghost and discrete symmetries

Now we would like to mention yet another symmetry of the system namely
the ghost symmetry. The ghost number of the ghost and antighost fields
are 1 and @xmath , respectively, the rest of the variables in the action
of the this theory have ghost number zero. Keeping this fact in mind we
can introduce a scale transformation of the ghost field, under which the
effective action is invariant, as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.467)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a global scale parameter. The infinitesimal version of
the ghost scale transformation can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.468)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The Noether conserved charge for the above symmetry transformations is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.469)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In addition to the above continuous symmetry transformation, the ghost
sector respects the discrete symmetry transformations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.470)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The above discrete symmetry transformation is useful to obtain the
anti-BRST symmetry transformation from the BRST symmetry transformation
and vice versa.

### 34 Geometrical cohomology

In this section we study the de Rham cohomological operators and their
realization in terms of conserved charges which generate the symmetries
for the theory of self-dual chiral boson. In particular we point out the
similarity between the algebra obeyed by de Rham cohomological operators
and that by different BRST conserved charges.

#### 34.1 Hodge-de Rham decomposition theorem and differential operators

The de Rham cohomological operators in differential geometry obey the
following algebra:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.471)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are the exterior, co-exterior and
Laplace-Beltrami operator, respectively. The operators @xmath and @xmath
are adjoint or dual to each other and @xmath is self-adjoint operator [
104 ] . It is well known that the exterior derivative raises the degree
of a form by one when it operates on it (i.e. @xmath ). On the other
hand, the dual-exterior derivative lowers the degree of a form by one
when it operates on forms (i.e. @xmath ). However, @xmath does not
change the degree of form (i.e. @xmath ). Here @xmath denotes an
arbitrary n-form object.

Let @xmath be a compact, orientable Riemannian manifold; then an inner
product on the vector space @xmath of @xmath -forms on @xmath can be
defined as [ 105 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.472)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for @xmath and @xmath represents the Hodge duality operator [ 106 ] .
Suppose that @xmath and @xmath are forms of degree @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively, then the following relation for inner product will be
satisfied

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.473)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Similarly, if @xmath is a form of degree @xmath , then we have the
relation @xmath . Thus, the necessary and sufficient condition for
@xmath to be closed is that it should be orthogonal to all co-exact
forms of degree @xmath . The form @xmath is called harmonic if @xmath .
Now let @xmath be a @xmath -form on @xmath and if there exists another
@xmath -form @xmath such that @xmath , then for a harmonic form @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.474)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath denote the subspace of @xmath of harmonic forms on @xmath .
Therefore, if a form @xmath exists with the property that @xmath , then
Eq. ( 8.474 ) is a necessary and sufficient condition for @xmath to be
orthogonal to the subspace @xmath . This reasoning leads to the idea
that @xmath can be partitioned into three distinct subspaces @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath which are consistent with exact, co-exact and harmonic
forms, respectively. Therefore, the Hodge-de Rham decomposition theorem
can be stated [ 107 ] .

A regular differential form of degree n ( @xmath ) may be uniquely
decomposed into a sum of the harmonic form ( @xmath ), exact form (
@xmath ) and co-exact form ( @xmath ) i.e.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.475)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath .

#### 34.2 Hodge-de Rham decomposition theorem and conserved charges

The conserved charges for all the symmetry transformations satisfy the
following algebra:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.476)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

This can be checked easily by using the canonical brackets in Eq. (
8.435 ), where @xmath generically represents the charges for BRST
symmetry ( @xmath ), anti-BRST symmetry ( @xmath ), dual-BRST symmetry (
@xmath ), anti-dual-BRST symmetry ( @xmath ) and ghost symmetry ( @xmath
). We note that the relations between the conserved charges @xmath and
@xmath as well as @xmath and @xmath mentioned in the last line of (
8.476 ) can be established by using the equation of motions only.

This algebra is reminiscent of the algebra satisfied by the de Rham
cohomological operators of differential geometry given in Eq. ( 8.471 ).
Comparing ( 8.471 ) and ( 8.476 ) we obtain the following analogies:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.477)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Let @xmath be the ghost number associated with a particular state @xmath
defined in the total Hilbert space of states, i.e.,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.478)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then it is easy to verify the relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.479)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

which imply that the ghost numbers of the states @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath are @xmath and @xmath , respectively. The states @xmath and
@xmath have ghost numbers @xmath and @xmath , respectively. The
properties of @xmath and @xmath are mimicked by the sets ( @xmath ) and
( @xmath ), respectively. It is evident from Eq. ( 8.479 ) that the set
( @xmath ) raises the ghost number of a state by one and on the other
hand the set ( @xmath ) lowers the ghost number of the same state by
one. These observations, keeping the analogy with the Hodge-de Rham
decomposition theorem, enable us to express any arbitrary state @xmath
in terms of the sets ( @xmath ) and ( @xmath ) as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.480)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.481)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the most symmetric state is the harmonic state @xmath that
satisfies

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.482)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

analogous to Eq. ( 8.474 ). It is quite interesting to point out that
the physicality criterion of all the fermionic charges @xmath and @xmath
, i.e.,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.483)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

leads to the following conditions:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.484)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is the operator form of the first-class constraint which
annihilates the physical state as a consequence of the above physicality
criterion, which is consistent with the Dirac method of quantization of
a system with first-class constraints.

### 35 Conclusions

The BFV technique plays an important role in the gauge theory to analyze
the constraint and the symmetry of the system. We have considered such a
powerful technique to study the theory of a self-dual chiral boson. In
particular we have derived the nilpotent BRST symmetry transformation
for this theory using the BFV technique. Further we have studied the
dual-BRST transformation which is also the symmetry of the effective
action and which leaves the gauge-fixing part of effective action
invariant separately. Interchanging the role of ghost and antighost
fields the anti-BRST and anti-dual-BRST symmetry transformations are
also constructed. We have shown that the nilpotent BRST and
anti-dual-BRST symmetry transformations are analogous to the exterior
derivative as the ghost number of the state @xmath on the total Hilbert
space is increased by one when these operate on @xmath and the algebra
followed by these are the same as the algebra obeyed by the de Rham
cohomological operators. In a similar fashion the dual-BRST and
anti-BRST symmetry transformations are linked to the co-exterior
derivative. The anticommutator of either the BRST and the dual-BRST
transformations or anti-BRST and anti-dual-BRST transformations leads to
a bosonic symmetry which turns out to be the analog of the Laplacian
operator. Further, the effective theory has a non-nilpotent ghost
symmetry transformation which leaves the ghost terms of the effective
action invariant independently. Further we have noted that the Hodge
duality operator @xmath does not exist for the theory of a self-dual
chiral boson in (1+1) dimensions because effectively this theory reduces
to a theory in (0+1) dimensions due to the self-duality condition of
fields ( @xmath as well as @xmath ). The algebra satisfied by the
conserved charges is exactly the same in appearance as the algebra of
the de Rham cohomological operators of differential geometry. These lead
to the conclusion that the theory for self-dual chiral boson is a Hodge
theory.

## Chapter \thechapter Concluding Remarks

In this thesis we have considered the extension of the finite field
dependent BRST transformation (FFBRST) and its applications on gauge
field theories.

We have started with the brief introduction of the BRST formalism and
its importance in the study of gauge field theories. We have not only
discussed the BRST formalism for simple gauge theories where the gauge
algebra is closed or irreducible but have also discussed the BRST
quantization for the more general class of the gauge theories when the
gauge group is allowed to be open and/or irreducible. In particular, BV
(field/antifield) formulation and BFV technique have been discussed
using the BRST transformation. There are various generalizations of the
BRST transformation in literature. The finite field dependent BRST
transformation is one of the most important generalizations of the BRST
transformation. The FFBRST transformation is also the symmetry of the
effective action and nilpotent. However, such a finite transformation
does not leave the generating functional invariant as the Jacobian in
the definition of generating functional is not invariant due to
finiteness of the parameter. But this nontrivial Jacobian under certain
condition can be replaced by @xmath , where @xmath is local functional
of the fields. Thus, the FFBRST transformation is extremely useful in
connecting two different effective theories.

In this thesis we mainly focused on further generalization of such
transformation with new applications. We have started with some basic
techniques and mathematical tools relevant for this thesis in chapter
two.

The generalization of BRST transformation considered earlier was
on-shell nilpotent as equation of motion for some of the fields were
used to show the nilpotency. In chapter three, we have constructed the
off-shell nilpotent FFBRST transformation in 1-form gauge theories by
introducing a Nakanishi-Lautrup type auxiliary field. Further, we have
developed both the on-shell and the off-shell FF-anti-BRST
transformations, by making the infinitesimal anti-BRST parameter finite
and field dependent, for 1-form gauge theories. The FF-anti-BRST
transformation also plays the same role as the FFBRST transformation and
connects the two different effective theories. Thus, same pair of the
theories are shown to be connected through both FFBRST and FF-anti-BRST
transformations but with the different finite parameters. We have shown
these by connecting the YM theories in the different covariant and
noncovariant gauges (like the Lorentz gauge, the axial gauge, the
Coulomb gauge and the quadratic gauge). The connection between
generating functional for the YM theory to that of the most general
Faddeev-popov effective theory have also been established. We have noted
that the nontrivial Jacobians of the path integral measures which arise
due to the FFBRST and the FF-anti-BRST transformations are responsible
for such connection. We have further observed that the off-shell FFBRST
and FF-anti-BRST formulations are more simpler and elegant to that of
the on-shell transformations.

In chapter four, we have constructed the FFBRST transformation for an
Abelian rank-2 tensor field theory by making the infinitesimal BRST
parameter finite and field dependent. It has been shown that such finite
transformation plays a crucial role in studying the Abelian 2-form gauge
theory in noncovariant gauges. We have considered the axial gauge and
the Coulomb gauge as the possible candidates for the noncovariant
gauges. The generating functional of the 2-form gauge theories in
different gauges have been connected through such FFBRST transformation
with the different choices of finite field dependent parameters. We have
further derived the FF-anti-BRST transformation and have shown that the
FF-anti-BRST transformation with different finite parameters also
relates the generating functional for the different effective theories.
The BV formulation for this Abelian 2-form gauge theory has also been
studied in the context of the FFBRST transformation. The effective
theories of Abelian rank-2 tensor field in different gauges are
considered as the different solutions of the quantum master equation. We
have shown that the FFBRST transformation with appropriate finite
parameters connects the generating functional corresponding to the
different solutions of the quantum master equation in BV formulation.

In the YM theories, even after fixing the gauge, the redundancy of the
gauge fields is not completely removed in certain covariant gauges for
the large gauge fields. This Gribov problem has been resolved in the GZ
theory by adding an extra term, known as horizon term, to the YM
effective action. The Kugo-Ojima (KO) criterion for color confinement in
manifestly covariant gauge is not satisfied in the GZ theory due to the
presence of the horizon term which breaks the usual BRST symmetry.
However, this theory has been extended to restore the BRST symmetry and
hence to satisfy the KO criterion for color confinement. In chapter
five, we have developed the FFBRST transformation for the GZ theory with
appropriate horizon term exhibiting the exact BRST invariance. By
constructing appropriate finite field dependent parameter we have mapped
the generating functional of the GZ theory, which is free from the
Gribov copies to that of the Yang-Mills theory through FFBRST
transformation. Thus, the theory with Gribov copies are related through
a field transformation to the theory without Gribov copies. We have
shown that same results also holds in the BV formulation of the GZ
theory.

In chapter six, we have introduced a new finite nilpotent symmetry,
namely finite field dependent mixed BRST (FFMBRST) symmetry. Mixed BRST
transformation is the combination of usual BRST and anti-BRST symmetry.
Infinitesimal mixed BRST transformation has been integrated to construct
the FFMBRST transformation. These finite transformations are an exact
nilpotent symmetry of both the effective action as well as the
generating functional for the certain choices of the finite parameters.
Further, it has been shown that the Jacobian contributions for the path
integral measure arising from BRST and anti-BRST part compensate each
other. Such symmetry transformation has also been considered in the
field/antifield formulation to show that the solutions of the quantum
master equation remain invariant under this.

We have shown yet another application of the FFBRST transformation by
establishing the connection between the generating functional for the
first-class theories and the second-class theories. The Stueckelberg
theory for the massive spin 1 field and the gauge invariant theory for a
self-dual chiral boson have considered as the first-class theories.
However, the Proca theory for massive spin 1 field and gauge variant
theory for self-dual chiral boson are considered as the second-class
constraint theories. The connection have been made with the help of
explicit calculations in the two above mentioned models. In the first
example, the generating functional of the Proca model has been obtained
from the generating functional of the Stueckelberg theory for massive
spin 1 vector field. In the other example, we have related the
generating functionals for the gauge invariant and the gauge variant
theory for self-dual chiral boson. Thus, we can obtain the Green
functions of the second-class theories from the Green functions of the
first-class theories in our formulation. Complicated nonlocal Dirac
bracket analysis for the study of the second-class theory is thus
avoided in our FFBRST formulation.

In chapter eight, the (1+1) dimensional theory for a single self-dual
chiral boson has been considered as a classical model for gauge theory.
Using the BFV technique, the nilpotent BRST and anti-BRST symmetry
transformations for this theory have been explored. In this model other
forms of the nilpotent symmetry transformations like co-BRST and
anti-co-BRST, which leave the gauge-fixing part of the action invariant,
have also been investigated. We have shown that the nilpotent charges
for these symmetry transformations satisfy the algebra of the de Rham
cohomological operators in the differential geometry. The Hodge
decomposition theorem on compact manifold has also been studied in the
context of the conserved charges. Further the theory for single
self-dual chiral boson has been realized as a field theoretic model for
the Hodge theory.

In this thesis we have made an attempt to extend the FFBRST formulation
by incorporating it in different field theoretic models. We do believe
that our formulation will find many more new applications in future. In
particular, it will be helpful in removing the discrepancy of the
anomalous dimension calculation for a gauge invariant operators [ 108 ]
. Exploring our formulation in the context of the different field
theoretic models having spontaneous symmetry breaking will also be very
exciting.

## Chapter \thechapter Mathematical details of 2-form gauge theories

## Appendix A FFBRST in Axial gauge

Under the FFBRST transformation with finite parameter given in Eq. (
4.160 ), the path integral measure for the generating functional in Eq.
( 4.156 ) transforms as

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .1)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

@xmath can be replaced by @xmath if the condition in Eq. ( 2.9 )
satisfies. We start with an ansatz for @xmath to connect the theory in
Lorentz to axial gauge as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------------------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .2)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------------------

where @xmath are explicit @xmath dependent parameters to be determined
by using Eq. ( 2.9 ). The infinitesimal change in Jacobian, using Eq. (
2.13 ) with finite parameter in Eq. ( 4.160 ), is calculated as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------------------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------------------

The condition ( 2.9 ) will be satisfied iff

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------------------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .4)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------------------

The contribution of antighost and ghost of antighost can possibly vanish
by using the equations of motion of the @xmath and @xmath . It will
happen if the ratio of the coefficient of terms in the above equation
and the similar terms in @xmath is identical [ 31 ] . This requires that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      ( \thechapter .5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------------------

The @xmath dependent terms can be converted into local terms by the
equation of motion of different fields. This can only work if the
following conditions are satisfied

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      ( \thechapter .6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------------------

Further by comparing the coefficients of different terms @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in both sides of Eq. ( \thechapter
.4 ), we obtain the following conditions

  -- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      ( \thechapter .7)
  -- -------- -- -------------------

A particular solution of the above differential equations subjected to
the conditions in Eqs. ( \thechapter .5 ) and ( \thechapter .6 ) with
initial condition @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------------------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      ( \thechapter .8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------------------

where we have chosen the arbitrary parameter @xmath . Putting the values
of @xmath in Eq. ( \thechapter .2 ) we obtain @xmath at @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------------------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .9)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------------------

## Appendix B FFBRST in Coulomb gauge

For the finite parameter given in Eq. ( 4.165 ) we make following ansatz
for @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .10)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

The infinitesimal change in Jacobian for Coulomb gauge is calculated as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .11)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

The condition will be satisfied iff

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .12)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------------------

Following the method exactly similar to Appendix A, we obtain the
solution for the parameters @xmath which is exactly same as in Eq. (
\thechapter .8 ).

Thus we obtain @xmath at @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------------------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            ( \thechapter .13)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------------------