the proceedings of the IAU colloquium 160. The debate that followed the
presentation (recorded in the same proceedings) gives a fair indication
as to how bad the situation is. Here we shall just record the facts
relevant to the field evolution, ignoring such questions that are
associated with binary evolution and other factors.

In the fifteen years following the discovery of the first millisecond
pulsar more than fifty pulsars have been discovered which belong to this
particular category. In an attempt to understand the origin of
millisecond pulsars, it was suggested that these are recycled pulsars,
pulsars that have evolved to the characteristic magnetic field and
spin-period by virtue of their binary history.

The major problem regarding the generation of millisecond pulsars in the
binaries is the question of progenitors. What kind of binaries would
give rise to millisecond pulsars? We have already mentioned that there
is a problem of birthrate mismatch if one assumes that all the
millisecond pulsars come from low mass X-ray binaries we normally
observe. There is no satisfactory explanation for the origin of isolated
millisecond pulsars either. Any model for field evolution has to be
consistent with the nature of binary evolution that produced these
objects. The field evolution scheme must also provide for a limiting
minimum field strength—the so-called ‘flooring’ seen at @xmath G should
arise out of the evolution itself. Except for a few of the models [
RomaniRomani1995 , Jahan Miri & BhattacharyaJahan Miri &
Bhattacharya1994 , Konar & BhattacharyaKonar & Bhattacharya1997 ] an
explanation for this has not been attempted so far. And the models of
field evolution must also match the spin-evolution of the neutron star
in the binaries. Since there is no consensus on either the internal
field structure or the evolution of the field, one important check on
such models would be to look for a consistency of the field evolution
models with that of the binary evolution scenario. In chapter[6] we
attempt to look for such a consistency in general and from the point of
view of millisecond pulsar generation in particular.
