There is no exaggeration in the statement that we are living truly
exciting times in Cosmology. Until recently our knowledge of the
primordial curvature perturbation was relatively modest. Ever since COBE
delivered its map of data we know the scalar spectrum of primordial
perturbations is approximately flat, with the power being only slightly
stronger at larger scales. Most inflationary models predict an
approximately scale-invariant spectrum, which therefore cannot be used
as a distinctive signature. To distinguish between different
inflationary microphysics we need to study higher point statistics of
the primordial perturbation, which can encode non-gaussian data. The
first of these can be accessible through the bispectrum, or three-point
function. A non-vanishing measurement of the bispectrum would be a key
diagnostic tool for telling models apart and rule out entire classes of
models.

In the first part of this thesis we study the bispectrum in all
single-field models with a well-defined quantum field theory during a
quasi-de Sitter inflationary phase. Any single-field models without
ghost-like instabilities fall into this description: from canonical, to
Dirac–Born–Infeld inflation and galileon inflation theories. We
investigate the scale and shape-dependences of the bispectrum to
next-order in the slow-roll approximation. We illustrate our results by
applying them to different models and argue these corrections must be
taken into account to keep the theoretical error below the observational
precision set by the Planck satellite. We then explore the ability of
using bispectrum shapes to distinguish between inflationary models more
efficiently. We further extend the study of the bispectrum of
single-field models beyond the slow-roll approximation, demanding the
spectral index to be close to, but not exactly, unity.

In the second part of this thesis we explore the process by which the
universe is repopulated with matter particles at the end of a
Dirac–Born–Infeld inflation phase. We place some mild bounds on the
reheating temperature of these models. We argue that the constraints
arising from the preheating analysis are complementary to those derived
from the primordial perturbation.
