# Acknowledgements

I am grateful to my supervisor Dr. Vladimir Pestov with whom I met
frequently, and whose constant advice shaped my research into the thesis
you see before you. Dr. Pestov encouraged my interest in unimodularity,
and his guidance during my undergraduate work in the Summers of 2010 and
2011 gave me an excellent base to work with. Our conversations were
enjoyable and usually led to new insights and ideas. Thank you,
Professor.

I would like to express my sincere gratitude for the NSERC CGS M
(Alexander Graham Bell Canada Graduate Scholarship) and the OGS (Ontario
Graduate Scholarship), which provided financial support during the
course of my Master’s degree. In addition, I am thankful for the
internal scholarships given by the Department of Mathematics and
Statistics and the Faculty of Graduate and Postdoctoral Studies at the
University of Ottawa, which alleviated my worries about tuition fees.

Furthermore, I give thanks to my wonderful parents, Alexandr and
Lyudmila, who supported me throughout my entire life, including the
final stretch of this thesis. Without them, I would not have had nearly
as much success in life. Thank you for giving me the wonderful
opportunities I have today, and for passing on your remarkable work
ethic.

Most importantly, I am extremely fortunate to have found the love of my
life while finishing my graduate degree. My incredible girlfriend Émilie
made sure I did not dwell on false hopes during my research, and kept me
moving forward. She tried her best to keep me happy, and reminded me to
relax once in a while. I do not think I could have succeeded were it not
for her.

###### Contents

-    Acknowledgements
-    1 Preliminaries
    -    1.1 Rooted and birooted graphs
    -    1.2 Sustained and unimodular measures
    -    1.3 Weak convergence
    -    1.4 Examples of graphs
-    2 Uniqueness and existence of sustained unimodular measures
    -    2.1 Infinite connected rigid graphs are lawless
    -    2.2 Example: the graph @xmath where @xmath is infinite
    -    2.3 Example: the tree @xmath where @xmath is finite
    -    2.4 Example: the tree @xmath
    -    2.5 Connected graphs sustain at most one unimodular measure
    -    2.6 Existence of a sustained unimodular measure
    -    2.7 The barred binary tree is lawless
    -    2.8 Applications
        -    2.8.1 Cayley graphs
        -    2.8.2 Convexity
-    3 Judiciality of disconnected graphs
    -    3.1 The union of multiple copies of a connected judicial graph
        sustains a unique unimodular measure
    -    3.2 Graphs with judicial components are judicial
    -    3.3 The case of disconnected finite graphs
    -    3.4 Non-null components of a judicial graph are judicial
-    4 Weak limits are invariant under negligence
    -    4.1 Example: the graph obtained by attaching trees to cycles
    -    4.2 Removal of a negligible sequence preserves the weak limit
    -    4.3 Applications
-    5 Counterexamples and open problems
    -    5.1 Convergence of balls
    -    5.2 Weak limits of adjacent balls
    -    5.3 Open problems

###### List of Figures

-    1 The graphs @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
-    2 The @xmath -regular tree
-    3 The infinite perfect binary tree
-    4 The barred binary tree
-    5 The graphs @xmath and @xmath
-    6 The graph @xmath
-    7 The infinite tree @xmath
-    8 The infinite tree @xmath
-    9 The construction of a unimodular measure is independent of the
    path
-    10 The barred binary tree
-    11 The graph @xmath whose connected components are @xmath and
    @xmath
-    12 The graph @xmath is @xmath with an additional vertex @xmath and
    an edge @xmath
-    13 The terms @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath of the sequence @xmath
-    14 The graph @xmath with @xmath
-    15 A cycle @xmath , and a copy of it with an additional vertex and
    edge
-    16 If @xmath is not in the @xmath -neighbourhood @xmath , then the
    ball @xmath does not intersect the subgraph @xmath of @xmath
-    17 The graph @xmath whose sequence of balls @xmath does not
    converge weakly
-    18 The graph @xmath , obtained by joining the infinite perfect
    binary tree and the barred binary tree
-    19 The balls @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath

## Introduction

The topic of unimodularity is discussed in many papers, and it is
defined in several ways. It was introduced by Benjamini and Schramm for
the purpose of applying the mass transport principle in a graph
theoretic setting [ BS01 ] , and Aldous and Steele, who used it for
deeper applications of the objective method [ AS03 ] . Since then, it
has been reformulated to suit the needs of the author. Prominent authors
in this area include Gábor Elek, Russell Lyons, and David Aldous whose
works have provided much of the inspiration for this thesis [ AL07 ,
Ele07 , Ele10 ] . However, our approach is different, and the
conclusions were usually discovered independently. In addition to new
results, this thesis includes detailed arguments of known results, as
well as generalizations of this author’s previous statements [ Art10 ,
Art11 ] .

The background knowledge for the majority of this thesis is rigorously
presented in the previous works of this author [ Art10 , Art11 ] .
Nevertheless, the ideas are carefully discussed to ensure that the
majority of this thesis is self-contained.

The collections @xmath of rooted graphs, and @xmath of birooted graphs
are compact ultrametric spaces. Every graph @xmath induces a subset
@xmath of rooted connected components @xmath for all @xmath . A
probability measure @xmath on @xmath is sustained by @xmath if @xmath
has full measure; @xmath is strictly sustained if each rooted connected
component has a positive measure. In the context of measures sustained
by countable graphs, a probability measure @xmath sustained by a graph
@xmath is unimodular if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all nonnegative functions @xmath on @xmath . As an extension of the
result shown in this author’s Honours project [ Art10 ] , we demonstrate
that a unimodular measure sustained by a connected graph is strictly
sustained.

Graphs that sustain unimodular measures are said to be judicial; those
that do not are lawless. Every finite graph @xmath is judicial because
it sustains the probability measure @xmath known as the law of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath , and @xmath otherwise [ Sch08 ] .

We discuss and demonstrate the following new observations. Infinite
connected graphs whose orbits are all finite are lawless. In particular,
the same is true for infinite connected rigid graphs. On the other hand,
connected graphs sustain at most one unimodular measure.

###### Theorem 2.2.

Let @xmath be a connected graph. If @xmath and @xmath are unimodular
measures sustained by @xmath , then @xmath .

The unique unimodular measure sustained by a connected judicial graph
@xmath is denoted by @xmath . This theorem relies on our useful, newly
obtained criterion for unimodularity: a measure @xmath sustained by a
connected graph @xmath is unimodular if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all adjacent vertices @xmath and @xmath of @xmath where @xmath and
@xmath is the stabilizer subgroup. Using this criterion, we determine
the structure of a unimodular measure sustained by a connected graph.

###### Theorem 2.6.

Let @xmath be a connected graph; let @xmath ; let @xmath be a positive
real number. Define a function @xmath as follows: @xmath , and for all
@xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a path in @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . Then the
following statements hold.

1.   The function @xmath is independent of the choice of path.

2.   If @xmath , then @xmath is the unique unimodular measure sustained
    by @xmath .

In addition, we deduce that every Cayley graph is judicial, a result
known to David Aldous and Russell Lyons [ AL07 ] in the setting of group
unimodularity. Furthermore, we use Theorem 2.2 to show that a unimodular
measure sustained by a connected graph is an extreme point of the convex
set @xmath of unimodular measures.

We also deal with disconnected graphs, and determine when they are
judicial. For example, if @xmath is a positive integer, the disjoint
union @xmath of @xmath copies of a connected judicial graph @xmath is
judicial. In fact, @xmath sustains the unique unimodular measure @xmath
. In general, however, a disconnected graph sustains multiple distinct
unimodular measures, as the following new observation shows.

###### Theorem 3.2.

Let @xmath be a subset of @xmath . Suppose that @xmath where @xmath is a
set of pairwise distinct connected judicial graphs and @xmath is a set
of positive integers. Let @xmath for all @xmath . If @xmath is sustained
by @xmath , then @xmath is the convex combination

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is shorthand for @xmath .

As a partial converse, a connected component of a judicial graph whose
measure is nonzero is judicial too. Theorem 3.2 is actually a
generalization of the same result for finite disconnected graphs
described in this author’s Honours project [ Art10 ] .

A sequence of graphs @xmath is negligible in the sequence @xmath of
finite graphs if @xmath is a subgraph of @xmath for all positive
integers @xmath , and @xmath as @xmath . Intuitively, the subgraphs
vanish in the limit. The following is a novel result for computing weak
limits of sequences of complicated graphs. It says that the weak limit
is preserved if we separate the graphs into simpler components.

###### Theorem 4.2.

Suppose that @xmath and @xmath are sequences of finite graphs such that
@xmath is negligible in @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . Furthermore, @xmath converges weakly to @xmath if and
only if @xmath does too.

Not all conjectures that sound reasonable in this area of research are
true. Let @xmath be an infinite connected graph, and let @xmath . The
sequence @xmath of laws of closed balls with linearly increasing radii
need not have a weak limit. Furthermore, it is possible to construct an
infinite connected graph @xmath such that, even if @xmath and @xmath are
adjacent vertices of @xmath , the weak limits of @xmath and @xmath are
distinct. Of course, we mention the famous open problem posed by Gábor
Elek [ Ele07 , Ele10 ] , David Aldous, and Russell Lyons [ AL07 ] :

“Is every unimodular measure the weak limit of a sequence of finite
graphs?”

Lastly, we ask whether it is possible to determine if a countable
connected graph is judicial without reference to a measure, and whether
every extreme point of @xmath is a unimodular measure sustained by a
connected graph.

## 1 Preliminaries

In this thesis, we adopt several conventions regarding concepts and
notation. All of our graphs are assumed to be simple, undirected,
countable (finite or infinite), and have at least one vertex, unless
stated otherwise. Furthermore, we do not distinguish between a graph and
its isomorphism class. That is, whenever @xmath and @xmath are graphs,
@xmath and @xmath are isomorphic if and only if @xmath where the
equality is between the isomorphism classes of @xmath and @xmath . In
addition, dotted lines in a figure of a graph mean the graph continues
indefinitely. Lastly, the reader may assume that all of our measures are
probability measures. Note that the results in this section are applied
often enough that we use them without reference in the rest of the
thesis.

Let @xmath be a graph, and let @xmath . The subgraph of @xmath induced
by @xmath is a graph whose vertex set is @xmath , and whose edge set is
@xmath . Denote by @xmath the connected component of @xmath whose vertex
set contains @xmath . Define the graph metric @xmath as follows: let
@xmath be the length of the shortest path from @xmath to @xmath in
@xmath if @xmath is connected. For every nonnegative integer @xmath and
@xmath , the (closed) ball @xmath is the subgraph of @xmath induced by
the set of vertices

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the neighbourhood @xmath is the set of vertices that are adjacent to
@xmath . In each case, the subscript @xmath may be dropped if there is
no confusion. A walk in a graph @xmath is a sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of vertices such that @xmath for all @xmath ; a path is a walk whose
vertices are pairwise distinct. If @xmath is a graph, then @xmath is its
automorphism group . For all @xmath , @xmath is the orbit of @xmath
under the action of @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath are graphs, and @xmath
is a positive integer, then @xmath is the disjoint union of @xmath and
@xmath , and @xmath is the disjoint union of @xmath copies of @xmath .
Furthermore, let @xmath be a subgraph of @xmath . Then @xmath is the
subgraph of @xmath induced by @xmath .

### 1.1 Rooted and birooted graphs

###### Definition 1.1.

A rooted graph is a pair @xmath where @xmath is a graph and @xmath ; a
birooted graph is an ordered triple @xmath where @xmath is a graph,
@xmath , and @xmath .

Fix a positive integer @xmath , which remains the same throughout this
entire thesis. Let @xmath be the set of all isomorphism classes @xmath
of countable, connected rooted graphs @xmath such that @xmath for all
@xmath .

Define the metric @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . It is known that @xmath is a compact ultrametric space [
Art10 ] .

Similarly, @xmath is the set of all isomorphism classes @xmath of
countable, connected birooted graphs @xmath such that @xmath for all
@xmath . There is an analogous ultrametric @xmath on @xmath , but it is
not used in this thesis.

Furthermore, we equip @xmath and @xmath with the Borel @xmath -algebras
of @xmath and @xmath , respectively. The reader is welcome to peruse
this author’s previous works [ Art10 , Art11 ] to learn more about the
compact ultrametric spaces @xmath and @xmath .

###### Definition 1.2.

If @xmath is a graph and @xmath , then @xmath is a rooted connected
component of @xmath . Denote by @xmath the set of rooted connected
components of @xmath . Similarly, @xmath is a birooted connected
component of @xmath for all adjacent vertices @xmath and @xmath of
@xmath , and @xmath is the set of birooted connected components of
@xmath .

###### Proposition 1.3.

Let @xmath be a graph, and let @xmath be a subset of @xmath . If @xmath
where @xmath is a connected graph for all @xmath , then @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath . Then @xmath for some @xmath . That is, @xmath . On
the other hand, assume that @xmath for some @xmath . Since @xmath ,
@xmath , and so @xmath . ∎

###### Proposition 1.4.

Let @xmath be a connected graph, and let @xmath . If @xmath , then
@xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath . There is an automorphism @xmath such that @xmath
and @xmath . Hence @xmath and @xmath . ∎

The following proposition is here to justify our ability to define
graphs using their rooted connected components, to claim that two graphs
are equal precisely when they share at least one rooted connected
component, and other technicalities.

###### Proposition 1.5.

Let @xmath and @xmath be connected graphs. The following statements are
equivalent: (i) @xmath , (ii) @xmath , and (iii) @xmath .

###### Proof.

To prove that @xmath implies @xmath , assume that @xmath . Let @xmath .
Since @xmath , there is an isomorphism @xmath , and so @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

That is, @xmath . Similarly, @xmath , and @xmath follows. The
implication @xmath implies @xmath is trivial. Lastly, @xmath implies
@xmath may be shown as follows. Consider a rooted connected component in
the intersection of @xmath and @xmath : @xmath for some @xmath and
@xmath . Then there is an isomorphism @xmath such that @xmath . In
particular, @xmath . ∎

Proposition 1.5 only considers connected graphs. However, there are
equally useful facts for graphs that may not be connected. In
particular, the following results tell us how orbits are related to
rooted connected components.

###### Lemma 1.6.

Let @xmath and @xmath be graphs. If @xmath is an isomorphism, then
@xmath , and so @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath . Since @xmath is an isomorphism, the image @xmath of the
connected component @xmath is itself connected. Let us prove that @xmath
.

Suppose that @xmath . Then @xmath for some @xmath . Since @xmath is
connected, there is a path @xmath between @xmath and @xmath in @xmath .
The image @xmath is a path between @xmath and @xmath , and so @xmath .
Thus @xmath . On the other hand, assume that @xmath . Consider the
inverse @xmath of the isomorphism @xmath . As before, the image of a
path between @xmath and @xmath is a path between @xmath and @xmath .
Thus @xmath , and so @xmath . That is, @xmath . ∎

###### Proposition 1.7.

Let @xmath be a graph. Suppose that @xmath and @xmath are vertices of
@xmath . Then @xmath if and only if @xmath .

###### Proof.

If @xmath , there is an automorphism @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath .
By Lemma 1.6 , @xmath . Conversely, @xmath implies there is an
isomorphism @xmath such that @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath lie in the
same component, then @xmath , and @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath is an extension of @xmath . On the other hand, assume
that @xmath and @xmath belong to distinct components. It is possible to
define an extension @xmath on @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . In either case, it is easy to see that @xmath is an
automorphism of @xmath , and @xmath . That is, @xmath . ∎

### 1.2 Sustained and unimodular measures

###### Definition 1.8.

[ Art10 ] A measure @xmath on @xmath is sustained by a graph @xmath if
@xmath has full measure, that is, @xmath . Alternatively, @xmath
sustains @xmath . It is strictly sustained by @xmath if every rooted
connected component has a positive measure.

###### Proposition 1.9.

If @xmath and @xmath are measures sustained by a graph @xmath , then
@xmath if and only if @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Proof.

Since @xmath and @xmath are sustained by @xmath , the @xmath -measure
and @xmath -measure of @xmath is zero. Thus @xmath for all @xmath .
Since @xmath and @xmath always agree on the complement of @xmath , the
result follows. ∎

The main concept of this thesis is unimodularity . Since its
introduction by Benjamini and Schramm [ BS01 ] , and Aldous and Steele [
AS03 ] , it has been reformulated and renamed in several papers. Our
attempt is also known as involution invariance according to Aldous and
Lyons [ AL07 , p. 10] . However, the paper by Aldous and Steele [ AS03 ,
p. 40] provides an alternative, yet equivalent, definition with this
terminology. Another variation is the intrinsic mass transport principle
, which is shown to coincide with our definition [ AL07 , p. 11] .

###### Definition 1.10.

A measure @xmath on @xmath is unimodular if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all nonnegative measurable functions @xmath on @xmath . The set of
unimodular measures on @xmath is denoted by @xmath .

To better understand the concept of unimodularity, think of the integral
of a function @xmath with respect to the measure @xmath as the average
value of @xmath . The function value @xmath is the amount of “mass”
being sent from @xmath to @xmath . Then @xmath is unimodular if the
average amount of mass sent from a vertex to its neighbours equals the
average amount of mass sent to a vertex from its neighbours.

Since every graph in this thesis is countable, and the measures we deal
with are sustained by such graphs, it is wise to just use the following
reformulation instead.

###### Proposition 1.11.

Let @xmath be a graph. A measure @xmath sustained by @xmath is
unimodular if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all nonnegative functions @xmath on @xmath with @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a measure sustained by a graph @xmath . Clearly, @xmath is
unimodular if and only if ( @xmath ) holds for all nonnegative
measurable functions @xmath on @xmath because @xmath is sustained by
@xmath . Suppose that @xmath is unimodular. Let @xmath be a nonnegative
function on @xmath with @xmath . Since @xmath is countable, so is @xmath
. It follows that @xmath is measurable, and the result holds.
Conversely, assume that @xmath is a nonnegative measurable function on
@xmath . Let @xmath be the product of @xmath and the characteristic
function of @xmath . It is obvious that @xmath is a nonnegative function
on @xmath and @xmath , which means @xmath satisfies ( @xmath ). Then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

because @xmath on @xmath , and so @xmath is unimodular. ∎

###### Remark 1.12.

In arguments involving unimodularity and a measure @xmath sustained by a
graph @xmath , it is usually assumed, without loss of generality, that
@xmath whenever @xmath is a nonnegative function on @xmath .

To combine the concepts of “sustained” and “unimodular,” we introduce
new terminology to distinguish graphs that sustain unimodular measures.

###### Definition 1.13.

A graph @xmath is judicial if there is a unimodular measure @xmath
sustained by @xmath . If a graph is not judicial, it is said to be
lawless .

###### Definition 1.14.

[ Sch08 ] Let @xmath be a finite graph. Define the measure @xmath on
@xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath , and @xmath otherwise. The measure @xmath is clearly
sustained by @xmath , and it is known as the law of @xmath .

###### Proposition 1.15.

If @xmath is a finite graph, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all measurable functions @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a measurable function. By Proposition 1.7 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a partition of @xmath . Then

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where the second equality holds by Proposition 1.7 , and the result
follows. ∎

###### Proposition 1.16.

[ Sch08 ] The law @xmath of a finite graph @xmath is unimodular. In
particular, every finite graph is judicial.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a finite graph, and let @xmath be a nonnegative function
on @xmath . Clearly, the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is symmetric. That is, @xmath if and only if @xmath for all vertices
@xmath and @xmath of @xmath . In addition, @xmath and @xmath if and only
if @xmath . Furthermore,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath because @xmath and @xmath are neighbours, and the second
equality is obtained by relabelling @xmath and @xmath . Using
Proposition 1.15 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

According to ( @xmath ), the right-hand sides of these two equations are
equal, which means @xmath is unimodular. Hence @xmath is judicial. ∎

### 1.3 Weak convergence

Let @xmath be the set of bounded continuous real-valued functions on
@xmath . As defined in measure theory, weak convergence plays a
prominent role in this thesis. Its definition is restricted to measures
on @xmath for simplicity.

###### Definition 1.17.

A sequence @xmath of measures on @xmath converges weakly to some measure
@xmath on @xmath if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . The measure @xmath is known as the weak limit of the
given sequence.

As a special case, assume that @xmath is a sequence of laws of finite
graphs. The sequence @xmath of finite graphs converges weakly if @xmath
does too.

The proof of the following important fact, which is due to Benjamini and
Schramm [ BS01 ] , is omitted in this thesis. However, the reader is
encouraged to see this author’s paper on graphings and unimodularity for
a full treatment [ Art11 ] . As stated by Schramm [ Sch08 ] , Aldous,
and Lyons [ AL07 ] , the converse is still an open question.

###### Proposition 1.18.

If @xmath is the weak limit of a sequence @xmath where @xmath is a
finite graph for each positive integer @xmath , then @xmath is
unimodular.∎

### 1.4 Examples of graphs

###### Definition 1.19.

A graph @xmath is vertex-transitive if @xmath for some @xmath ; a graph
@xmath is rigid if its automorphism group @xmath is trivial.

###### Proposition 1.20.

Let @xmath be a connected graph. If @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath ,
then @xmath is vertex-transitive.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath . Since @xmath is connected, there is a path @xmath in @xmath
with @xmath and @xmath . By assumption,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath , which means there are automorphisms @xmath of @xmath
such that @xmath for all @xmath . Hence @xmath is an automorphism of
@xmath such that @xmath . ∎

There are several important examples of finite and infinite graphs
mentioned in this thesis. Each of these graphs is described below, and
the proposition that follows gives a taste of their usefulness.

###### Example 1.21.

The graph @xmath is the cycle on @xmath vertices , and @xmath is the
path on @xmath vertices . Additionally, @xmath is known as the
bi-infinite path ; its vertices are the integers, and its edge set
consists of the elements @xmath for all @xmath . These three types of
graphs are presented in Figure 1 .

###### Example 1.22.

The graph @xmath in Figure 2 is the @xmath -regular tree , which is an
infinite vertex-transitive tree each of whose vertices has degree @xmath
. The graph @xmath in Figure 3 is the infinite perfect binary tree . The
graph ² ² 2 The reader should be aware that @xmath is not a tree because
it is not acyclic. The terminology is used to establish a link with the
infinite perfect binary tree. @xmath in Figure 4 is the barred (infinite
perfect) binary tree . The first ancestor of @xmath (and @xmath ) is the
unique vertex of degree @xmath .

Given a positive integer @xmath , let @xmath and @xmath be the balls in
@xmath and @xmath , respectively. There is a unique path @xmath in
@xmath where @xmath is a leaf. Similarly, there is a unique path @xmath
in @xmath where @xmath is a vertex of degree @xmath , and the vertices
of the path belong to pairwise distinct orbits. With this, the graphs
@xmath and @xmath depicted in Figure 5 are defined as follows: @xmath
and @xmath for all positive integers @xmath .

###### Lemma 1.23.

Let @xmath and @xmath be real numbers for all positive integers @xmath
and @xmath . Suppose that @xmath , and assume that there is a real
number @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath for all positive integers
@xmath and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a positive real number. There is a positive integer @xmath
such that @xmath . For each @xmath , there is a positive integer @xmath
such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all positive integers @xmath with @xmath . Choose

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and let @xmath be a positive integer with @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and the result follows. ∎

###### Proposition 1.24.

Let @xmath and @xmath for all positive integers @xmath . The weak limits
of @xmath and @xmath are @xmath and @xmath , respectively, defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all positive integers @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath . By the continuity of @xmath , and the definitions of @xmath
and @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all positive integers @xmath . Using induction, it is clear that
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath for all positive integers @xmath
and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where, in either case, the fourth equality holds by Lemma 1.23 , which
applies because @xmath is bounded. Hence the weak limit of @xmath is
@xmath , and the weak limit of @xmath is @xmath . ∎

## 2 Uniqueness and existence of sustained unimodular measures

The purpose of this section is to demonstrate that unimodular measures
sustained by connected graphs are unique. More precisely, a connected
graph cannot sustain more than one unimodular measure. Following the
proof of this result, we discuss its relation to Cayley graphs, and its
application to the study of the convexity of @xmath . Additionally, we
determine the structure of a unimodular measure sustained by a connected
graph.

### 2.1 Infinite connected rigid graphs are lawless

Recall that a finite connected graph always sustains a unimodular
measure, known as its law. However, this is not necessarily true for
infinite connected graphs, as the following proposition proves.

###### Proposition 2.1.

If @xmath is an infinite connected rigid graph, then there is no
unimodular measure sustained by @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath is a unimodular measure sustained by @xmath . Since
@xmath is rigid, there is a unique birooted graph @xmath for each pair
of neighbours @xmath in @xmath . That is, @xmath if and only if @xmath
for all adjacent vertices @xmath and @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath of
@xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath . Denote by @xmath the characteristic
function of the singleton @xmath . By the unimodularity of @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so @xmath because @xmath is rigid. Hence there is a real number
@xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is a contradiction. ∎

### 2.2 Example: the graph @xmath where @xmath is infinite

Consider the graph @xmath in Figure 6 . For convenience, let @xmath .
Suppose that @xmath is a measure on @xmath such that @xmath . It is
valid to ask how @xmath may be defined. An example of a unimodular
measure @xmath sustained by @xmath is described in Proposition 1.24
where @xmath is defined by @xmath for all positive integers @xmath . In
fact, this is the only unimodular measure sustained by @xmath .

To understand why, recall that such a measure @xmath is unimodular if
and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all nonnegative functions @xmath on @xmath . Observe that @xmath ,
and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath belongs to the orbit @xmath if @xmath . Let @xmath be a
bounded nonnegative function on @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath because there is an automorphism of @xmath that fixes
@xmath and exchanges @xmath and @xmath . Similarly,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is bounded, the sums on either side of ( @xmath ) are
finite, which means the equation ( @xmath ) is satisfied precisely when

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using these equations,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

because @xmath is unimodular. Note that @xmath appears as a multiple of
@xmath and @xmath . Furthermore, @xmath does not appear as any other
multiple. The remaining terms possess a similar pattern. Let us
rearrange, factor, and combine the terms in the summation above to
obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      ( @xmath )
  -- -------- -------- -- ------------

By the definition of unimodularity, it is possible to let @xmath be the
characteristic function of the singleton @xmath . In this case, ( @xmath
) simplifies to the equation @xmath . That is, @xmath . In fact, by
choosing different characteristic functions, we see that @xmath for all
positive integers @xmath .

These equations restrict the measure @xmath , but they do not define it.
However, @xmath is uniquely determined because @xmath . To see this, it
suffices to calculate @xmath . By induction and the equation @xmath , it
is easy to see that @xmath for all positive integers @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so @xmath . Since the measure of every rooted connected component of
@xmath is a multiple of @xmath , it follows that @xmath is uniquely
determined. Indeed, @xmath , the previously mentioned measure.

### 2.3 Example: the tree @xmath where @xmath is finite

The following example deals with an infinite graph whose set of rooted
connected components is finite. Consider the infinite tree @xmath
depicted in Figure 7 whose vertices alternate having @xmath and @xmath
neighbours. Let @xmath be a vertex of degree @xmath , and let @xmath be
a vertex of degree @xmath . The rooted connected components of @xmath
are @xmath and @xmath .

Suppose that @xmath is a unimodular measure sustained by @xmath . That
is, @xmath has full measure. Note that @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath
for all @xmath . Denote by @xmath the characteristic function of the
singleton @xmath . Since @xmath is unimodular and @xmath is bounded,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath because @xmath .
Furthermore, @xmath , and so these two equations yield @xmath and @xmath
. Hence @xmath is uniquely determined.

### 2.4 Example: the tree @xmath

Let us build on the previous example by modifying the tree @xmath .
Consider the infinite tree @xmath , shown in Figure 8 , defined by
subdividing each edge of @xmath exactly once. This tree has three types
of vertices: let @xmath be a vertex of degree @xmath , let @xmath be a
vertex of degree @xmath , and let @xmath be a vertex of degree @xmath .
The set of rooted connected components of @xmath is simply @xmath .
Intuitively, the neighbours of @xmath belong to the orbit of @xmath ,
the neighbours of @xmath belong to the orbit of @xmath , and the
neighbours of @xmath belong to both the orbits of @xmath and @xmath .

Suppose that @xmath is a unimodular measure sustained by @xmath . Let
@xmath be a bounded nonnegative function on @xmath . Observe that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

using similar reasoning as in the previous example. Furthermore, @xmath
implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, for all bounded nonnegative functions @xmath on @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

In particular, this is true for the characteristic functions of the
singletons @xmath and @xmath . More precisely,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

respectively. Since @xmath , we have a system of three equations,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

whose solution is @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Hence @xmath is
uniquely determined.

### 2.5 Connected graphs sustain at most one unimodular measure

As these examples have shown, the claim that every connected graph
sustains at most one unimodular measure is plausible. Having given the
reader a taste of the ideas used in this section, it is time to
demonstrate the main result.

For convenience, let @xmath , and let @xmath be the stabilizer subgroup
of @xmath . With this notation, @xmath is the orbit of @xmath under the
action of @xmath , and @xmath is the orbit of @xmath under the action of
@xmath . The following result is a new observation.

###### Theorem 2.2.

Let @xmath be a connected graph. If @xmath and @xmath are unimodular
measures sustained by @xmath , then @xmath .

###### Remark 2.3.

Equivalently, whenever @xmath is a connected judicial graph, it sustains
a unique unimodular measure. Denote this measure by @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.4.

Let @xmath . Then @xmath if and only if @xmath ; and @xmath if and only
if @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath . Then there is a @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath
. Since @xmath , it follows that @xmath . On the other hand, assume that
@xmath . Then there is an automorphism @xmath such that @xmath . Thus
@xmath . Similar reasoning applies to the second statement. ∎

Proposition 2.5 is a new criterion for unimodularity in the case of
measures sustained by connected graphs. Aside from its importance in the
proof of Theorem 2.2 , it is very useful on its own, which is why it is
not merely a lemma.

###### Proposition 2.5.

Suppose that @xmath is a measure sustained by a connected graph @xmath .
Then @xmath is unimodular if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all adjacent vertices @xmath and @xmath of @xmath . In addition,
@xmath is unimodular only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all adjacent vertices @xmath and @xmath of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and @xmath be adjacent vertices of @xmath . Denote by @xmath
the characteristic function of @xmath . Observe that @xmath if @xmath or
@xmath for all @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath if and only if @xmath by Lemma 2.4 for all @xmath .
Similarly,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is unimodular, it follows that @xmath .

Conversely, assume that @xmath for all adjacent vertices @xmath and
@xmath of @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

holds where @xmath is the characteristic function of the singleton
@xmath for all adjacent vertices @xmath and @xmath . To see that @xmath
is unimodular, let @xmath be a nonnegative function on @xmath with
@xmath . It is easy to verify that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is countable, so are @xmath and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where interchanging the summations is possible because the terms are
nonnegative. Similarly,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

By ( @xmath ), it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so @xmath is unimodular, as required.

To demonstrate the second part of the proposition, let @xmath and @xmath
be adjacent vertices of @xmath . Denote by @xmath the characteristic
function of the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Observe that @xmath if @xmath or @xmath for all @xmath . Furthermore,
@xmath if and only if @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Similarly,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is unimodular, it follows that @xmath . ∎

###### Proof of Theorem 2.2.

By Proposition 2.5 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all adjacent vertices @xmath and @xmath of @xmath . Let @xmath be a
rooted connected component of @xmath , and let @xmath . Since @xmath is
connected, there is a path @xmath with @xmath and @xmath in @xmath .
Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . The product of these terms is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

That is,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which means @xmath . It follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

because @xmath and @xmath are probability measures sustained by @xmath .
Hence @xmath , and so @xmath . ∎

### 2.6 Existence of a sustained unimodular measure

Recall that @xmath and @xmath is the stabilizer subgroup of @xmath where
@xmath is a graph. So far, we have shown that a connected graph sustains
at most one unimodular measure. It is natural to ask under what
conditions such a measure exists. According to Proposition 2.5 , a
sustained unimodular measure must satisfy the equation @xmath for all
adjacent vertices @xmath and @xmath of @xmath . Based on this, we see
that the measure of @xmath is just a multiple of the measure of @xmath ,
which leads us to the following observation.

###### Theorem 2.6.

Let @xmath be a connected graph; let @xmath ; let @xmath be a positive
real number. Define a function @xmath as follows: @xmath , and for all
@xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a path in @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . Then the
following statements hold.

1.   The function @xmath is independent of the choice of path.

2.   If @xmath , then @xmath is the unique unimodular measure sustained
    by @xmath .

The validity of Theorem 2.6 rests entirely on the well-definedness of
the function @xmath . Indeed, there may be several distinct paths
between two vertices. However, the following lemmas are sufficient to
see that @xmath must be well-defined. The idea is to use the Haar
measure on @xmath , as suggested in a preprint by Vadim Kaimanovich [
Kai13 ] .

###### Lemma 2.7.

Let @xmath for some connected graph @xmath . Denote by @xmath the left
Haar measure on @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath are adjacent vertices of
@xmath , then @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and @xmath be adjacent vertices of @xmath . It is known that
the stabilizers @xmath and @xmath are compact subgroups of @xmath , as
shown, for example, by Woess [ Woe91 ] .

Define the equivalence relation @xmath on @xmath as follows: @xmath if
@xmath for all @xmath . Clearly, @xmath where @xmath is the identity
map, and @xmath is its equivalence class. In addition, it is easy to see
that @xmath for all @xmath . Furthermore, the function @xmath defined on
the quotient set by @xmath is a well-defined bijection, which means
@xmath . Using the left-translation-invariance and additivity of the
Haar measure @xmath , it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the second equality holds because the union is disjoint. ∎

###### Lemma 2.8.

Let @xmath be a connected graph. Suppose that @xmath is a walk in @xmath
. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

According to Lemma 2.7 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all adjacent vertices @xmath and @xmath of @xmath where @xmath is
the left Haar measure on @xmath , and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as required. ∎

###### Proof of Theorem 2.6.

Let @xmath be a connected graph, and let @xmath . To see that the
function @xmath is independent of the choice of path, assume that @xmath
is another path in @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . As shown in Figure 9
,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a walk in @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . By Lemma 2.8 , it is easy
to deduce that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which means @xmath is well-defined.

It remains to demonstrate that @xmath is unimodular. Suppose that @xmath
and @xmath are adjacent vertices of @xmath . Without loss of generality,
assume that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are paths in @xmath with @xmath . Thus @xmath ,
and so @xmath is unimodular according to Proposition 2.5 . ∎

### 2.7 The barred binary tree is lawless

The following example should convince the reader that a connected graph
need not sustain a unimodular measure, even if it is not rigid. Consider
the barred binary tree @xmath . For the benefit of the reader, its
orbits are labelled using the positive integers, and the resulting tree
is shown in Figure 10 . Note that @xmath and @xmath for all positive
integers @xmath . Suppose that @xmath sustains a unimodular measure
@xmath . Then Proposition 2.5 tells us that the equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is true for all positive integers @xmath . It follows that @xmath , and
so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the right-hand side is unbounded unless @xmath . In either case,
@xmath , which is a contradiction.

### 2.8 Applications

To demonstrate the usefulness of Proposition 2.5 , our so-called
unimodularity criterion, we discuss several results that apply this
fact. To begin, it is possible to extend Proposition 2.1 , which states
that infinite connected rigid graphs are lawless.

###### Lemma 2.9.

Suppose that @xmath is a connected graph whose orbits under the action
of @xmath are all finite. Then @xmath for all adjacent vertices @xmath
and @xmath of @xmath .

###### Proof.

If @xmath , then the result holds. On the other hand, assume that @xmath
. Let @xmath , and let @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . Clearly,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . Then the number of edges @xmath of @xmath where @xmath
and @xmath may be counted in two ways:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which means @xmath . ∎

Lemma 2.9 and Proposition 2.5 yield a straightforward proof of the
following new observation, which extends Proposition 2.1 .

###### Theorem 2.10.

If @xmath is an infinite connected graph whose orbits are all finite,
then there is no unimodular measure sustained by @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath is a unimodular measure sustained by @xmath . Let
@xmath . By Proposition 2.5 and Lemma 2.9 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all adjacent vertices @xmath and @xmath of @xmath . Let @xmath , and
let @xmath be a path in @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so @xmath . It follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

because @xmath is a probability measure. However, this is a
contradiction. Hence there is no unimodular measure sustained by @xmath
. ∎

In the results below, we generalize two facts that were proven in this
author’s Honours project [ Art10 ] .

###### Proposition 2.11.

If @xmath is a unimodular measure sustained by a connected graph @xmath
, then @xmath is strictly sustained by @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath is a unimodular measure sustained by a connected
graph @xmath . To derive a contradiction, assume that @xmath is not
strictly sustained by @xmath . That is, @xmath for some @xmath . Let
@xmath . By Proposition 2.5 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so @xmath because @xmath . Since @xmath is connected, it follows
that @xmath ; a contradiction. ∎

###### Corollary 2.12.

Let @xmath and @xmath be connected graphs that sustain unimodular
measures @xmath and @xmath , respectively. If @xmath , then @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath . For all @xmath , @xmath by Proposition 2.11 , and
so @xmath . Similarly, @xmath . It follows that the rooted connected
components of @xmath are precisely those of @xmath . Hence @xmath . ∎

#### 2.8.1 Cayley graphs

The criterion for unimodularity presented in Proposition 2.5 is truly
useful in its own right. It provides a simple method to determine
whether a connected vertex-transitive graph is judicial. As previously
stated, let @xmath .

###### Corollary 2.13.

A connected vertex-transitive graph @xmath is judicial if and only if
@xmath for all adjacent vertices @xmath and @xmath of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Since @xmath is vertex-transitive, it has a unique rooted connected
component @xmath . Thus the only measure sustained by @xmath is the
Dirac measure @xmath defined by @xmath . By Proposition 2.5 , @xmath is
unimodular if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all adjacent vertices @xmath and @xmath of @xmath . ∎

This author is curious to know whether there is a similar “measure
independent” characterization of more general judicial graphs.

Unfortunately, even the seemingly weak condition in Corollary 2.13 is
not satisfied for all vertex-transitive graphs. For a counterexample,
the reader is encouraged to study the so-called grandparent graph ,
which is constructed in the text by Russell Lyons and Yuval Peres [ LP13
, p. 257] . However, as the same reference mentions, there is a
prominent subcollection of connected vertex-transitive graphs, each of
which is judicial.

###### Definition 2.14.

Let @xmath be a group, and let @xmath be a generating set of @xmath that
does not contain the identity @xmath with @xmath . The Cayley graph
@xmath of @xmath is the graph defined as follows: @xmath and @xmath .

Note that a Cayley graph @xmath is connected because it is constructed
using a set that generates the entire group. Since the edges of Cayley
graphs have a specific form, it is possible to rephrase Corollary 2.13
as follows. Suppose that @xmath is a Cayley graph for some group @xmath
. Then @xmath is judicial if and only if @xmath for all @xmath and
@xmath . Thus it suffices to demonstrate the following result.

###### Proposition 2.15.

If @xmath is a Cayley graph for some group @xmath , then @xmath for all
@xmath and @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.16.

Under the assumptions of Proposition 2.15 , let @xmath , let @xmath ,
and let @xmath and @xmath be automorphisms of @xmath . Define @xmath and
@xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . Then (i) @xmath and (ii) @xmath . Furthermore, assume
that @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

In either case, we must prove that @xmath and @xmath are injective,
surjective, preserve adjacency, and satisfy the equations @xmath and
@xmath .

Let us begin by showing that (i) is true. To see that @xmath is
injective, assume that @xmath and @xmath are vertices of @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which means @xmath because @xmath is injective. Let @xmath . Since
@xmath is surjective, there is an @xmath such that @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so @xmath is surjective too. The following argument shows that
@xmath preserves adjacency. Suppose that @xmath and @xmath are vertices
of @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath are adjacent precisely when @xmath
and @xmath are. Furthermore,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

for all @xmath . It follows that @xmath and @xmath are adjacent if and
only if @xmath and @xmath are too. Lastly, @xmath . Hence @xmath . The
proof of (ii) is analogous, and so it is omitted.

The second part of the lemma involves two simple calculations, which are
aided by the assumption that @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

for all @xmath . Thus @xmath and @xmath . ∎

###### Proof of Proposition 2.15.

Let @xmath , and let @xmath . To see that @xmath , it suffices to
construct a bijection between @xmath and @xmath . Define @xmath by
@xmath for all @xmath where @xmath . Consider the function @xmath
defined by @xmath for all @xmath where @xmath . Lemma 2.16 tells us that
@xmath and @xmath are well-defined. In fact, as the following argument
demonstrates, @xmath is the inverse of @xmath . Let @xmath for some
@xmath , and let @xmath for some @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath by Lemma 2.16 . Hence there is a bijection
between @xmath and @xmath , which means these two sets are of equal
size. ∎

The inspiration for the following result came from the known fact that
Cayley graphs are unimodular in the sense of group unimodularity [ AL07
, p. 8] , which concerns the right invariance of the left Haar measure.
Although this fact is demonstrated by Russell Lyons and Yuval Peres [
LP13 , p. 305] , we restate the result in our language of unimodularity.

###### Corollary 2.17.

Every Cayley graph is judicial.∎

#### 2.8.2 Convexity

Denote by @xmath the closure of the set of laws @xmath of finite graphs.
The remainder of this section is devoted to the study of the convexity
of @xmath . As demonstrated in the author’s Honours project [ Art10 ] ,
@xmath is convex. Furthermore, it is known that @xmath is weakly compact
[ Sch08 ] , which means it is reasonable to determine its extreme
points. Since the set of unimodular measures @xmath is convex too, we
attempt to calculate its extreme points as well.

###### Definition 2.18.

An extreme point of a convex set @xmath is an element @xmath such that
if @xmath for some @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.19.

Let @xmath be a measure sustained by a connected graph @xmath . If
@xmath for some measures @xmath and @xmath on @xmath , then @xmath and
@xmath are sustained by @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath for some measures @xmath and @xmath on @xmath .
Without loss of generality, assume that @xmath for some @xmath . Then
@xmath , but @xmath ; a contradiction. It follows that @xmath for all
@xmath . Thus @xmath must be sustained by @xmath . Similarly, @xmath is
sustained by @xmath . ∎

###### Proposition 2.20.

If @xmath is sustained by a connected graph, then @xmath is an extreme
point of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath is sustained by a connected graph @xmath , and
assume that @xmath for some @xmath . By Lemma 2.19 , @xmath and @xmath
are sustained by @xmath too. Then Theorem 2.2 tells us that @xmath .
Hence @xmath is an extreme point of @xmath . ∎

A nearly identical argument yields the following proposition, which
informs the reader of some of the extreme points of the set of
unimodular measures.

###### Proposition 2.21.

If @xmath is a unimodular measure sustained by a connected graph, then
@xmath is an extreme point of the convex set @xmath of unimodular
measures.∎

The converse of Proposition 2.21 states that every extreme point of
@xmath is a unimodular measure sustained by a connected graph. Whether
or not it is true is unknown to this author.

## 3 Judiciality of disconnected graphs

Recall that a graph is judicial if it sustains a unimodular measure, and
it is lawless otherwise. Consider a graph whose connected components are
judicial. In this section, we demonstrate that such a graph itself is
judicial, even if it has countably many components.

As previously shown, if @xmath is a connected judicial graph, it
sustains a unique unimodular measure @xmath . However, this does not
hold if the graph is not connected. Indeed, let @xmath where @xmath and
@xmath are the complete graphs on @xmath and @xmath vertices,
respectively. Of course, the law @xmath is an example of a unimodular
measure sustained by @xmath . However, the measure @xmath defined by
@xmath and @xmath is unimodular too; here @xmath and @xmath are the
rooted connected components of @xmath . It is easy to see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all unimodular measures @xmath sustained by @xmath . That is, @xmath
is a convex combination of the measures @xmath and @xmath .
Unfortunately, this is not as simple for more general graphs, but the
unimodularity of @xmath is enough to prove it.

### 3.1 The union of multiple copies of a connected judicial graph
sustains a unique unimodular measure

There is a special case though: a union of multiple copies of a
connected judicial graph. As the following proposition states, such a
graph sustains a unique unimodular measure, even though it is not
connected.

###### Proposition 3.1.

If @xmath is a connected judicial graph, then for all positive integers
@xmath , the graph @xmath is judicial, and @xmath is the unique
unimodular measure sustained by @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath is a connected judicial graph, let @xmath , and let
@xmath be a positive integer. Since @xmath where @xmath is the connected
component of @xmath containing @xmath , it follows that the set of
rooted connected components of @xmath coincides with that of @xmath .
Clearly, @xmath is sustained by @xmath . To prove uniqueness, assume
that @xmath is sustained by @xmath too. Then @xmath is sustained by
@xmath , which means @xmath by Theorem 2.2 . Hence @xmath is the unique
unimodular measure sustained by @xmath . ∎

### 3.2 Graphs with judicial components are judicial

In general, a disconnected judicial graph does not sustain a unique
unimodular measure. Instead, as the following result states, every
unimodular measure sustained by such a graph is a convex combination.

###### Theorem 3.2.

Let @xmath be a subset of @xmath . Suppose that @xmath where @xmath is a
set of pairwise distinct connected judicial graphs and @xmath is a set
of positive integers. Let @xmath for all @xmath . If @xmath is sustained
by @xmath , then @xmath is the convex combination

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is shorthand for @xmath .

To gain some intuition for this result, consider the following example.
Denote by @xmath and @xmath the graphs in Figure 11 , let @xmath and
@xmath , and let @xmath . Here @xmath and @xmath . Note that @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath . As in the hypothesis of Theorem 3.2 , let @xmath
be a unimodular measure sustained by @xmath . In order to use
unimodularity in this case, it suffices to define a pair of nonnegative
functions @xmath and @xmath on @xmath as follows: @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath are zero otherwise. Since @xmath
is unimodular and @xmath , it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are equal. That is, @xmath . Similarly, the unimodularity of @xmath
implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are equal, which means @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It remains to show that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which may be accomplished by evaluating the right-hand side at @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath . Doing so at @xmath is trivial because @xmath and
@xmath . However, let us use the equality obtained above, and apply the
right-hand side to @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

because @xmath . An identical sequence of equalities proves that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence the conclusion of Theorem 3.2 holds for this example. As the
reader can guess, this idea of exchanging the arguments of @xmath and
@xmath is the basis of the proof of Theorem 3.2 . The ability to perform
such an exchange is entirely obtained using the definition of
unimodularity by specifying functions similar to @xmath and @xmath in
the example above. The remainder of the section involves fleshing out
these technical results, and eventually demonstrating Theorem 3.2
followed by a few interesting corollaries.

###### Lemma 3.3.

Under the assumptions of Theorem 3.2 , @xmath is unimodular if and only
if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all nonnegative functions @xmath on @xmath ; and @xmath is
unimodular if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all nonnegative functions @xmath on @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Since @xmath consists of pairwise distinct connected judicial graphs, it
follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a disjoint union. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all nonnegative functions @xmath on @xmath . The remainder follows
immediately using the definition of unimodularity. ∎

###### Lemma 3.4.

Under the assumptions of Lemma 3.3 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all adjacent vertices @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath
are rooted connected components of @xmath , and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath , and let @xmath and @xmath be rooted connected components of
@xmath . If @xmath , the result holds. Suppose that @xmath and @xmath .
Denote by @xmath the characteristic function of the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are the orbits of @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. Define the nonnegative function @xmath on @xmath as
follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all adjacent vertices @xmath and @xmath of @xmath , and @xmath
otherwise. Note that @xmath if and only if @xmath , and @xmath if and
only if @xmath .

Since @xmath is unimodular, Lemma 3.3 implies that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

are equal, and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly, the unimodularity of @xmath tells us that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

are equal where @xmath and @xmath because @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Observe that @xmath is nonempty because @xmath . By combining the
equations above,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so @xmath because @xmath is nonzero. ∎

###### Corollary 3.5.

Under the assumptions of Lemma 3.4 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all vertices @xmath and @xmath of @xmath , and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath , and let @xmath and @xmath be vertices of @xmath . Since
@xmath is connected, there is a path @xmath with @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath . Note that @xmath for all @xmath . By Lemma 3.4 ,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath , as required. ∎

###### Proof of Theorem 3.2.

Suppose that @xmath is sustained by @xmath . To show that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it suffices to prove that the left-hand side and the right-hand side
agree on the rooted connected components of @xmath . Let @xmath , and
let @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where the second equality holds by Corollary 3.5 . ∎

### 3.3 The case of disconnected finite graphs

To put the main result into perspective, consider the special case of
finite graphs and their laws. The particular case of the following
result is demonstrated in the author’s Honours project [ Art10 ] . Let
us instead show how it arises from Theorem 3.2 . Recall that @xmath is
defined by @xmath for all @xmath if @xmath is a finite graph.

###### Corollary 3.6.

Suppose that @xmath where @xmath is a set of pairwise distinct finite
connected graphs and @xmath is a set of positive integers for some
positive integer @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular, if @xmath and @xmath are nonnegative integers with @xmath
, and @xmath and @xmath are distinct finite connected graphs, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To ease the proof of Corollary 3.6 , it is wise to isolate the following
technical result, which relates the size of an orbit of @xmath to that
of an orbit of one of its components.

###### Lemma 3.7.

Let @xmath be a finite graph. Suppose that @xmath for some positive
integer @xmath where @xmath is a connected graph, which is not a
connected component of @xmath . Then @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath . Since @xmath , it is possible to write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and identify the vertices @xmath and @xmath . It suffices to prove that
@xmath . Given @xmath , there is an automorphism @xmath on @xmath such
that @xmath , and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the @xmath th copy of @xmath in @xmath . Since @xmath is
not a connected component of @xmath , their sets of rooted connected
components are disjoint, which means @xmath , and so @xmath .
Furthermore, the inclusion @xmath , the projection @xmath , and the
restriction @xmath of @xmath to @xmath whose image is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are isomorphisms. Their composition @xmath is an automorphism on @xmath
with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so @xmath . On the other hand, assume that @xmath and @xmath . Then
there is an automorphism @xmath on @xmath such that @xmath . Define the
function @xmath as follows: @xmath for all @xmath , and @xmath is the
identity on @xmath . Clearly, @xmath is an automorphism on @xmath , and
so is the function @xmath , which exchanges the copies @xmath and @xmath
leaving the rest fixed. Thus the composition @xmath is an automorphism
on @xmath such that @xmath . Hence @xmath , and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof of Corollary 3.6.

Let @xmath for convenience. Certainly, @xmath is unimodular and
sustained by @xmath . By Theorem 3.2 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is shorthand for @xmath . Let @xmath . By Lemma 3.7 ,
@xmath for all @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

using the definition of the law of @xmath , which demonstrates the
result. ∎

### 3.4 Non-null components of a judicial graph are judicial

Having shown that the union of judicial graphs forms another such graph,
the reader may wonder if every disconnected judicial graph has judicial
components. Unfortunately, by assigning a measure of zero to the lawless
components, it is clear that this is not true. However, with an
additional assumption on the connected components, a weaker statement is
true.

###### Proposition 3.8.

Let @xmath be a judicial graph that sustains a measure @xmath . If
@xmath is a connected component of @xmath and @xmath for some @xmath ,
then @xmath is judicial.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a judicial graph, and let @xmath be a connected component
of @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is sustained by @xmath . Clearly,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is nonzero because @xmath for some @xmath . Denote by @xmath the
characteristic function of @xmath . Note that @xmath is a measure
sustained by @xmath . It remains to show that @xmath is unimodular. Let
@xmath be a nonnegative function on @xmath with @xmath . Define the
function @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . Clearly, @xmath because @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

are equal because @xmath is unimodular. Hence @xmath is unimodular too.
∎

## 4 Weak limits are invariant under negligence

Although this section bears a silly name, the concept is meaningful. We
show that the weak limit of a sequence of finite graphs remains the same
if a so-called negligible subgraph of each term is deleted. Using this
result, we deduce several simple consequences.

Let us begin with an example. Consider the graphs in Figure 12 , which
are terms in the sequences @xmath and @xmath of finite connected graphs
where @xmath is @xmath with an additional edge @xmath and vertex @xmath
for all positive integers @xmath . In general, the orbits of these
graphs are vastly different. This means that it is not wise to compare
the laws of @xmath and @xmath by definition. Instead, let @xmath , and
recall that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we do not distinguish orbits, and simply sum over the vertices of
@xmath . Furthermore, the distance between @xmath and @xmath is small if
@xmath is far from @xmath , that is, if @xmath for some nonnegative
integer @xmath . Using the continuity of @xmath , it is possible to
deduce that the distance between @xmath and @xmath tends to zero as
@xmath grows. In this case, the sequences @xmath and @xmath have the
same weak limit if it exists.

### 4.1 Example: the graph obtained by attaching trees to cycles

To better understand this situation, consider the following specific
example. Recall that @xmath is the @xmath -regular tree, and @xmath is a
vertex of @xmath . Denote by @xmath the sequence illustrated in Figure
13 and defined as follows: @xmath is obtained by “attaching” the root of
@xmath to a vertex of the cycle @xmath using a path on three vertices
for all positive integers @xmath . The set of rooted connected
components is the union

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all positive integers @xmath . Observe that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all positive integers @xmath and @xmath . Individually, the weak
limits of @xmath and @xmath are @xmath and the Dirac measure @xmath ,
respectively. It is reasonable to assume that the weak limit of @xmath
is sustained by the graphs @xmath and @xmath , and related to @xmath and
@xmath . In fact, it is a convex combination of these two measures.
However, the goal is to determine the appropriate coefficients of this
combination.

Given a function @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all positive integers @xmath . Note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is similar to @xmath and @xmath in an appropriate region
outside of a neighbourhood of @xmath , let us assume that @xmath and
@xmath are close, and @xmath and @xmath are close in the limit.
Furthermore,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which means

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath , as previously calculated. Thus the weak limit
of @xmath is simply @xmath . Loosely speaking, this happens because the
cycles do not grow as quickly as the trees, and so the measure of the
cycles becomes negligible. However, this is no longer true if the cycles
grow exponentially to keep up with the size of the trees. The weak limit
of such a sequence is strictly sustained by both @xmath and @xmath .

### 4.2 Removal of a negligible sequence preserves the weak limit

As shown in Figure 14 , it is possible to consider more complicated
examples of this phenomenon. With an additional stipulation, similar
reasoning may be used to prove that the weak limits of @xmath and @xmath
are equal if they exist. The requirement is that the ratio @xmath must
vanish as @xmath tends to infinity, which intuitively means the “link”
@xmath eventually disappears, and @xmath simply becomes @xmath . In
fact, an even more general statement may be made.

###### Definition 4.1.

Let @xmath be a sequence of finite graphs. A sequence of graphs @xmath
is negligible in @xmath if @xmath is a subgraph of @xmath for all
positive integers @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem 4.2.

Suppose that @xmath and @xmath are sequences of finite graphs such that
@xmath is negligible in @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . Furthermore, @xmath converges weakly to @xmath if and
only if @xmath does too.

Unfortunately, it is not readily possible to use the definition of the
law of a finite graph to prove this result. As mentioned before, and as
Figure 15 demonstrates, two graphs that appear similar may have very
different orbits. Indeed, the cycle @xmath is vertex-transitive, but the
graph on the right has ten distinct orbits, represented by the first ten
positive integers. However, it is possible to ignore orbits and focus on
the similar portions of the graphs, a procedure which is made precise
using neighbourhoods.

###### Definition 4.3.

Let @xmath be a graph, let @xmath be a subgraph of @xmath , and let
@xmath be a nonnegative integer. Denote by @xmath the @xmath
-neighbourhood of @xmath in @xmath . That is,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.4.

Recall that @xmath is a positive integer such that @xmath for all @xmath
. Let @xmath be a finite subgraph of a graph @xmath . If @xmath is a
nonnegative integer, then @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath is a nonnegative integer and @xmath . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath , and observe that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the right-hand side is at most @xmath by induction on @xmath .
Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 4.5.

Let @xmath be a graph, and let @xmath be a subgraph of @xmath . If
@xmath is a nonnegative integer, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a nonnegative integer, let @xmath , and let @xmath .
Suppose that @xmath is nonempty. That is, there is a @xmath . Since
@xmath , it follows that @xmath , which is a contradiction; see Figure
16 . Hence @xmath . Certainly, @xmath . If @xmath , there is a path from
@xmath to @xmath in @xmath of length at most @xmath . Clearly, this path
must lie in @xmath , which means it lies in @xmath , and so @xmath .
That is, @xmath . It follows that @xmath for all @xmath . ∎

###### Proof of Theorem 4.2.

For convenience, let @xmath for all positive integers @xmath . Let
@xmath be a positive real number. Since @xmath where @xmath is compact,
it has an upper bound @xmath , and it is uniformly continuous:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore, @xmath for some positive integer @xmath . Let @xmath be a
positive integer, and let @xmath for convenience. By ( @xmath ) and
Lemma 4.5 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . Since @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it follows that

  -- -------- -------- --
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- -------- --
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to simplify notation. It remains to prove that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Proposition 4.4 , @xmath , and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

tells us that @xmath for all positive integers @xmath , which means

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Having shown that these limits are zero, there is an integer @xmath such
that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

for all positive integers @xmath with @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as required. In addition, assume that @xmath converges weakly to @xmath
. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath , and so @xmath is the weak limit of @xmath . The proof
of the converse is analogous. ∎

### 4.3 Applications

Let us discuss the following elementary example to put Theorem 4.2 into
perspective. Recall that @xmath is a cycle on @xmath vertices, and
@xmath is a path on @xmath vertices for all positive integers @xmath
with @xmath . Consider the sequences @xmath and @xmath . Clearly, @xmath
where @xmath for all positive integers @xmath with @xmath . Furthermore,
the sequence @xmath is negligible in @xmath . Since every cycle is
vertex-transitive, we know that @xmath , and it is easy to see that the
weak limit of this sequence of Dirac measures is @xmath . Then Theorem
4.2 tells us that @xmath converges weakly to @xmath too. Even though
this fact is shown in this author’s Honours project [ Art10 ] , this
proof is much less technical.

Another demonstration of the usefulness of Theorem 4.2 is the following
corollary. Denote by @xmath the infinite perfect binary tree, and let
@xmath be its first ancestor. Fix any vertex @xmath of @xmath . Let
@xmath , and let @xmath for all positive integers @xmath . Intuitively,
we expect that the weak limit of @xmath is equal to that of @xmath
because @xmath may be thought of as @xmath with only two branches
extruding from @xmath .

###### Corollary 4.6.

The weak limits of @xmath and @xmath coincide.

###### Proof.

Observe that @xmath for all positive integers @xmath . Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the weak limit of @xmath is @xmath , Theorem 4.2 tells us that
@xmath converges weakly to @xmath too. ∎

In addition, Theorem 4.2 is easily specialized to better appeal to the
examples presented at the beginning of this section. It is also useful
in obtaining the weak limit of a sequence of complicated finite graphs
by breaking them down into simpler parts.

###### Corollary 4.7.

Let @xmath and @xmath be sequences of finite graphs where @xmath is
connected, @xmath is negligible in @xmath , and @xmath for all positive
integers @xmath . Fix the positive integers @xmath and @xmath for all
@xmath . Suppose that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a set of pairwise distinct connected subgraphs of @xmath
for all positive integers @xmath . If the weak limit of @xmath is @xmath
for all @xmath , then @xmath converges weakly to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let @xmath . If @xmath is the weak limit of @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . By Corollary 3.6 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Its limit is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the result follows by Theorem 4.2 . ∎

## 5 Counterexamples and open problems

Now that the reader has seen many true results, it is necessary to
exhibit a few counterexamples to ensure us that not everything in this
field of research is true. In fact, this section covers counterexamples
for conjectures that, at first glance, could be seen as valid. The
remainder deals with questions that this author has yet to answer,
including a famous open problem posed by Schramm [ Sch08 ] , Aldous, and
Lyons [ AL07 ] .

### 5.1 Convergence of balls

Let @xmath be an infinite connected graph, let @xmath , and let @xmath
for all positive integers @xmath . The question is whether or not @xmath
converges weakly. There are certainly examples for which this statement
holds, such as the @xmath -regular tree, but this is not true in
general. To streamline the process of proving that the following
counterexample is indeed valid, consider the following criterion.

###### Proposition 5.1.

Let @xmath be a sequence of graphs. The degree function @xmath is
defined by @xmath for all @xmath . If

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

does not exist, then @xmath does not converge weakly.

The intuition behind a counterexample @xmath is the following procedure:
modify the subgraph of @xmath induced by the positive integers by
attaching finite graphs of large degree at specific vertices along the
path; this ensures that certain balls will have a “jump” in average
degree.

It is possible to construct such a graph @xmath recursively. Consider
the infinite path @xmath , which is simply the subgraph of @xmath
induced by the positive integers. Attach a copy of @xmath , the complete
graph on six vertices, at the vertex @xmath , and let @xmath . In
general, attach a copy of @xmath at the vertices

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all positive integers @xmath . The resulting infinite graph @xmath
is shown in Figure 17 .

It remains to prove that @xmath does not converge weakly where @xmath
for all positive integers @xmath . Let @xmath be a positive integer with
@xmath . Note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For convenience, let @xmath . Since @xmath is a path on @xmath vertices
together with @xmath copies of @xmath , it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which means the average degree is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand, let @xmath . In this case, @xmath is a path on @xmath
vertices with @xmath copies of @xmath . Clearly,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which means

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Suppose that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

a contradiction. Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows that @xmath and @xmath , which means @xmath does not exist.
By Proposition 5.1 , @xmath does not converge weakly, as required.

### 5.2 Weak limits of adjacent balls

Let @xmath be an infinite connected graph, and let @xmath and @xmath be
vertices of @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath for all positive integers
@xmath . Suppose that @xmath and @xmath are adjacent. Intuitively, the
reader may understandably expect a ball around @xmath to be “similar” to
a ball around @xmath of the same radius. However, this is not the case,
and it is possible to construct a graph @xmath such that the weak limits
of @xmath and @xmath are distinct.

To construct such an example, it is necessary to recall the infinite
perfect binary tree @xmath and the barred binary tree @xmath . Let
@xmath be the first ancestor of @xmath , and let @xmath be the first
ancestor of @xmath . The graph @xmath is defined as follows: @xmath and
@xmath . The result is shown in Figure 18 with a labelling of its
orbits. That is, @xmath where @xmath and @xmath . With this labelling,
it is easy to describe the balls around @xmath and @xmath . The balls of
radius @xmath and @xmath are depicted in Figure 19 . Indeed, @xmath is
induced by the union @xmath , and @xmath is induced by the union @xmath
for all positive integers @xmath .

Next we use Theorem 4.2 to more easily determine the weak limits of
@xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath for all
positive integers @xmath with @xmath . If @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all positive integers @xmath with @xmath .

By Theorem 4.2 , it suffices to determine the weak limits of the
sequences @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath because

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall the graphs @xmath and @xmath , which were presented in the
preliminaries. Proposition 1.24 and Corollary 4.6 tell us that @xmath
and @xmath converge weakly to @xmath and @xmath , respectively.
Similarly, the weak limits of @xmath and @xmath are @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. Note that @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath for all
positive integers @xmath with @xmath . By Theorem 4.2 , @xmath converges
weakly to

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and @xmath converges weakly to

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

which are certainly distinct measures.

### 5.3 Open problems

Readers who have perused any other papers concerning the topics of
unimodularity or weak limits of sequences of laws [ AL07 , Sch08 ] are
likely familiar with the following important, yet unanswered, question.

“Is every unimodular measure the weak limit of a sequence of finite
graphs?”

The converse is true, and although the proof is omitted in this thesis,
the reader is welcome to see this author’s previous work [ Art11 ] for a
detailed argument.

Corollary 2.13 tells us precisely when a connected vertex-transitive
graph is judicial without relying on a specific measure. As previously
mentioned, this author hopes for an extension of this result to more
general judicial graphs.

Another question concerns the extreme points of @xmath , the set of
unimodular measures. Proposition 2.21 tells us that a unimodular measure
@xmath sustained by a connected graph is an extreme point. Whether or
not every extreme point is a measure of this form is unknown.