## 1.4 Purpose and plan of the thesis

We are well aware of the fact that the previous motivations cannot be
taken for granted. They can be contested in various ways, and also lack
a great deal of precision. The reader should see them as a guiding
thread towards making full sense of the emergence of space-time from
background independent physics, rather than definitive statements
embraced by the author. From now on, we will refrain from venturing into
more conceptual discussions, and mostly leave the specific examples
worked out in this thesis speak for themselves, hoping that they will do
so in favor of the general ideas outlined before.

The rest of the thesis is organized as follows. In chapter 2 , we will
start by recalling the two main ways of understanding the construction
of GFT models. One takes its root in the quantization program for
quantum gravity, in the form of loop quantum gravity and spin foam
models. In this line of thoughts, GFTs are generating functionals for
spin foam amplitudes, in the same way as quantum field theories are
generating functionals for Feynman amplitudes. In this sense, they
complete the definition of spin foam models by assigning canonical
weights to the different foams contributing to a same transition between
boundary states (spin networks). Moreover, a quantum field theory
formalism is expected to provide easier access to non-perturbative
regimes, and hence to the continuum. For example, classical equations of
motion can be used as a way to change vacuum [ edr ] , or to study
condensed phases of the theory [ gfc ] . Of course, this specific
completion of the definition of spin foam models relies on a certain
confidence in the quantum field theory formalism. Alternative but
hopefully complementary approaches exist, such as coarse-graining
methods imported from condensed matter physics and quantum information
theory [ bianca_cyl , bianca_review , bahr2012 ] . Though, if one
decides to stick to quantum field theory weights, it seems natural to
also bring renormalization in. From this point of view, perturbative
renormalizability of GFTs is a self-consistency check, and is rather
independent from the continuum limit and the emergence question. A
second set of motivations is given by discrete approaches to quantum
gravity. We will first focus on the successful example of matrix models,
which allowed to define random two-dimensional surfaces, and henceforth
achieve a quantization of two-dimensional quantum gravity. We will then
outline natural extensions of matrix models, known as tensor models,
which will be crucial to the rest of the thesis, particularly in their
modern versions. In this perspective, GFTs appear as enriched tensor
models, which allow to define finer notions of discrete quantum
geometries, and the question of emergence of the continuum is put to the
forefront, merely by construction. We will then comment on the relations
between these two historical paths, and advocate for a middle path, in
which the hard questions to be faced are renormalization and
universality of the continuum limit.

In Chapter 3 , we will move to the more recent aspects of GFTs and
tensor models, following the introduction of colored models by Gurau in
2009. This will be the occasion to summarize the main results and tools
which have been developing fast since then. This will especially include
combinatorial and topological properties of colored graphs, which shape
all the models we will discuss in the later chapters, and will be at the
core of all the original results of this thesis. The important notion of
tensor invariance will also be introduced and motivated in this chapter.

Finally, all the concepts introduced in the first chapters will be used
in Chapters 4 and 5 to present the original results of this PhD thesis.
They come in two types, and as we will try to illustrate, are quite
complementary. The first set of results concerns the so-called @xmath
expansion of topological GFT models. It applies to GFTs with cut-off
(given by the parameter @xmath ), in which a particular scaling of the
coupling constant allows to reach an asymptotic many-particle regime at
large @xmath . We will in particular focus on asymptotic bounds on the
amplitudes which allow to classify their contributions according to the
topology of the underlying cell-complex. This will be argued to be a
rough preliminary version of the second set of results, which concerns
full-fledge renormalization. Tensorial Group Field Theories (TGFTs),
which are refined versions of the cut-off models with new non-trivial
propagators, will be introduced. They have a built-in notion of scale,
which generates a well-defined renormalization group flow, and will give
rise to somewhat dynamical versions of the @xmath expansions. We will
give several examples, culminating in a detailed study of a
just-renormalizable TGFT based on the group @xmath in three dimensions,
and incorporating the ’closure constraint’ of spin foam models. As will
be argued at this point, this TGFT can be considered a field theory
realization of the original Boulatov model for three-dimensional quantum
gravity [ boulatov ] .

The results accounted for in Chapters 4 to 7 are mainly based on four
publications, the first two in collaboration with Daniele Oriti [ vertex
, edge ] , and the two others with Daniele Oriti and Vincent Rivasseau [
u1 , su2 ] . At the end of Chapter 7 , we also include unpublished work
[ beta_su2 ] about the flow equations of the TGFT introduced in [ su2 ]
. Finally, a fifth paper [ boulatov_phase ] , in collaboration with
Aristide Baratin, Daniele Oriti, James Ryan and Matteo Smerlak, will be
briefly evoked in the conclusions.

## Chapter 2 Two paths to Group Field Theories

Men’s memories are uncertain and the past that was differs little from
the past that was not.
Cormac McCarthy , Blood Meridian .

In this chapter, we recall two historical and conceptual paths leading
to the GFT formalism. The first follows the traditional quantization
route, from canonical LQG, to spin foam models, and finally to GFTs,
seen as generating functionals for the latter. The second approach
relies from the start on the idea of discretization, and takes its root
in the successes of matrix models. We will then argue in favor of taking
these two strategies equally seriously to investigate the properties of
GFTs, and the physical picture emerging from them.

### 2.1 Group Field Theories and quantum General Relativity

#### 2.1.1 Loop Quantum Gravity

Loop Quantum Gravity is a tentative approach to the canonical
quantization of general relativity. It is conceptually very much in line
with the old Wheeler-DeWitt (WdW) theory, at the notable exception that
many previously formal expressions could be turned into rigorous
equations thanks to LQG techniques. This breakthrough triggered many
developments, from cosmology to black hole physics, all relying on the
well-understood kinematical properties of LQG. Unfortunately, to this
date the canonical quantization program could not be completed, a proper
definition of the dynamics being still challenging, despite some recent
progress [ Laddha:2011mk , casey_weak ] .

As in the WdW theory, one starts from a canonical formulation of general
relativity, which requires hyperbolicity of the space-time manifold
@xmath . This allows to introduce a global foliation, in terms of a time
function @xmath indexing three-dimensional spacelike hypersurfaces
@xmath . One then recasts Einstein’s equation in the form of a
Hamiltonian system, dictating the evolution of spatial degrees of
freedoms in this parameter @xmath . In the WdW theory, the Hamiltonian
formulation is the ADM one [ adm ] , for which the configuration space
is the set of all spatial metrics @xmath ( @xmath ) on @xmath . This is
where LQG departs from the WdW theory, with the Ashtekar-Barbero
formulation of classical GR [ ashtekar1986 , barbero1994 ] as a starting
point, hence shifting the emphasis to forms and connection variables.

Let us first introduce the four-dimensional formalism. Instead of using
the space-time metric @xmath ( @xmath ) as configuration variable, one
instead introduces a tetrad field

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is a quadruple of @xmath -forms on @xmath , indexed by a Minkowski
index @xmath . The metric is only a derived quantity, which simply
writes as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Minkowski metric (with signature @xmath ). This
redundant rewriting of the metric introduces a new local symmetry,
corresponding to the action of @xmath on the Minkowski index labeling
the tetrad:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Einstein’s equations can then be recovered from a first order
variational principle, depending on an additional spin connection @xmath
, which is a @xmath -form with values in the Lie algebra @xmath . The
particular action lying at the foundations of current LQG and spin foams
is the Holst action (for vacuum gravity without cosmological constant):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a constant containing Newton’s @xmath , @xmath is the
Barbero-Immirzi parameter, and @xmath is the curvature of the spin
connection. Varying @xmath with respect to @xmath and @xmath
independently provides two sets of equations: the first forces @xmath to
be the unique torsion-free connection compatible with @xmath , and the
second gives Einstein’s equations. The term proportional to the
Barbero-Immirzi parameter is topological, and therefore plays no role as
far as classical equations are concerned. It is however a key ingredient
of the loop quantization, and as we will see is a cornerstone of the
current interpretation of quantum geometry in LQG.

Assuming hyperbolicity of @xmath , it is possible to perform a canonical
analysis of ( 2.4 ) leading to the Ashtekar-Barbero formulation of GR.
Details can for example be found in [ perez_review2012 , Geiller:2012dd
] , and at the end of the day a @xmath splitting is obtained for both
the tetrad and the spin connection in terms of canonical pairs @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where now @xmath and @xmath refer to coordinates on the spatial
hypersurface @xmath . @xmath is an @xmath connection encoding parallel
transport on @xmath , and the densitized triad @xmath can be used to
define geometric quantities such as areas and volumes embedded in @xmath
. The most interesting aspect of such a formulation is that the dynamics
of GR is encoded in three sets of constraints, bearing some similarities
with Yang-Mills theory on a background space-time:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

These constraints are first class, which means that the Poisson bracket
of two constraints is itself a linear combination of constraints, and
therefore weakly vanishes. In addition to defining a submanifold of
admissible states in phase space, they therefore also generate gauge
transformations, which encode all the symmetries of the triad
formulation of GR. More precisely, the Gauss constraint @xmath generates
@xmath local transformations induced by the @xmath symmetry ( 2.3 ),
while the vector constraint generates spatial diffeomorphism on @xmath .
The third and so-called scalar constraint @xmath is responsible for time
reparametrization invariance, therefore extending the gauge symmetries
to space-time diffeomorphisms.

In its canonical formulation, GR is a fully constrained system, which
can be quantized following Dirac’s program [ dirac_qm ,
henneaux_teitelboim ] . The first step consists in finding a
representation of the basic phase space variables as operators acting on
a kinematical Hilbert space @xmath , and such that Poisson brackets are
turned into commutation relations in the standard way. Then, one has to
promote the constraints themselves to operators on @xmath . Third, one
should perform the equivalent of finding the constraint surface in the
classical theory, which means finding the states annihilated by the
constraint operators. This step is crucial in the sense that it is only
at this stage that the Hilbert space of physical sates @xmath is
defined. Finally, one has to look for a complete set of physical
observables, that is a maximal set of operators commuting with the
constraints. The main achievements of LQG regarding this quantization
program concerns the first three steps. Contrary to the WdW theory, a
kinematical Hilbert space could explicitly be constructed. Moreover, a
representation of the constraint algebra on this Hilbert space could be
specified, without any anomaly, therefore completing the second step.
Ambiguities remain, but they mainly concern the scalar constraint. The
Gauss and vector constraints, which form a closed subalgebra, could
moreover be solved explicitly. The resulting Hilbert space of gauge and
diffeomorphism invariant states has also been proved unique under
certain additional assumptions [ lost ] . This provides a solid arena to
study the dynamics of LQG further, as encoded by the scalar constraint.
However, its quantum definition remains ambiguous, and a complete set of
solutions out of reach, hence precluding the completion of the canonical
program. It should also be noted that, even if a satisfactory space of
solutions to the scalar constraint were to be found, completing Dirac’s
program would remain incredibly difficult: even at the classical level,
finding a complete (and manageable) set of Dirac observables for GR
remains an outstanding task, and possibly forever so.

The structures of the kinematical Hilbert space of LQG, and of the
solutions to the Gauss and vector constraints, are one of the main
inputs for the covariant approach, and therefore deserve to be described
in some details here. A distinctive feature of the loop approach is the
choice of basic variables to be quantized, which are holonomies of the
connection rather than the connection itself. To any path @xmath in
@xmath is associated the unique holonomy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath stands for path ordering. This @xmath element encodes
parallel transport of the triad along @xmath , and collectively the set
of all the holonomy functionals fully capture the information contained
in the connection. There is an important subtlety however, lying in the
fact that smooth connections are replaced by a generalized space of
connections before the quantization. It can be given an inductive
definition in terms of holonomy functionals associated to closed
embedded graphs [ Ashtekar:1994wa ] , which play a central role in the
definition of the kinematical Hilbert space. As far as we know,
alternative constructions might be proposed at this level, relying on
slightly different generalizations of smooth connections. This concerns
for example regularity properties of the graphs (usually assumed to be
piecewise analytic), as was already explored in [ Zapata:2004xq ] . But
more importantly so, it seems to us that the relevance of the
combinatorial properties of the graphs supporting LQG states might have
been underestimated. As we will see in the GFT context, combinatorial
restrictions can dramatically improve analytic control over the theory,
without affecting its conceptual aspects in any clear way. It seems to
us that this freedom, so far overlooked in the canonical approach, would
deserve to be investigated and taken advantage of. In any case, the
standard kinematical Hilbert space of LQG is spanned by so-called
cylindrical functionals @xmath , labeled by a closed oriented graph
@xmath with @xmath links, and a function @xmath . @xmath only depends on
the holonomies @xmath along the links of @xmath , through the following
formula:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is moreover assumed to be square-integrable with respect to the
Haar measure on @xmath , which allows to define a scalar product between
cylindrical functionals associated to a same graph:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

This scalar product naturally extends to arbitrary couples of
cylindrical functionals, via embeddings of two distinct graphs into a
common bigger one. The kinematical Hilbert space @xmath is the
completion with respect to this scalar product of the vector space
generated by the cylindrical functionals. It can be shown to be nothing
but the space @xmath of square-integrable functions on the space of
generalized connections @xmath , with respect to the
Ashtekar-Lewandowski measure @xmath [ Ashtekar:1994mh ] . The (matrix
elements of the) holonomies are turned into operators, acting by
multiplication on the kinematical states. As for the momenta @xmath ,
there are also smeared out before quantization. For any two-dimensional
surface @xmath in @xmath , and any @xmath -valued function @xmath , one
defines the flux :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The action of an elementary flux on a kinematical state can be found by
formally turning the densitized triad into a derivative operator with
respect to the connection. This construction provides an anomaly-free
representation of the classical holonomy-flux algebra , that is the
Poisson algebra formed by the smeared variables just introduced, which
is moreover unique under certain assumptions regarding the
diffeomorphism symmetry [ lost ] . Solving the Gauss constraint is
relatively straightforward once this representation has been
constructed, since its (quantum) action on cylindrical functionals can
be simply inferred from its (classical) action on holonomies. A finite
(generalized) gauge transformation is labeled by one @xmath element
@xmath at each point @xmath , acting on holonomies and cylindrical
functionals as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Thanks to group-averaging techniques, any cylindrical functional can be
projected down to a gauge invariant one. Combined with the Peter-Weyl
theorem, this allows to construct an explicit orthonormal basis for the
gauge invariant Hilbert space. It is the subspace of @xmath spanned by
the spin network functionals , which are special cylindrical functionals
@xmath . The half-integers @xmath label representations of @xmath
associated to the links @xmath of @xmath , while @xmath is an @xmath
intertwiner attached to the node @xmath , compatible with the different
representations meeting at @xmath . @xmath is the contraction of
representations matrices @xmath with the intertwiners, according to the
pattern of the decorated graph @xmath , which can schematically be
denoted:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Solving the vector constraint is more intricate, because its solutions
have to be found in the topological dual of an appropriate dense
subspace of @xmath . This aspect of the canonical theory is largely
unrelated to the present thesis, therefore it is sufficient to recall
the main conceptual idea, and skip all the technical details. When acted
upon a spin network, a diffeomorphism simply moves and deforms the graph
on which it is supported. One therefore needs to repackage spin network
functionals into equivalent classes of decorated graphs which can be
deformed into one another. All the information about the embeddings of
the graphs is washed out, except for their knot structures, which
provide additional quantum numbers characterizing the diffeomorphism
invariant classes. As we will see, a different route has been developed
in the covariant theory as regards the diffeomorphism symmetry. The
embedding information is altogether dispensed with, and the spin
networks states are instead labeled by abstract graphs. The topological
structure is then recovered from the graph itself, and likewise smooth
diffeomorphisms (be them spatial or four-dimensional) are only expected
to be (approximately) recovered in a yet to be defined continuum limit.

The essential outcome of this partial completion of Dirac’s quantization
program is the notion of quantum geometry , which provides a physical
interpretation for spin network states. From the quantum fluxes, it is
possible to construct geometric operators quantizing the area of a
@xmath -dimensional surface, or the volume of a @xmath -dimensional
region. Because the spin network functionals are eigenstates of such
operators, it was possible to determine their spectra, which turned out
to be discrete. More precisely, it was shown that the quanta of area are
carried by the links of a spin network: each link with spin @xmath ,
puncturing a surface @xmath , contributes with a term @xmath to the
(oriented) area of @xmath , where @xmath is the Planck length.
Similarly, the nodes of a spin network carry infinitesimal volumes, in a
rather complicated but still discrete fashion. These results are at the
chore of the applications of LQG techniques to cosmology and black hole
physics, and also enter crucially into the semi-heuristic constructions
on which spin foam models are based. The fact that the Immirzi parameter
@xmath parametrizes these spectra is the reason why we claimed earlier
it crucially enters the geometric interpretation of spin networks
states.

#### 2.1.2 Spin Foams

Spin Foam Models (SFMs) are a covariant approach to the quantization of
GR, initially introduced to circumvent the difficulties with the scalar
constraint encountered in canonical LQG. Like any known quantum theory,
LQG is expected to have a second equivalent representation, in the form
of a path-integral la Feynman. SFMs provide tentative formulations of
this covariant theory, with the idea that LQG techniques can again make
old formal theories well-defined, and that the dynamics of quantum GR
might be more amenable in a four-dimensional setting. In the
gravitational context, Feynman’s formulation of quantum mechanics
suggests to define transition amplitudes between three-dimensional
boundary states of the gravitational field by integrating over histories
(i.e. space time geometries interpolating between such boundary states),
with a weight given by an action for GR. Schematically, call @xmath and
@xmath two boundary @xmath -geometries, and denote by @xmath a space
time manifold having @xmath and @xmath as boundaries. Then one would
like to define the transition amplitude between @xmath and @xmath by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a suitable probability measure on the space of
interpolating @xmath -geometries, and @xmath is an action for GR. This
goal is mathematically very challenging, essentially because of the
dubious existence of probability measures on spaces of continuous
geometries. Indeed, if we were to use coordinates in order to define
such quantities, in addition to having to handle the usual difficulties
associated to measures on infinite dimensional spaces, one would also
have to face the even harder question of diffeomorphism invariance. Even
the left-hand side of ( 2.14 ) is problematic, as it assumes the
availability of a well controlled space of @xmath -geometries. Finally,
even at this very abstract level, what exactly should be summed over is
not really clear (metric degrees of freedom only or topologies as
well?).

In order to make ( 2.14 ) more concrete, one can follow the ideas behind
LQG, but this time in a four-dimensional framework. This can be done in
several ways, which all seem to point in a same direction. They can be
classified according to the amount of inspiration and results which can
be directly traced back to the canonical theory. The first, historical
route, has been to reproduce Feynman’s heuristic construction from
canonical LQG. While this allows to deduce the general form of spin foam
amplitudes, no definite model can be inferred, since the dynamics of
canonical LQG is itself not well understood. Rather, one hopes in
reverse to be able to pin-point the right model on the covariant side
(right-hand side of equation ( 2.14 )), and deduce the definition of the
physical Hilbert space (scalar product on the left-hand side of equation
( 2.14 )). In this approach, one takes as many features of the canonical
theory as possible for granted, such as the boundary @xmath spin network
states, and relies on covariant quantization techniques for the dynamics
only. In the second approach, one starts the quantization from scratch
in the covariant setting, but like in canonical LQG one hopes that
shifting the emphasis from metric to tetrads and connection variables is
profitable. Finally, the third strategy consists in taking seriously the
type of degrees of freedom and discrete features of canonical LQG, but
being critical towards strict quantization procedures. The latter will
be discussed in details in the next section. Here, we only present and
comment on the advantages and shortcomings of the first two strategies.

The dynamics of canonical LQG is encoded into the vector and scalar
constraints, which together must ensure space-time diffeomorphism
invariance. The vector constraint can be imposed at the kinematical
level, and with the additional combinatorial abstraction previously
mentioned, provides an intermediate Hilbert space spanned by
(combinatorial) spin networks. The physical Hilbert space should be
deduced by projecting down to states annihilated by the quantum scalar
constraint @xmath . The trick lies in the fact that formally

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and therefore the projector on physical states can be given the formal
definition:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The parameter @xmath is not a time variable, but an abstract parameter
of gauge transformations generated by @xmath . However, formally one can
reproduce Feynman’s original derivation of the path-integral, by cutting
the integral on @xmath into infinitesimal pieces and inserting
resolutions of the identity in terms of the spin network basis. This
heuristic argument [ Reisenberger:1996pu , rovelli_book ] leads to the
spin foam general ansatz replacing ( 2.14 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are two spin network states and @xmath is a spin
foam interpolating between them. In addition to @xmath and @xmath ,
@xmath is labeled by a triplet @xmath , where @xmath is a @xmath
-complex with boundary @xmath , @xmath are @xmath representations
associated to its faces @xmath , and @xmath are intertwiners associated
to its edges @xmath . Compatibility between @xmath and its boundary
requires a face @xmath touching a boundary link @xmath to be labeled by
@xmath , and an edge @xmath touching a boundary vertex @xmath to be
associated to an intertwiner @xmath . The main advantages of ( 2.17 )
over ( 2.14 ) is that boundary states have well-defined
background-independent labels, and the sum-over-path is combinatorial in
nature. Apart from that, the conceptual setting is identical: boundary
states represent quantum spatial geometries, while the foams are one
dimensional higher analogues which can be given the interpretation of
quantum space-times. The main shortcoming is that no clear-cut
derivation of this ansatz from canonical LQG is available, and therefore
viewing SFMs as the covariant realization of the same thing might be
misleading, at least in a literal sense. In any case, this general
heuristic argument does not provide much clue as to how the amplitudes
@xmath should be defined, nor as to which exact combinatorial structures
should be summed over. We discard the question of the combinatorics for
the moment, since it will be addressed at length in the core chapters of
this thesis. At this stage we only point out that in most of the
literature on spin foams, the @xmath -complexes are assumed to be dual
to simplicial decompositions of some topological @xmath -manifold.
Taking seriously the fact that the scalar constraint of LQG (as defined
by Thiemann [ Thiemann:1996ay ] ) only acts at the nodes of LQG states,
one can further assume that the amplitudes @xmath can be factorized over
elementary contributions @xmath , only depending on the group-theoretic
labels related to the vertex @xmath . It is therefore on the definition
of the so-called vertex amplitude that most of the efforts have been
concentrated, and we refer to [ Bianchi:2012nk ] for details or
additional references. We would like to see this assumption as a
’locality principle’, akin to the fact that @xmath is best understood as
an integral over the @xmath -manifolds entering the formal definition (
2.14 ). In this respect, it is worth-mentioning one particular
derivation of spin foam dynamics, outlined in the review [
Bianchi:2012nk ] , which is tightly related to the canonical theory: LQG
provides the degrees of freedom and their quantum geometric
interpretation, the dynamics of the Engle-Peirera-Rovelli-Livine (EPRL)
[ eprl ] model is then argued for on the basis of Lorentz covariance and
some locality principle. This approach is conceptually similar to the
original parts of this thesis, and it seems to us could benefit from the
new ’locality principle’ we will introduce. For more insights into the
relation between canonical LQG and SFMs, we refer to [ Alexandrov:2011ab
] .

The other approach to SFMs, more independent from canonical LQG,
originates from the Ponzano-Regge model for quantum gravity, which is a
spin foam model for Euclidean quantum gravity in three dimensions. The
basic idea is that, because the classical theory is topological, it can
be discretized before quantization without loss of information. Applying
a path-integral quantization to the discretized classical theory, which
takes the form of an @xmath @xmath theory, provides a SFM with the same
structure as inferred from the heuristic reasoning based on LQG. This
model has then been generalized, in several ways, to four-dimensional
models with Euclidean or Lorentzian signatures (see for instance [
Baez:1997zt , bc , eprl , fk , Dupuis:2011fz , Dupuis:2011wy , bo_bc ,
bo_holst ] ). The classical starting point is not the Holst action
itself, but rather the Holst-Plebanski one, which recasts gravity as an
@xmath @xmath theory with additional constraints. The Holst-Plebanski
action is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a Lagrange multiplier symmetric under the exchange of
pairs @xmath and @xmath , and such that @xmath . @xmath is an @xmath
-valued @xmath -form, the bivector, and the @xmath term ensures that on
shell:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a triad. Solving for the equations of motion the
variation of @xmath provides therefore gives back the Holst action (in
one sector). The main interest of the Holst-Plebanski action principle
is that @xmath theory can be rigorously quantized by spin foam
techniques. This consists in two steps: 1) define a discretization of
the @xmath -field and the curvature on some adequate cell complex, which
thanks to the topological nature of @xmath , captures all its dynamical
features; 2) quantize the discrete theory through path-integral methods.
In three dimensions gravity and @xmath theory coincide, hence the
initial interest in such a strategy. In four dimensions, the idea is to
start from the exact quantization of @xmath , and use a discrete version
of the Plebanski constraints to reintroduce the tetrad degrees of
freedom at the quantum level . Note that in such approaches, one works
with the full @xmath (or @xmath ) group rather than @xmath , and
therefore slightly generalizes the formalism. This strategy of
quantizing first, and only then constraining the degrees of freedom, is
at the same time one of the main appeals and the most cumbersome issue
of the spin foam quantization. While this allowed to construct
interesting quantum gravity models, some of them well-connected to the
canonical theory, it is certainly problematic from the conceptual point
of view, and to a large extent explains the variety of models one can
construct: ill-defined recipes necessary introduce a handful of
ambiguities. We refer again to [ Alexandrov:2011ab ] for a review of
quantization and discretization ambiguities in SFMs.

We finish this discussion of SFMs by a brief introduction to the
Ponzano-Regge model. Classically, three-dimensional Euclidean gravity
can be formulated through the first order action:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the triad @xmath is an @xmath -valued @xmath -form (the @xmath
field), @xmath is an @xmath -connection with curvature @xmath , and
@xmath stands for the trace in @xmath . As in the four-dimensional
context, variation with respect to @xmath imposes the torsion-free
equation, and the variation of @xmath provides Einstein’s equation:
@xmath ; hence space-time is flat. The only degrees of freedom of vacuum
@xmath Euclidean gravity are global, which is the sense in which the
theory is said to be topological, and this flatness condition should
therefore be preserved at the quantum level. Indeed, the triad can
formally be integrated in the (ill-defined) continuous partition
function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

suggesting that a rigorous definition should in a way measure the
’volume’ of the set of flat connections on @xmath . This expectation can
be made more rigorous in the discrete: let us introduce a cellular
decomposition @xmath of @xmath , and its dual @xmath -complex @xmath .
For definiteness, one can for example assume that @xmath is a
three-dimensional simplicial complex: elementary cells are tetrahedra,
glued along their boundary triangles. @xmath is a set of nodes @xmath ,
lines @xmath and faces @xmath such that: inside each tetrahedron of
@xmath one finds a unique node, two nodes are connected by a line
whenever the two dual tetrahedra share a triangle, and faces are
collections of lines closing around the edges of @xmath . Similarly to
lattice gauge theory, one then discretizes the connection by extracting
its holonomy along each line of @xmath , noted @xmath . As for the
triad, it can be integrated along the edges of @xmath , and provides a
Lie algebra element @xmath for each edge @xmath dual to the face @xmath
. This allow to discretize the action in the following way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the oriented product of the holonomies around the face @xmath . The
formal partition function ( 2.21 ) is made concrete by summing
holonomies with the Haar measure @xmath over @xmath , and triads with
the Lebesgue measure @xmath on @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

This formulation of the Ponzano-Regge partition function, in lattice
gauge theoretic language making flatness of the geometry apparent, will
be primary in the GFT context. Two other formulations are however
possible. One could instead integrate the connection degrees of freedom,
and express @xmath as an integral over Lie algebra variables [
Baratin:2010wi ] . The subtlety is that these are non-commutative
variables, but we will see how it can be done and put to good use in
later chapters. The other rewriting, which we describe now, makes the
connection to spin foam models explicit. One simply relies on the
Peter-Weyl theorem, and expands the @xmath -functions in
representations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the character of the @xmath representation of @xmath .
Each character can be decomposed in products of Wigner matrices with
individual line holonomies as variables. Each variable @xmath will
appear exactly three times, one for each edge of the dual triangle of
@xmath . The @xmath holonomies can therefore be integrated explicitly,
yielding one @xmath -valent intertwiner per line, which is nothing but a
@xmath symbol. Finally, these can be contracted together, four by four,
following the tetrahedral pattern associated to each vertex of @xmath .
The partition function then takes the original form proposed by Ponzano
and Regge in their seminal work [ ponzano_regge ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the sum runs over all possible spin attributions to the faces of
@xmath , and @xmath denotes the evaluation of the @xmath symbol on the
six spin labels of the faces of @xmath running through @xmath . This is
the first SFM ever proposed, and we see that in the simplicial setting,
the vertex amplitude is essentially captured by the @xmath symbol.

#### 2.1.3 Summing over Spin Foams

From the point of view of the heuristic path towards spin foams from
canonical LQG (formula ( 2.17 )), it is clear that when computing
transition amplitudes, one should not only sum over the group-theoretic
data, but also on the combinatorial structure of the foam. The first
question to come to mind is then: with which measure? Since the precise
form of the amplitudes is dictated by a quantization of the discretized
theory, where the foam is chosen once and for all at the classical
level, this is a difficult question to address. On the other hand, if we
do not give too much credit to the heuristic construction la Feynman,
and focus instead on the Ponzano-Regge and related spin foam models for
three-dimensional gravity, it is possible to argue for a different
strategy. Indeed, an interesting property of the Ponzano-Regge model is
that it is formally triangulation independent: that is, performing any
possible local move which do not change the topology (Pachner moves) on
the triangulation only affects the amplitude through a generically
divergent overall factor. The unpleasant formal character of this
invariance can even be cured at the price of trading the @xmath group
for its quantum-deformed version. Is obtained in this way the so-called
Turaev-Viro model, which is usually interpreted as 3d quantum gravity
with a non-vanishing positive cosmological constant [ turaev_viro ] .
Since 3d quantum gravity turns out to be equivalent in this sense to the
definition of a topological invariant for @xmath -manifolds, it is
tempting to assume that 4d quantum gravity will be likewise equivalent
to the definition of a diffeomorphism invariant for @xmath -manifolds.
Again, in the realm of triangulated manifolds, diffeomorphism invariance
can be understood as triangulation invariance, and more precisely
invariance under local Pachner moves. This key property is what is
generally understood as entailing the definition of a well-behaved
state-sum model , applying tools from topological quantum field theory
to quantum gravity [ Barrett:1995mg ] .

In this thesis we tend to favor the heuristic argument leading to the
idea of SFMs over the very formal idea of a quantum invariant. The
outstanding difficulties paving the way to a satisfactory diffeomorphism
invariant in 4d, and the rigidity of such a strategy are discouraging to
us. As explained in the introduction, we would rather favor an approach
in which the notions of scale and renormalization have a role to play,
thus allowing for more flexible models, where approximate rather than
exact invariance matters. This route is currently explored in details by
Bianca Dittrich and collaborators [ Bahr:2011uj , Dittrich:2011zh ,
Dittrich:2011vz , bianca_review , bianca_cyl ] . Rather than looking for
an exact state-sum model, they are instead developing coarse-graining
and renormalization methods allowing to consistently improve the
dynamics, and hopefully reach a diffeomorphism-invariant phase in some
infinite refinement limit of the foams. In addition to providing a
constructive method towards diffeomorphism invariance, this framework
aims at developing the necessary tools to perform approximate
calculations. From the point of view of applications to realistic
physical situations, this seems to us a good alternative to the more
abstract incarnations of state-sum models.

More prosaically, most of the SFMs currently under investigation not
only fail to implement topological or diffeomorphism invariance, but
even fail to verify the axioms which are at the basis of the state-sum
approach [ Baez:1997zt ] . For instance, the ’projector’ defining the
intertwiner space of the Lorentzian EPRL model does actually not square
to itself. As a result, spin foam amplitudes do not compose well: if
@xmath is a spin foam mapping a spin network state @xmath to @xmath ,
and @xmath maps @xmath to @xmath , one has in general

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

contrary to the formalism advocated in [ Baez:1997zt ] . Even in the
Ponzano-Regge model, such requirements cannot be implemented in full
generalities. Because of the formal of nature equation ( 2.24 ), plagued
with divergences, one needs to introduce a regulator cutting-off large
spin labels. Such a cut-off spoils both the triangulation invariance and
the morphism properties of the Ponzano-Regge amplitudes. It is true that
in this case one could resort to the well-behaved Turaev-Viro model.
However, from a more physical point of view it is not clear why the
cosmological constant should be necessary to the very definition of spin
foam models. These pathologies seem on the contrary to suggest that the
strict notion of state-sum model, with rigid composition rules, is too
narrow to accommodate interesting and physically sound proposals such as
the EPRL model.

Let us summarize shortcomings of SFMs such as the Ponzano-Regge model or
the EPRL one. First, they do not provide any canonical measure on the
space of foams to be summed over, and even this space is not clearly
constrained. Second, the presence of divergences (at least when the
cosmological constant vanishes) calls for regularization and
renormalization procedures, which as in usual quantum field theories are
expected to map different combinatorial structures to one another (via
coarse-graining or renormalization steps). Again, the quantization
procedure leading to specific models does not seem to provide any hint
as to how this should be done. Third, and this is certainly the main
drawback, the first issue together with the absence of triangulation
independence precludes any complete definition of the transition
amplitudes ( 2.17 ), even at the formal level. We would like to add a
fourth trouble, which we will address in more details later one: the
question of the continuum limit of SFMs. If spin networks boundary
states are thought of as encoding elementary excitations of the
gravitational field, or equivalently atoms of space, one is naturally
inclined to address the question of the dynamics of very many such
states, collectively representing macroscopic and approximately smooth
geometries. Indeed, if LQG and SFMs can ever be related to continuous GR
in full generality, and hence established as proper quantum theories of
gravity, it seems unlikely to be at the level of spin networks with a
few links and nodes. For if such states were to describe macroscopic
spaces, these would be highly discrete ones (i.e. sampled with very few
points), hardly comparable to the smooth structure we experience in
everyday life and physics. It is true that they might be appropriate to
describe specific physical situations where the number of relevant
degrees of freedom are effectively small, such as for instance in
cosmology, but they cannot themselves explain the emergence of classical
space-time. On the contrary, handling combinatorially large and
complicated spin networks can only be made possible if new approximation
tools are developed. Individually, and even more altogether, these four
challenges seem to point towards essentially two alternatives, both
relying on renormalization. The first, inspired by lattice gauge
theories, is to find a consistent way of refining SFMs, as already
explained. The second is to instead look for a way of consistently
summing spin foam amplitudes.

#### 2.1.4 Towards well-defined quantum field theories of Spin Networks

The application of Group Field Theory to spin foam models originates
from seminal work by De Pietri, Freidel, Krasnov, Reisenberger and
Rovelli [ dPFKR , GFT_rovelli_reisenberg ] . The central idea is to
construct a generating functional for spin foam amplitudes, which allows
to sum them with quantum field theory techniques. Let us give a concrete
illustration with the first GFT ever proposed, the Boulatov model [
boulatov ] , which generates Ponzano-Regge amplitudes. Following the
general QFT procedure, we want to encode the boundary states of the
model into functionals of one or several fields, and for definiteness
let us say a single scalar field @xmath . Let us moreover aim at the
lattice gauge formulation of the Ponzano-Regge amplitudes given in
equation ( 2.24 ). It is then natural to assume the field @xmath to have
support on several copies of @xmath . In its simplicial version, the
boundary states of the Ponzano-Regge model are labeled by closed graphs
with three-valent vertices, whose analogue in the field theory formalism
are convolutions of the fields @xmath . It is thus necessary to work
with three copies of @xmath , and hence natural to assume @xmath (with
respect to the Haar measure). Incidentally, one immediately recognizes
how to recover the spin network boundary states of the Ponzano-Regge
model: through the harmonic expansion of @xmath in terms of Fourier
modes labeled by triplets of spins. The partition function of the looked
for field theory will have the generic structure:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a Gaussian measure defining the notion of propagation of
boundary data, and @xmath is the interaction part of an action, encoding
the non-Gaussian part of the dynamics. Note that, for reasons which will
become clear shortly, the kinetic part of the action is encoded in the
Gaussian measure @xmath , together with the (ill-defined) Lebesgue
measure on @xmath . Let us focus on the combinatorics first. A boundary
field is associated to a node of a spin network, while its variables
label the three links connected to this node. Therefore in the bulk the
GFT fields must label spinfoam edges, and a field variable be associated
to a couple @xmath where @xmath is a face incident on the edge @xmath ,
called a wedge (see Figure (b)b ). We want moreover to recover the
@xmath -valent interaction vertices of the Ponzano-Regge model when
constructing the perturbative theory, through an expansion of the
exponential term in ( 2.28 ). Therefore @xmath must consist in a single
term, which precisely convolutes four GFT fields according to a
tetrahedral pattern. Since in any QFT we are free to encode the
non-combinatorial aspects of the dynamics in the propagator rather than
the interaction, we can, without loss of generality fix:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a new coupling constant. This ensures that, whatever the
precise form of the propagator @xmath , the perturbative expansion of (
2.28 ) will be labeled by arbitrary @xmath -complexes verifying the
condition that at each vertex meet exactly @xmath edges and @xmath
faces, with a ’tetrahedral’ pattern. See Figure 2.1 .

We now need to find the correct covariance, so that the amplitudes
contain the relevant @xmath -functions ensuring triviality of the
holonomies around any face. Recall that the covariance defines a kernel
@xmath (the propagator), through:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first data which should be introduced in this kernel are the
holonomies @xmath associated to the lines of the foam. They cannot be
the field variables @xmath or @xmath themselves, which as we pointed out
rather label the wedges of the foam. Therefore @xmath should be
expressed as an integral over a single @xmath parameter. It should also
contain three @xmath functions depending on @xmath , such that when
constructing the amplitudes and integrating out the @xmath ’s one
recovers formula ( 2.24 ). It is then not difficult to convince oneself
and check that the solution is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this case, one can indeed show that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath runs over all the @xmath -complexes (without boundaries)
verifying the aforementioned combinatorial constraints, @xmath is the
number of vertices in @xmath , and @xmath is a symmetry factor. It is
now clear why we did not want to write the kinetic term of this field
theory in an exponentiated form: because of the integration over the
holonomy @xmath , @xmath does not define an invertible operator, and
therefore this representation is strictly speaking not available. A
different but equivalent way of understanding this point is sometimes
adopted (see for instance the presentation adopted in the classical
references [ Perez:2003 , rovelli_book , freidel_gft , daniele_rev2006 ]
). Instead of integrating over the whole Hilbert space @xmath with
respect to a degenerate Gaussian measure, one can restrict beforehand
the space of fields to the gauge invariant ones:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

and use an invertible propagator (the trivial one with no @xmath
variable). The constraint ( 2.33 ) is nothing but the Gauss one in the
GFT setting. It implies that boundary states are really gauge invariant
(abstract) spin networks. Using an unconstrained space of fields with
the degenerate covariance ( 2.31 ) is morally equivalent, in the sense
that only the gauge invariant part of the field is propagated in this
framework. The reasons why we prefer to adopt the degenerate covariance
formalism are: a) it is mathematically rigorous; b) it allows to use
simple notions of locality for the interactions [ Krajewski:2010yq ] ;
c) it seems convenient to encode as much as the dynamics as possible in
the propagator, this way combinatorial issues and the problem of how
gravitational constraints should be imposed get clearly separated. In
particular, this thesis explores ways of defining a locality principle,
and covariances implementing the Gauss constraint, such that a
well-defined theory of renormalization becomes available.

The correspondence between GFTs and SFMs we have just illustrated is
very general, as the example of the Boulatov model hopefully makes it
clear. GFTs can from this perspective be characterized as quantum field
theories for spin networks, generalizing the correspondence between
relativistic QFTs and scattering states one finds at the root of
particle physics. The only constraints are on the valencies of the spin
networks nodes on the boundary, and the structures of the spin foam
vertices in the bulk. The former are determined by the field content,
while the latter depend on the choice of interactions. More precisely,
if we want to have @xmath -valent spin networks nodes in the boundary,
we need to bring in one new GFT field with @xmath variables; and to any
type of vertex in the spin foam amplitudes must be associated a certain
convolution of fields in @xmath . Therefore the formalism is in
principle general enough to accommodate any finite numbers of nodes in
the boundary, and any finite number of vertices in the bulk. Likewise,
the type of boundary data and dynamics can be specified at will by
changing the group and the covariance. In particular, any constraint
arising from the spin foam quantization, such as simplicity constraints,
can be included in the covariance. From this point of view, the Gauss
constraint is a defining feature of GFTs, since it is responsible for
the presence of holonomy degrees of freedom. This explains why we will
concentrate on this aspect in the remainder of this thesis.

The appeals of the GFT formalism from the point of view of SFMs and LQG
are numerous. First and foremost, the QFT formalism allows to fix
canonical weights for the sum over foams. While a full justification of
these weights from first principles is not available, they have the
merit of being well-defined, therefore completing the definition of
SFMs. They can moreover be partially justified: with an appropriate
definition of the GFT coupling constant, the combinatorial weight of a
complex is the order of its automorphism group, which can be argued to
be a discrete, purely combinatorial analogue of the diffeomorphism
group. Second, the divergences of SFMs are now understood as divergences
of the amplitudes of a field theory. Such features have to be expected
in any QFT, and tools to control them are well understood both
conceptually and mathematically, thanks to renormalization theory.
Through the embedding of SFMs into GFTs, the question of the value of
the cosmological constant and that of the occurrence of divergences
become clearly separated, as it seems to us they should be. A third
feature which can be seen as an advantage too, is that in GFT the
topology of space-time is itself dynamical. For instance in the version
of the Boulatov model introduced above, the foams contributing to the
partition function are dual to arbitrary gluings of tetrahedra, which
include in particular all types of triangulated topological manifolds,
but also more pathological structures. Therefore GFT can potentially
explain the local topology of macroscopic space-time, in addition to its
metric properties. This feature is sometimes called third quantization,
and we refer to [ ds_3 ] for a more detailed exposition in the context
of GFTs. Finally, as quantum field theories on local symmetry groups
rather than space-time, GFTs make possible to incorporate all the tools
which are so crucial to quantum field theories in a background
independent context. Especially, perturbative methods in the QFT sense
are available, without having to resort to perturbation in the
space-time sense. This is very different from the usual perturbative
approach to quantum gravity, which is so to speak doubly perturbative:
perturbative QFT methods are used to analyze quantum perturbations over
a background metric. This aspect of GFTs has already been taken
advantage of, in the limited context of ’graviton propagator’
calculations, where the existence and physical relevance of the
perturbative expansion in the coupling constants of GFTs is assumed from
the start [ lqg_propa1 , lqg_propa2 , lqg_propa3 ] .

In order to determine whether this list of merits is truly realized in
GFTs, a lot of work is needed, both at the conceptual and mathematical
level. The key result to achieve in this respect is to establish GFTs as
well-defined perturbative quantum field theories. To this effect, one
needs to generalize renormalization theory to this new context. It is
only equipped with such a new toolbox that we will be able to determine
whether a specific GFT model can be taken seriously as a field theory or
not, and in which sense. It seems that the key physical questions are to
be settled down only then. The most pressing one is to determine in
which sector of a given theory (if any) the classical effective dynamics
of GR lies. In particular, can we relate the first few orders of the
perturbative expansion to continuum macroscopic physics? Or, on the
contrary, does it emerge from the interaction of very many degrees of
freedom, and can as a result only be captured by non-perturbative
techniques, or by perturbation in a different phase of the theory? The
somehow mysterious interpretation of the coupling constants of a GFT
from the gravity perspective is certainly related. Whatever the answers
to these questions, for which in our view renormalization methods
applied to phase transitions could play a discriminant role, it must be
admitted that if GFTs are used to complete the definition of SFMs, the
problem of their renormalizability have to be faced head on and
resolved.

This concludes our summary of motivations for studying GFTs, from the
point of view of loop quantum gravity and spin foam models. As is
certainly clear to the reader, several points of the reasoning are
semi-heuristic and formal. Moreover, several key combinatorial aspects
of GFTs seem poorly motivated by the quantization procedures, and it
seems to us essentially independent of them. It is therefore of
paramount importance to take some distance with the quantization, and
present the more combinatorial motivations behind GFTs, which we do in
the next section.

### 2.2 Group Field Theories and random discrete geometries

#### 2.2.1 Matrix models and random surfaces

Since GFTs are in a sense higher dimensional incarnations of matrix
models, we start with a brief presentation of basic aspects of the
latter [ david1985planar , Ginsparg:1991bi , DiFrancesco:1993nw ,
Ginsparg:1993is ] . Matrix models are statistical models for matrix-like
degrees of freedom, in the sense that ’locality’ is based on a matrix
rather than point-wise product. For instance, let @xmath be an hermitian
matrix of size @xmath . We can construct an action @xmath for @xmath by
requiring it to be invariant under conjugation of @xmath . This plays
the role of ’locality’ principle in the same way as Lorentz and gauge
invariance are at the root of local quantum field theories, i.e. by
providing a set of allowed interactions. It is then possible to show
that @xmath has to be a sum of products of invariants of the form:
@xmath , with @xmath . If we further restrict to connected invariants,
then @xmath is simply a sum of such terms. The simplest non-trivial
connected invariant action retains the first two terms only:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a coupling constant. The partition function of the
matrix model is then defined by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the invariant measure on the set of @xmath hermitian
matrices. This theory can be expanded in perturbations in @xmath and
shown to generate Feynman amplitudes labeled by ribbon graphs . The
propagator, deduced from the quadratic Gaussian term in @xmath , can be
pictured as a line with two strands, each strand carrying one index of
the matrix @xmath . More precisely, the covariance of this theory
identifies indices as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The interaction part of the action introduces a single @xmath -valent
vertex, which identifies @xmath strands pairwise. The propagator and
interaction vertex are represented in Figure 2.2 .

The free energy @xmath is then indexed by closed and connected ribbon
graphs @xmath , an example of an open ribbon graph being given in Figure
2.3 .

The ribbon structure of the graphs allows to define the notion of face:
a face of @xmath is a set of strands forming a loop. We note @xmath the
number of ( @xmath -valent) vertices of @xmath , and @xmath its number
of faces. It is then not difficult to see that:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.37)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a symmetry factor. The fact that the amplitude @xmath is
weighted by the number of faces is easy to understand: since in @xmath ,
the indices of the strands are identified by @xmath -functions across
propagators and vertices, one can trivially sum all of them but one per
face; we are therefore left with one free index per face, which sums to
@xmath . The main interest of the occurrence of such ribbon graphs in
the perturbative expansion of the matrix models, is that their duals are
triangulated surfaces. To see this, it suffices to associate a
transverse line to each propagator, and a triangle to each vertex, as
represented in Figures 2.2 and 2.3 . In this dual picture, the role of
the propagator is to identify pairwise the edges of the @xmath triangles
generated by @xmath , yielding a closed triangulated surface. Note that,
very importantly, the vertices of the triangulation are dual to the
faces of @xmath , so that a complete and unambiguous correspondence is
established between a ribbon graph and its dual triangulation. This
interpretation of matrix models as statistical models for discretized
surfaces is very general. The statistical ensemble one is spanning
depends on which matrix ensemble and which interactions are being used.
For instance, in the model we just presented, the hermiticity of @xmath
restricts the sum to orientable triangulations, while both orientable
and non-orientable triangulations would be included had we used
symmetric matrices instead. Also, one could work with quadrangulations
upon replacing the third order interaction by a fourth order one, or
include arbitrarily wild kinds of discretizations thanks to all the
other matrix invariants.

The first technical aspect which makes the link between matrix models
and random triangulations so interesting is the existence of a @xmath
expansion, bringing powerful analytical control over the formal sum (
2.37 ). One can use the arbitrary size of the matrix @xmath to unravel
universal properties of the statistical model, in the limit of
infinitely large matrices. In practice, one looks for a rescaling of the
coupling constant

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that, when @xmath : a) the most divergent configurations have a
uniform divergence degree at each order in @xmath ; b) these
configurations are infinitely many. In such a situation, @xmath can be
used as a new perturbative parameter, in such a way that the leading
order term in @xmath captures infinitely many orders in @xmath . This is
in this sense that a @xmath expansion captures non-perturbative effects.
In our context, large orders in the coupling constants correspond to
discrete surfaces with many building blocks, hence the @xmath expansion
is particularly relevant to the question of the continuum limit of such
discrete models. Let us consider again the model ( 2.35 ). The unique
value of @xmath verifying the two previous conditions is @xmath , and in
this case the amplitude of a graph @xmath becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us call @xmath , @xmath and @xmath the numbers of vertices, edges,
and triangles in the triangulation @xmath dual to @xmath . Each edge of
@xmath being shared by exactly two triangles, we have @xmath and
therefore:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Euler characteristic of @xmath , and @xmath its
genus. Recall that closed two-dimensional topological manifolds are
fully characterized by two invariants, the Euler characteristic and the
orientability, so that in the orientable case we are considering the
genus fully determines the topology of the triangulation. Therefore the
@xmath expansion is actually a topological expansion:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.42)
              @xmath   @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

sums all the triangulations with genus @xmath . As a result, in the
limit of infinitely large matrices, spherical topologies ( @xmath )
dominate; and the more holes a non-spherical surface has, the more it is
suppressed.

Assuming that one can first take the large @xmath limit to restrict
oneself to the spherical sector, one can then look for a continuum limit
in this sector. Because @xmath contains all the spherical
triangulations, with arbitrary number of triangles, it is meaningful to
ask whether it is dominated by large triangulations in some regime of
@xmath . Such large order terms will start dominating the behavior of
@xmath close to its convergence radius. It can be shown that @xmath has
a non-zero and finite convergence radius, providing a critical value
@xmath for the coupling constant, and such that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is the critical exponent, and is equal to @xmath in this model,
so that the free energy associated to the spherical sector diverges
close to the critical point. At least at a formal level, this supports
the idea that a continuum phase of the theory is reached by tuning
@xmath to its critical value. We can illustrate this in the following
way. Suppose that each triangle of the model is assumed equilateral, and
attributed some elementary area @xmath . Then the mean area of a
triangulation in the statistical ensemble is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

So that if we send the fiducial area to @xmath when approaching
criticality, in such a way that the mean value of the area is kept
fixed, one obtains a statistical model for infinitely refined spherical
triangulations with a given area. This has certainly the flavor of the
continuum!

One can go further and construct statistical ensembles containing all
possible (oriented) manifolds. This is achieved in the so-called double
scaling limit, which consists in taking the large @xmath and critical
limits in a correlated manner. It is possible at all thanks to the fact
that @xmath can be shown to have the same critical point as @xmath , for
any @xmath . More precisely, one has

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

which suggests to take the joint limit @xmath and @xmath , keeping the
ratio

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

fixed. In such a limit, the damping effect due to the large @xmath limit
and the enhancement of higher genera close to the critical point
compensate, in such a way that all topologies contribute to the free
energy:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are some computable constants.

The way these results are usually proven is through a rewriting of the
free energy in terms of @xmath invariant quantities, namely the
eigenvalues of @xmath . Such a tool is not (yet?) available in higher
dimensions, so we do not want to provide any details along this line
here. The interested reader may refer to [ david1985planar ,
Ginsparg:1991bi , DiFrancesco:1993nw , Ginsparg:1993is ] . It should
also be noted that these results are only a first step, and that the
precise correspondence between the discrete theory and its continuum
limit is studied by different means, for instance thanks to
Schwinger-Dyson equations for the so-called loop observables , which in
the large @xmath limit reproduce the Witt algebra [ Ginsparg:1991bi ,
DiFrancesco:1993nw , Ginsparg:1993is ] , and can be related to the
Wheeler-DeWitt equation for 2d quantum gravity [
staudacher_moore_seiberg ] . Finally, mathematically rigorous
characterizations of the continuum limit of matrix models have been
obtained thanks to random planar maps, see [ legall ] and references
therein.

As far as quantum gravity is concerned, what makes matrix models
interesting is their connection to quantum gravity in two dimensions. We
only recall the correspondence at the discrete level, which can be shown
to extend to the continuum phase thanks to the Schwinger-Dyson
equations. The action for gravity in two dimensions with cosmological
constants is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the second equality is a consequence of the Gauss-Bonnet theorem.
The Einstein term being topological in two dimensions, only the Euler
characteristic and the area @xmath can be dynamical in the vacuum.
Intuitively, this suggests that a fine enough discretization of the
theory is enough to encode the dynamics of these two global degrees of
freedom. We can for instance introduce an equilateral triangulation
@xmath of @xmath , each individual triangle having a same area @xmath .
The Einstein term of ( 2.50 ) can then be replaced by @xmath , and the
area approximated by @xmath . This provides an action principle for a
discrete theory, from which we can deduce a path-integral quantization.
Remarkably, the resulting partition function is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

and can therefore be matched to the free energy ( 2.37 ) of the matrix
model (with the large @xmath rescaling). The sum over @xmath can include
arbitrary topologies, so that one really obtains a third quantization of
@xmath gravity. The correspondence imposes the following
identifications:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore the large @xmath limit of the matrix model corresponds to the
weak coupling regime of @xmath gravity. Thanks to the double scaling,
one can moreover extend the sum over topologies to the continuum phase.

Let us summarize the situation. Matrix models are at first sight
algebraic models, with no particular relation to gravity or geometry in
general. However the relation to discrete geometry is readily seen at
the perturbative level, since Feynman amplitudes are labeled by
discretized surfaces. Still at the discrete level, the amplitudes can be
related to discrete gravity path integrals, the two coupling constants
of gravity being encoded in the coupling constant of the matrix model
and the size parameter @xmath . Finally, the matrix model formulation
allows to reach a continuum phase when sending @xmath to infinity,
dominated by spherical topologies, and which can also be extended to all
types of manifolds. In a sense, what matrix models achieve is a
definition of a measure on continuous geometries thanks to discrete
methods, which reminds the relationship between Riemann sums and the
Riemann integral.

#### 2.2.2 Higher dimensional generalizations

The success of matrix models motivated extensions to higher dimensions
already in the nineties, called tensor models [ Ambjorn_tensors , gross
, Sasakura:1990fs ] . Viewing a matrix as a @xmath -tensor, it is
natural to introduce @xmath -tensors in @xmath dimensions. The action
@xmath of a tensor is inspired by its matrix counter-part: the kinetic
term convolutes indices of two tensors pairwise, and is interpreted as
the identification of two @xmath -simplices; and the interaction is
built in such a way as to represent elementary @xmath -cells. It is also
natural to work with a single interaction, dual to a @xmath -simplex, as
it is the interaction with the smallest number of fields which can be
given a @xmath -dimensional interpretation, and also any discretization
of a manifold can be subdivided in such a way that all cells are
simplices. For example, in three dimensions, one can define:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

where all the indices run from @xmath to @xmath . As we will see later
on, the type of tensors one is working with has important implications.
This part of the generalization from matrix models is also not obvious,
and the strategy which was adopted in the early nineties was to
symmetrize the tensor indices. Since one does not want to give them any
physical meaning, it seems at first sight a reasonable assumption, but
it is not the only way to fulfill the requirement, and is responsible
for key difficulties of this approach. One major challenge is to control
the overwhelmingly complicated sum over triangulations generated in
perturbative expansion. Contrary to matrix models, not all of them are
discretization of topological manifolds: quite differently, mild
singular contributions such as pseudo-manifolds are included, but also
highly degenerate triangulations with extended singularities (see for
instance [ Gurau:2010nd ] , in the context of GFTs). This comes from the
fact that in higher than two dimensions, prescribing simple local gluing
rules for @xmath -simplices along their @xmath -subsimplices is not
restrictive enough to eliminate these pathological structures. In
particular, and as we will explore in more details in the next section,
the data encoded in these simple combinatorial models is not rich enough
to capture the structure of the simplices of dimension strictly less
than @xmath . For instance, in the model defined by the action ( 2.53 ),
no data is associated to the vertices of the triangulation, therefore
the topological structure around the vertices of the triangulations is
essentially arbitrary [ Gurau:2010nd ] .

With hindsight, this lack of combinatorial structure is what prevented
all the achievements of matrix models from being reproduced in higher
dimensions. Without the necessary analytical control over the
perturbative series, no @xmath expansion could be formulated for these
early versions of tensor models, and therefore none of the other appeals
of matrix models could be investigated either. The only part of the
story which remained true was the interpretation of the amplitudes as
discrete gravity path integrals, at least for triangulations of
manifolds. Interpreting the elementary @xmath -simplices as equilateral,
a discrete metric can be assigned to each configuration, in the same way
as in two dimensions. The amplitudes themselves can then be matched to
the exponential of a discrete version of the Einstein-Hilbert action.
Volume terms coming from the cosmological constant are again related to
the coupling constant @xmath , and the curvature is captured by deficit
angles around @xmath -simplices. Such considerations gave birth to the
Dynamical Triangulations program, and later on their Causal versions,
where ensembles of discrete space-times are generated and summed over
numerically rather than by analytical means. We refer to the lecture
notes [ Ambjorn:2012jv ] for details and references.

This situation changed dramatically thanks to the pioneering work of
Gurau, which upon slightly restricting the combinatorial structures of
tensor models, could define a @xmath expansion. A wealth of results
could be gathered after this breakthrough, giving new support in favor
of analytical studies of random triangulations.

#### 2.2.3 Bringing discrete geometry in

We can now explain how GFT comes about in this discrete approach to
quantum gravity. Tensor models and dynamical triangulations are the
minimalistic backbone of discrete gravity path integrals, in the sense
that metric degrees of freedom are encoded in a purely combinatorial
way. While this was fine enough in the case of two dimensional gravity,
where only topology matters, the strategy can be questioned when it
comes to three or four dimensions. In general relativity enter several
important background structures. A topological manifold of the
appropriate dimension is one such structure, and is arguably exhaustive
in two dimensions. However, this topological manifold has to be endowed
with a differential structure, which is not uniquely specified by the
topology in four dimensions. Most importantly, local Lorentz invariance
can also be argued to be a primary ingredient of any quantum theory of
gravity. It is experimentally tested with an overwhelming precision, and
seems to be rather hard to make emergent from a more fundamental theory.
In this respect, getting the continuum of GR out of a fundamentally
discrete model seems ambitious enough, so that it seems reasonable to
save ourselves the burden of explaining Lorentz invariance as well.

In GFTs, a notion of local Lorentz invariance (or Euclidean invariance
in Euclidean models) is assumed from scratch. To this effect, the purely
combinatorial indices of tensor models become instead elements of some
subgroup of the Lorentz or rotation group. For example in a 3d Euclidean
context, one goes from the interaction part of ( 2.53 ) to ( 2.29 ) by
turning the indices into @xmath group elements. It is in this
combinatorial sense that a GFT field can be considered a tensor.
However, that is not all: after this new type of data has been
introduce, one needs to provide them with a discrete geometric meaning.
We simply follow the matrix/tensor models reasoning: if the GFT field
@xmath is assumed to represent an elementary building block of geometry,
then the geometric data should refer to this building block. Let us
again use the Boulatov model as an example, in which case @xmath is to
be interpreted as a flat triangle, and the variables @xmath label its
edges. It is the role of the constraint ( 2.33 ) to introduce an @xmath
flat discrete connection at the level of the amplitudes, encoded in the
elementary line holonomies @xmath . The natural interpretation of the
variable @xmath is as the holonomy from a reference point inside the
triangle, to the center of the edge @xmath . Thanks to the flatness
assumption, this holonomy is independent of the path one chooses to
compute @xmath . The meaning of the constraint ( 2.33 ) is also clear:
it simply encodes the freedom in the choice of reference point. From the
discrete geometric perspective, the Boulatov model can therefore
naturally be called a second quantization of a flat triangle : the GFT
field @xmath is the wave-function of a quantized flat triangle, and the
path integral provides an interacting theory for such quantum geometric
degrees of freedom. This point of view was already present in the early
stages of SFMs [ Barbieri1997 , BaezBarrett_tetra ] , and has guided the
development of this research field ever since. It was more recently
advocated in [ Baratin:2010wi , daniele_rev2011 ] , providing a new look
at the construction of four-dimensional models [ bo_bc , bo_holst ] .

The natural question which can arise at this point is: which type of
geometric data one should introduce? Or more specifically, why should we
work with holonomy variables rather than simply edge vectors, as is done
for example in Regge calculus [ lr_loll ] ? As it turns out, there is a
general correspondence between these two alternatives, which gives us
the opportunity to introduce the Lie algebra formalism for GFTs,
initially introduced in [ Baratin:2010wi ] . To avoid unnecessary
complications, we illustrate this dual representation on the Boulatov
model restricted to the @xmath group. The technical tool allowing to use
(non-commuting) Lie algebra variables @xmath , is the group Fourier
transform [ PR3 , majidfreidel , karim ] . In our case, it maps @xmath
to a space @xmath , endowed with a non-commutative @xmath -product. The
Fourier transform of @xmath is defined as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are non-commutative plane-waves, and functions on @xmath
are now identified with functions on @xmath invariant under @xmath . The
definition of the plane-waves involves a choice of coordinates on the
group. Following [ Baratin:2010wi ] , we adopt:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where for @xmath we denote @xmath , and @xmath is the trace in the
fundamental representation of @xmath . Note that other choices are
possible, and some may be more convenient than others [ cdr_duflo ] .
The Lie algebra variables can be given a simple metric interpretation,
as vectors associated to the edges of the triangles [ Baratin:2010wi ] .
One can therefore start from the Lie algebra representation, and provide
an independent construction of the theory, following a similar procedure
as in group space. The same combinatorial structure of the action can be
assumed, entailing the same simplicial interpretation, except that the
pointwise product for functions on @xmath is replaced by the
non-commutative and non-local @xmath -product. The latter is induced by
the group structure of @xmath , as dual to the convolution product for
functions on the group. Defined first on plane-waves:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

it is then extended to the image of the non-commutative Fourier
transform, i.e. @xmath , by linearity. This formalism becomes
particularly interesting when it comes to the geometric constraints.
Indeed, if @xmath have to be interpreted as the edge vectors of a flat
triangle, they should close, as for i

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

This condition needs to be imposed at the operator level on the GFT
field @xmath . A possible version of this projector is constructed out
of a non-commutative notion of @xmath -function. Defining

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

it is easy to verify that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

and therefore @xmath plays the role of Dirac distribution at point
@xmath in @xmath . We can therefore impose the following closure
constraint on the GFT field:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

with:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is then easy to check that transforming back ( 2.60 ) to @xmath gives
back the gauge invariance condition ( 2.33 ). This confirms that the
Boulatov model can be understood as a second quantization of a flat
triangle, and we refer to [ Baratin:2010wi ] for more details.

In four dimensions, the same correspondence between group and Lie
algebra representation has been put to profit [ bo_bc , bo_holst ] .
There, the GFT field represents a quantum tetrahedron, and Lie algebra
elements correspond to bivectors associated to its boundary triangles.
In addition to the closure constraint (again equivalent to the Gauss
constraint in group space), additional geometricity conditions have to
be imposed to guarantee that the bivectors are built from edge vectors
of a geometric tetrahedron. These additional constraints are nothing by
the simplicity constraints, and non-commutative @xmath -functions can
again be used to implement them.

### 2.3 A research direction

Let us summarize the two possible takes on GFTs we have been presenting
so far. We first focused on quantization procedures, either in canonical
or covariant form, applied to Einstein’s field equations. The key steps
entering this line of thoughts were: a) adopt connection and flux rather
than metric variables at the classical level; b) thanks to canonical LQG
techniques, show that spin network functionals are good kinematical
states for quantum GR; c) resort to a semi-heuristic covariant
formulation, spin foams, to identify the dynamics of these states; d)
introduce GFTs as generating functionals for spin foam amplitudes.
Already from this point of view, we could see non-trivial combinatorial
assumptions entering GFT models, as well as unorthodox quantization
rules motivating spin foam models for four-dimensional gravity.
Actually, discrete geometric considerations rather than strict
quantization procedures are arguably at the root of most of the modern
spin foam models. As a result, the combinatorics should play an
important role, but seems essentially unconstrained by these procedures:
one usually works with simplicial complexes because it seems like a
natural starting point. However, there is no strong case for it, even
less from the GFT point of view: as in any quantum field theory, it
would be preferable to have a large set of interactions at our disposal,
determined by a symmetry principle. The second set of works we focused
on, matrix and tensor models, put on the contrary most of their emphasis
on the combinatorics. GFTs in this perspective are simply enriched
tensor models, where tensor indices carry geometrical information. The
conceptual gap between 2d and 4d gravity supports the idea that such
additional data might be needed in 4d, contrary to 2d where purely
combinatorial models are able to capture the very limited metric aspects
of gravity.

As for example put forward in [ daniele_rev2011 ] , we would like to use
these two sets of incomplete motivations for GFTs as a way to find new
research directions. If we allow ourself to make a simple synthesis
between the two, we could say that GFTs are quantum field theories of
discrete geometries, in which boundary states are LQG like, namely a
subset of spin network functionals (for the appropriate group). The key
questions to ask can then be split into two classes. The first concerns
model building, in the sense of finding the appropriate notion of
quantum discrete geometry, both in the boundary and in the bulk. The
second concerns more generic features of the formalism, such as the
combinatorics, symmetry principles, regularization and renormalization.
It should be noted that these two sets of questions are rather
independent and should therefore better be explored in parallel. In this
thesis, we are only concerned with the generic aspects of GFTs, and
therefore we will mostly work in situations where discrete geometric
aspects are either irrelevant, or well-controlled and unambiguous. More
precisely, we would first like to understand to which extent GFTs can be
defined rigorously as perturbative quantum field theories. And second,
one would like to develop tools to explore the large
triangulations/foams regime of GFTs. Whatever the position one adopts as
regards discreteness in GFTs and SFMs, such regimes exist and therefore
deserve to be studied. This is especially true in the current situation,
in which the connection between the most refined models and continuum GR
remain rather elusive. Whether this connection is to show up at the
perturbative level already seems rather unlikely in the discrete gravity
interpretation of these models, and if any such connection exists one
would rather expect an emergence scenario [ daniele_hydro ] . In such a
mindset, the large triangulations regime is the physically relevant one.
These two open problems will be addressed by two complementary means:
large @xmath methods similar to the @xmath expansion of matrix models;
and renormalizability studies of enriched GFT models, called Tensorial
Group Field Theories (TGFTs). The latter will be established as the
first well-behaved perturbative quantum field theories related to spin
foam models, which is in our opinion the strongest result of this
thesis. Key to these two series of results are new combinatorial tools
which recently revived tensor models. In the next section, we therefore
give some motivations for introducing them, and a detailed account of
the combinatorial backbone provided by these new improved tensor models.

## Chapter 3 Colors and tensor invariance

In any case, one does not have the right today to maintain that the
foundation must consist in a field theory in the sense of Maxwell. The
other possibility, however, leads in my opinion to a renunciation of the
time-space continuum and to a purely algebraic physics.
Albert Einstein , letter to Paul Langevin, October 1935. ¹ ¹ 1
translated and cited by John Stachel in [ stachel1986einstein ] .

Colors were first introduced by Gurau as a way to restrict the class of
complexes generated by GFT models [ Gurau:2009tw ] . In addition to
giving a handle on their topological properties [ Gurau:2010nd , jimmy ]
, it was soon shown that colored models support a @xmath expansion [
RazvanN , RazvanVincentN , Gurau:2011xq ] . Aside from these purely
combinatorial and topological considerations, a careful study of the
shift symmetry of BF theory and its imprint on the Boulatov model [
diffeos ] gave more support to the physical relevance of the colored
models. We will briefly recall these two sets of initial motivations in
the first section of this chapter.

The discovery of the @xmath expansion then triggered a lot of activity,
mainly focused on colored tensor models [ Gurau:2011xp , critical ,
dr_dually , v_revisiting , v_new , jr_branched , wjd_double ] . These
can be seen as a revival of the purely combinatorial approach to quantum
gravity, but also as a necessary step towards the understanding of more
involved GFTs. Interestingly, just like matrix models, colored tensor
models have already found applications outside quantum gravity [
vrv_ising , v_dimers , vh_dimers , pspin , vf_packed ] . This is because
they provide universal probabilistic tools [ universality ] , and as
such can be expected to be relevant to a wide range of statistical
physics problems. We introduce the main properties of colored tensor
models in the second section of this chapter.

Finally, a key evolution we would like to comment on in the third
section is the introduction of tensor invariance [ r_vir , universality
, uncoloring ] . It was indeed soon realized that the color restriction
can be understood as a @xmath symmetry, where @xmath is the rank of the
tensors. This opened a whole new set of applications, and in particular
allowed to launch a renormalization program for Tensorial Group Field
Theories (TGFTs), that is for GFTs based on tensorial interactions [
tensor_4d , vincent_tt2 ] .

### 3.1 Colored Group Field Theories

#### 3.1.1 Combinatorial and topological motivations

In order to understand the difficulties with GFTs as introduced so far,
let us consider again a generic 3d model, defined by the partition
function ( 2.28 ) and the interaction ( 2.29 ). We do not need to make
any assumption about the covariance @xmath at this stage, since we are
mainly concerned with the labels of the Feynman amplitudes, not their
structure. These labels are @xmath -stranded graphs, built out from the
elementary vertex shown in Figure 2.1 . A (closed) @xmath -stranded
graph can be equivalently thought of as a @xmath -complex, with faces
identified by the closed circuits of strands.

The key objection put forward in [ Gurau:2010nd ] is that, while the
lines and faces of the @xmath -complex unambiguously identify the
triangles and edges of the dual triangulation, there is no combinatorial
data associated to its vertices. As a result, the tetrahedra can be
glued in arbitrary wild fashions along there common vertices, which
leads to the presence of extended topological singularities. That is to
say that the topological space naturally associated to such a
pathological triangulation contains points with neighborhoods not
homeomorphic to a @xmath -ball, and that these singular points can form
subspaces of dimension higher than @xmath . Hence, these triangulations
cannot be interpreted as topological manifolds. Even worst, they are not
homeomorphic to pseudomanifolds , which are milder versions of singular
topological spaces (see again [ Gurau:2010nd ] ). Examples of such
configurations can easily be constructed by gluing vertices in such a
way that a given face runs several times through the same line. It is
therefore natural to look for combinatorial prescriptions which prevent
the generation of such faces, called tadfaces .

These unwelcomed properties of ordinary GFTs were cured by the
introduction of new data in the action: the colors. These are purely
combinatorial labels which identify the @xmath -simplices constituting a
given @xmath -simplex. One therefore needs @xmath -colors in a rank-
@xmath GFT, labeling @xmath independent fields. It is moreover
convenient to work with complex fields, which will ensure nice
orientability properties. For instance, the colored rank- @xmath GFT is
defined in terms of fields @xmath , each distributed according to a
(complex) Gaussian measure @xmath , and the interaction convolutes the
four fields together:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where in the second line we kept the convolution pattern implicit ² ² 2
It is made explicit in Figure 3.1 . It is the same as in equation ( 2.29
), up to a reordering of the variables. . The only effect of the
coloring is to reduce the combinatorial complexity of the Feynman graphs
generated by the GFT: they must be bipartite and colorable . The first
condition comes from the complex nature of the field: there are two
types of vertices, associated to the interaction of @xmath or @xmath
fields respectively; and propagator lines can only connect two vertices
of different types. The second condition comes from the colors: each
line is now equipped with a color label, and only four lines with
distinct colors can interact. But, and this is essential, the amplitude
of a colorable and bipartite stranded graph in the colored GFT is
identical to its amplitude in the non-colored theory.

The main advantage of the colored model is that it generates
pseudomanifolds only [ Gurau:2010nd ] . In the 3d context we are
focusing on, this means that at most pointlike topological singularities
can occur, located at the vertices of the triangulations. This
topological information is fully encoded in the colored structure of the
stranded graphs, which can equivalently be represented by colored graphs
.

###### Definition 1.

Let @xmath . A @xmath -colored graph is a bipartite regular graph of
valency @xmath , whose edges are colored by labels @xmath , and such
that at each vertex meet @xmath edges with distinct colors.

These graphs have been extensively used in the mathematical literature,
as an efficient combinatorial way of representing topological manifolds
[ FerriGagliardi , Vince_gene ] . This goes under the name of
crystallization theory. These techniques have been partly rediscovered
and partly directly imported into the GFT context, though with a
different nomenclature, and one notable difference: crystallizations are
a particular subclass of @xmath -colored graphs which represent
manifolds, while in GFT we cannot avoid dealing with the singular
pseudomanifolds as well. The general formalism is discussed at length in
[ Gurau:2011xp ] , and we should content ourselves with the main ideas
here, which we again introduce in three dimensions. To begin with, we
will represent the vertex interaction associated to @xmath (resp. @xmath
) fields by a white (resp. black) dot, and a propagator between fields
of color @xmath with a line of color @xmath . The first interesting
point to notice is that the stranded substructure of a Feynman graph can
be fully inferred from its colored representation. Indeed a strand can
be canonically labeled by a couple @xmath of colors, where @xmath and
@xmath are the colors of the two types of lines in which the strand
runs. See Figure 3.1 . Therefore the faces, which are connected circuits
of strands, are equivalently labeled by connected cycles of edges of
color @xmath and @xmath . And due to the color prescription, tadfaces
cannot occur in colored GFTs. This solves a first pathology of ordinary
GFTs.

The second key aspect is that the colors give direct access to the
vertices of the triangulation. First, they can be attributed a color
label in the following way: in a tetrahedron, the vertex of color @xmath
is the one opposite to the triangle of color @xmath . Consider a @xmath
-colored graph @xmath . We define the @xmath - bubbles of color @xmath
as the connected components of edges with colors in @xmath . See Figure
3.2 for an example.

In the same way as the @xmath -colored graph @xmath represents a
simplicial complex of dimension @xmath , a @xmath -bubble @xmath is a
@xmath -colored graph and represents a triangulated two dimensional
surface. This is nothing but the the boundary of a 3d cell dual to a
particular vertex @xmath . And hence the topology of the neighborhood of
@xmath can be directly read out from that of the surface encoded by
@xmath : if it is a sphere (i.e. of genus @xmath ), @xmath is regular,
otherwise (i.e. of genus @xmath ) it is topologically singular. We will
use this idea at length in Chapter 4 .

The notion of bubble is very general. In arbitrary dimension @xmath , a
@xmath -colored graph @xmath comes with nested sets of @xmath -bubbles,
for @xmath , simply defined as the maximally connected subgraphs made of
edges with @xmath fixed colors. They define particular embedded surfaces
of dimension @xmath , dual to the @xmath -simplices of the complex
encoded in @xmath , which in turn provide a full homology for the
topological spaces generated by colored GFTs [ Gurau:2009tw ,
Gurau:2011xp ] .

#### 3.1.2 Motivation from discrete diffeomorphisms

A second argument in favor of colors one can find in the literature
relies on the symmetries of discrete gravity models. However, it mainly
applies to 3d for now, and therefore is not as generic as the
combinatorial and topological motivations.

It goes as follows. Because of the strict duality between spin foam
models and discrete gravity path-integrals, as for example uncovered in
[ Baratin:2010wi ] , it is tempting to implement discrete gravity
symmetries directly at the level of the GFT. Of particular interest is
the diffeomorphism group: if one wants to reach a continuous limit in
which the full symmetry of GR is restored, identifying a residual action
of the diffeomorphism group at a discrete level, and subsequently
turning it into a symmetry (or at least an approximate one) is a natural
strategy. This point of view has long been advocated by Bianca Dittrich
and collaborators [ bianca_review ] . Thanks to the metric variables
introduced in [ Baratin:2010wi ] , this could be partially explored at
the GFT level by the authors of [ diffeos ] , who focused on the
Boulatov and Ooguri models. In particular, they identified a translation
symmetry in the Boulatov model, a quantum-deformed version of vertex
translation invariance interpreted as discrete diffeomorphism
invariance. It is then natural to try to use this symmetry as a defining
feature of the Boulatov model, acting directly on the fields and leaving
the action invariant. But this could only be achieved in the colored
version of the model, the reason being essentially that in order to
translate a given vertex in a tetrahedron, one needs to act on specific
edge variables of three of its triangles. Therefore the triangles need
to be identified by additional labels in the action: the colors.
Moreover, they argued that this symmetry would systematically be broken
at the quantum level in a non-colored model.

In order to make this argument stronger, one would need to investigate
it further in a four-dimensional context. In the Ooguri colored model, a
similar translation symmetry could be uncovered [ diffeos ] , this time
associated to the edges of the 4d complexes. It however has no geometric
interpretation, and is broken by the imposition of simplicity
constraints. Hence it cannot be used in favor of colored models for
four-dimensional quantum gravity.

We will come back to these symmetries in Chapter 4 , to motivate new
formulations of the Boulatov and Ooguri models which are well adapted to
the computation of scaling bounds.

### 3.2 Colored tensor models

Let us now introduce tensor models in some details. They rely on the
same structures as colored GFTs, but exact calculations are made a lot
easier. Hence, this provides a simplified context in which to introduce
the main tools we will use again in the next sections.

#### 3.2.1 Models and amplitudes

Colored tensor models turn out to have very specific properties from
dimension three onwards, we will therefore exclude the matrix case and
assume @xmath from now on. The degrees of freedom are @xmath colored
rank- @xmath tensors @xmath , and their conjugates @xmath . @xmath is
again the color index, and the indices run from @xmath to @xmath . From
the GFT perspective, these tensors can equivalently be considered as
truncated version of the Fourier transforms of fields defined on @xmath
copies of a compact Lie group. For instance, the Fourier dual of @xmath
is @xmath , and can be truncated to a set of cardinal @xmath . But
because of the choice of covariances made in tensor models, they are
essentially insensible to the nature of the group. The kernels of the
propagators are given by simple Kronecker @xmath ’s with respect to the
indices and the colors. For any @xmath , we define the Gaussian measure
@xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The interaction is given by a simplicial term and its conjugate. We
introduce a notation with two indices ³ ³ 3 Additions are understood
modulo @xmath in the color set, and @xmath is identified with @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

which makes its definition compact:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

For simplicity of the discussion, we already introduced the unique
rescaling of the coupling constant @xmath which makes the large @xmath
expansion possible. The partition function of this tensor model expands
as a power series in @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the sum runs over @xmath -colored graphs, @xmath is the number of
nodes of a graph @xmath , and @xmath its amplitude. The latter is easily
computed. Each node brings a @xmath factor, and identifies indices two
by two, according to the face structure of the graph. Following a given
face across propagators and vertices, we are able to trivially sum all
the Kronecker @xmath ’s, until we have just one index left in this face.
This gives a free sum and hence a factor @xmath per face contributing to
the amplitude. Therefore, we simply have:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the set of faces of the graph @xmath .

#### 3.2.2 Degree and existence of the large N expansion

The @xmath expansion of tensor models relies on a rewriting of the
amplitudes ( 3.7 ) in terms of appropriate combinatorial objects. Of
particular relevance is the notion of jacket , first introduced in [ lin
] , and better understood in [ RazvanN , RazvanVincentN , jimmy ] .

###### Definition 2.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -colored graph. A jacket @xmath of @xmath is a
@xmath -subcomplex of the ( @xmath -complex represented by) @xmath ,
labeled by a cycle @xmath in the color set (or equivalently by @xmath ).
@xmath consists of the same nodes and edges as @xmath , while its faces
are the faces of colors @xmath .

The jackets label particular ribbon subdiagrams in the stranded diagrams
encoded by the colored graphs, which are dual to @xmath -dimensional
discretized surfaces embedded in the dual simplicial complexes [ jimmy ]
. They are also orientable, thanks to the complex structure of the
tensor models, and therefore their topology is fully captured by a
single positive integer: the genus. It is moreover possible to count the
faces of a graph @xmath in terms of the combinatorial data associated to
all its jackets, and prove a simple relation with their genera (see [
Gurau:2011xp ] and references therein):

###### Proposition 1.

The amplitude of a @xmath -colored graph is equal to:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , called degree of @xmath , is the sum of the genera of its
jackets:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

This very important result shows the existence of the @xmath expansion:
given its expression, @xmath is a positive integer and therefore the
divergence degree at large @xmath is uniformly bounded by @xmath . At
each order of the @xmath expansion, one needs to sum all the graphs with
a given degree, in the same way as one needed to sum all triangulations
with a given genus in matrix models. Notice however that, while @xmath
encodes some topological information about the graph @xmath , it is not
a topological invariant (see again [ Gurau:2011xp ] for a detailed
discussion of the topological properties of colored tensor models).

#### 3.2.3 The world of melons

After the discovery of the @xmath expansion, the research efforts mainly
focused on the leading order sector. The only configurations which
survive when @xmath is sent to infinity are the @xmath graphs. They were
given a simple recursive characterization in [ critical ] , in terms of
so-called melons . An elementary melon is a connected subgraph with two
nodes, @xmath internal lines, and @xmath external legs, as represented
on the left-side of Figure 3.3 .

In [ critical ] , it is first demonstrated that an @xmath graph
necessarily contains an elementary melon; and in a second step, that
contracting an elementary melon as pictured in Figure 3.3 does not
affect the degree of the graph. The second property is easy to
understand from formula ( 3.7 ), since @xmath nodes and @xmath faces are
suppressed in the contraction process. As for the first, it relies on
specific combinatorial relations, which we do not want to elaborate on
here. Therefore, any connected leading-order graph can be reduced to the
unique graph with two nodes, called the supermelon , in a contraction
process which involves only deletions of elementary melons.
Reciprocally, any such graph can be obtained from the supermelon and
successive dressings of its lines with elementary melons. These graphs
are called melonic , an example of which is provided in Figure 3.4 .

The free-energy of the melonic sector was also studied in details in [
critical ] , and was shown to have a finite radius of analyticity in
@xmath . Close to the critical value @xmath , graphs with very many
melons dominate, which signals the transition to a continuum phase. The
melonic free-energy @xmath behaves like

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the vicinity of the critical point, with a critical exponent @xmath
which turns out to be independent of the dimension @xmath . The nested
structure of melonic graphs suggests that this phase is a "branched
polymer" one, describing a very crumpled metric. This last point has
been rigorously confirmed in the recent work [ jr_branched ] : the
continuous emergent space at the critical point has Hausdorff dimension
@xmath and spectral dimension @xmath .

From the quantum gravity perspective, this result can be interpreted in
two ways. Either a well-behaved emergent spherical space has to be
looked for in a double scaling or a generalization thereof, in a similar
fashion as higher genera are incorporated to matrix models; or it can
alternatively be understood as one other sign suggesting that tensor
models need to be supplemented with additional pre-geometric data.
Ongoing efforts aim at exploring this alternative, with first
encouraging results towards the realization of a double scaling in
tensor models [ wjd_double ] , and preliminary steps towards the
analysis of a melonic phase transition in the Boulatov-Oguri GFTs [
boulatov_phase ] .

### 3.3 Tensor invariance

#### 3.3.1 From colored simplices to tensor invariant interactions

A new set of developments of tensor models have been triggered by the
introduction of tensor invariant interactions. It was first realized in
[ r_vir ] that, in a rank- @xmath colored tensor model, @xmath fields
can be directly integrated, yielding an effective theory for the last
field. The new effective interactions are labeled by @xmath -bubbles (in
the color of the last field), as easily understood from the point of
view of the initial perturbative expansion: instead of summing over the
initial interactions and propagators, one first integrates the
propagators in three of the colors, yielding new effective bubble
vertices to which the propagators in the last color can be hooked. These
interactions are infinitely many, and the coupling constants in front
are functions of the initial @xmath . What is remarkable with these
simple tensor models is that their kernels are also products of
Kronecker @xmath ’s, which identify indices according to which face they
belong. If one furthermore assumes the new coupling constants to be
independent, one obtains a whole class of tensor models with a single
field, but an infinite set of freely adjustable interactions.

Let us assume the single effective field to have color @xmath , and the
bubble vertices to be constructed out of color @xmath to @xmath . The
only faces which matters are the color- @xmath ones, and are identified
thanks to the colored structure of the bubbles. With the notations
introduced before, in a given bubble interaction @xmath , the @xmath
index of a @xmath field is identified to the @xmath index of a @xmath ,
and both are in the same position in these tensors. We can therefore
interpret the color @xmath as labeling the position of an index in the
tensors @xmath and @xmath . And the color conservation of the faces in
the initial colored models translates into the requirement that: in the
bubble @xmath , an index in the @xmath position of a tensor @xmath must
be contracted with an index of a @xmath in the same position.

These considerations allowed the authors of [ uncoloring ] to develop an
axiomatic formulation of random tensor models, based on this
single-field framework. Consider a complex rank- @xmath tensor @xmath ,
and assumes that it transforms as a tensor products of fundamental
representations of @xmath . That is to say that matrices @xmath act on
@xmath and its conjugate as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This large symmetry group, @xmath , acts independently on each of the
indices. The action can then be required to be tensor invariant , i.e.
invariant under @xmath . It turns out [ universality ] that tensor
invariants are generated by monomials, which contract the indices of
@xmath tensors @xmath and @xmath tensors @xmath , in such a way that the
@xmath index of a @xmath is always contracted with the @xmath index of a
@xmath . They are labeled by @xmath -colored graphs, with white (resp.
black) dots representing @xmath (resp. @xmath ) tensors, and a line of
color @xmath picturing the contraction of two indices in the @xmath
position. They are the analogues of the trace invariants of matrix
models. If we moreover restrict to connected such invariants, we find
that the action is a sum of bubble interactions, i.e. a sum of monomials
labeled by connected @xmath -colored graphs. A general probability
theory for such independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) tensors
has been constructed at the perturbative level [ universality ] . It
relies on a generalization of the @xmath expansion for colored tensor
models, which provides the tools to prove universality theorem akin to
the central limit theorem [ universality ] . Another avenue towards the
same results is provided by Schwinger-Dyson equations [ v_revisiting ] ,
which generalize the loop equations of matrix models [ r_vir , r_sdgene
] . They even allowed to uncover the existence of slightly modified
@xmath expansions, which retain more than melonic graphs at
leading-order [ v_new ] . Finally, recent non-perturbative studies [
r_constructive ] of the same models opened a new era, in which
constructive field theory methods [ rz_loop1 , rz_loop2 ] are expected
to deepen our understanding of the large @xmath limit of i.i.d. tensor
models.

#### 3.3.2 Generalization to GFTs

The concept of tensor invariance unlocked a new understanding of tensor
models, which allows to view the colors as a consequence of a symmetry
principle, rather than labels of extra fields introduced by hand. With
insight, the relative failure of analytical methods in the early
incarnations of tensor models [ Ambjorn_tensors , gross ,
Sasakura:1990fs ] is tied to an unfortunate symmetrization of the tensor
indices. The colored substrate making the topology and combinatorics
tractable is only recovered with unsymmetrized tensors. The wealth of
results gathered in this new framework establish tensor models as a very
active field of research, in rapid development. From the point of view
of spin foam models and group field theories, it is at the same time a
competitor and an important source of inspiration. The more we will
learn about tensor models, the more we will be able to understand the
quantum field theory properties of group field theories.

In particular, the notion of tensor invariance seems to be of paramount
importance, as will be illustrated in Chapters 5 , 6 and 7 . It has been
first applied to fields defined on group manifolds in [ tensor_4d ] ,
which considers a 4d GFT based on the @xmath group. The main innovation
of this article is to replace the sharp cut-off in Fourier space, which
would immediately yield a tensor model, with a non-trivial propagator
based on the Laplace operator on @xmath . This introduces a non-i.i.d
@xmath weight into the propagator, hence defining a non-trivial field
theory. In this context, tensor invariance provides a notion of
locality, well-adapted to a renormalizability analysis. The field theory
of [ tensor_4d ] is the first renormalizable instance in a large class
of GFTs based on bubble interactions, known as Tensorial Group Field
Theories (TGFTs). They have been generalized to various groups and
propagators [ josephsamary , joseph_etera , u1 , fabien_dine , su2 ,
joseph_d2 ] , slowly bridging the gap with more involved 4d quantum
gravity models. It is in our view a very important line of research to
pursue, to which a large part of this thesis is dedicated.

## Chapter 4 Large N expansion in topological Group Field Theories

In this chapter, we present results about the large @xmath expansion of
topological GFTs, initially obtained in [ vertex ] and [ edge ] . We
first focus on the Boulatov model, and then generalize to its
four-dimensional counter-part, the Ooguri model, which can be considered
the backbone of any of the current quantum gravity models. Our main
purpose will be to illustrate how the geometric data encoded in the
group or algebra variables of the fields can be exploited to understand
the scalings of the amplitudes with respect to the large @xmath
parameter. We will in particular detail how both of these models can be
reformulated in variables adapted to the symmetry uncovered in [ diffeos
] . While we think these formulations can be useful in various
situations, we will only present direct applications to the large @xmath
expansion. The two main results in this respect will be: scaling bounds
in terms of the bubbles of the Feynman diagrams, which prove that
topological singularities do not contribute to the first few orders of
the large @xmath expansion; scaling bounds in terms of the jackets which
slightly generalize the jacket bounds of [ RazvanN , RazvanVincentN ] ,
and thereby provide an independent way of proving the existence of the
@xmath expansion of these models.

### 4.1 Colored Boulatov model

#### 4.1.1 Vertex variables

##### Colored Boulatov model and shift symmetry

We begin with a complete definition of the colored Boulatov model, and
the construction of its vertex representation, as introduced in [
diffeos ] and further developed in [ vertex ] . For clarity of the
presentation, we will restrict again to functions on @xmath , identified
as functions @xmath on @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath . This
will allow us to use the group Fourier transform of [ majidfreidel ] ,
which is bijective in the case of @xmath , but not in the case of @xmath
. Note however that we could work with the full @xmath group, at the
price of using the generalized Fourier transform introduced in [ karim ]
. As this would introduce heavy notations without changing any of the
scaling bounds we can deduce from the vertex formulation, we refrain
from doing so and work within the simplified framework. Recall that the
group Fourier transform maps functions @xmath to functions @xmath
defined on the Lie algebra @xmath . The @xmath -product endows this
space of Lie algebra functions with a non-commutative structure,
reflecting the group structure of @xmath . It is indeed the Fourier dual
of the convolution of functions in @xmath , in the sense that:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

This implies in particular that an integral of the point-wise product of
two functions on the group manifold is equal to the integral over @xmath
of the @xmath -product of their Fourier transforms:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is convenient at this stage to work ’on-shell’, i.e. in a space of
fields verifying the Gauss constraint. We therefore introduce four
complex fields @xmath , labeled by a color index @xmath , verifying the
gauge invariance condition:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

as well as the @xmath invariance. The colored Boulatov model [ cboulatov
] can then be defined by the action:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.6)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

and the partition function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the (formal) Lebesgue measure on the space of gauge
invariant fields. Alternatively, one can work with the Fourier
transformed fields @xmath , and a non-commutative path integral weighted
by an action with the same structure as ( 4.4 ), except that the @xmath
-product is used in place of the pointwise product. The geometrical
interpretation of the fields and of the interactions is recalled in
Figure 4.1 . By convention, we will refer to the interaction between
@xmath fields (resp. @xmath fields) as the clockwise (resp.
anti-clockwise) interaction, this nomenclature referring to the
graphical representation we adopt to distinguish these two interactions.

In [ diffeos ] , this model was shown to respect (quantum) symmetries,
given by actions of the Drinfel’d double @xmath on the (’on-shell’)
fields. We will focus on the translational part of these actions,
interpreted as (discrete) diffeomorphisms [ laurentdiffeo ,
biancadiffeos , biancabenny ] . They have four generators @xmath , each
@xmath acting non-trivially on fields of color @xmath . For instance,
@xmath acts on @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

This can be interpreted as translations of the edges @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively by @xmath and @xmath , with a deformation given by the
@xmath -product. This is clearer in metric variables, where the previous
equation can be (schematically) written as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

As a result, the action of @xmath on the field of color @xmath can
geometrically be interpreted as a deformed translation of one of its
vertices, as represented in Figure 4.2 . Furthermore, we can assign
colors to the vertices of the tetrahedron defining the interaction term,
with the convention that @xmath should be the vertex opposed to the
triangle of color @xmath (as introduced in the previous chapter). This
induces a color label for the vertices of the different triangles. In
this picture, the action of @xmath on @xmath corresponds to a
translation of the vertex of color @xmath in the triangle of color
@xmath .

This geometrical interpretation generalizes to any generator and any
field: @xmath translates the vertex of color @xmath in @xmath (if any)
by a quantity @xmath . With our conventions, the symmetries are
therefore given by the following equations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Note that the Hopf algebra deformations (i.e. the @xmath -products) are
defined such that the plane-waves generating the translations are always
of the form @xmath . This feature has also a geometrical meaning: it
guarantees that the transformed fields stay invariant under diagonal
left action of @xmath , that is the triangles remain closed after
translation of one of their vertices.

To be complete, we would need to specify how these translations act on
products of fields. This step, which depends on the @xmath co-product,
again amounts to a choice of @xmath -product orderings of the plane
waves resulting from the actions on individual fields. One result of [
diffeos ] is that it is possible to define them in such a way that the
action, and in particular its interaction term, are left invariant. We
postpone this task to the next section, where the use of vertex
variables will make the definitions more geometrically transparent.

The interpretation of these symmetries is very nice. As just mentioned,
they are interpreted as translations of the vertices of the
triangulation, which at the level of simplicial gravity are the discrete
counterparts of the diffeomorphisms [ biancadiffeos ] . At the discrete
gauge field theory level, that is in group space, they impose triviality
of the holonomy around a loop encircling a vertex of the boundary
triangulation (this is apparent in the group representation of the GFT
interaction vertex), which is the content of the diffeomorphism
constraints of 3d gravity. Finally, in the spin foam formulation they
generate the recurrence relations satisfied by @xmath -symbols [
BarrettCraneWdW , eterasimonevalentin ] , which again encode the
diffeomorphism invariance of the theory in algebraic language. We refer
to [ diffeos ] for a detailed discussion of these aspects.

##### Vertex Lie algebra variables

Following the interpretation of the symmetries as vertex translations,
it is tempting to change variables so that the new fields directly
depend on the generators of these translations. The idea is simply to
write each edge Lie algebra variable as a difference between the
positions of its two endpoints (with respect to some arbitrary reference
point). Each triangle is now to be described by the three positions of
its vertices, as represented in Figure 4.3 . However, due to the
non-commutative nature of this symmetry, one would actually like to
define a twisted version of this change of variables, schematically:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath ’s stand for implicit internal @xmath -products. To
this effect one can introduce the map @xmath , which to any
left-invariant field @xmath , associates a function of three @xmath
elements, defined as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The variable @xmath is interpreted as a position variable for the vertex
shared by the edges @xmath and @xmath . The intrinsic geometry of a
triangle in @xmath is fully characterized, up to rotations, by
specifying three edge vectors constrained to close. If we are given the
three positions of its vertices instead, there is a redundancy: a
simultaneous translation of all the vertices simply corresponds to a
change of the origin of the coordinates in @xmath and does not affect
the geometry. This redundancy should also manifests itself in the
properties of the function @xmath . However, because the translation
symmetry is encoded in a quantum group acting on products of
representations, in order to define it properly we need to specify an
ordering of the arguments of the fields. We therefore interpret @xmath
as a tensor product of representations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can then introduce the global translation operator @xmath , defined
on tensor products of plane-waves by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.13)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We immediately verify that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore @xmath maps the space of left-invariant functions in @xmath to
a set of functions of three @xmath elements invariant under @xmath . One
can moreover prove it to be injective, and hence bijective between
@xmath and its image. We will not detail this point here, but we will do
it for the slightly more involved Ooguri model, in Proposition 4 . This
property ensures that the theory can fully be formulated with vertex
variables, provided by the new fields:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The key point of this transformation lies in the following: the initial
gauge invariance condition, that is diagonal left-translation invariance
in group space, is traded for a global (twisted) translation invariance
in Lie algebra vertex variables.

As already proven in [ diffeos ] , the original Boulatov action can then
be re-written in terms of the new fields @xmath . With the conventions
of this thesis, we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We notice that in all the integrals we have one free variable which can
be fixed to any value without changing the value of the action; this
amounts to a choice of origin from which measuring the position of the
vertices. This is also reflected in the four translation symmetries not
being independent, one of them being automatically verified when the
others are imposed; in other words, the model knows about the intrinsic
geometry of the triangles and of the tetrahedra they form, and correctly
does not depend on their embedding in @xmath .

We remark also that, in the interaction, each vertex variable appears in
three different fields, so that we have a @xmath -product of three terms
for each @xmath . The extra signs encode orderings of the @xmath
-products, which can again be interpreted as defining the orientations
of the triangles. Consider for example the triangle of color @xmath .
From Figure 4.2 , its orientation is given by the cyclic ordering @xmath
of its edge variables, which induces a natural cyclic ordering of its
vertices: @xmath (notice that by convention, we actually choose the
reverse ordering). This induces in turn an ordering of the triangles
attached to the vertex @xmath : @xmath (see again the left part of
Figure 4.2 ). This is the (cyclic) order in which, in the clockwise
interaction term, the @xmath -product of fields having @xmath in their
arguments (that is @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ) has to be computed. In
the anticlockwise interaction term, this has to be reversed. That is why
the variable @xmath appears with a positive sign in the first
interaction term, and a minus sign in the second. This discussion
generalizes to any color, so that in the end signs in front of variables
@xmath are fully determined by the ordering of variables in the field
@xmath of the same color.

##### Shift symmetry in vertex variables

Now we have a vertex representation of the classical theory, it is
interesting to discuss further the translation symmetries. As expected,
we have simpler formulas in this representation.

Let us first discuss the action of translations on individual fields.
The transformations read:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Thus each field @xmath can be interpreted as living in the
representation space of (the translation part of) three copies of the
deformed 3d Poincaré group @xmath . This makes the interpretation of
these transformations as vertex translations more explicit, and
clarifies the very definition of the GFT.

The deformation of the translations manifests itself when acting on
products of fields. This is a question we left open in the previous
sections, exactly because it is more easily understood in the vertex
formulation. To define the action of the translations on a product of
fields, we need to interpret it as a tensor product. There is no
canonical choice: for example the integrand @xmath in the interaction
term ( 4.1.1 ) can be interpreted as the evaluation of @xmath , but also
of @xmath , and generally of any permutation of the representation
spaces. The Hopf algebra deformation of the translations required to
make the interaction invariant will then depend on this additional
convention. For definiteness let us interpret the term @xmath as the
evaluation of @xmath . The Hopf algebra structure of the symmetries then
has to be consistent with orderings of @xmath -products (i.e. signs) in
equation ( 4.1.1 ). This requires to distinguish colors @xmath from
@xmath , since the corresponding variables have opposite signs in (
4.1.1 ). All this suggests the following definition of translations, on
products of fields, which we give in group variables. If @xmath are
living in the representation space of @xmath , then:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.18)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

With this definition, and the tensor product interpretation of the
interaction term we gave, the action is indeed invariant under
translations. For instance, in metric variables, the integrand of the
interaction part of the action is simply translated with respect to its
variable of color @xmath under the transformation @xmath . As a result,
and because it is defined by integrals over the whole space @xmath , the
invariance follows.

##### Vertex group variables

As far as the quantum theory is concerned, and in particular for
practical calculations, it is convenient to Fourier transform back the
vertex formulation to group space. The dual group variables are @xmath ,
Fourier duals of the @xmath . Due to the translation invariance of the
Lie algebra fields, in group space the configuration fields are
distributions @xmath of the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are regular functions. It is interesting at this point to
notice the double duality between algebra/group and edge/vertex
variables: one has to impose closure constraints in algebra edge
variables and group vertex variables; the same translate into
translation invariance in group edge variables and algebra vertex
variables. The precise forms of these different constraints are
summarized in Table 4.1 .

In terms of the newly defined fields, the action takes the form:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with the notation convention @xmath , and a vertex function defined by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.22)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The notations in the vertex function are as follows: upper indices label
triangles or equivalently fields, and lower indices are associated to
vertices, with the convention that a color @xmath labels the vertex
opposite to the triangle of the same color @xmath (see Figure (a)a ).

Notice the appearance of a kernel of the kinetic term (i.e. the
distributional part of the fields @xmath ). This is the Fourier dual of
the translation invariance of the fields we described in the Lie algebra
representation. It is interpreted as a consistency constraint on the
three group elements associated to a quantized triangle: their ordered
product needs by construction to be trivial.

The vertex function consists (first line) in the same distributional
factors of the fields @xmath , imposing the mentioned consistency
conditions, while the second lines are flatness conditions associated to
paths around the vertices of the tetrahedra, hence guaranteeing flatness
of the connection in the boundary of the tetrahedron (see Figure 4.4 ).
Note that only three of these flatness constraints appear in the
interaction kernel, while a tetrahedron has four vertices. This is
obviously because only three of these flatness constraints are
independent. We can therefore choose any triplet of these four
constraints ¹ ¹ 1 The fourth one, associated to the vertex of color 1
being simply @xmath . to express the same distribution, implementing all
four constraints.

##### Quantum amplitudes

Now that we have well-understood the constraints that need to be imposed
in vertex variables, we can provide a rigorous definition for the
partition function @xmath in these variables. We resort to a non
degenerate Gaussian measure @xmath over the space of regular fields
@xmath , which combines the translation invariance constraint with the
ill-defined Lebesgue measure into a well-defined Gaussian covariance:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Only the exponential of the interaction part of the action remains to be
integrated, to give a suitable definition of @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

A couple of remarks are in order. First, only the flatness part of the
kernel of the interaction has been used in the definition of @xmath .
This is because the distributional nature of the configuration fields
@xmath has already been taken care of in the measure. Were we to
integrate @xmath and not @xmath , we would pick up products of equal
distributions in the amplitudes, hence further divergences. Second, at
this formal level, which of the four flatness constraints we use to
define @xmath does not matter (see the resulting graphical
representation in Figure 4.5 ). In the regularized theory, to which we
turn in the next subsection, this is not the case, and we expect
different choices to give amplitudes with the same scaling behavior but
differing by factors of order @xmath (in the cut-off). That is why,
contrary to the regularization chosen in the paper [ vertex ] , we will
use the symmetric regularization in the color indices of [ edge ] .
Finally, it is important to stress that the vertex formulation of the
path-integral we just introduced is strictly equivalent to the usual
Boulatov model, written in terms of edge variables. At the level of
gauge invariant fields, our construction amounts to a simple change of
variables in terms of which the fields are expressed. Therefore the
Jacobian of the transformation evaluates to one.

Formally, we can expand the partition function as a power series in
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the amplitudes @xmath are labeled by closed colored graphs. White
nodes are associated to anticlockwise vertices, and black nodes to
clockwise ones. They contribute with an integrand respectively equal to
@xmath or @xmath times the kernel ( 4.22 ). Each line of color @xmath is
associated to a covariance ( 4.23 ), with @xmath . An example of the
correspondence between colored and stranded representations is provided
in Figure 4.6 , for the elementary melon graph. Also illustrated in this
figure is the fact that the vertex variables make the @xmath -bubbles
explicit, as opposed to the faces in the edge variables. Indeed, in the
stranded representation, let us consider a connected component of
strands of color @xmath . It is a graph of a non-commutative @xmath
scalar field theory on a Lie algebra space-time @xmath , with momentum
space @xmath , the interaction being essentially momentum conservation
at each node. From the simplicial perspective, it is dual to the bubble
around a vertex of color @xmath , and encodes its topological structure.
Precisely, each line of this @xmath -graph can be assigned an additional
individual color: that of the colored @xmath -graph line it is part of.
Thus we really have a colored @xmath -graph, which is therefore dual to
a closed and orientable triangulated surface [ Vince_2d , lrd , diffeos
] : the bubble. The overall amplitude associated to a 4-graph is
therefore given by @xmath graphs encoding the structure of the bubbles,
glued to one another through propagators (associated to triangles).

As far as computations are concerned, the main advantage of the vertex
formulation, is that most of the non-trivial constraints encoded in the
propagators can be integrated out straight away. This is because one of
the four @xmath -functions associated to stranded nodes is missing in
each interaction kernel. A consistent choice throughout a given graph
@xmath therefore allows to associate all the strands of a given color,
say @xmath , to integration variables which appear in no more than one
propagator each. The corresponding @xmath -functions can therefore be
integrated to @xmath , and one is left with reduced amplitudes built out
of interaction vertices of the type shown in Figure (b)b . One achieves
in this case a factorization of the integrands of the amplitudes in
terms of color- @xmath bubble contributions, initially proven in [
vertex ] . This is of course possible with any color @xmath , and yields
the general formula:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the order of @xmath , @xmath is its set of bubbles of
color @xmath , @xmath the set of vertices in a bubble @xmath , @xmath
the set of triangles in a bubble @xmath that share one of its vertices
@xmath , and finally @xmath is the set of triangles of color @xmath in
the dual complex. The geometrical interpretation of this expression is
very natural: the bubble terms in the first parenthesis encode flatness
around each of the vertices of the triangulated surface, and the terms
in the second parenthesis encode the consistency conditions in triangles
of color @xmath . One thus obtains an effective description of the model
in terms of triangulated 3-cells whose boundaries have color @xmath ,
the bubbles. In Figure 4.7 , we illustrate this result by showing a
portion of a bubble @xmath , dual to a vertex @xmath . The effective
interaction term associated to @xmath imposes a trivial holonomy around
the vertex @xmath .

In the regulated theory, this factorization allows to derive nice bounds
on the amplitudes: on the one hand, one can understand the effect of
singularities at vertices of color @xmath ; on the other hand, one can
derive jacket bounds, which give information about the global topology
of the 4-colored graph, and of its dual simplicial complex.

#### 4.1.2 Regularization and general scaling bounds

Because the amplitudes of the Boulatov model are generically divergent,
we need to regularize it. We adopt here the regularization scheme of [
edge ] , which is well-adapted to the computation of scaling bounds in
vertex variables. This differs from the regularization used in [ vertex
] in two respects: a) the cut-off is introduced at the level of the
potential @xmath ; b) instead of a sharp cut-off in the harmonic
expansion of the @xmath -functions, we will use heat kernels. The first
point is in contrast with what has been and will be again advocated for
renormalization, where keeping a fixed notion of locality in the
interaction is very profitable. In the present situation, locality does
not play any role, and on the contrary it is at the level of the
covariances that the correspondence between edge and vertex variables
has been established. It seems therefore preferable to keep the full
Gaussian measures and regularize the interactions, this way the relation
between scaling bounds in the two formulations is more transparent. Let
us elaborate a bit on this second point, and introduce the heat kernel.
The @xmath -function on @xmath expands as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand, the heat kernel at time @xmath on @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the characters of @xmath . We see that @xmath converges
to the @xmath -distribution when @xmath , and therefore provides us with
a regularization of the @xmath -function. The three properties of this
regularization we will use in this and later chapters are the following.
First, @xmath is a positive function, which will be very convenient for
bounding amplitudes. Second, these functions behave nicely with respect
to the convolution product:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, when @xmath , we have the following asymptotic formula ² ² 2
This formula holds on any compact excluding @xmath , a simple derivation
can be found in the Appendix A.1 . :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Riemannian distance between @xmath and the identity,
and @xmath . In particular we will use the fact that @xmath at small
@xmath . @xmath is the parameter with respect to which the @xmath
expansion will be constructed.

We define the regularized theory by the following partition function:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.32)
     @xmath   @xmath                     (4.33)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Before moving on to the analysis of the regularized amplitudes, let us
discuss briefly the role of the regularization chosen. Note, in fact,
that we have chosen a symmetric regularization in the colors, hence the
re-introduction of the flatness constraint around the vertex of color
@xmath , together with the appropriate rescaling. The main advantage of
such a symmetric regularization is that discussing bounds from different
bubble factorizations will be made easier, as will be detailed shortly.

On the one hand, this regularization is slightly different from the
natural scheme one would use in edge variables (see for instance [
ValentinJoseph ] , which also largely motivated the heat kernel
regularization used in [ edge ] ). This is because it does not
correspond to a regularization of the @xmath -functions imposing
flatness of the wedges dual to edges in the GFT interaction vertex (thus
encoding the piece-wise flatness of the simplicial complexes generated
in the GFT expansion). On the other hand, regularizations that make
bubble factorizations explicit after transformation to vertex variables
are very natural also when these last ones are used. For example, we
could use a non-symmetric regularization of the interaction

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

which allows to write the amplitudes in a factorized form similar to (
4.27 ), with @xmath . This corresponds exactly, in edge variables, to
regularizing only the @xmath -functions associated to edges which do not
contain the vertex of color @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.35)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We see, then, that equation ( 4.32 ) interpolates between the four
possible regularizations of this type.

The main fact that makes this form of the regularized amplitude ( 4.32 )
convenient for our purposes is that, using the positivity of the heat
kernel, one can bound any of the four flatness constraints by @xmath ,
and obtain bounds on amplitudes which have the same expression as with a
regularization of the non-symmetric type ( 4.34 ), but maintaining the
symmetry among colors manifest up to this last step.

One can then show that, for any graph @xmath and any choice of color
@xmath , the regularized amplitude @xmath admits the following bound:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the number of triangles in a bubble @xmath that
contain the vertex @xmath .

Let us now see how this formula allows to derive interesting scaling
bounds. The general idea is that we would like to remove the remaining
propagator constraints, which are in a sense non-local quantities (from
the point of view of the bubbles), and prevent us from trivially
integrating the amplitudes. A simple way of doing it is to pick up a
second color label @xmath , and bound all the flatness constraints
associated to vertices of color @xmath by their value at the identity.
In the resulting bound, all the propagator constraints will then have an
independent variable of color @xmath , allowing us to trivially
integrate them. We are finally left with two @xmath graphs,
corresponding to the strands in the two remaining colors @xmath and
@xmath . Now, each connected component of such a graph is dual to a
vertex (of the same color) of the simplicial complex. Therefore,
integrating a tree in each of these components, and bounding the final
expression by its value at the identity, we arrive at:

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.37)
  -- -- -- --------

where for any @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

is equal to the number of tetrahedra in the simplicial complex that
contain @xmath . Finally, remarking that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can rewrite this bounds using powers of heat kernels with the same
parameter, for instance @xmath . This allows to show that for any
constant @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

we asymptotically have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In addition to the bound ( 4.1.2 ), we will also need the following
combinatorial lemma from [ vertex ] :

###### Lemma 1.

Let @xmath be a connected vacuum graph. Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

Choose two colors @xmath . From @xmath we construct a connectivity graph
@xmath , whose vertices are the bubbles of color @xmath and @xmath .
Then for any @xmath and @xmath we draw a line between them if and only
if @xmath has a vertex dual to @xmath in its triangulation. We call
@xmath the number of lines of @xmath , and @xmath its number of
vertices. Now remark that the fact that @xmath is connected implies that
@xmath is also connected. In fact, the bubbles of color @xmath are all
connected in @xmath by lines of color @xmath . But these lines are
themselves part of bubbles of color @xmath , which means that two
bubbles of color @xmath are connected if and only if their dual vertices
appear in a same bubble of color @xmath , that is if and only if they
are connected to a same element in the graph @xmath . So @xmath is
connected. A maximal tree in this graph has @xmath lines, which implies
the simple inequality: @xmath . To conclude, first notice that by
construction @xmath is equal to @xmath . Still by construction, for any
@xmath , @xmath has to be greater than the number of lines ending on
@xmath in @xmath . Therefore:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

∎

In the following paragraphs, two kinds of bounds on the divergence
degree @xmath of a connected vacuum graph @xmath will be provided. The
notion of divergence degree we adopt is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

which measures the divergence behavior of a graph @xmath in units of
@xmath .

#### 4.1.3 Topological singularities

##### Bubble bounds

Let us first derive the bubble bounds, which allow to analyze the
behavior of topologically singular configurations. These were first
derive in [ vertex ] , but we follow here the more direct proof of [
edge ] . Starting from ( 4.1.2 ), the derivation is straightforward. As
a first step, we simply apply Lemma 1 with @xmath and @xmath . This
gives:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.45)
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We then use the definition of the genus of a bubble @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the combinatorial relation between the number of edges and faces

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

to write:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to obtain a uniform bound in the number of interaction vertices
(dual tetrahedra), one must rescale the GFT coupling constant with
appropriate powers of @xmath , namely:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

We summarize this result in the following proposition:

###### Proposition 2.

Using the rescaling ( 4.51 ), the divergence degree @xmath of any
connected vacuum graph @xmath of the colored Boulatov model verifies,
for any color @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

As an immediate corollary of the previous proposition, one can give a
bound in terms of the number of pointlike singularities of a given
color:

###### Corollary 1.

With the rescaling of the coupling constant ( 4.51 ), the divergence
degree @xmath of any connected vacuum graph @xmath verifies, for any
color @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number of singular vertices of color @xmath .

In summary: in the perturbative expansion of the Boulatov GFT model,
singular simplicial complexes are generically suppressed, uniformly in
the number of tetrahedra. Provided that these bounds are saturated, we
have just established the existence of a @xmath expansion in which the
leading order graphs represent regular manifolds. We therefore now turn
to the question of the optimality of the bubble bounds.

##### Optimality of the bounds

In order to address this question, we need to be able to compute the
exact power-counting of a sufficiently rich set of graphs. In this
respect, we propose to first design elementary pieces of graphs which
have one unique bubble of color @xmath , and a certain number of
external legs. We will then be able to build connected vacuum graphs
with any kinds of bubbles out of these elementary graphs. Of course we
want to keep the combinatorics of these elementary graphs rather simple,
to be able to do exact calculations.

It is then natural to start from minimal @xmath -graphs representing
@xmath -dimensional orientable surfaces of a given topology. They are