In the thesis, we consider discrete dynamical systems generated by local
diffeomorphisms in a neighborhood of an isolated fixed point. Such
discrete dynamical systems associate to each point its orbit . We
investigate to what extent we can recognize a diffeomorphism and read
its intrinsic properties from fractal properties of one of its orbits .
By fractal properties of a set, we mean its box dimension and Minkowski
content . The definitions of the box dimension and the Minkowski content
of a set are closely related to the notion of @xmath -neighborhoods of
the set. More precisely, one considers the asymptotic behavior of the
Lebesgue measure of the @xmath -neighborhoods, as @xmath goes to zero.
Thus, in a broader sense, by fractal property of a set we mean the
measure of the @xmath -neighborhood of the set, as a function of small
parameter @xmath . When necessary, in the thesis we introduce natural
generalizations of fractal properties, which are better adapted to our
problems. The relevance of this method lies in the fact that fractal
properties of one orbit can be computed numerically.

Local diffeomorphisms appear naturally in many problems in dynamical
systems. For example, they appear in planar polynomial systems as the
first return maps or Poincaré maps of spiral trajectories, defined on
transversals to monodromic limit periodic sets (singular elliptic
points, periodic orbits and hyperbolic polycycles). With appropriate
parametrizations of the transversal, Poincaré maps are local
diffeomorphisms on @xmath , except possibly at zero, having zero as an
isolated fixed point. Recognizing the multiplicity of zero as a fixed
point of the first return map is important for determining an upper
bound on the number of limit cycles that are born from limit periodic
sets in unfoldings. This number of limit cycles is called the cyclicity
of the limit periodic set. The problem is closely related to the @xmath
Hilbert problem .

In the first part of this thesis, we show that there exists a bijective
correspondence between the multiplicity of zero as a fixed point of a
diffeomorphism @xmath and the appropriate generalization of the box
dimension of its orbit, which we call the critical Minkowski order .

Another occurrence of diffeomorphisms is when considering the holonomy
maps in @xmath . In particular, we consider germs of complex saddle
vector fields in @xmath . Their holonomy maps on cross-sections
transversal to the saddle are germs of diffeomorphisms @xmath , with
isolated fixed point at the origin. It is known that the formal and the
analytic normal form of such fields can be deduced from the formal and
the analytic classes of their holonomy maps.

In the second part of the thesis, we therefore study germs of
diffeomorphisms @xmath , from the viewpoint of fractal geometry. We
restrict ourselves to germs whose linear part is a contraction, a
dilatation (the so-called hyperbolic fixed point cases ) or a rational
rotation (the so-called parabolic fixed point cases ). The hyperbolic
cases are easy to treat and most of the time we deal with the
non-hyperbolic case of rational rotations, that is, with parabolic germs
. In this work we omit the very complicated case when the linear part is
an irrational rotation.

We give the complete formal classification result: there exists a
bijective correspondence between the formal invariants of a germ of a
diffeomorphism and the fractal properties of any of its orbits near the
origin. We use generalizations of fractal properties that we call
directed fractal properties .

On the other hand, we have not solved the analytic classification
problem for parabolic germs, using fractal properties of orbits. We
state negative results in this direction and problems that are
encountered. For germs inside the simplest formal class, we investigate
analytic properties of @xmath -neighborhoods of orbits and compare them
with the well-known results about analytic classification.

Keywords : @xmath -neighborhoods, box dimension, Minkowski content,
fixed points, germs of diffeomorphisms, multiplicity, Poincaré map,
cyclicity, parabolic germs, complex saddle vector fields, holonomy maps,
saddle loop, formal classification, analytic classification, Abel
equation, Stokes phenomenon
