##### Acknowledgements. I cannot imagine what my past five years at
Princeton would be like without so many helps I received along the way.
I would like to first thank my advisor, Prof. Duncan Haldane, who is
always there to discuss about physics with much patience and enthusiasm.
I consider myself very fortunate to have the opportunity to learn many
aspects of condensed matter physics from one of the defining scholars in
the field. Prof. Haldane exemplifies how physical intuition and
creativity should be combined with mathematical rigor, and he will
always remind me of the level of dedication it takes to venture into the
world of physics. Most importantly, Prof. Haldane initiated me into the
field of fractional quantum Hall effect, a fascinating subject with
which I have had a love-hate relationship for the past few years, which
will probably last for many years to come. I would also like to thank my
pre-thesis advisor, Prof. Shivaji Sondhi. Not only was his guidance and
advice (including a very useful reading list for condensed matter
physics) invaluable at the early stage of my life in Princeton, he also
helped me in many ways throughout my graduate career, letting me tag
along with his group discussions, being on the committee of my
pre-thesis presentations, and writing recommendation letters for my
summer school applications, just to name a few. I am also very thankful
for his careful reading of my final thesis and many constructive
feedbacks. Princeton University offers me a unique intellectual
environment where I can meet a lot of talented and passionate
physicists. I would like to especially thank Prof. Andrei Bernevig for
his guidance and comments on my works about the collective modes in
FQHE. His earlier works on entanglement spectrum and FQHE model
wavefunctions have always been inspirations for me; I am very glad to
see the field of the topological insulators having its first pedagogical
textbook, evolving from Andrei’s series of lectures at Princeton I was
fortunate to have the opportunity to attend. I am also fortunate to work
with Hu Zi-xiang and Zlatko Papic, two talented postdocs who know
everything about the numerics of the quantum Hall systems. I thank
Zi-xiang for teaching me the physics of FQHE on the disk, and for
tolerating many of my stupid questions on coding while we were working
together. I thank Zlatko Papic for teaching me the phase transition of
the FQHE in higher Landau levels, and how to make sense out of seemingly
messy numerical data. The manuscripts we write always read better after
his final touch, and I thank him for a very careful reading of my thesis
draft, when it was still full of typos and missing articles. I am also
grateful for many fellow graduate students around me, who made my life
at Princeton stimulating both academically and socially. During my early
days here I learnt a lot of physics from discussions with Sid
Parameswaran and Chris Laumann. It was also a pleasant experience to
learn DMRG from PCTS postdoc Bryan Clark. Discussions with Yeje Park in
between long conversations with our common advisor often times made my
thoughts and understandings much clearer. I also enjoyed lively
conversations with my officemates Anushya Chandran and Wu Yang-le, and
Arijeet Pal, who in addition to being a fellow explorer in physics, was
also responsible for a lot of my improvements on the tennis court. I
thank Sonika Johri, who helped me plot the FQH spectrum on the cylinder
in this thesis. I am also thankful for my fellow students on pu2012
mailing list, and especially my friend Ming, who made a lot of my
weekends and holidays memorable moments of my graduate life. Finally, I
would like to thank Agency for Science, Technology and Research in
Singapore for the scholarship over the past five years, and Prof. Jason
Petta for letting me work in his lab for my experimental project. I also
thank Prof. Herman Verlinde and Prof. Nai Phuan Ong for being on the
committee of my thesis defense. Needless to say I owe everything to my
parents. The pursuit of PhD has been a uniquely rewarding and humbling
experience, I am very thankful to have it as an episode of my life.
\dedication To my parents. \makefrontmatter

## Chapter 1 Introduction

The quantum Hall effect (QHE) [ 1 ] is one of the great discoveries in
the history of condensed matter physics. It leads to many exciting
physical concepts in @xmath dimensional spacetime, including fractional
[ 7 ] and non-Abelian statistics [ 20 ] , classification of matter with
topological phases [ 8 ] , bulk-edge correspondence [ 9 , 12 ] and the
framework of topological quantum computing [ 13 ] , just to name a few.
Quantum Hall systems are experimentally realized by confining an
electron gas to a two-dimensional manifold with a strong perpendicular
magnetic field which breaks time reversal symmetry (see Fig.( 1.1 )).
Experimental discovery of the integer quantum Hall effect (IQHE) dates
back to 1980, when Klaus von Klitzing [ 2 ] found the quantization of
the Hall conductivity at integer multiples of @xmath , where @xmath is
the elementary charge and @xmath is the Planck’s constant. The formation
of plateaus and the vanishing of dissipative longitudinal resistivity
are hallmarks of the quantum Hall effect, suggesting a gapped phase with
non-trivial attributes very robust against disorder. The integer
coefficients multiplying @xmath at these plateaus are accurate up to
@xmath . These integers are equal to the ratio of the number of
electrons to the number of flux quanta @xmath at the special
incompressible points (which are typically in the middle of the
plateau). We call this ratio the filling factor @xmath . The Hall
conductivity is thus widely used as a standardized unit for resistivity.

The fractional quantum Hall effect (FQHE) was discovered in 1982 by
Tsui, Stormer and Gossard [ 3 ] , where the plateau in the Hall
conductivity was found in the lowest Landau level (LLL) at fractional
filling factors (notably at @xmath ). Unlike the IQHE, which can be
primarily explained by single particle physics, the FQHE is a result of
strong interactions between electrons within a single Landau level, in
which the single particle kinetic energy is a trivial constant.
Theoretical understandings of the FQHE was initiated by R. Laughlin [ 15
] ; in his seminal paper the wavefunctions for the ground state and
charged excitations were proposed for filling factors @xmath , where
@xmath is an odd integer for fermions. Soon after that Haldane [ 16 ]
and later Trugman and Kivelson [ 17 ] constructed the model Hamiltonians
in the form of pseudopotentials where Laughlin-like model wavefunctions
are exact zero energy states gapped from the rest of the energy
spectrum. These elegant model Hamiltonians are intuitively appealing,
and are believed to be adiabatically connected to the realistic physical
interactions in the thermodynamic limit. Though general arguments of
gauge invariance and recognition of the non-trivial band topology were
first inspired by IQHE [ 18 ] , the idea that topological phases can
exist beyond Landau’s paradigm of spontaneous symmetry breaking became
widespread after people start to understand the FQHE. Till this day, the
FQHE is one of the very few experimental examples (and probably the only
reasonably well-understood theoretical model) where strongly correlated
topological phases are realized without the protection of any symmetry
(also see ref. [ 31 ] for a relatively modern understanding of the
superconducting phases).

A more comprehensive review of the quantum Hall effect can be found in
the Les Houches lecture notes prepared by Steve Girvin [ 4 ] . In this
chapter I will give a brief overview of some of the important aspects of
the QHE. A formal approach with the microscopic model will be presented.
Though the effect of disorder is crucial in the experimental realization
of the QHE, in this thesis the disorder is ignored unless otherwise
stated.

### 1.1 Aspects of Quantum Hall Effects

Most features of the integer quantum Hall effect (IQHE) can be
understood in the framework of single particle physics. The energy
levels of a two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) subject to a
perpendicular magnetic field form Landau levels (LL), each with
macroscopic degeneracy @xmath , which is proportional to the system
size. Here @xmath is the strength of the magnetic field, @xmath is the
area of the 2DEG and @xmath is the flux quantum; thus @xmath is the
number of flux quanta piercing through the Hall surface. The magnetic
length is given by @xmath , where we set @xmath , and @xmath is the
charge of the particle. For Galilean invariant systems the energy
spacing of LLs is given by the characteristic cyclotron frequency @xmath
, where @xmath is the effective mass of the particle and @xmath is the
speed of light. It is easy to see that the ground state of completely
filled LLs are gapped. On the other hand the partially filled LLs are
compressible due to the macroscopic degeneracy. For a translationally
invariant system the Hall conductivity is always equal to @xmath , where
the filling factor @xmath can be any real number. In this ideal
situation experimental measurement of the Hall conductivity cannot
distinguish between compressible and incompressible phases.

In real samples, the presense of disorder, however weak it is, is
expected to localize the state and suppress the Hall conductivity [ 5 ,
6 ] . The surprising fact is at integer filling factor when the system
is incompressible, the Hall conductivity is unaffected by disorder. On
the contrary, any small deviation from these integer filling factors
creates particle or hole charge carriers that are localized by disorder,
forming the plateau around these integer filling factors [ 6 ] . The
presense of disorder is not necessary for the physics of the QHE, but is
essential to experimentally expose these special filling factors, where
the ground state is gapped and dissipationless.

It is by now understood that any quantity that is robust against small
perturbation is likely to have a topological origin. The famous gedanken
experiment by Laughlin [ 18 ] shows that if the 2-D Hall manifold has a
cylinder geometry, one can thread magnetic fluxes through the cylinder
along the longitudinal axis. By gauge invariance the system should be
the same before and after adiabatic threading of a single flux quantum.
One can follow the spectral flow of the single particle orbitals during
this adiabatic process. At the end of the process the spectrum returns
back to the intial configuration, implying an integer number of
particles pumped from one edge to the other, leading to the integer Hall
conductivity. Even in the presense of disorder that affects the details
of the spectral flow, the initial and final configuration has to be
identical by gauge invariance. By the argument that one cannot make
small changes to quantities that are integers, the integer Hall
conductivity has to be robust against disorder.

The topological nature of the QHE was further illustrated by the work of
TKNN [ 19 ] , and later substantiated by Niu et.al [ 21 ] , with the
Kubo formula developed by the linear response theory on a lattice. The
single particle wavefunctions on a lattice can be viewed as a section of
a @xmath fiber bundle, where the periodic momentum space is the base
space. It was shown for a fully occupied conduction band, the Hall
conductivity is the first Chern number of the @xmath fiber bundle over
the Brillioun zone. This was later generalized to Chern insulators first
introduced by Haldane [ 22 ] , whereby the filled valence band structure
has none zero Chern number even when the net magnetic field per unit
cell is zero. This observation has ignited a flurry of research in
symmetry protected topological insulators both in two and three
dimensions [ 23 ] .

In contrast to the IQHE, the fractional quantum Hall effect (FQHE) is
primarily due to strong interactions between electrons, where the single
particle dynamics is ignored in the limit of a strong magnetic field.
The incompressibility of the FQH fluid at certain fractional filling
factors results from intricate interplay between interactions and the
truncated Hilbert space defined by the filling factor. Theoretical
understanding of the FQHE was initiated by Laughlin’s many-body trial
wavefunctions [ 15 ] for the ground states of odd-denominated fractional
filling factors, followed by the model Hamiltonians [ 16 , 17 ] with a
gapped spectrum, such that Laughlin’s trial wavefunctions are exact
ground states.

An interesting fact about these trial wavefunctions is that as long as
rotational invariance is assumed, no variational parameters are
typically necessary to optimize these trial wavefunctions within the
lowest Landau level (LLL): they are intrinsically good model
wavefunctions. Following this line, the study of the FQHE via model
wavefunctions and model Hamiltonians has been a very fruitful endeavor.
At filling factors @xmath , where @xmath is odd, wavefunctions of ground
states and charged (quasielectrons and quasiholes) excitations can be
written down in nice analytic forms, and the model Hamiltonians are just
two-body intereactions with judiciously selected Haldane
pseudopotentials [ 16 ] . While at even @xmath the FQHE state is
generally forbidden because of the fermionic statistics of electrons, at
@xmath a pairing mechanism is introduced to explain the experimental
observation of the @xmath plateaux [ 27 ] , or @xmath state in the
@xmath Landau Level (1LL). The ground state can be written down
analytically as a Pfaffian [ 20 ] multiplying the Jastrow factor.
Charged excitations can also be written down following the similar
procedure of flux insertion introduced by Laughlin. The model
Hamiltonian is the three-body interaction that allows pairing of
electrons but penalizes the congregation of three electrons. This is
physically possible in higher LLs, where the effective two-body
interaction has nodes, allowing particles to stay close to each other.

It is thus natural to formally generalize to @xmath -body interactions
that allow clustering of @xmath electrons but penalizes congregation of
@xmath electrons. This leads to the Read-Rezayi (RR) series [ 30 ] of
the single component FQH states. The @xmath case of the RR series is the
Laughlin state, while the @xmath case is the MR state. The set of the
many-body wavefunctions from the FQHE are themselves quite fascinating
objects. Even with explicit analytic forms, they are quite complex. The
simplest case of the Laughlin wavefunctions has the following form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the holomorphic variables are used with @xmath , and @xmath is the
particle index. Though it has a compact analytic form, there is no
closed expression for its normalization constant as a function of the
number of particles. The Moore-Read ground state at half filling is a
bit more complicated [ 28 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Pfaffian is defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

for an @xmath antisymmetric matrix @xmath , and @xmath is the
permutation group on @xmath indices. In Eq.( 1.2 ), @xmath is even for
fermions, and @xmath at @xmath . To tackle these wavefunctions
analytically, there are efforts to reinterpret them in more revealing
ways. It was first noticed by Laughlin [ 15 ] that the norm of Eq.( 1.1
) describes a system of a two-dimensional one-component plasma (2DOCP)
with logarithmic Coulomb interactions and a neutralizing background. The
physical picture of 2DOCP, which is well studied in plasma physics,
lends insight on charged excitations in the FQHE, as well as possible
ground state phase transitions from a fluid state to a symmetry breaking
Wigner crystal state. It also allows effective use of Monte-Carlo
techniques in calculating wavefunction overlaps and correlation
functions [ 29 ] . In Chapter 4 and 5 a set of model wavefunctions for
the neutral collective excitations in the FQHE will be introduced both
from a numerical perspective [ 32 ] and an analytical perspective [ 38 ]
. The latter extends the way we understand the FQHE via the plasma
analogy to include the neutral bulk excitations. It seems the analogy
between the FQHE and the 2DOCP is not only limited to the Hilbert space,
but also includes the energy spectrum as well.

Almost parallel to the development of the Pfaffian wavefunctions, it was
realized that many trial wavefunctions in the FQHE can be written as
correlators in 2-D conformal field theory (CFT) [ 40 ] . On first sight,
one would be surprised to think that CFT, which describes quantum
critical systems with gapless excitations, would play a role in gapped
systems like the FQHE. On the other hand, the FQHE is gapless when an
edge is present. It was shown by Wen [ 9 ] that while the bulk of the
FQHE can be described by an effective Chern-Simons theory, the
requirement of the gauge invariance for a system with a boundary
predicts gapless neutral edge excitations that can be described by CFT.
From a more formal perspective, the connection between CFT and the
topological field theory (TFT) was previously established by Witten [ 41
] . A microscopic interpretation of the edge and bulk excitations of the
FQHE in the framework of @xmath algebra will be presented in Chapter 5,
where the analogy between edge excitations and CFT is made explicit.

The conformal block description of the FQHE wavefunctions has the
practical use of calculating the statistics of quasiparticle excitations
with much ease. In principle, the anyonic statistics of quasiparticles
in the Laughlin FQHE, and the non-abelian braiding statistics of those
in the MR states are entirely encoded within the explicit first
quantized wavefunctions. While it is relatively straightforward to show
the anyonic statistics of the quasiparticle excitations of the Laughlin
state [ 42 ] , the non-abelian statistics of the RR series with @xmath
is much harder to prove. It is only until recently a rigorous proof was
presented in [ 43 ] for the Moore-Read state at @xmath .

The plasma analogy and the CFT connections are very limited in
describing the dynamics of FQHE, since in both cases the Hamiltonians
are not explicitly involved. For many physical systems, the ground state
does contain information about the low-lying excitations in the spectrum
(e.g. the Goldstone modes of the symmetry-breaking ground state). It is
thus hopeful that the FQHE ground state will yield information about
some part of the excitation spectrum, even though there is no
symmetry-breaking for the quantum Hall fluid, and the bulk is gapped.
The entanglement spectrum of the bulk ground state has been found to
yield information on the gapless edge modes [ 12 ] , and the connection
to CFT plays a significant role here [ 48 ] . The bulk neutral
excitation is known to depend on the guiding center Hall viscosity and
the ground state structure factor at least in the long wavelength limit
[ 49 ] , and recently the relationship between the entire branch of the
neutral excitations and the ground state has been made much clearer with
an explicit set of analytic wavefunctions [ 38 ] .

The single component FQHE given by the RR series (including Laughlin and
MR states) cannot explain all the experimentally observed plateau at
fractional filling factors. Haldane and Halperin [ 52 , 53 ] introduced
a hierarchy picture where additional plateau can be explained as
incompressible QH states of the quasiholes/quasiparticles. Later on Jain
introduced the composite fermion picture whereby the “elementary
particles” in the FQHE are taken as electron-vortex composite, instead
of bare electrons [ 94 ] . These composite particles obey fermionic
statistics. It is conjectured that the FQHE can be mapped into the IQHE
of composite fermions forming its own “Landau levels” (also refered to
as the “ @xmath levels) in an effective magnetic field, leading to the
“Jain hierarchy” that is very successful in explaining most plateau
observed experimentally. The composite fermion picture is also very
useful in numerically generating model wavefunctions for these
hierarchical states, including both charged and neutral excitations.

The hierarchical states can be described as multi-component FQH states,
where different types of Hall fluids coexist. This is the place where
TFT becomes very efficient in characterizing various types of FQH
states. For the FQHE descended from the Abelian Laughlin states, both
single component and multicomponent Abelian states can be expressed in a
unified way by the K-matrix formulation [ 56 ] . For the RR series with
@xmath , which are non-abelian FQHE due to the braiding statistics of
the quasiparticle excitations, there are efforts in formulating
effective field theory by introducing Majorana fermion fields [ 57 ] ,
and it is still a field of active research.

Numerical analysis has been an indispensible tool in studying the FQHE,
given the inherent difficulty in characterizing strongly correlated
systems analytically. Historically Laughlin justified the validity of
his model wavefunctions by their large overlap with the ground state of
Coulomb interaction found by exact diagonalization. It is a remarkable
fact that even for system sizes as small as a few electrons, exact
diagonalization can reveal the physics of the FQHE quite clearly.
Haldane developed the numerical formalism for the FQH systems on the
sphere and torus geometry [ 52 , 58 ] . These compact geometries do not
have boundaries, making them especially convenient for studying the bulk
properties of the finite FQH fluid. Other common geometries include disk
[ 44 ] and cylinder geometry [ 46 ] , where the edge physics of FQH can
be explored.

Recently, many model wavefunctions of the FQHE are identified with Jack
polynomials [ 59 ] , which substantially enhances the capability of
numerically generating wavefunctions at various FQH filling factor.
While model wavefunctions have compact analytic forms, most finite-size
calculations require explicit knowledge of the coefficients of
expansions in terms of the orbital occupation basis. These coefficients
are geometry dependent. With model Hamiltonians this information can be
obtained via exact diagonalization, an expensive numerical procedure
that grows exponentially with the system size. In comparison, the Jack
polynomials have rich algebraic structures [ 61 ] and can be generated
numerically via a recursive procedure, and one can adapt them onto
different geometries just by proper single particle normalization, as
long as these geometries have genus zero. A brief discussion about the
Jack polynomials can be found in Chapter 4.

There has been a recent effort in understanding the FQHE, and QHE in
general, from a geometric point of view [ 62 ] . Formally, a magnetic
field perpendicular to a 2D Hall manifold maps a four dimensional phase
space for each electron onto two sets of 2D real space coordinates - the
cyclotron coordinates and the guiding center coordinates. In the limit
of strong magnetic field, the incompressibility of the IQHE is governed
by the dynamics of the cyclotron coordinates, which depends on the
single particle kinetic energy [ 35 ] . On the other hand, the FQHE is
governed by the dynamics of the guiding center coordinates only, from
the many-body interaction. Thus the IQHE and the FQHE exist in two
different Hilbert spaces; in each of the Hilbert space, the spatial
coordinates do not commute with each other, leading to quantum
fluctuations of their respective metric. The fluctuation of the
cyclotron metric is suppresed by strong magnetic field, while the
fluctuation of the guiding center metric plays an important role on the
bulk neutral excitations in the long wavelength limit.

Closely related to the geometric aspects of the FQHE is a topological
quantity called the Hall viscosity [ 64 , 65 ] . The formal definition
of the Hall viscosity will be presented in Chapter 3. From a heuristic
hydrodynamic point of view, the Hall viscosity induces a force in the
fluid proportional to the gradient of the velocity field; unlike the
common dissipative viscosity, this force is perpendicular to the
velocity field, thus it does not lead to any energy dissipation. It is
only present in systems where time reversal symmetry is broken, such as
in the QH system. In fact the Hall viscosity is related to the average
angular momentum per particle in the fluid; for a rotationally invariant
system it is defined with a metric, and is quantized just like the
angular momentum.

The guiding center Hall viscosity is an important quantity in the FQHE,
because the filling factor as a topological index does not fully
characterize the FQHE [ 56 ] . The Hall viscosity, or the average
angular momentum per particle, is another topological index
differentiating between different phases, and is stable against
perturbations that do not close the gap, as long as rotational
invariance is preserved [ 64 , 65 ] .

Phenomenologically, the FQHE can be viewed as consisting of fluids of
particle-flux composites with a finite areal extension on the order of
the square of the magnetic length. Different types of composite
particles define different topological orders, and each composite
particle carries a charge. Since both the particle and the flux carries
angular momentum, each composite particle also carries a “spin” relating
to the Hall viscosity -thus the composite particles are “topological”
objects. On the sphere where the Hall manifold is curved, the spin of
the composite particles will couple to the curvature of the manifold,
resulting in a shift - an @xmath correction to the number of states
available due to the Berry phase of the coupling [ 66 ] . This shift is
also quantized by the Gauss-Bonnet theorem and is basically the same
quantity as the Hall viscosity.

The finite areal extension of the composite particles requires a metric
to define its shape (as well as its spin). Thus even on a flat Hall
manifold, the adiabatic deformation of the shape will couple to the
guiding center spin in a non-trivial way. This interesting interplay
between the topology and geometry in the FQHE was first emphasized by
Haldane [ 62 ] , who conjectured the quantum fluctuation of the metric
of the composite particle and its coupling to the guiding center spin
captures the dynamics of the FQHE, or its collective mode, at least in
the long wavelength limit.

The collective modes in the FQHE are neutral excitations completely
dictated by the dynamics of the guiding center degrees of freedoms,
which defines the incompressibility of the topological phase. It is the
less well-known part of the FQHE spectrum, as compared to charged
excitations like quasiparticles and quasiholes. The neutral excitations
were first studied by Girvin, Macdonald and Platzman [ 49 ] using single
mode approximation (SMA) within the LLL. The collective mode is similar
to the roton-modes in the Helium-4 superfluid [ 50 ] . It has a roton
minimum at momentum around the inverse of the magnetic length, hence the
name “magneto-roton mode”. Unlike the collective mode in the Helium-4
superfluid, in the long wavelength limit the magneto-roton mode is
gapped. Thus the roton-minimum defines the gap of the FQHE. Experimental
realization of the FQH phases requires a much better understanding of
these neutral excitations. With the recent discovery of fractional Chern
insulators on the lattice and their apparent connections to the FQHE [
24 , 25 , 26 ] , there is a pressing need to understand the collective
modes better. Since the collective modes are neutral, the term ”neutral
excitations” will also be used in this thesis to refer to the collective
modes in the FQHE in Chapter 4 and 5.

### 1.2 Formalism of the Quantum Hall Problems

A magnetic field perpendicular to the two-dimensional Hall surface leads
to the minimal coupling of the kinetic momentum with the in-plane vector
potential @xmath with @xmath , where @xmath is the strength of the
magnetic field. The length scale is thus defined by the magnetic length
@xmath , where @xmath is the effective charge of the particles and we
set @xmath . For a Hall surface of an area @xmath the total number of
the magnetic flux is given by @xmath . Normally, we pick a gauge for the
vector potential and solve the single particle Hamiltonian to get the
wavefunctions for the eigenstates. For a rotationally invariant system
the convenient gauge is the symmetric gauge, and the single particle
wavefunctions are coherent states of electrons undergoing cyclotron
motion about the origin. For translationally invariant systems the
Landau gauge is often used, where the single particle wavefunctions are
plane waves in one direction, and confined Gaussian packages in the
other direction.

This chapter aims to give a very general treatment of the formalism of
the QHE, without recourse to explicitly picking a guage for the external
vector potential. In this way, the algebraic structure of the Hilbert
space of the two-dimensional Hall surface is fully exploited with
explicit gauge invariance. Unlike most previous literature, the
geometric aspect of the quantum Hall problem is emphasized by requiring
real space coordinates to have the upper indices and the covariant
momentum vectors to have lower indices. Einstein summation convention is
assumed unless otherwise stated. Metric dependence of various quantities
are shown explicitly, without the assumption of rotational invariance,
allowing the existence of several metrics with different physical
origins. The notations of this thesis will also be fixed in this
section.

#### 1.2.1 Algebra and Hilbert space

The phase space of the 2D Hall surface is four-dimensional for each
particle, with spatial coordinates @xmath and momentum coordinates
@xmath satisfying commutation relations @xmath . With a perpendicular
uniform magnetic field, the covariant momentum is given by @xmath . We
choose a new basis for the four-dimensional phase space by writing
@xmath with @xmath and the following algebra :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Physically, while @xmath gives the location of the particle in the real
space, we can separate @xmath into the cyclotron coordinates @xmath and
the guiding center coordinates @xmath . Now the phase space is mapped
onto two copies of 2D real spaces, with transparent physical meanings in
the two-dimensional Hall manifold (See Fig.( 1.4 )).

The generator of translations can be separately defined for the
cyclotron and guiding center coordinates as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The generator of rotation can be defined similarly. Note the definition
of angular momentum operator requires a unimodular metric @xmath with
@xmath . Taking @xmath we have @xmath . To separate it into the
cyclotron and guiding center parts, we define @xmath ; the cyclotron and
the guiding center angular momentum operators are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Now the cyclotron and guiding center angular momentum operators are
defined with their respective metric: the cyclotron metric @xmath , and
the guiding center metric @xmath . This is possible because the two
angular momentum operators act on different Hilbert spaces. Rotational
invariance in the real space asserts @xmath , which is a special case
generally adopted in the literature for technical convenience.

For systems with more than one particle, the density operator is given
by @xmath , where @xmath is the particle index. The cyclotron density
operators can be defined as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

while the guiding center density operators can be defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The algebra in Eq. ( 1.9 ) and Eq.( 1.10 ) is also called the
Girvin-Macdonald-Platzman (GMP) algebra in their respective Hilbert
space, which is isomorphic to the @xmath algebra. To show that, let us
factorize the unimodular metric tensor by a set of complex vectors
@xmath satisfying the constraint @xmath . Explicitly we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

These complex vectors are useful in constructing the ladder operators
from non-commuting coordinates. As an example, from the guiding center
coordinates we can define @xmath such that @xmath . Taking @xmath with
@xmath , the @xmath algebra [ 51 ] is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

That the @xmath algebra is isomorphic to the density operator algebra
can be seen with the wavelength expansion of the density operators in
their respective coordinates. Let us illustrate this by the expansion of
the guiding center density operators. The procedure for the cyclotron
density operators is exactly the same.

The regularized guiding center density operator is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the ground state expectation value. We thus have @xmath
. The regularized guiding center density operator still obeys the
algebra

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Before expansion, we formally define

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.15)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The expansion of the guiding center density operator is thus given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The reason for this notably elaborate definition is that in general the
operators @xmath are not bounded in the thermodyamic limit. On the other
hand, @xmath is well-defined when the periodic boundary condition is
chosen. In this case only discrete values of @xmath are allowed, but in
the thermodynamic limit the partial differential is properly defined.
Less formally we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath anti-symmetrizes over the upper indices. Since in the FQHE
the cyclotron coordinates are bounded, the cyclotron counter-part
defined in the form of Eq.( 1.17 ) has no problem at all.

The expansion in Eq.( 1.16 ) reveals two useful sub-algebras [ 89 ] .
Writing @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.18)
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note in Eq.( 1.18 ) the extensive part proportional to the number of
particles is regularized, and @xmath is none other than the generator of
center-of-mass translation. @xmath is the generator of area-preserving
deformation. Explicitly for any symmetric tensor @xmath , we can define
a unitary operator @xmath , which gives us

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . The deformation in Eq.( 1.20 ) is equivalent to a
Bogoliubov transformation of the guiding center ladder operators @xmath
, where @xmath can be reparametrized as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

here @xmath parametrizes the overall phase of the Bogoliubov
transformation, and is physically irrelevant.

#### 1.2.2 Hamiltonian and Dynamics

For simplicity, only the QHE of a single species of (spin polarized)
fermions is considered here. The full Hamiltonian of the many-body QH
system is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the single particle Hamiltonian and @xmath contains the
many-body interactions. In principle @xmath can contain @xmath - body
interactions for any integer @xmath . Here only the physical case of the
two-body Coulomb interaction is considered. However, this is in no way
reducing the generality of the effective Hamiltonian for the FQHE, since
the @xmath interactions physically result from LL mixing, as we shall
see later.

The single particle Hamiltonian is special because the minimal coupling
of the external magnetic field to the kinetic momentum implies that
@xmath is a function of only the cyclotron coordinates. Assuming
inversion symmetry, the most general form of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the fully symmetric tensors. In general @xmath does not
have Galilean or rotational invariance. Physically the QHE is realized
on a lattice system, where Galilean and rotational invariance can only
emerge in the weak field limit @xmath , where @xmath is the lattice
constant. The energy spectrum of @xmath are generalized Landau levels,
each with macroscopic degeneracy generated by the guiding center
coordinates, because @xmath commutes with @xmath . If we do have
rotational invariance for @xmath , every @xmath can be expressed as a
function of a single metric - the cyclotron metric @xmath . The general
form of @xmath will be simplified to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this case, the eigenstates are labeled by the cyclotron angular
momentum. A familiar example is the massless Dirac fermions with the
single particle Hamiltonian @xmath . For free electrons confined in
two-dimensions, we have Galilean invariance and the cyclotron metric is
given by the effective mass tensor. In this case the LLs are equally
spaced, and we can also define a cyclotron frequency @xmath and the
single particle Hamiltonian reduces to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Galilean term is the leading term of the expansion in Eq.( 1.23 ),
and in most cases it defines the energy scale of the single particle
Hamiltonian @xmath .

The interaction term @xmath depends on the real space coordinates of
particles @xmath . Even though the Coulomb interaction is universal, the
details of effective interaction between electrons confined in a
two-dimensional manifold depends on the LL form factor and the
experimental conditions, such as the single particle wavefunction in z
direction (perpendicular to the Hall manifold), which depends on the
thickness of the sample and the profile of the confinement potential.
Denoting @xmath the Fourier component of the effective two-body
interaction potential we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The only length scale is given by the magnetic length @xmath , thus the
typical energy scale of the interaction is given by @xmath , which is
subleading to @xmath . In the limit of strong magnetic field, one is
allowed to treat @xmath as a small perturbation, and we use this to
organize the many-body Hilbert space. Formally, we write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the limit of @xmath , there is a subspace @xmath spanned by
eigenstates of @xmath that are degenerate with the ground state. If the
filling factor @xmath is an integer, this subspace only contains the
ground state, and the non-degenerate perturbation theory can be applied
straightforwardly. This is the way we understand the IQHE. When
partially filled LLs are present in the ground state, one has to apply
the degenerate pertubation theory, which becomes intractable when the
degeneracy is macroscopic in the thermodynamic limit. This is the case
of the FQHE, which is formally treated by defining a projection operator
@xmath for all @xmath . The interaction Hamiltonian can thus be written
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The projected interaction Hamiltonian @xmath has the
spectrum

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this projected Hilbert space, the kinetic energy of each particle is
just a constant, the dynamics is dictated by the interaction alone.

The leading order of Eq.( 1.28 ) is the two-body interaction within a
single partially filled LL (the case with more than one partially filled
LLs is technically more cumbersome but conceptually the same). Terms of
@xmath contain LL mixing induced by the interaction, and can be
calculated perturbatively [ 67 ] . The perturbation does not just
renormalize the effective two-body interaction; the first order
perturbation also gives effective three-body interactions, while
higher-order perturbations lead to four-body interactions and more.

Formally, Eq.( 1.28 ) can be written as a general effective Hamiltonian
including @xmath body interactions for @xmath . The Hilbert space is
still within a single LL, but the coefficients of every term in the
Hamiltonian can be expanded in powers of @xmath . Thus the FQHE can be
completely described by the physics within a single LL even when LL
mixing is included. Theorists can tune the coefficients of @xmath body
interactions at will to realize different models of the FQHE; this makes
numerical analysis a very powerful tool. Perturbative calculations from
realistic physical interactions, on the other hand, suggest that the
effect of LL mixing is quite small, even though @xmath itself is not
very small ( @xmath ) under most experimental conditions [ 67 ] . Thus a
model of two-body interaction is sufficient in realizing most FQH
states.

### 1.3 Organization of the Thesis

In Chapter 2, an overview of the numerical techniques in the FQHE is
presented, focusing on the fact that the Hamiltonian matrix can be
numerically constructed in a purely algebraic way that is manifestedly
gauge invariant. The chapter also contains three examples that
illustrate the power of the numerical analysis. The first example
presents the entanglement spectrum of the FQH ground state on the
sphere, with a notably new partition of the Hilbert space leading to a
clear entanglement energy separation between the topological and the
non-universal part of the entanglement spectrum. This new partition can
be potentially useful for DMRG application. In the second example a
numerical definition of the guiding center metric for the FQH fluid
without rotational invariance is presented. In the last example,
possible transitions from the incompressible FQH phase to compressible
bubble/stripe phases are studied in the higher Landau levels, especially
when the rotational invariance is broken.

In Chapter 3, the geometric aspect of the QHE is illustrated with
microscopic calculations of the linear response to spatially varying
electromagnetic fields. In particular, the term “Hall viscosity” will be
introduced in this chapter, which is an important quantity in the
electromagnetic response, and is universal with rotational invariance.
The Hall viscosity bridges the geometry of the QHE with its topological
aspect, and also determines the gap of the neutral excitations in the
long wavelength limit, as will be shown in Chapter 4 and 5.

In Chapter 4 a numerical scheme for the construction of neutral
excitation model wavefunctions in the Laughlin and Moore-Read state is
presented. These model wavefunctions are compared with both the exact
diagonalization and the single mode approximation. The dynamics of the
long wavelength part of the magnetoroton mode is revealed to be both
dependent on the Hall viscosity and the energy cost of the shear
deformation of the ground state guiding center metric.

With numerical results from Chapter 4 at hand, the analytic
wavefunctions for the neutral excitations are presented in Chapter 5.
These analytic wavefunctions are shown to be a generalization of the
Laughlin and Moore-Read ground state wavefunctions, with no tuning
parameters and transparent physical interpretations. The analytic
calculations of the long wavelength neutral excitation gap in the
thermodynamic limit reveals interesting connections to the dynamics of
the two-dimensional plasma picture, where the energy gap of the
quadrupole excitation is related to the free energy cost of the fusion
of charges in the plasma. A lattice diagramatic representation of the
model wavefunctions for the neutral excitations is also presented in
this chapter, leading to a fresh point of view of the nature of quantum
Hall many-body wavefunctions.

## Chapter 2 Numerical Studies of the FQHE

Numerical calculation is an indispensible tool in studying the FQHE. It
is remarkable that in many cases the physics of the FQHE in the
thermodynamic limit can be revealed with the numerical calculation of
systems containing only a few particles. The Hilbert space of the FQHE
is tractable once the system is projected into a single Landau level,
with the proper boundary conditions. Effects of different cyclotron form
factors in different LLs, modifications of the interaction by finite
thickness, etc. can be modeled with a suitable choice of a set of the
Haldane pseudopotentials for the two-body interactions. The effects of
LL mixing, on the other hand, can be modeled by adding three (or even
more) body interactions within a single LL.

In contrast to common practices in the FQHE numerical calculations,
where one has to pick a gauge to specify the single particle
wavefunctions, the numerical method presented in this chapter is based
on the algebra of the FQH Hilbert space, and is manifestedly gauge
invariant. This is both conceptually and technically advantageous over
the use of real space wavefunctions of the single particle orbitals.
While this chapter does not give a detailed guide for implementing
numerical calculations and optimizations based on symmetry, it
emphasizes the universal features of the numerical analysis in different
geometries, from which the Hamiltonian matrix is built for exact
diagonalization or DMRG analysis. For simplicity only spin polarized FQH
systems are considered. The three examples in the chapter illustrate how
numerical techniques can be implemented in spherical and torus geometry,
to analyze both the ground state properties and the dynamics involving
the entire energy spectrum.

### 2.1 Landau Level Projection

It is convenient to introduce the second-quantized formalism when doing
numerical calculations. The density operator is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the upper-case indices are LL indices, and the lower-case indices
are the guiding center orbital indices. @xmath creates a particle in the
@xmath LL and the @xmath intra-LL orbital, and @xmath . Projection into
the @xmath LL means only particles with LL index N are included in the
Hilbert space. Writing @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the LL form factor, completely determined by the single
particle kinetic energy Hamiltonian @xmath . If @xmath is rotationally
invariant, i.e. containing only a single metric @xmath , we can define
the spectrum generating LL ladder operators @xmath such that @xmath
(where the complex vectors @xmath are defined in Eq.( 1.11 )). An
explicit calculation gives @xmath , where @xmath is the @xmath Laguerre
polynomial. For the purpose of numerical calculations, we are only going
to deal with a rotationally invariant @xmath , and the density operator
is written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The LL index for the creation and annihilation operators are omitted
without ambiguity. For numerical calculations on a flat surface, Eq.(
2.3 ) is the general implementation for the LL projection.

### 2.2 Two-Body and Three-Body Interactions

The general Hamiltonian for the two-body interaction is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the guiding center density operator and @xmath is the
particle index. Comparing to Eq.( 2.1 ), the form factor is absorbed
into @xmath , the Fourier component of the two-body interaction.
Different ways of organizing the single particle orbitals within a
single LL is analogous to picking a gauge. Choosing an arbitrary complex
vector @xmath we can define @xmath . Coherent states with @xmath is one
way of labeling the single particle orbitals. If rotational invariance
exists with metric @xmath , where @xmath is defined in Eq.( 1.11 ), we
can let @xmath so @xmath is the ladder operator. In this case a more
natural way is to label the single particle orbital by its guiding
center angular momentum. The single particle orbital is labeled by
@xmath with @xmath . Writing @xmath , and in an infinite plane such
states are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is analogous to the case when an explicit symmetric gauge is
picked. The coherent state for a general @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Choosing @xmath to be a real vector is analogous to picking a “Landau
gauge”, where Eq.( 2.6 ) is extended in the direction perpendicular to
the vector @xmath , and confined in the direction parallel to @xmath .
If the single particle wavefunction needs to satisfy certain boundary
condition (e.g. periodic boundary condition on torus), Eq.( 2.6 ) is
mathematically more complicated, and one is forced to pick a gauge for
the vector potential. On the other hand, numerical calculations do not
require us to deal with wavefunctions explicitly; they can be done
algebraically with various different boundary conditions, as we shall
see in the next section.

Since for two-body interactions only the relative coordinates are
involved in the Hamiltonian, we write @xmath . The two-body eigenstates
are given by @xmath , where @xmath is the index for @xmath , and @xmath
is the index for @xmath .

The Hamiltonian is thus given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

If @xmath is rotationally invariant, we can expand it in the basis of
Laguerre polynomials with @xmath and:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is because the Laguerre polynomials @xmath are orthogonal when
integrated with the measure @xmath . @xmath is called the @xmath Haldane
pseudopotential. If we label the single particle orbitals by its guiding
center angular momentum, i.e. @xmath . This leads to @xmath . Due to the
orthogonality between the Laguerre polynomials, Eq.( 2.7 ) is simplified
to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus @xmath is the energy cost of a pair of particles having relative
angular momentum @xmath . The generalization to @xmath body interactions
with @xmath is presented in [ 54 ] . Here we are going to use the Jacobi
coordinates to generalize the Haldane pseudopotentials. For three-body
interactions the Jacobi coordinates are given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Defining @xmath , the three-body Hilbert space is given by @xmath ,
where @xmath is the eigenstate index for @xmath , @xmath is the
eigenstate index for @xmath and @xmath is the eigenstate index for
@xmath . The most general three-body Hamiltonian is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

With rotational invariance we can do a similar expansion of the
interaction with the basis of the Laguerre polynomials:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again labeling the single particle orbitals by their guiding center
angular momentum we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is how the Haldane pseudopotentials for two-body interactions are
generalized. The scheme can be naturally extended to @xmath interactions
for @xmath with the set of coefficients @xmath ; Eq.( 2.8 ) and Eq.(
2.12 ), and the physics of the coefficients of expansions, are
completely general and independent of the geometry or topology of the
Hall surface. The numerical study of the FQHE is tantamount to exploring
the family of model Hamiltonians in the parameter space @xmath .

### 2.3 Disk, Cylinder and Torus

From an experimental point of view, the quantum Hall droplet is realized
on a two-dimensional plane of a finite size with electrons confined by
an external potential. The details of the confinement potential
perpendicular to the two-dimensional plane modifies the single particle
wavefunction in the perpendicular direction, which in turn modifies the
effective two-body interaction. Numerically, this can be modeled by
tuning the different components of the pseudopotentials. The simplest
geometry is the disk geometry with open boundary conditions; in this
geometry both the bulk and edge excitations can be explored numerically
[ 44 , 45 ] . We can also make the boundary condition open in one
direction and periodic in the other; this gives a cylinder geometry with
two chiral edges [ 46 , 47 ] . If we make both directions periodic, we
have the torus geometry [ 58 ] . Torus geometry has no edge, which is
convenient for exploring the bulk excitations. It also has a different
topology (with genus 1), which is essential in studying the ground state
degeneracy of different topological phases [ 10 ] .

On the disk, rotational invariance is present and we can use Eq.( 2.9 )
and Eq.( 2.13 ) directly. The two-particle creation operators can be
expanded in terms of the single-particle creation operators:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The numerical implementation is thus straightfoward, and the Hamiltonian
will be block-diagonal with total angular momentum @xmath as a good
quantum number. The finite size system consists of a finite number of
particles @xmath , and in principle there is no restriction of the
number of orbitals, or the size of the disk. If a confining potential
from the background positive charges is present, additional on-site
single particle potential term will be added to the Hamiltonian [ 44 ,
45 ] . One can also impose a sharp cut-off by restricting the number of
orbitals, and thus truncating the Hilbert space in which the
diagonalization is performed.

In Fig.( 2.1 ) the energy spectrum of a typical Laughlin state is
plotted. What is interesting is the bottom half of the diagram, where we
zoom into the bulk excitation part of the spectrum below the multi-roton
continuum. Except for the big circular plot, each many-body state
contains both bulk and edge excitations. The five different colors
represent five different branches of the neutral excitations below the
multi-roton continuum (except for the blue color at the lower right
corner, where different branches mix and there is not enough resolution
of the plot to differentiate between them). In each branch, the state
with the big circular plot is the highest weight bulk state (with no
edge excitations) corresponding to those on the sphere or the torus. In
each branch the counting of the states follows the Virasoro algebra (see
Chapter 5), and the small circular plots are the highest weight states.
Just like the ground state, each bulk neutral excitation is the highest
weight primary field where the Kac-Moody edge modes are generated.

The cylinder geometry does not have rotational invariance. Let the
cylinder to be periodic along the @xmath -axis with the circumference
@xmath and open along the @xmath -axis, we can pick @xmath and the
single particle orbitals are given by @xmath . We thus have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is discrete for integer @xmath , and @xmath is a continuous
variable. We can thus pick @xmath to be an integer as well. In the
second quantized form the guiding center density operator is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus the two-body and three-body interaction Hamiltonians are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.17)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.18)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where in Eq.( 2.18 ) we have @xmath .

The torus geometry is periodic in both directions. Unlike the disk and
cylinder geometry, the torus is a compact manifold. To respect the
boundary conditions, the total number of fluxes going through the
surface has to be an integer [ 58 ] . This implies the total area of the
torus to be @xmath , where the integer @xmath is the number of fluxes.
Let the torus be defined by two principal vectors @xmath , so that
@xmath forms a parallelgram, and the periodic boundary conditions
require opposite sides of the parallelgram to be identified. The flux
quantization condition is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The periodic boundary conditions fix a discrete set of allowed momentum
vectors forming the reciprocal lattice, with primitive vectors @xmath .
There are in total @xmath allowed vectors within the Brillouin zone,
with @xmath for @xmath .

The single particle orbitals can be defined in the same way as the case
for the cylinder in Eq.( 2.15 ), with additional periodic boundary
conditions. Writing @xmath , with @xmath for integers @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is thus straightforward to rewrite Eq.( 2.17 ) and Eq.( 2.18 ) in
terms of discrete sums over the reciprocal lattice momentum vectors:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.22)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where in Eq,( 2.21 ) we have @xmath ; in Eq.( 2.22 ) we have @xmath .

#### 2.3.1 Spherical Geometry

Another geometry with no boundary is the spherical geometry, with a
magnetic monopole sitting at the center of the sphere so that a total of
@xmath fluxes radiate through the surface [ 52 ] . By Dirac’s
quantization condition, @xmath has to be an integer, and the single
particle orbitals are spinors of total spin @xmath , where @xmath is the
Landau level index. Thus at @xmath LL the total number of
states/orbitals is @xmath .

One can explicitly pick a gauge @xmath , where @xmath is the radius of
the sphere, @xmath is the azimuth angle and @xmath is the polar angle.
In the LLL the @xmath states have the wavefunctions expressed in terms
of spinor coordinates @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the @xmath component of the spinor which ranges from
@xmath to @xmath . This directly corresponds to single particle orbitals
on the disk with the guiding center angular momenta ranging from @xmath
to @xmath . We can explicitly use the stereographic mapping by taking
@xmath , where @xmath is the radius of the sphere. The single particle
wavefunction of Eq.( 2.23 ) can be written as @xmath . Thus the
Hamiltonian on the disk from Eq.( 2.9 ) can be directly transcribed onto
the sphere, where @xmath is the creation operator of a pair of particles
on the sphere with relative @xmath and total @xmath . For particles in
the @xmath LL, the states are given by spinors @xmath . Let the total
spin of two particles be @xmath and the total azimuthal spin be @xmath ,
the two-particle state is given by @xmath . The change of basis is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the familiar Clebsch-Gordan coefficients. On the
sphere, the @xmath pseudopotential is equivalent to the projection into
a two-particle state with relative total angular momentum @xmath . Thus
the form of Eq.( 2.9 ) on the sphere is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

and Eq.( 2.3 ) on the sphere is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Hamiltonian matrix thus can be built up numerically in exactly the
same way as the case for the disk geometry.

### 2.4 Example A: Entanglement Spectrum of Spherical FQHE Ground State

A major reason why we need to use numerics to solve FQH problems is
because the many-body wavefunctions of the FQHE is intrinsically not
simple. One way to quantify the complexity of a many-body state is to
look at its entanglement. To do that, the Hilbert space of a many-body
system @xmath is partitioned into two sub-Hilbert spaces

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The partition can be done in real space, momentum space, particle space,
or in any other more abstract ways, and a wavefunction @xmath can be
expanded as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have @xmath spanning @xmath . Since @xmath is a pure state, the
density matrix is one-dimensional @xmath . One can then define a reduced
density matrix for the subsystem A

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is an @xmath square matrix, where @xmath is the dimension of @xmath
. Similarly we can also have @xmath , an @xmath square matrix with
@xmath the dimension of @xmath . For a local operator @xmath that acts
entirely within @xmath , its expectation value is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

While the information about the part which is traced out is completely
lost, the reduced density matrix retains all the information about the
un-traced part. If the two parts of the Hilbert space are entangled , a
local experimental measurement on a pure state is equivalent to a
measurement of a mixed state represented by the reduced density matrix.
This quantum-statistical correspondence is the hallmark of non-locality.

Quantitatively we can define the entanglement entropy, or the
Von-Neumann entropy as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The von Neumann entropy is a unique measure of the bipartite
entanglement in the following senses [ 83 ] . 1). @xmath is invariant
under local unitary operations. 2). @xmath is a continuous function of
the state in the Hilbert space [ 84 ] . 3). @xmath is additive: @xmath .
If A and B are not entangled, the reduced density matrix is calculated
from a product state, and @xmath . Eq.( 2.31 ) is well-defined because
the non-zero part of the spectrums of @xmath and @xmath are identical.
This can be shown with a singular value decomposition (SVD) of the
@xmath by @xmath matrix @xmath from coefficients in Eq.( 2.28 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are unitary square matrices of dimensions @xmath and @xmath
respectively, and @xmath is an @xmath diagonal matrix with non-negative
real numbers @xmath on the diagonal. Writing @xmath , Eq.( 2.31 ) can be
converted into the diagonal form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

which leads to @xmath and @xmath . Normalization of the state requires
@xmath .

The entanglement entropy measures the minimal amount of the information
needed to fully characterize the state. While it is a very important
quantity that can contain topological signatures [ 11 ] , Li and Haldane
[ 12 ] pointed out that the entire spectrum of @xmath , or the
entanglement spectrum, contains additional important information as
well. One can rewrite Eq.( 2.33 ) as @xmath , where @xmath is the
so-called entanglement energy. In this way, the reduced density matrix
resembles the partition function of a quantum system at a
“pseudo-temperature” equal to unity. If any state is missing in the
entanglement spectrum, its entanglement energy goes to infinity.

To explore the real space entanglement of a quantum state, a partition
of the Hilbert space in real space is usually performed. For the FQHE a
real space cut involves both the cyclotron and guiding center
coordinates [ 85 ] , which is technically more demanding, and not
desirable if one wants to explore the entanglement involving only the
guiding center degrees of freedom. The alternative is to perform an
orbital cut. With spherical geometry and a monopole of strength @xmath
sitting at the center, there are in total @xmath orbitals in the LLL.
The Hilbert space for each orbital is two-dimensional (occupied or
un-occupied). One can thus separate these orbitals into two groups, the
Hilbert space of each is the direct product of the single particle
Hilbert space for all orbitals in that group.

The entanglement entropy calculated from the reduced density matrix of
the ground state depends on how strongly correlated these two subgroups
are. In [ 12 ] , the cut is made near the equator of the sphere, so the
dimension of the reduced density matrix is maximized. Two most important
observations can be summarized as follows:

-   The virtual cut that separates the Hilbert space resembles a
    physical cut that separates the sphere into two hemispheres with
    real edges. The low-lying part of the entanglement spectrum has the
    same counting as the physical edge states of the FQHE, as predicted
    by the conformal field theory

-   The entanglement spectrum of the model wavefunction (e.g. the
    Laughlin wavefunction or Moore-Read Pfaffian) has significantly
    fewer states than the dimension of the sub-Hilbert space, i.e. many
    basis elements in the sub-Hilbert space do not participate in the
    ground state. When the model Hamiltonian is adiabatically tuned
    towards the Coulomb interaction, the missing states appear with a
    small but finite weight. As long as the FQH phase persists, these
    non-universal basis elements remain partially gapped from the
    universal ones in the entanglement spectrum

Apart from being used as a diagnostic tool for the topological phases of
many-body ground states, the entanglement spectrum also has practical
applications for numerical techniques like the density matrix
renormalization group (DMRG) [ 88 ] . It is clear that the eigenstates
in the entanglement spectrum contribute differently to the ground state;
the presence of the entanglement gap further indicates that most of the
probabilistic weight is carried by the basis elements below the gap
(remember the entanglement energy is the negative logarithmic function
of the probability amplitude). This is particularly appealing for DMRG,
which uses the entanglement spectrum to judiciously truncate away the
unimportant part of the Hilbert space. While DMRG does not generally
perform well for two-dimensional systems due to the exponential growth
of the entanglement entropy with the system size, it can be more useful
for systems with gapped topological phases.

We will now illustrate the idea of the entanglement spectrum for the
FQHE ground state with a different partition of the Hilbert space (See
Fig.( 2.6 )), as compared to the work in Fig.( 2.5 ). In their work a
single cut at the equator is employed, and there does not exist a unique
entanglement energy that separates the topological part of the spectrum
from the non-universal part. From the DMRG point of view, this makes
selection of “good basis” difficult. Here instead of just one cut, two
cuts are performed on the sphere that are parallel and symmetric about
the equator. The two resulting subsystems (one including two “caps”
around the north and south pole, the other including the bulk around the
equator) have equal number of orbitals. In general, more cuts imply
greater entanglement entropy between the two subsystems, which tends to
disfavor such partitions; on the other hand, almost all the topological
part of the spectrum are below the non-universal part, making the
truncation of the unimportant Hilbert space less ambiguous.

From Fig.( 2.7 ) the counting of the low-lying states come from the two
branches of the edge excitations. We can form the projection operator
from the reduced density matrix of the model wavefunction, and it
faithfully projects out the non-universal part of the entanglement
spectrum calculated from the coulomb interaction, as shown in Fig.( 2.8
):

The very small entanglement energy overlap between the non-universal
states and the “topological” states is advantageous for DMRG: instead of
generating projection operators from diagonalizing intermediate
Hamiltonians, one can obtain them directly from Jack polynomials (see
Chapter 4). This presents a new approach for DMRG on the FQH states. One
should note however be aware that the increase of the entanglement due
to the presence of two edges of the partition leads to a larger number
of low lying states. It is thus not yet clear which factor outweighs the
other.

Before closing the section let us look at the entanglement spectrum of
the partition with two edges in the conformal limit [ 87 ] (also defined
in the caption of Fig.( 2.5 )), and compare it with Fig.( 2.5 ). The
spectrum before and after stripping away the single particle
normalization looks pretty much the same, suggesting the new partition
is less prone to the finite size effect that tends to introduce
environmental errors in the DMRG procedure.

### 2.5 Example B: Guiding Center Metric In FQHE

It was first pointed out by Haldane that the rotational invariance is
not required to protect the topological phases of the FQHE. From
previous chapters we know that the rotational invariance only exists if
the cyclotron metric and the guiding center metric are congruent: @xmath
. This is not necessarily the case in many physical situations. For
Galilean invariant systems, the cyclotron metric is defined by the
effective mass tensor. Microscopically the effective mass tensor depends
on the band structure of the underlying lattice model, which is
anisotropic in materials like ALAs many-valley semiconductors, or Si in
the presence of uniaxial stress [ 76 ] . For a Hall surface with finite
thickness, we can also tune the effective mass tensor by tilting the
magnetic field [ 69 , 39 ] .

On the other hand, the interaction part of the Hamiltonian generally
contains an independent metric. For Coulomb interaction, this metric is
defined by the dielectric tensor, which has the shape of equipotential
lines around a charged particle. Explicitly, the Fourier component of
the effective interaction is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath with @xmath from the dielectric tensor and
@xmath from the effective mass tensor. Once again if @xmath , we have
@xmath , and rotational invariance is preserved. Notice here the
definition of rotational invariance allows anisotropy where @xmath .
Physically, only the relative difference between different metrics
matters. Thus without loss of generality, the dielectric tensor is
always taken to be isotropic; the rotational invariance is broken when
the effective mass tensor is anisotropic, which is given in the
following form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

A unimodular metric only has two free parameters, where @xmath
parametrizes squeezing of the metric, and @xmath parametrizes the
rotation. The anisotropy parameter is given by @xmath . The point of
isotropy is given by @xmath .

In the LLL, exact diagonalization shows that the incompressibility is
quite robust against anisotropy of @xmath . In Fig. 2.10 , the energy
spectrum of the Coulomb interaction at @xmath as a function of
anisotropy is plotted, and the ground state is always gapped.
Level-crossing only occurs among the excited states. On the other hand
the isotropic Laughlin wavefunction no longer gives good overlap with
the ground state.

Since the FQHE depends on the Landau level form factor, the distortion
of the effective mass tensor induces a change of the guiding center
metric, a purely ground state property which can be viewed as a hidden
variational parameter of the FQHE state. For model wavefunctions, one
can define a family of generalized Laughlin wavefunctions parametrized
by the guiding center metric @xmath , with the guiding center ladder
operators given by @xmath . In the plane geometry the generalized
Laughlin state is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the vacuum is defined as @xmath . The ladder operators are now
explicitly metric dependent, and @xmath with different metrics are
related to each other by a Bogoliubov transformation. Equivalently, the
wavefunction can be expressed by a unitary transformation @xmath , where
@xmath is a real symmetric tensor and @xmath is the generator of
area-preserving diffeomorphism, and @xmath is isotropic. The model
Hamiltonian of Eq.( 2.36 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have @xmath . Thus for finite systems Eq.( 2.36 ) can be
generated numerically by exact diagonalization. Similarly, the ground
state @xmath without rotational invariance can be obtained numerically
by diagonalizing the following Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is given by Eq.( 2.34 ). One can thus define the guiding
center metric of @xmath as the @xmath that maximizes the overlap @xmath
, treating @xmath as the variational parameter. In Fig.( 2.11 ), the
exact diagonalization is done on the torus with periodic boundary
conditions. The ground state of the Coulomb interaction has fixed mass
anisotropy @xmath (the metric of the dielectric tensor is implicitly
assumed to be @xmath ), and we evaluate the overlap with a family of
Laughlin states generated by varying @xmath . The overlap @xmath is
plotted as a function of @xmath and @xmath . The principal axis of the
Laughlin state is aligned with that of the Coulomb state (maximum
overlap occurs for @xmath ). Notably, the maximum overlap occurs for
some value of the anisotropy that is a “compromise” between the
dielectric @xmath and a cyclotron one @xmath . The value of the
anisotropy that defines the intrinsic metric depends linearly on the
band mass anisotropy (Fig. 2.12 ). This result illustrates the ability
of the Laughlin state to optimize the shape of its fundamental droplets
and maximize the overlap with a given anisotropic ground state of a
finite system.

The guiding center metric obtained by minimizing the wavefunction
overlap is purely a ground state property. The structure factor of
@xmath is thus also anisotropic with the same guiding center metric. One
would ask if the guiding center metric could be used to characterize the
Hamiltonian Eq.( 2.38 ), where excited states in the energy spectrum is
involved. The elementary neutral excitations of the FQHE is given by the
magneto-roton mode, so an alternative way to obtain the intrinsic metric
is to analyze the shape of the two-dimensional momenta of the roton
minimum. In a rotationally-invariant case, this mode has a minimum at
@xmath . In the presence of anisotropy, the minima occur at different
@xmath in the different directions (Fig. 2.13 ). This leads to an
alternative definition of the intrinsic metric based on the shape of the
roton minimum in the 2D momentum plane.

In Fig. 2.13 the energy spectrum of an anisotropic Coulomb interaction
at @xmath is plotted as a function of the rescaled momentum @xmath ,
where @xmath is the guiding center metric that maximizes the overlap
with the family of Laughlin wavefunctions (Fig. 2.12 ). With the usual
definition of the momentum @xmath , the magnitudes of the roton minima
are now direction dependent. Different magneto-roton branches collapse
onto the same curve if we plot them as a function of @xmath . This is
reasonable, because the magneto-roton mode is well approximated by the
single mode approximation (SMA) up to the roton minimum [ 32 ] , and the
SMA can be calculated entirely in terms of the properties of the ground
state (See Eq.( 4.2 )). The anisotropy of the peak of the ground state
structure factor dictates the position of the roton minima.

### 2.6 Example C: Phase Transition in Second Landau Level

In the LLL ( @xmath , where @xmath is the LL index) the incompressible
phase is quite robust against anisotropy of the effective mass tensor.
In higher LLs, due to a number of nodes in the single-particle
wavefunction, the region of the phase diagram where incompressible
states occur becomes increasingly narrower, and compressible phases such
as stripes and bubbles take over. In this section we briefly present
some results on the effects of anisotropy on FQH states in higher LLs,
focusing on fillings @xmath and @xmath . A more detailed analysis of the
issue can be found in [ 38 ] .

#### 2.6.1 Stripes and Bubbles in @xmath

For @xmath the ground state is generally compressible with stripes and
bubbles phases, and these phases are enhanced by anisotropic effective
mass tensor. In Fig. 2.14 the energy spectrum (in units of @xmath ) is
shown as a function of the anisotropy @xmath (the angle @xmath is set to
zero). Energies are plotted relative to the ground state at each @xmath
. As we see on the right panel of Fig. 2.14 , the increase in @xmath
leads to a more pronounced quasi-degeneracy of the ground-state
multiplet, and an increase of the gap between this multiplet and the
excited states. Level crossing occurs for even larger @xmath , but that
could be due to finite size effect, which is more pronounced when the
effective mass tensor is highly distorted.

In case of @xmath state, one expects a two-dimensional CDW order at
@xmath known as the bubble phase [ 72 ] . A bubble differs from a stripe
in having a larger degeneracy and a two-dimensional mesh of
(quasi)degenerate ground-state wavevectors (as opposed to the
one-dimensional array in case of a stripe). The spread of the
quasidegenerate levels was also found to be somewhat larger than in the
case of stripes. From Fig. 2.14 (left) for @xmath . The bubble phase
remains stable to some extent when @xmath is reduced; for very small
@xmath it is eventually destroyed and replaced by a simple CDW. On the
other hand, when @xmath is increased, a smaller subset of momenta
becomes very closely degenerate with some of the excited levels. This
second-order (or weakly first order) transition results in a stripe
phase. As for the @xmath case, this stripe becomes enhanced as @xmath is
further increased. Therefore, in @xmath LLs mass anisotropy generally
produces stripes, even when isotropic ground states have a tendency to
form a bubble phase.

#### 2.6.2 Incompressible to Compressible Transitions in @xmath

For pure Coulomb interaction in @xmath , early numerical calculations
found the ground state to be at the transition point between
compressible and incompressible phases [ 74 ] . An experimentally
incompressible phase does exist at @xmath , which is believed to be
stabilized by the finite thickness of the two-dimensional electron gas,
which renormalizes the Coulomb interaction.

Numerically, varying the @xmath pseudopotential leads to the following
outcomes: (i) generically, for @xmath , the system is pushed deeper into
a compressible phase; (ii) for @xmath , finite-size calculations on
systems up to @xmath electrons permit the existence of two regimes: for
@xmath , the ground state is in the Laughlin universality class, but the
lowest excitation is not the magneto-roton; for @xmath , the ground
state and the excitation spectrum is the same as in the LLL. For smaller
systems, @xmath is estimated to be around @xmath , while @xmath is
around @xmath . Larger systems suggest that these two points might merge
in the thermodynamic limit, when only a small modification of the
interaction might be needed for the Laughlin physics to appear at @xmath
in @xmath LL. Alternatively, we can consider the Fang-Howard ansatz that
mimicks the finite-width effects. In this case, the width of @xmath or
smaller is sufficient to drive a phase transition between the
compressible state and the Laughlin-like state, in agreement with
results on the sphere and using an alternative finite-width ansatz [ 75
] .

In Fig. 2.15 we plot the energy spectrum as a function of anisotropy.
One notices that the isotropy point ( @xmath ) does not bear any special
importance – indeed, the system appears more stable in the vicinity of
it where it can lower its ground state energy or increase the neutral
gap. On either side of the isotropy point, however, the system remains
in the Laughlin universality class; e.g. at @xmath and @xmath the
maximum overlap with the Laughlin state is @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively (these overlaps, although modest compared to the standards
of @xmath LL, can be adiabatically further increased by tuning the
@xmath pseudopotential). Note that the quoted maximum overlaps are
achieved by the Laughlin state with @xmath somewhat different from
@xmath of the Coulomb state, analogous to Fig. 2.11 .

The new aspect of Fig. 2.15 is the transition to a compressible state
with CDW ordering for @xmath . In that region of the parameter space,
the system is very sensitive to changes in the boundary condition – the
sharp degeneracies seen in the rectangular geometry in Fig. 2.15 are not
obvious in case of higher symmetry, square or hexagonal, unit cell. As
an additional diagnostic tool for the compressible states, it is useful
to consider a guiding-center structure factor,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the expression for the Fourier components of the guiding-center
density, @xmath , has been used. Note that @xmath is normalized per flux
quantum rather than (conventional) per particle [ 77 ] . In Fig. 2.16
(a) we show the plot of @xmath evaluated for the state with @xmath in
Fig. 2.15 . Two sharp peaks in the response, similar to those previously
identified in @xmath LL states [ 78 ] , are the hallmark of the CDW
order. They are to be contrasted with the smooth response in case of an
anisotropic state in the Laughlin universality class for @xmath , Fig.
2.16 (b).

As a second example in @xmath LL, we consider half filling where the
Moore-Read Pfaffian state [ 20 ] is believed to be realized in some
regions of the phase diagram. This state has a non-Abelian nature, which
is reflected in the non-trivial ground state degeneracy [ 79 ] when
subjected to periodic boundary conditions. For @xmath , the eigenstates
of any translationally-invariant interaction possess a twofold
center-of-mass degeneracy [ 80 ] . On top of this, Moore-Read state has
an additional threefold degeneracy. Conventionally, the many-body
Brillouin zone is defined for @xmath , @xmath and has a size @xmath (
@xmath being the GCD of @xmath and @xmath ), which forces the degenerate
groundstates to belong to a Brillouin zone corner @xmath and centers of
the sides, @xmath .

In Fig. 2.17 we plot the spectrum of the Coulomb interaction as a
function of anisotropy (states belonging to @xmath sectors where the
Moore-Read state is realized, are indicated). As earlier, we assume
finite width of @xmath in order to instate the Pfaffian correlations [
82 ] . With two-body (Coulomb) interaction, therefore in each finite
system the Moore-Read state will mix with its particle-hole conjugate
pair, the anti-Pfaffian [ 81 ] . The mixing between the two states can
be controlled by including higher LLs [ 71 ] . For @xmath , we find a
three-fold quasi-degenerate multiplet, suggesting the presence of the
Moore-Read state at the isotropy point and in the neighborhood of it. In
finite systems, there is some splitting of the degeneracy that might be
reduced upon tuning the @xmath pseudopotentials. Also, upon tuning the
anisotropy around @xmath , there are crossings within the multiplet of
degenerate ground states without apparent closing of the gap. The region
of the Moore-Read state is defined by sharp transitions towards crystal
phases. These transitions are likely second order because they do not
appear to involve any level crossing, but rather lifting of the
degeneracy within a ground-state multiplet.

## Chapter 3 Geometry and Linear Response in FQHE

The interplay between topology and geometry in the FQHE is a fascinating
subject that is recently gaining more attention. Wen and Zee first
studied the fact that the finite-size QHE realized on spherical geometry
does not have the same filling factor as the one in the thermodynamic
limit [ 66 ] . Instead the general relation between the number of fluxes
@xmath and the number of particles @xmath at various incompressible
phases is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the filling factor in the thermodynamic limit @xmath ,
and @xmath is the so-called “shift”, an @xmath correction thought to be
distinctive for different topological phases. For IQHE with @xmath , the
shift @xmath is positive. For FQHE, on the other hand, the shift is
negative. For Laughlin states at @xmath the shift is given by @xmath .
Indeed, if we ignore @xmath in Eq.( 3.1 ) when performing numerical
diagonalizations for the FQHE, the spectrum will no longer be
incompressible. For model Hamiltonians the null space (spanned by the
zero energy states) is a degenerate manifold of quasihole states.

The shift is topological because it is quantized and stable against
perturbations that preserve rotational symmetry, as long as the system
remains gapped. Microscopically, a particle with a non-zero spin
accumulates a phase when going around a loop in curved real space. This
phase is analagous to the Aharonov-Bohm phase of a charged particle
moving in a magnetic field. In the QHE the wavefunction of a particle on
the sphere can always be viewed as a coherent state with the @xmath
symmetry of a spinor; its orbital angular momentum is effectively its
spin. The coupling of the angular momentum (either internal or orbital)
to the curvature can be viewed as a result of an additional effective
magnetic field, therefore increasing/decreasing the total number of
available orbitals. This is the origin of the shift in the QHE. The
shift is quantized to integers or half-integers on the sphere because of
this observation: a spinning particle going around the equator can pick
up the Gaussian curvature of either the northern hemisphere or the
southern hemisphere; the phase ambiguity will be @xmath times the shift,
which has to be an integer multiple of @xmath .

On a flat Hall surface, the quantity closely related to the shift is the
Hall viscosity [ 64 , 65 ] . In this chapter, the microscopic origin of
the Hall viscosity will be presented. The Hall viscosity of the FQHE is
characteristic of its topological phase, which couples to the geometry
of the FQH system resulting from both the quantum fluctuation and the
external perturbation. A thorough overview of the linear response to a
spatially varying electromagnetic perturbation is given in this chapter,
starting with the most general case where neither Galilean invariance
nor rotational invariance is assumed. The role of the Hall viscosity is
highlighted to illustrate the necessary condition for such a quantity to
be measured experimentally.

### 3.1 Hall Viscosity : A Formal Definition

The Hall viscosity arises in studies of the stress tensor @xmath in a
continuum medium. Any deformation of the continuum media from its
equilibrium state generates stress, and for a small deformation the
stress tensor is a linear response to the strain @xmath , and the rate
of strain @xmath . Denoting the displacement of the elements from their
equilibrium position to be @xmath , the strain tensor is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

If at equilibrium the local metric is given by @xmath , the strain
tensor gives the local deformation of the metric to the lowest order:
@xmath . The linear response of the stress tensor gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the elastic modulus tensor and @xmath is the viscosity
tensor. The elastic modulus tensor is symmetric under the following
exchange: @xmath . The viscosity tensor is symmetric under the following
exchange: @xmath . For exchange between @xmath the viscosity tensor can
be separated into the symmetric and anti-symmetric part:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

We can also separate out the traceless part of the strain tensor by
writing @xmath . Thus Eq.( 3.3 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is the pure shear modulus, and @xmath is the bulk modulus.
Classically the shear modulus vanishes for a fluid, which is made of
point particles with no internal structure. However as we shall see in
Eq.( 4.14 ) of Chapter 4, a uniform deformation of the guiding center
metric of the FQH fluid does cost energy. Phenomenologically the FQH
fluid is made of particle-flux composite with internal structures. The
shear modulus comes from the deformation of the shape of these composite
particles, and is purely a quantum effect. The shear of the cyclotron
metric (i.e. the effective mass tensor for Galilean invariant systems)
induces LL mixing and also costs energy. In the limit of strong magnetic
field the LL mixing can be ignored; it is only in this sense the IQH
fluid has vanishing shear modulus.

The bulk modulus for a classical incompressible fluid is infinity. For
the case of the QHE, the gapped QH fluid can transmit force by gapless
chiral edge modes, but not through the bulk. A spatially varying force
(i.e. induced by the gradient of the electric field) induces a locally
varying cyclotron/guiding center metric. This will modulate density as
will be shown in Eq.( 3.72 ). The internal structure of the coherent
state/composite particles will again lead to finite bulk modulus which
only vanishes in the long wavelength limit (i.e. with a spatially
uniform force).

For a dissipationless fluid, @xmath has to vanish. On the other hand,
@xmath is non-zero only if time-reversal symmetry is broken. This term
is the so-called Hall viscosity. For gapped quantum fluids with broken
time-reversal symmetry, the Hall viscosity dominates the response at low
temperature.

Quantum mechanically, the total stress tensor over the entire volumn,
induced by a uniform strain is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Hamiltonian and @xmath is the energy of the
eigenstate @xmath , with @xmath . Comparing Eq.( 3.7 ) with Eq.( 3.3 ),
the Hall viscosity is the Berry curvature when the Hamiltonian is
adiabatically deformed. Thus Eq.( 3.7 ) can be taken as the quantum
mechanical definition of the Hall viscosity [ 64 ] .

### 3.2 The Geometry of the Hilbert Space

Let us look at a physical state @xmath that depends on a set of external
parameters @xmath . Notice all states in the Hilbert space has a @xmath
gauge invariance so that the physics is not affected by the following
transformation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The phase @xmath can now depend on the external parameters, but local
gauge invariance in the parameter space should be preserved; the set of
@xmath form a @xmath fiber bundle over the manifold of the external
parameters. The gauge invariant derivative of @xmath in the parameter
space is given by [ 77 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

This allows us to define the gauge invariant quantum metric @xmath and
the Berry phase @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

If @xmath is a non-degenerate eigenstate of a Hermitian operator (which
could be the Hamiltonian) @xmath , there is useful way to express Eq.(
3.10 ) in terms of @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the summation is over all states in the Hilbert space defined by
@xmath that are orthogonal to @xmath , and @xmath are eigenvalues of
@xmath respectively. While Eq.( 3.11 ) and Eq.( 3.12 ) suggest the Berry
curvature and the quantum metric are both the properties of a single
state, Eq.( 3.13 ) and Eq.( 3.14 ) explicitly shows how the entire
Hilbert space is required for the two quantities to be well-defined.
This is especially important when the Hilbert space is physically
truncated, and Eq.( 3.13 ) and Eq.( 3.14 ) are the proper ways to
calculate the Berry curvature and the quantum metric. These two
equations are also advantageous for numerical calculations for the
quantum metric and the Berry phase, because one does not have to worry
about random phases of the ground state obtained from exact
diagonalizations at different points in the parameter space.

#### 3.2.1 Single-Particle Case: Coherent States

The coherent states are defined by ladder operators with commutation
relations @xmath . The family of coherent states can be parametrized by
the “center of mass” position in the phase space, i.e. a complex number
@xmath such that @xmath . The definition of a coherent state in the
phase space requires a metric, and explicitly let us have @xmath , where
@xmath is the usual complex vector with the unimodular metric @xmath
(Eq.( 1.11 )) and @xmath . One can identify @xmath as the guiding center
coordinates in quantum Hall systems with @xmath , but in general for any
one-dimensional harmonic oscillators, @xmath is the non-commutative
coordinates in the phase space. The auxillary Hamiltonian is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the set of parameters upon which the Hamiltonian
can vary adiabatically, and @xmath . Thus the unique ground state of
@xmath is a coherent state located at @xmath in the complex plane with
its shape determined by @xmath . Defining @xmath , the Lie algebra of
translation and area-preserving deformation is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
     @xmath      (3.17)
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

To adiabatically drag a state around and deform it at the same time, we
define the following unitary operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

For infinitesmal parameters @xmath and the symmetric tensor @xmath we
have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.20)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Only linear orders of infinitesmal parameters are kept, and constants
are dropped since they are irrelevant. There is no one-to-one
relationship between @xmath and @xmath due to a physically insignificant
phase (see Eq.( 1.21 ) and the comments below), the most convenient
choice is to write @xmath , where @xmath is the infinitesmal change of
the metric. The infinitesmal translation of the coherent state is given
by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Going back to Eq.( 3.13 ) and using @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Defining @xmath , we have @xmath , where @xmath is the orbital spin in
the phase space, and @xmath . Identifying the parameter space with the
real space by @xmath and with a bit of algebra one obtains the following
results

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The orbital spin is related to the Hall viscosity @xmath by @xmath .
Time reversal symmetry in the phase space is always broken, since
momentum is odd under time-reversal. For particles with a non-zero
orbital spin, the quantum metric is well-defined and proportional to the
phase space metric, as shown by the first term of Eq( 3.26 ). If the
phase space is not flat, there is an additional correction coming from
the second term of Eq.( 3.26 ). The first term of Eq.( 3.27 ) is the
Aharanov-Bohm phase of dragging the coherent state around in the phase
space with an effective uniform magnetic field. For the QHE where the
phase space is mapped to the real space, the Aharanov-Bohm phase results
from the external magnetic field. Additional phase from the second term
of Eq.( 3.27 ) comes from the coupling of the single particle orbital
spin to the @xmath curvature of the underlying geometry @xmath . Note
unlike the shift of a spinor, this @xmath curvature is only one part of
the Gaussian curvature given as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq.( 3.28 ) is only valid for a unimodular metric @xmath , and is the
curl of the spin connection [ 66 ] . The second term of Eq.( 3.27 )
gives an additional effective magnetic field when the particle is
dragged in a loop with a non-trivial geometry of the phase space. For
the QHE, the phase space is mapped to the real space, so the @xmath
curvature of the real space will modify the number of orbitals available
for the single particle state.

#### 3.2.2 FQH State: Thermodynamic Limit and Edge Effect

The analysis for a single particle state can be generalized to a
many-body ground state as long as the ground state is non-degenerate. In
this section we focus on the ground state of the FQH Hamiltonian at
filling factor @xmath on the disk geometry, the most natural geometry
from an experimental point of view. To make the ground state unique, one
can impose a hard-wall boundary condition, whereby the Hilbert space is
restricted to a finite number of orbitals; the alternative is to impose
a soft confining potential. The latter is more realistic, but the
analysis in the following does not depend on the details of the
Hamiltonian @xmath for @xmath particles. We only need to assume the
many-body ground state is non-degenerate.

The disk geometry has rotational invariance, thus @xmath is parametrized
by a metric @xmath . To adiabatically vary the metric of the
Hamiltonian, the generator for area-preserving deformation is given by
@xmath , where @xmath only depends on the cyclotron coordinates and
@xmath is the guiding center analog. The two parts can be evaluated
separately.

Since the ground state @xmath only involves a single LL (which we label
as the @xmath LL), the cyclotron part can be easily evaluated. Its Berry
curvature and quantum metric contributions are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.29)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.30)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Both are extensive quantities obtained by summing up single particle
contributions, where @xmath is the cyclotron spin. The evaluation of the
guiding center contribution requires more care. Replacing @xmath with
@xmath in Eq.( 3.29 ) and Eq.( 3.30 ), the quantity of interest we need
to evaluate are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , and @xmath for @xmath are excited states of @xmath .
Since @xmath is rotationally invariant, we can define @xmath , and
@xmath is an eigenstate of @xmath , Eq.( 3.31 ) and Eq.( 3.32 ) can be
written in a more illuminating form by defining @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.33)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Physically, @xmath is the guiding center Hall viscosity, and @xmath is
the @xmath coefficient of the guiding center structure factor defined in
Eq.( 2.39 ). It is instructive to first calculate Eq.( 3.33 ) and Eq.(
3.34 ) for a droplet of IQH fluid at filling factor @xmath with @xmath .
The ground state @xmath is a Slater determinant of all single particle
orbitals given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

The second term of Eq.( 3.33 ) and Eq.( 3.34 ) vanishes. A simple
calculation shows @xmath , and both are super-extensive. We know that
for the bulk of the IQH fluids there is no guiding center degrees of
freedom, so both the guiding center spin and the guiding center
structure factor should vanish. The super-extensive part is coming from
the edge of the droplet, where electrons in the outermost two orbitals
can hop into un-occupied orbitals. Note this process is forbidden on a
compact geometry like the sphere or the torus. Thus to calculate the
bulk contributions to @xmath and @xmath on the disk, one needs to
exclude the edge modes when summing over the excitation spectrum in Eq.(
3.33 ) and Eq.( 3.34 ); in particular, one cannot just rewrite Eq.( 3.33
) as the ground state expectation value of a commutator, even in the
thermodynamic limit @xmath .

For FQHE at @xmath , the ground state is the Laughlin state. Without
removing the edge modes, @xmath , where @xmath is the coefficient of the
extensive part. The analytic expression for @xmath is unknown, but it
also contains both the extensive and super-extensive part. The removal
of the edge modes of the FQH fluid on the disk is a tricky issue. The
first term of Eq.( 3.33 ) and Eq.( 3.34 ) couples the ground state to
the excited states in the momentum sector @xmath , where the ground
state is taken as @xmath . Since @xmath is another zero energy state, it
only coupled to the two-dimensional manifold of zero energy edge states
(the counting of the zero energy edge modes will be explained in Chapter
5). For finite size systems, this will give both an extensive and a
super-extensive part.

The second term of Eq.( 3.33 ) and Eq.( 3.34 ) couples the ground state
to the highest weight excited states in the momentum sector @xmath (by
definition, the highest weight state is annihilated by @xmath ). In this
sector, there are bulk excitations, as well as states containing both
bulk and edge excitations (see Fig. 2.1 ); because of the presence of
the latter, this term also contains both extensive and super-extensive
part. In the thermodynamic limit, the bulk and edge excitations are
independent. Projecting out the gapless edge excitations will remove the
super-extensive part of both Eq.( 3.33 ) and Eq.( 3.34 ). It is
conjectured that for maximally chiral FQHE [ 62 ] we have @xmath and
both are given by the guiding center Hall viscosity. This implies in the
thermodynamic limit the first term of Eq.( 3.33 ) and Eq.( 3.34 ) is
purely super-extensive. Numerical calculation on compact torus geometry
was performed to show the Hall viscosity is the extensive part of Eq.(
3.33 ) when the system is large enough [ 65 ] , both for the Laughlin
and Moore-Read state.

From now onwards we will only focus on the bulk properties of FQHE, so
gapless edge modes will be projected out whenever Eq.( 3.33 ) and Eq.(
3.34 ) are used. In particular, from Eq.( 3.31 ) we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is the regularized result that will be used in the following
section.

### 3.3 Hall Viscosity and Long Wavelength Limit of the Linear Response

In this section, the formalism developed in previous sections will be
applied to calculate quantities that can be potentially measured
experimentally. The linear response of the quantum Hall fluid to a
uniform electric field is known to be a topological index equal to the
filling factor. It has been first noticed by Hoyos and Son [ 90 ] that
the Hall viscosity constitutes the universal part of the long wavelength
corrections to the Hall conductivity, when a spatially varying electric
field is present. The result was derived by requiring the effective
Chern-Simons (CS) theory for integer and fractional quantum Hall fluids
to satisfy diffeomorphism invariance, with the implicit assumption of
Galilean and rotational invariance. Later on, a Kubo formula for the
Hall viscosity is developed by Bradlyn et al. [ 91 ] , from which the
long wavelength limit of the Hall conductivity can be derived for
Galilean invariant IQH fluids.

An intriguing fact of the above analysis is that the only FQH
contribution to the @xmath part of the Hall conductivity is the guiding
center Hall viscosity, a topological quantity independent of the details
of the interaction. The intra-Landau level dynamics, on the other hand,
does not play a significant role, as long as the system is gapped. This
is certainly not explicit from the effective Chern-Simons theory, in
which the Galilean invariance is assumed even for the FQHE. Galilean
invariance generally requires quadratic dispersion of the elementary
excitations. Numerical evidences(See Chapter 2) clearly indicate no
explicit Galilean invariance of the intra-Landau level dynamics. More
importantly, the argument in [ 90 ] does not work if no Galilean
invariance is assumed even for the IQH fluids.

In this section, a general account of the various response functions in
quantum Hall fluids is presented, in which Galilean invariance and
rotational invariance are only treated as special cases. In this way,
the roles played by different metrics in the systems are made explicit,
and contributions from the intra-Landau level dynamics can also be
separated explicitly. The response functions allow us to compute the
linear response to a spatially varying external electromagnetic
perturbation, which is of experimental interest. On a more formal
ground, we can also compute the density response to a spatially varying
deformation of the effective mass tensor. Throughout our calculation the
limit of strong magnetic field is taken. When the Galilean or the
rotational invariance is lacking, the corrections to the transport
coefficients are important when comparing the theory to experiments,
where situations are almost always less ideal. Conceptually, it is
important to understand that even though the Hall conductivity with a
uniform electric field is robust from topological arguments (requiring
no special symmetry), for the Hall viscosity, the relationship to the
experiemental measurement is much less universal. In addition, while
rotational invariant perturbations do not alter the Hall viscosity as
long as the gap is not closed, the quantization of the Hall viscosity to
rational values is generally destroyed once rotational invariance is
broken by the perturbation.

#### 3.3.1 Model and Algebra

The full Hamiltonian of the many-body system in this section is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the single particle Hamiltonian @xmath only depends on @xmath and
satisfies inversion symmetry. The most general form is given by Eq( 1.23
). @xmath is the translationally invariant k-body interaction term for
@xmath . @xmath is the external perturbation. The density operator is
given by @xmath . The cyclotron part of the density operator is given by
@xmath , while the guiding center part is given by @xmath

The gauge invariant current density operator @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is the external vector potential. Up to @xmath
the Fourier component of the current density operator is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.39)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We can divide the current into the longitudinal and transverse part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

The divergence of the longitudinal part gives the electron density:
@xmath , while the transverse part is divergenceless. Given that the
energy scale of @xmath is much larger than the energy scale of @xmath ,
it is also conceptually useful to separate the current density operator
into the cyclotron ( @xmath ) and guiding center ( @xmath ) part by
writing @xmath and @xmath with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.42)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath contains the energy scale on the order of LL spacing, and
one has to be careful not to ignore the LL mixing induced by many-body
interactions. We will also see in later sections that for a rotationally
invariant @xmath , @xmath is well-defined within the projected Hilbert
space, and is a function of only the guiding center coordinates.

Treating @xmath as a small perturbation up to the first order, the
ground state (of @xmath ) expectation value of @xmath is as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath , where @xmath are eigenstates of @xmath with unperturbed
eigenvalues @xmath . @xmath is the Fourier component of @xmath , with
translational invariance imposed.

One has to include counter-terms to impose gauge invariance if @xmath .
This gives an additional term for the current density operator:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.45)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

While the counter-term is important, one can always ignore it first and
deal with it at the end of the calculation, where gauge invariance can
be restored by general argument or explicit subtractions. Leaving out
the counter-term, Eq.( 3.44 ) gives:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the expectation value of the ground state of @xmath .
Thus the first term of Eq.( 3.47 ) only depends on the ground state. The
third term only depends on @xmath , so we can just evaluate it with the
projected Hilbert space defined in Eq.( 1.29 ), at the cost of
introducing an error of @xmath , which we can ignore in the limit of
large magnetic field.

It is also useful to define the change of the operator @xmath with
respect to the rescaling of the magnetic field to be @xmath . For single
particle Hamiltonian @xmath that only depends on the cyclotron
coordinates, and the projected interaction Hamiltonian @xmath that only
depends on the guiding center coordinates, we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.48)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

For the un-projected interaction @xmath that depends on @xmath , one can
define a dilatation operator @xmath , and we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 3.3.2 Response Functions

The relevant response functions considered here are charge-charge,
charge-current and current-current response functions, defined as @xmath
(following the notations of Eq.( 3.44 )), where @xmath . By gauge
invariance we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
     @xmath      (3.52)
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the area of the Hall surface. Here @xmath is the local
Hall conductivity which is now @xmath dependent, while @xmath is the
“magnetic Hall conductivity”, defined as the coefficient of the current
response to the local curl of the magnetic field. From Maxwell’s
equation @xmath is the gradient of the local magnetization density. One
would like to evaluate these response functions in the long wavelength
limit. The incompressibility of the FQHE ensures [ 49 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand, the cyclotron coordinates are bounded operators as
the excitations to higher LLs are energetically suppressed. Similarly
defining @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.55)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.56)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The average angular momentum per particle can be calculated from the
ground state: @xmath , where @xmath is the electron density and @xmath
is the number of electrons; @xmath are the cyclotron and guiding center
metrics. @xmath are the cyclotron and guiding center spin, which are
related to the cyclotron and guiding center part of the Hall viscosity
by @xmath [ 90 ] respectively. From Eq.( 3.55 ) to Eq.( 3.57 ) we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.58)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.59)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

While the current-current response function is relatively simple due to
gauge invariance, the charge-current response requires a bit of
explanation. The first line of Eq.( 3.58 ) is universal, though the Hall
viscosities do not have to be quantized in any way when rotational
invariance is absent. The second line shows the Hall viscosities,
cyclotron metric and guiding center metric are renormalized by @xmath .
This part actually vanishes when @xmath has rotational invariance, as we
will see in the next section. The third line is the non-universal part
that depends on the LL index, and the last line is the contribution from
the intra-Landau level dynamics. Eq.( 3.58 ) and Eq.( 3.59 ) are the
most general expressions for response functions.

To make explicit connection to possible transport experiments, a small
periodic perturbation of the external electrostatic potential with
wavelength @xmath is given by @xmath , where @xmath is a small
parameter. Thus the linear current and density response is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

For a periodic external perturbation of the magnetic field @xmath
induced by the change in the vector potential @xmath , where @xmath are
small, we have @xmath . The linear current and density response is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Eq.( 3.52 ) and Eq.( 3.53 ), the explicit expressions for the
coefficients of the Hall conductivity and magnetic Hall conductivity can
be extracted from Eq.( 3.60 ) and Eq.( 3.61 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.62)
     @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this most general case, the Hall conductivity up to @xmath does
depend on the intra-Landau level dynamics, as can be seen in the last
term of Eq.( 3.62 ). On the other hand, in the long wavelength limit the
magnetic Hall conductivity is completely independent of the details of
the interaction.

#### 3.3.3 Rotationally Invariant @xmath

We now specialize to the case where the inversion symmetric @xmath
contains only one metric. In this case the cyclotron angular momentum
operator is given by @xmath and we have @xmath . Such rotationally
invariant @xmath with metric @xmath can be generally expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

The energies of LLs depend on the expansion coefficients @xmath and
without Galilean invariance, they are not evenly spaced. The LL
wavefunctions, on the other hand, does not depend on @xmath . They are
well-defined by ladder operators @xmath with @xmath , where @xmath is a
complex vector given in Eq.( 1.11 ). With a little algebra one can show
that the guiding center current density operator in Eq.( 3.43 ) can be
written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.65)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.66)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we define the longitudinal and transverse part of the current
operator in Eq.( 3.66 ) and Eq.( 3.67 ) respectively. Note Eq.( 3.65 )
is defined entirely in terms of the projected operators within the
projected Hilbert space.

From Eq.( 3.64 ) we also have @xmath , which greatly simplifies the
transverse part of the current. In particular, the magnetic Hall
conductivity is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is just the spatial derivative of the magnetization density. The
expression for the Hall conductivity is a bit more complicated:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the LL index of the @xmath electron, and @xmath .
Without Galilean invariance the contribution of each LL to the Hall
conductivity is different.

It is also interesting to look at the linear response to small
deformation of the metric @xmath in @xmath . A periodic deformation of
the metric is given by @xmath , and the perturbation is given by @xmath
, where @xmath is the @xmath derivative that does not differentiate
@xmath , i.e. it only takes the derivative of the cyclotron momentum.
The density response is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Interestingly, if we assume that the deformation of the metric preserves
area, e.g. @xmath , then up to lowest order in @xmath , the second term
of Eq.( 3.3.3 ), or the guiding center contribution, vanishes. Thus the
intra-Landau level dynamics does not contribute, regardless of whether
or not the system has full rotational symmetry. It is more useful to
look at the response in the real space, which gives us

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is well-known that the Gaussian curvature of a spatially varying
unimodular metric is given by @xmath up to the linear order in metric
deformation, thus the induced electron density is locally proportional
to the Gaussian curvature for small metric deformation. It is
instructive to look at the case where @xmath is Galilean invariant, and
Eq.( 3.3.3 ) simplifies to a nice formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

Galilean invariance plays an important role in the universality of the
coefficient in front of the Gaussian curvature, which is the cyclotron
Hall viscosity. It is also interesting to see if the guiding center
density also has a similar relationship with the Gaussian curvature of
the guiding center metric. While analytical calculation seems
intractable, the issue can be explored numerically and is part of the
on-going research.

#### 3.3.4 Galilean Invariant @xmath

We can impose Galilean invariance on @xmath by keeping just the
quadratic term in the expansion of Eq.( 3.64 ). In this case we can
define the cyclotron frequency as @xmath with an effective mass @xmath .
With Galilean metric @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this special case there is a nice relationship between @xmath and
@xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note the third term in Eq.( 3.3.4 ) only depends on the intra-Landau
level dynamics, and without further symmetry is non-vanishing even at
the order @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

The transverse part of the guiding center current operator renormalizes
the guiding center spin in a non-universal way depending on the details
of the interaction. However if we impose full rotational symmetry so
that @xmath , the interaction Hamiltonian @xmath commutes with the
guiding center angular momentum operator @xmath , where @xmath . From
Eq.( 3.67 ) it is easy to see that @xmath , so @xmath only connects the
ground state to excited states in the same @xmath sector. On the other
hand we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

As the ground state is an eigenstate of @xmath , @xmath only connects
the ground state to excite states @xmath of a different @xmath sector
(with @xmath ). Thus with full rotational invariance, Eq.( 3.75 )
vanishes up to @xmath and Eq.( 3.3.4 ) is reduced to the same expression
first obtained by Hoyos and Son [ 90 ] .

Numerical tests [ 65 ] from Laughlin model wavefunctions have confirmed
that the guiding center Hall viscosity at filling factor @xmath is
@xmath . The same paper presents a few arguments to show that rotational
invariant perturbation of the Hamiltonian does not change the Hall
viscosity. To complement those arguments, we can easily see from Eq.(
3.76 ) that as long as the perturbation @xmath does not break rotational
invariance, i.e. @xmath , it will not change the ground state
expectation value of @xmath , up to any order of perturbation. This
argument only works if the perturbation theory is applicable, i.e. the
perburtation does not close the gap of the FQH state. In particular for
Laughlin states, the guiding center spin will not change when we
adiabatically move from the model Hamiltonian with pseudopotential
interactions to a physically realistic Coulomb interaction, if
rotational invariance is preserved.

### 3.4 Summary

In this chapter, the geometry aspect of the FQHE is illustrated with
both the Berry phase and the quantum metric induced by area-preserving
deformation of the metric characterizing the quantum fluid. Both single
particle wavefunctions and strongly correlated many-body wavefunctions
are considered. For many-body wavefunctions that describe a droplet of
FQH fluids, the edge contribution has to be carefully removed in order
to obtain the bulk contributions. The bulk contribution to the Berry
phase leads to an important quantity called the “ guiding center Hall
viscosity”, which for rotationally invariant systems is a topological
invariant constituting the universal part of various eletromagnetic
linear responses of the QH fluids in the long wavelength limit.

The geometric aspect of the FQHE will also be reflected in the next two
Chapters, where we will focus on the collective neutral excitations. For
the topological phase of the FQHE to be stabilized, the system has to be
incompressible. We shall see the bulk neutral gap in the long wavelength
limit, or the so-called “quadrupole gap”, is inversely proportional to
the guiding center Hall viscosity, and is proportional to the stiffness
of the FQH droplet against the guiding center metric deformation. In
particular as a sanity check, when the guiding center Hall viscosity
approaches zero (i.e. for IQHE), the intra-Landau level dynamics is
frozen by Landau level projections, and the gap of the neutral
excitations goes to infinity.

## Chapter 4 Model Wavefunctions for the Neutral Excitations

The neutral excitations, or the collective modes of the FQHE defines the
incompressibility of the bulk of the topological phase. Experimentally
these neutral excitations were explored by several groups [ 33 , 34 , 36
, 37 ] ). They can be probed numerically by exact diagonalizations on
geometries without boundary (e.g. sphere or torus geometry, see Fig.(
2.3 ) and Fig.( 2.4 )). For the Laughlin state, there is only one branch
of the low-lying neutral excitations: the magneto-roton mode, first
studied with the single mode approximation (SMA) within the projected
Hilbert space. Starting from the Laughlin ground state @xmath , the SMA
model wavefunctions are constructed as density wave excitations:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the regularized guiding center density operator
satisfying the GMP algebra in Eq.( 1.10 ). In this way, the model
wavefunctions are orthogonal to the translationally invariant ground
state @xmath , and the variational energy is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.2)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where in the first line the variational energy is given in terms of the
ground state dynamical structure factor @xmath , thus @xmath can be
thought of as the average energy of the excitations that couple to the
ground state via density fluctuations. In the second line, the two-body
interaction @xmath is shown explicitly, and @xmath is the ground state
static structure factor. Thus @xmath depends on @xmath for the entire
range of @xmath , even in the limit of @xmath . Details of the SMA can
be found in [ 49 ] .

The SMA model wavefunctions give an upper bound for the energies of the
neutral excitations. However, they are only reasonably good up to the
roton-minimum, at the momentum which is of order @xmath (see Fig.( 2.3
)). For the rest of the section we will try to understand why SMA fails,
and present a numerical scheme that constructs the model wavefunctions
of the neutral excitations for the entire range of the momenta, based on
the formalism of Jack polynomials and clustering properties of many-body
wavefunctions.

### 4.1 Jack Polynomials and Clustering Properties

We first review some basic properties of the Jack polynomials, which are
members of the vector space spanned by symmetric monomials. Each
symmetric monomial is characterized by two numbers: number of variables
@xmath , and the total degree N, which is the sum of the powers of all
variables in the monomial.

The two numbers do not uniquely determine the monomial; we also need to
specify how the total degree is distributed among different variables.
There are two schemes to represent each monomial with a string of
non-negative integers. In the first scheme, the monomial is represented
by @xmath , which is called the “occupation basis”. The string is a
partition of @xmath ; @xmath gives the number of variables with power
@xmath in the monomial. In relation to FQH wavefunctions on the disk,
where the variables are @xmath with @xmath , the subscript of @xmath is
the orbital index. Thus the wavefunction for the @xmath orbital is given
by @xmath . For example, [2,0,0,1] gives @xmath , [1,1,0,1] gives @xmath
. We can thus label each monomial by its corresponding partition @xmath
so that all monomials are denoted as @xmath .

In the second scheme, the monomial is represented by @xmath , and now
the subscript of @xmath is the particle index, same as the subscript of
@xmath ; but the symmetrization @xmath is only over the particle indices
of @xmath . In this chapter, the monomials will be represented in the
first scheme unless otherwise stated.

Within the vector space of symmetric monomials there is a non-hermitian
Laplace-Beltrami operator:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The operator conserves @xmath and N. The kinetic term K is diagonal in
the monomial basis, while @xmath . Partitions @xmath have the same total
degree, but @xmath is squeezed from, or dominated by @xmath . Explicitly
by squeezing we mean

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath and an integer @xmath . We write @xmath and mathematically
there is a dominance rule that @xmath if and only if @xmath for all i.
The set of basis @xmath with @xmath is a partially ordered set. The
property of K and V allows us to recursively construct the eigenvectors
of @xmath in the monomial basis. These eigenvectors are called Jack
polynomials (or Jacks). We denote such polynomials as @xmath , and its
expansion in the monomial basis is given by @xmath , where the
coefficient of @xmath is normalized to one , and all @xmath are
dominated by @xmath : @xmath . The coefficients of expansion are given
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus after fixing @xmath and @xmath , the Jack polynomial is
characterized by a root configuration @xmath , and it consists of only
basis squeezed from @xmath , with coefficients determined by @xmath
through Eq.( 4.1 ). In the limit @xmath the Jack polynomials reduce to
the monomials of the root configuration: @xmath , which are orthogonal
to each other. When @xmath is non-zero, the Jack polynomials deform into
the squeezed basis, and they are in general not orthogonal anymore (Note
Eq.( 4.1 ) is not Hermitian).

The coefficients @xmath are highly structured. It can be shown from the
recursion relation that it has a product rule [ 93 ] . While in
principle @xmath can be complex, here we only consider the case when
@xmath is real. When @xmath is positive, the coefficients of Jacks are
well-defined. On the other hand, the wavefunctions for FQHE are all
constructed with negative @xmath . When @xmath is negative, it is not
always true that all of the coefficients of expansions are well-defined.

It was shown in [ 59 ] that for negative rational @xmath , with k, r
integers and @xmath coprime, @xmath is well-defined if @xmath is @xmath
admissible: there are no more than @xmath “particles” in r consecutive
“orbitals” in the root configuration. These Jack polynomials form a
basis for the space of symmetric polynomials with the clustering
property that it vanishes when @xmath variables coincide.

The criterion shown above does not exhaust all well-defined Jack
polynomials for negative @xmath [ 60 ] . Define a partition @xmath to be
(k,r,s,N) admissible when @xmath and @xmath is @xmath admissible. Denote
the partition by @xmath and @xmath is well-defined. Moreover, @xmath
satisfies HW condition when @xmath .

This new set of Jack polynomials corresponds to symmetric polynomials
with new clustering properties reflected in the root configuration (the
result is not proven but checked numerically):

1) The polynomial vanishes when s clusters of @xmath particles are
formed, but remains finite when only @xmath or fewer clusters of @xmath
particles are formed.

2) The polynomial is finite when @xmath particles are at the same point
(but vanishes for more particles because of the first clustering
property). Letting @xmath , we have @xmath .

Unlike (k,r,N) admissible states, (k,r,s,N) states do not span the space
of symmetric polynomials with the above clustering properties.

Before ending this short introduction of Jack polynomials, one should
note that the Jack polynomials are symmetric with the particle indices,
which is appropriate for bosonic FQHE wavefunctions. To obtain fermionic
FQHE wavefunctions, one uses the fact that for any symmetric monomial
@xmath , there is a one-to-one mapping to an antisymmetric monomial
@xmath : the multiplication of the Vandermonde (given by @xmath ) is all
that is needed. Thus throughout this chapter, an “antisymmetric Jack
polynomial” is always obtained from multiplying the Vandermonde
determinant to the symmetric Jack polynomial, parametrized by the same
@xmath .

### 4.2 Numerical Construction of Neutral Excitations

In this section, we only treat fermionic FQHE wavefunctions, while the
corresponding bosonic FQHE wavefunctions can be trivially obtained by
dividing the factor of the Vandermonde determinant. The wavefunctions
will be expanded in terms of the occupation basis. A typical occupation
basis is a string of binary numbers like @xmath , where @xmath now can
only be either @xmath (occupied) or @xmath (unoccupied). The total
degree @xmath now corresponds to the total angular momentum of the
wavefunction (where the vaccum is set to have zero angular momentum).
For example, a state @xmath with four particles has a total angular
momentum @xmath . An example of the mapping between the monomial
wavefunctions and occupation basis is shown as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the ground state and quasihole states of the Read-Rezayi series
(including the Laughlin and Moore-Read states), the model wavefunctions
are Jack polynomials. Quasielectron states, on the other hand, are more
complicated [ 60 ] because they contain local defects where electrons
are forced to get closer to each other than allowed in the ground state.
The same difficulty arises in neutral excitations which consist of
quasielectron-quasihole pairs. However, we do assume the excitations are
local defects of the ground state root configuration, and each model
wavefunction for the neutral excitations can be expanded into its root
configuration and the corresponding squeezed basis. This defines the
Hilbert space of each model wavefunction; the next step is to determine
the coefficients of these squeezed basis.

#### 4.2.1 Magneto-roton Mode at @xmath

The explicit set of root configurations for the magneto-roton mode is
shown as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The states are labeled by their total angular momentum @xmath on the
sphere, though once the single particle normalization is removed the
wavefunctions are suitable for any genus-0 manifold (e.g.
sphere/disk/cylinder [ 63 ] ). In Eq.( 4.2.1 ) the black dot
schematically indicates the position of a quasielectron, while the white
dot that of a quasihole. To determine the position of a quasiparticle,
one can look at any three consecutive orbitals in the root
configurations above, and count the number of electrons to see if it
violates the ground state clustering property. In this particular case,
if there is more (less) than one electron in every three consecutive
orbitals, we have a quasielectron (quasihole), which is located right
below the middle of the three consecutive orbitals.

From the root configuration we can see that in the long wavelength
limit, i.e. when @xmath is small, the quasihole merges with the
quasielectrons at the north pole (to the left of the root
configuration), creating a quadrupole excitation. Note the ground state
is in the sector of @xmath , and the neutral excitations start at @xmath
, thus in the long wavelength limit the quadrupole excitation can be
viewed as a “spin-2 graviton”.

Due to rotational invariance on the sphere, we impose the highest weight
condition on the wavefunctions @xmath to single out from the degenerate
states the one with quasiparticles piled up at the north pole. On the
disk this also means picking out a state with no center-of-mass
rotation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the monomial with partition @xmath [ 59 ] . The
summation is over all partitions @xmath that can be squeezed from the
root configuration @xmath . The constraints in Eq.( 4.2.1 )
substantially reduce the Hilbert space dimension (e.g., the basis
dimension is less than 20 for 10 particles. A formal explanation of this
issue will be presented in Chapter 5). The @xmath state actually
vanishes, when we impose the constraints to generate the coefficients of
expansions. For now we take it as a numerical observation; more insight
will be shed on this issue in Chapter 5. The resulting lowest-energy
eigenstates of the Hamiltonian, restricted to this Hilbert space, are
very good approximations to the exact magneto-roton mode.

Instead of exact diagonalization within the restricted Hilbert space, we
follow the spirit of Jack polynomials and impose the following
constraint:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the operator corresponding to the first Haldane
pseudopotential of which the Laughlin state is the exact zero energy
state, and @xmath annihilates an electron at the @xmath th orbital. This
additional constraint renders @xmath unique by enforcing the following
clustering property: the wavefunction is vanishing only when two or more
clusters of two particles coincides in the real space.

The resulting implementation is numerically much less expensive, with
variational energies only slightly above the lowest energy state
obtained in the Hilbert space defined by only constraints Eq.( 4.2.1 ),
and improving with the increase in system size. Two features of the
resulting wavefunction is worth noting: firstly, when the geometric
normalization factors of the single particle orbitals on the sphere are
removed, the coefficients of the decomposition in the Fock space are
integers, with the coefficient of the root configuration normalized to
one; secondly, there is a “product rule” [ 92 , 93 ] if the first five
orbitals are treated as one “big” orbital, which allows us to generate a
large subset of coefficients recursively. An approximation to @xmath can
be built from the product rules; the overlap between the approximate and
exact model wavefunctions is high and increasing with system size (see
Table I). The approximate state is thus used as the seed state, or the
initial trial state for the Lanczos procedure that imposes the highest
weight condition. The use of the approximate state as the seed state can
reduce the computing time by a factor of four.

To check how good our model wavefunctions are, we can evaluate their
variational energies and compare them with exact diagonalization. In
Fig. 4.1 , the variational energies are plotted versus momentum @xmath ,
where @xmath is the number of orbitals in the LLL. This is how the
linear momentum is obtained from the angular momentum on the sphere. We
include the data for a number of system sizes and rescale the magnetic
length @xmath by a factor @xmath to minimize the finite size effects.
For the model @xmath Hamiltonian and Coulomb Hamiltonian, the dispersion
obtained using the model wavefunction is in excellent agreement with the
results from exact diagonalization, both in small @xmath and large
@xmath regime. The model wavefunctions compare favorably with the exact
diagonalization eigenstates, with 99% overlap for 10 electrons.

#### 4.2.2 Neutral Excitations at @xmath

The same approach can be used to construct the neutral excitation
wavefunctions for the entire Read-Rezayi series, once the root
configuration is identified. For the magneto-roton mode of the
Moore-Read state at filling factor @xmath , the root configurations are
given by

In addition to the magneto-roton mode, there is another branch of
neutral excitations for MR state due to its non-abelian nature. This is
the so called neutral fermion mode [ 79 , 98 ] , which can be physically
interpreted as the breaking of paired particles in the ground state. The
root configurations of the neutral fermion mode thus contain an odd
number of particles, and are shown as follows:

The Moore-Read ground-state root configuration is given by 2 electrons
in 4 consecutive orbitals [ 59 ] . Similarly to the Laughlin state, any
deviation from the uniform background density yields the position of the
quasihole/quasielectron. Unique model wavefunctions can be constructed
by imposing the constraint Eq.( 4.2.1 ), and in addition a modified
constraint Eq.( 4.7 ) that reads @xmath , where @xmath is the Moore-Read
three-body model Hamiltonian. Their variational energies are plotted in
Fig. 4.2 .

It should be emphasized that for both the Laughlin and Moore-Read case,
the neutral excitations enter the multi-roton continuum in the long
wavelength limit. The continuum starts at the energy that is double the
energy gap of the roton minimum. While this makes exact diagonalization
ambiguous, the root configurations give clear physical interpretations
for the modes for the entire momentum range. Again, the @xmath state
(and @xmath state for the neutral fermion mode) vanishes with the set of
constraints we impose. Thus in the long wavelength limit, the NF mode
can be identified as a spin- @xmath “gravitino”, or the “supersymmetric
partner” of the “graviton” in the magneto-roton mode.

### 4.3 Validity of SMA

It is very instructive to compare the model wavefunctions gerenated in
the previous section with SMA wavefunctions obtained from the ground
state @xmath by the guiding center density modulation in Eq.( 4.1 ). The
SMA yields excitation energies manifestly depends on the guiding center
structure factor the ground state. On the sphere, the ground state has
the total angular momentum @xmath , and the SMA wavefunction with total
angular momentum @xmath is obtained by boosting one electron with
orbital angular momentum @xmath . The projection into the LLL is
equivalent to the projection of the boosted single-particle state into
the sub-Hilbert space of the total spin @xmath . Formally we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the electron index, and @xmath is defined by its action
on the single electron state @xmath , where @xmath are the Clebsh-Gordon
coefficients, and @xmath are the spherical harmonics. This is a result
of the Wigner-Eckart Theorem, and due to rotational invariance we can
set @xmath in Eq.( 4.8 ). The dispersion of the SMA wavefunctions is
plotted in Fig. 4.3 along with that of our model wavefunctions.

For small momenta the variational energies of the two classes of
wavefunctions agree very well, while the SMA mode evidently becomes
invalid for momenta larger than the magneto-roton minimum. Note that at
@xmath the SMA wavefunctions only involve the elements of the basis
squeezed from the same root configuration that defines our model
wavefunctions. Taking the Laughlin @xmath as an example, we now prove
the SMA wavefunctions are actually identical to the model wavefunctions
at @xmath . By the product rule of the Jack polynomial, we can write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the relative coefficients between different terms are ignored
because they are unimportant for the proof. The partitions @xmath , and
@xmath involves the rest of the squeezed basis. It is easy to check that
@xmath . We thus have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Again, the coefficients are suppressed in Eq.( 4.10 ), and @xmath for
@xmath . Thus the SMA wavefunctions satisfy exactly the same constraints
as the model wavefunctions, which makes them identical. Note that for
@xmath the SMA wavefunctions contain unsqueezed basis components with
respect to the root configurations used in our model wavefunctions, and
the proof breaks down.

It is also clear from the construction of the model wavefunctions why
SMA ceases to give good upper-bound for the neutral excitations at large
momenta. The nature of the neutral excitations at large momenta is
characterized by a dipole excitation of a quasihole-quasielectron pair.
The separation of the quasihole and quasielectron is proportional to the
momentum. Heuristically, this is because the Lorentz force on the
opposite charges is proportional to the momentum and tends to pull them
apart. In SMA the momenta of the neutral excitations are given by the
boost of a single particle. The construction in the previous section
shows the neutral excitations are actually many-body excitations,
whereby the momentum of the state is shared by particles between the
quasihole-quasielectron pair. At large momenta the number of particles
involved in the neutral excitations is also large, making SMA an
increasingly bad approximation.

### 4.4 Geometric Interpretation in the Long Wavelength Limit

From Eq.( 4.2 ) the variational energy of the SMA in the long wavelength
limit is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the total number of flux quanta. Eq.( 4.13 ) is the
@xmath coefficient of the guiding center structure factor [ 89 ] , which
we know is the guiding center spin. Thus the guiding center spin
controls the gap of the neutral excitations in the long wavelength
limit. In particular, the guiding center spin of the IQHE is zero, and
the gap goes to infinity. This should be the case, since the guiding
center dynamics are frozen in the IQH.

The area-preserving diffeomorphism generator @xmath defined in Eq.( 1.19
) can also be used to deform the guiding center metric with a unitary
operator @xmath as shown in Eq.( 1.20 ). In the limit of small
deformation, we have @xmath , and the variational energy is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is precisely the energy gap as @xmath , when Eq.( 4.14 ) is given
by an infinitesmal uniform deformation of the guiding center metric
(which defines the shape of the FQH droplets). The four tensor @xmath
can thus be interpreted as the “guiding center shear modulus ”. Since we
know the SMA describes neutral excitations exactly in the long
wavelength limit, one can now understand the quadrupole excitation as
the energy cost of deforming the guiding center metric. It is gapped
from the ground state because of the zero-point quantum fluctation from
the non-commutivity of the guiding center coordinates. This reinforces
the idea that the quadrupole excitation can be identified as a “spin-2”
graviton, with its dynamics controled by the geometry of the FQH
droplets.

### 4.5 Summary

This Chapter presents a numerical scheme to generate the model
wavefunctions for the neutral bulk excitations in both the Laughlin and
Moore-Read state. The high overlap between the model wavefunctions with
those obtained with exact diagonalization suggests the physics of the
neutral excitations both for the magneto-roton mode and the neutral
fermion mode is well captured by the root configurations of the model
wavefunctions. The comparison of the model wavefunctions with the single
mode approximation (SMA) shows that SMA gives the correct model
wavefunctions only in the long wavelength limit. With that insight the
quadrupole gap can be shown to be related to the energy cost of a
uniform deformation of the guiding center metric.

Note the model wavefunctions generated in the chapter are not exact
eigenstates of any known model Hamiltonians (in particular, they are not
the exact eigenstates of the model Hamiltonians of the Read-Rezayi
series). One should, however, think of these model wavefunctions as the
prefered basis in describing the dynamics of the FQHE, since physical
interactions in a two-dimensional system is non-universal and dependent
on many experimental conditions (unlike in high energy physics where the
presence of Lorentz invariance strongly constrains the physical systems,
leading to “much cleaner” theories as compared to condensed matter
physics). The magneto-roton mode and the neutral fermion mode can be
treated as the “elementary excitations” of the FQHE that in the long
wavelength limit merges into the multi-roton continuum. The interaction
Hamiltonian (either Coulomb interaction or the more artificial
pseudopotential interactions) will cause these elementary excitations to
scatter and decay, but it is conjectured based on both numerical and
analytic (see next chapter) evidences that they have appreciable
lifetime in the thermodynamic limit for physically realistic systems, as
long as the FQHE incompressible phase persists.

## Chapter 5 Analytical Wavefunctions for the Collective Modes

The model wavefunctions numerically generated in the previous chapter
lead to several interesting observations. Firstly, the model
wavefunctions for both the magneto-roton mode and the neutral fermion
mode seem to agree exactly with those generated in [ 94 , 95 , 97 ] . In
the latter, the neutral excitations of the FQHE are mapped to the
excitons of the IQHE made of composite fermions (CF). The many-body
wavefunction of an exciton in the IQH is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have @xmath particles in the LLL and one particle in the first
Landau level (1LL), and the exciton has total angular momentum @xmath
relative to the ground state. To form the composite fermion wavefunction
at @xmath , @xmath fluxes are attached to each particle:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The model wavefunctions for the magneto-roton mode are obtained by
projection into the LLL:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the mangeto-roton mode and neutral fermion mode of the MR state, a
bipartite CF picture is employed [ 95 ] , but the scheme is essentially
the same. The resultant wavefunctions are numerically found to be
identical to those generated in the previous chapter. This is an
intriguing fact, as the underlying physical pictures for these two
approaches are quite different.

The numerical comparison between the two sets of model wavefunctions are
made easy because of the second interesting fact about these model
wavefunctions: if we strip away the single particle normalizations of
the many-body wavefunctions expanded in the occupation basis, followed
by normalizing the coefficient of the root configuration to unity, all
the coefficients of the neutral excitations are integers for the
Laughlin states, and integers or rational numbers for the MR states.
This is generally characteristic of Jack polynomials, where all
coefficients are essentially generated via combinatorics. However, as is
emphasized in the previous chapter, model wavefunctions for the neutral
excitations are not Jack polynomials.

The last interesting observation is the existence of a product rule very
similar to Jack polynomials, as shown in the previous chapter. One would
then conjecture these wavefunctions are very similar to the Jack
polynomials. Just as the ground states and charged excitations of the
FQHE, there are natural ways of writing down wavefunctions for the
neutral excitations requiring no variational parameters whatsoever. This
is indeed the case, as will be illustrated in the next few sections.

### 5.1 Algebraic Structures of the Edge Neutral Excitations

It is instructive to first explore the algebraic properties of the edge
neutral excitations. The edge neutral excitations correspond to the bulk
charged quasihole excitations; both are obtained by inserting fluxes
into the ground state of the quantum Hall fluid. Labeling the edge
excitations by @xmath , with the ground state taken as @xmath , the
number of edge excitations in each momentum sector is given by the
number of ways of inserting quasiholes in the bulk. Thus the counting of
the edge states at @xmath is given by the partition number @xmath . For
finite systems, the counting is only valid for @xmath , where @xmath is
the number of particles. Let us take the Laughlin state as an example.
For model Hamiltonians, the subspace of the edge modes in each momentum
sector is spanned by Jack polynomials satisfying the admission
conditions [ 59 ] . The root configurations for a few momentum sectors
are listed as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath      @xmath            
     @xmath      @xmath            
                 @xmath            
     @xmath      @xmath            (5.4)
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- -------

The counting of Laughlin edge states is @xmath and all Jack polynomials
in Eq.( 5.1 ) are in the null space of the model Hamiltonian. They are
therefore gapless excitations at the edge. The counting also matches
that of the Virasoro algebra of @xmath bosons in the conformal field
theory (CFT). This is not merely a coincidence. The @xmath algebra in
Eq.( 1.12 ) has a Virasoro sub-algebra

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

One should note, though, that the negative modes of the Virasoro algebra
is missing (so Eq.( 5.5 ) is also called the Witt algebra).
Nevertheless, it is easy to show for the model Hamiltonian @xmath , if
@xmath , then @xmath . This is because in real space @xmath . Taking
@xmath as the Laughlin ground state, the edge states with @xmath are
given by @xmath with @xmath , each of them has zero energy and is a
linear combination of the appropriate Jack polynomials (which themselves
are not orthogonal).

The edge states generated by acting “Virasoro operators” @xmath on the
ground state is complete. This is the microscopic connection of the
chiral edge modes to the chiral CFT. To see the connection of the edge
mode to the bulk mode, one notice that @xmath also generates the
complete edge modes given by @xmath . This is related to the Kac-Moody
algebra that describes the edge states [ 68 , 102 , 103 ] . With
translational invariance we have @xmath , thus each state has an
infinite degeneracy associated with the center-of-mass rotation. If this
“trivial degeneracy” is removed, the space of edge states at @xmath is
spanned by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The states in Eq.( 5.6 ) are linearly independent but not orthogonal.
The edge mode space for each @xmath is spanned only by the highest
weight states , once the center of mass degeneracy is removed. The
counting of such edge modes for @xmath is given by @xmath

The canonical conjugate of @xmath is given by @xmath . Since the ground
state @xmath is the highest weight state, we have @xmath , while @xmath
are also the highest weight state. In analogy to the edge modes, at
@xmath there is a subspace of highest weight states spanned by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

One can diagonalize the Hamiltonian within the highest weight subspace
spanned by states in Eq.( 5.7 ) in @xmath sector. The ground state in
each momentum sector is a good trial wavefunction for the magneto-roton
mode. In particular at @xmath , the highest weight subspace is empty, so
the @xmath elementary neutral excitation does not exist.

One should note the edge modes generated by Virasoro operators or
Kac-Moody operators are the @xmath charge sector of the edge
excitations, which in CFT is obtained by inserting the @xmath current
into the ground state correlator. For the Laughlin state only the charge
sector is present, so the scheme above generates all the edge
excitations. For the non-abelian MR state, there is an additional
statistical sector from the fermionic majorana mode, and the counting of
the edge modes are thus different. The details of this subtelty can be
found in [ 68 ] and the references therein, and will not be pursued
further in this thesis.

### 5.2 Magneto-roton modes in Laughlin State

Let us start by presenting the wavefunctions of the neutral excitations
for the fermionic Laughlin state at filling factor @xmath in the LLL,
where @xmath is odd. On the sphere the ground state is the Laughlin
wavefunction in total angular momentum @xmath sector, or the fermionic
Jack polynomial @xmath [ 61 ] . By stripping away the single particle
normalization factor, the Laughlin ground state is given by Eq.( 1.1 ).
The model Hamiltonian in Eq.( 2.4 ) can be written as @xmath , with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

To make comparison with the wavefunctions in the previous chapter, the
family of neutral excitations at @xmath sector (we omit the exponential
part of the wavefunction, which is irrelavent in the LLL) is labeled by
the corresponding total angular momentum @xmath on the sphere:

  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------
                 @xmath      
                 @xmath      
                 @xmath      
     @xmath                  (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath indicates antisymmetrization over all particle indices, and
@xmath means products of only pairs @xmath that do not appear in the
prefactors to the left of it. Thus the @xmath state, which is the
quadrupole excitation in the thermodynamic limit [ 32 ] , is obtained
from the ground state by reducing the power of one pair of particles
(which we can choose arbitrarily as particle @xmath and @xmath due to
the antisymmetrization) by two , followed by antisymmetrizing over all
particles. This scheme naturally forbids an @xmath state by pair
excitation, since if we reduce the power of one pair of particles by one
, antisymmetrization kills the state.

The @xmath state is generated by pairing particle @xmath with another
particle (which we arbitrarily label as particle @xmath ) and reducing
their pair power by one. It is now clear how the modes in other momentum
sectors are generated. Naturally for a total of @xmath particles, the
family of the neutral excitations ends at @xmath , agreeing with the
numerical scheme in the previous chapter. Indeed all wavefunctions here
satisfy the highest weight condition, and the states relax to the ground
state far away from the excited pairs; these are exactly the conditions
we used to numerically generate the unique model wavefunction in each
momentum sector.

### 5.3 Magneto-roton Mode and Neutral Fermion Mode in MR State

The same scheme applies to the MR state. It is instructive to first see
how the MR ground state is obtained. The Laughlin wavefunction at half
filling is given by @xmath . For fermions this is not a valid state;
instead the ground state was constructed by a pairing mechanism [ 20 ] ,
which is also a Jack polynomial @xmath . The pairing reduces the power
of each pair of particles by one . For @xmath particles, the
antisymmetrization reproduces the Pfaffian up to a constant as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last line of Eq.( 5.3 ) is the familiar Pfaffian for the MR
ground state. The explicit use of antisymmetrization instead of the
Pfaffian allows us to naturally extend to the case with an odd number of
particles: starting from the Bosonic Laughlin wavefunction at half
filling, every two particles form a pair except for just one particle.
Naturally the “ground state” of the neutral fermion mode is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note both @xmath in @xmath runs from @xmath up to @xmath , with pairs
appearing before @xmath excluded. Though we can no longer represent Eq.(
5.3 ) as a Pfaffian, comparing the antisymmetrized products we can see
Eq.( 5.3 ) is really the same as that of Eq.( 5.3 ), only with an odd
number of particles. For the model three-body Hamiltonian, this is a
zero-energy abelian quasihole state @xmath in the angular momentum
sector @xmath . The magneto-roton mode and the neutral fermion mode are
obtained from Eq.( 5.3 ) and Eq.( 5.3 ) respectively by reducing the
powers in the Jastrow factor the same way as what is done for the
Laughlin state.

### 5.4 A Generalized Formal Scheme

To write down the analytic wavefunctions in a more formal way, we define
@xmath . Notice the Pfaffian for @xmath particles can be written as
@xmath , where @xmath . The magneto-roton mode for the Laughlin state is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the symmetrization over all particle indices. From the
bosonic Laughlin wavefunction at filling factor @xmath we can impose
pairing to obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

For an even number of electrons we have @xmath and Eq.( 5.13 ) is the MR
ground state. The magneto-roton modes are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

For an odd number of electrons we have @xmath and Eq.( 5.13 ) is the MR
quasihole state of Eq.( 5.3 ). The neutral fermion modes are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this way, the class of ground state model wavefunctions are
generalized to include neutral excitations under a universal scheme.

### 5.5 A Lattice Diagram Representation

An intuitive way to visualize the family of the neutral excitations is
to map the particles onto a lattice, where each lattice site represents
a particle. Since for the FQHE we have a quantum fluid instead of a
solid, every two lattice sites interact with each other. The number of
bonds between each pair of lattice sites equal to the power of the pair
of particles in the wavefunction. As an example we consider the
simpliest Laughlin state at @xmath , so for the ground state every two
lattice sites are connected by three bonds, as shown in Fig. 5.1 .

The neutral excitations are obtained by breaking the bonds between
lattice sites, as shown in Fig. 5.2 . We can view the entire family of
the neutral excitations as elementary excitations centered around a
single red lattice site. Note the lattice pattern uniquely defines the
many-body wavefunction, and different types of “elementary excitations”
can be identified with different patterns of bond-breaking around a
single lattice site.

This suggests lattice representation of the MR state and its
magneto-roton mode with the same scheme, as shown in Fig. 5.3 . The
representation of the MR quasihole state and those of the neutral
fermion modes are given in Fig. 5.4 .

### 5.6 Quadrupole Gap in the Thermodynamic Limit

The analytic wavefunction is useful in calculating the magneto-roton
mode energy gap in the long wavelength limit. For the Laughlin state,
the energy gap is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

We already know from [ 32 ] that in @xmath and @xmath sector, SMA is
exact for the magneto-roton model wavefunctions. Writing the Laughlin
wavefunction as @xmath and using the guiding center ladder operators
@xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In the thermodynamic limit, the normalization constant of Eq.( 5.17 ) is
thus related to the long wavelength expansion of the ground state
guiding center structure factor, as shown in Eq.( 3.34 ), which leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The numerator of Eq.( 5.16 ) can be calculated using the plasma analogy.
Note in Eq.( 5.2 ), before antisymmetrization the term only has one pair
of particles with relative angular momentum smaller than @xmath . We
thus have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the normalization constant of the Laughlin state. We
note that @xmath projects out states with relative angular momentum
@xmath , which can be integrated over. The numerator is thus equivalent
to evaluating the norm of the following wavefunction:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be evaluated as the free energy of a two-dimensional
one-component plasma (OCP) on the disk with radius @xmath and elementary
charge @xmath , where particle @xmath interacts with the rest of the
particles with charge @xmath . We thus obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Both @xmath are free energies of OCP in the thermodynamic limit ( @xmath
), where @xmath is for @xmath particles, each with charge @xmath and
interacting with lthe ogarithmic two-body interaction together with a
neutralizing background of radius @xmath ; for @xmath , we have the same
neutralizing background with @xmath particles of charge @xmath , and
exactly one particle with charge @xmath . Thus @xmath is the free energy
cost of fusing two particles of charge @xmath to create a particle of
charge @xmath , which is an @xmath effect.

Similar calculations can be carried out for the magneto-roton mode in
the MR state. Analogous to Eq.( 5.17 ) we have @xmath , and in the long
wavelength limit we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the guiding center spin for the MR state, and @xmath is
the standard two-component plasma free energy for the MR ground state [
43 ] . The charge for the interaction between the two components is
given by @xmath , while the charge for the interaction between one of
the components and the neutralizing background is given by @xmath .
@xmath is the free energy cost of fusing three particles to create one
particle for each component with charge @xmath but with the same @xmath
.

The evaluation of the long wavelength gap of the neutral fermion mode is
less transparent. The difficulty lies with evaluating the normalization
constant of @xmath . There is no SMA for the neutral fermion mode, and
it is not known if in the thermodynamic limit the gap should be
inversely proportional to the guiding center spin. On the other hand
@xmath can be mapped to a two-component plasma as well, and we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the free energy of the 2-component plasma similar to that
of @xmath with only one difference: there is exactly one more particle
carrying charge @xmath that interacts with the neutralizing background,
and its @xmath charge is zero. This is how an unpaired fermion in the MR
state is interpreted in the plasma analogy. Furthermore, @xmath is the
energy cost of fusing the unpaired fermion with one pair of two other
fermions, creating a particle with charge @xmath but again with z ero
@xmath .

### 5.7 Summary

The numerical results from the previous chapter help to identify the
analytic wavefunctions constructed in this chapter. From a practical
point of view, these compact analytic forms are useful, because now the
energy gap of the quadrupole excitation in the thermodynamic limit can
be related to the free energy cost of the fusion of charges in the
plasma energy, and is inversely proportional to the guiding center spin
which characterizes its topological order. This is the first time that
the plasma analogy is extended to the neutral excitations of the FQHE,
and the analogy not only applies to the wavefunctions, but also to the
energy spectrum as well. Since the neutral excitations in the long
wavelength limit is buried in the multi-roton continuum, it is important
to calculate the decay rate of these neutral modes. Numerical
calculation has been performed to show that even in the continuum the
decay rate of the neutral modes is very small [ 96 ] . This opens up the
possibility of experimental detection of these modes. A more detailed
analysis of the decay rate of the neutral modes is currently research in
progress.

The neutral excitations in the single component FQHE can now be
understood in several coherent frameworks, at least for the Laughlin and
Moore-Read states, with possible generalization to the entire
Read-Rezayi series. The composite fermion picture maps the FQHE to the
IQHE of the particle-vortex composite, and in this framework the neutral
excitations are excitons of composite fermions. The Jack polynomial
formalism enables us to describe the wavefunctions of the ground states,
the quasihole and quasiparticle states, as well as the neutral
excitations in a unified way with root configurations and squeezed basis
constrained by clustering properties. It is now satisfactory to see that
compact analytic real space wavefunctions in electron coordinates, which
initiated the theoretical understandings of the FQHE, can now be
extended from ground states and charged excitations to include neutral
bulk excitations. One could still ask if the neutral excitations
proposed so far completely describes the energy spectrum of the FQHE.
Experimental measurements on the Laughlin state [ 99 ] suggest a
splitting of the neutral modes in the long wavelength limit, with
theoretical explanations proposed from a hydrodynamic point of view [
100 ] , and the composite fermion point of view [ 101 ] . It would be
interesting to see if the lattice diagram can be generalized to produce
suitable analytic wavefunctions that describes the multi-roton
excitations and the splitting of the neutral modes as well.

It is well-known in the literature that the wavefunctions of the gapless
edge excitations on the disk can be obtained by multiplying the ground
state with symmetric polynomials. With model Hamiltonians these are the
zero energy states in the positive @xmath angular momentum sectors [ 102
, 103 ] . For the Moore-Read state, in addition to the charge sector
generated by the symmetric polynomials, there are also edge excitations
obtained from the statistical sectors via inserting Majorana fermions [
85 ] . The analytic wavefunctions of these states are known explicitly.
One can also generate wavefunctions by similar operations not only on
the ground state, but also on the bulk neutral excitations obtained in
this paper. These wavefunctions describe states such that each contains
both bulk and edge excitations. We call these roton-edge excitations,
which explain the gapped low-lying multitude of states below the
multi-roton gap in disk geometry. Recent studies show [ boyang ] that
for the Laughlin state, each bulk neutral excitation generates a branch
of quasi-degenerate roton-edge excitations with the same Virasoro
counting as the zero-energy edge states (See Fig.( 2.1 )). For the
Moore-Read state, however, the counting of the roton-edge states seem
different because of the lack of the linear independence between states
in the same momentum sector, possibly due to the non-abelian nature of
the FQH fluid.

## Chapter 6 Summary and Outlook

In this thesis, I explored the physics of the fractional quantum Hall
effect from a geometric point of view, where the dynamics are governed
by the guiding center coordinates with non-commutative spatial
components. The recognition of the geometric aspect of the FQHE leads to
a better understanding of the guiding center Hall viscosity, which is a
topological index that defines the energy gap of the neutral excitations
in the long wavelength limit. The guiding center Hall viscosity also
captures the universal part of the transport coefficients, when the FQH
fluid is perburbed by a spatially varying electromagnetic field. It is
also shown that the experimental measurement of the guiding center Hall
viscosity as proposed by Son and collaborators requires both Galilean
and rotational invariance. The microscopic calculation presented in this
thesis include all general corrections when those symmetries are absent,
with different geometric dependence made explicit.

The neutral excitations of the FQHE in the Laughlin state and the
Moore-Read state are presented both from a numerical perspective and a
more general analytic construction. Using the formalism of Jack
polynomials, the model wavefunctions for the neutral excitations are
constructed for the entire range of momenta, improving earlier attempts
with the single mode approximation. The numerical construction with the
root configurations allows us to identify the long wavelength limit of
the neutral excitations as “spin-2 gravitons” (with “spin @xmath
gravitino” as the super-partner in the Moore-Read case). It is also
proven that the single mode approximation gives exact “graviton”
wavefunctions, which allows us to understand the neutral gap in the long
wavelength limit as the energy cost of area-preserving deformation of
the ground state guiding center metric, and is inversely proportional to
the guiding center Hall viscosity as a result of zero-point quantum
fluctuation of the non-commuting coordinates in the projected Hilbert
space.

The analytic wavefunctions for both the magneto-roton modes and the
neutral fermion modes presented in this thesis unify previous numerical
constructions of the neutral excitation model wavefunctions, including
the one presented in the thesis, as well as the other scheme from the
perspective of the composite fermions. The analytic wavefunctions have
simple representations in terms of lattice diagrams, and allow analytic
computation of the dynamics of the neutral excitations in the long
wavelength limit. It was shown that the usual plasma picture for the
Laughlin and Moore-Read state, which was previously only applicable to
the ground state wavefunctions, has interesting connections to the FQHE
neutral excitations. The energy cost from area-preserving deformation of
the guiding center metric can be viewed as the free energy cost of
fusing charged particles with a neutralizing background in the plasma
analogy.

It would be interesting to see how to experimentally measure the guiding
center Hall viscosity, which is a result of strong correlation between
electrons and is sensitive to rotational invariance as well as the edge
effects. Additional theoretical work is needed to fully understand the
quantization of the guiding center Hall viscosity when the interaction
moves away from the model Hamiltonians where the Laughlin and Moore-Read
model wavefunctions are exact. Numerically, one good way of probing the
guiding center Hall viscosity is to locally deform the guiding center
metric and measure the guiding center density response, and there are
ongoing works on cylinder geometry with DMRG technique [ 104 ] . This
calculation is complementary to the work on torus, where the Hall
viscosity is measured by deforming the periodic boundary condition. In
addition to that, it can also shed light on the formulation of the
geometric effective field theory of the FQHE, where the guiding center
dynamics are determined by the coupling of the composite boson guiding
center spin to the fluctuation of the guiding center metric.

For neutral excitations in the FQHE, there are unanswered questions on
the stability and life-time of the neutral excitations, especially in
the long wavelength limit where the quadrupole excitation merges into
the continuum of multi-roton excitations. With a better understanding of
the entire branch of the neutral excitations, one can investigate the
tunability of the energy of the mode from a dynamic point of view. For
the Moore-Read state with both the magneto-roton mode and the neutral
fermion mode, it is interesting to see if in the long wavelength limit
this pair of “super-partners” converge to the same energy. There are
interesting questions on the transition of the FQHE from an
incompressible phase to a fermi liquid or nemetic phase [ 105 ] ; the
thermodynamic gap can be closed either by the roton minimum going soft,
or the quadrupole excitation going soft. For the latter, it is also
interesting to see if one can bring the quadrupole excitations below the
multi-roton minimum by tuning the Hamiltonian, so it can be probed
experimentally.