# Chapter 1 Millisecond Pulsars

Pulsars (PSRs) are rapidly spinning, strongly magnetized neutron stars
(NSs) that emit beams of radiation crossing the line of sight of the
observer once per rotation and thus producing a detectable pulse
(Stairs, 2004 ) . PSRs are commonly classified on the basis of their
observed properties: the spin period ( @xmath ) and the period
derivative ( @xmath ).

In the framework of this classification it is possible to distinguish
two main groups (see Figure 1.1 and Lorimer & Kramer, 2005 ) . The
larger group is composed of “normal PSRs” which have @xmath s and @xmath
s s @xmath . A second significant group clearly separated and located in
the lower left side of the diagram in Figure 1.1 consists of PSRs
characterized by @xmath ms and @xmath s s @xmath . These systems are
called Millisecond Pulsars (MSPs) because of their very short spin
periods. Lines of constant magnetic field and characteristic age (see
Appendix) are drawn in Figure 1.1 , showing that typical magnetic fields
and ages are of the order of @xmath G and @xmath yr for normal PSRs, and
@xmath G and and @xmath yr for MSPs.

The first MSP was discovered in 1982 by Backer et al. ( 1982 ) and Alpar
et al. ( 1982 ) who finally unveiled the nature of the source 4C21.53.
Backer et al. ( 1982 ) suggested that the observed radio properties of
4C21.53 could be interpreted assuming that this system is a PSR with
@xmath of 1.558 ms, hence rotating near the maximum rate possible for a
NS. They also proposed that it was not a young system, despite its large
rotational velocity and energy. At the same time Alpar et al. ( 1982 )
suggested that NS with sufficiently low magnetic field, accreting from a
surrounding Keplerian disk for long time, can be spin up to millisecond
periods. Therefore they proposed that 4C21.53 belongs to a new class of
objects, thereafter defined as MSPs. They have short @xmath , long
apparent ages, and pulsed optical, X-ray and @xmath -ray fluxes
significantly below those expected for canonical PSRs with similar
@xmath .

### 1.1 The formation of MSPs

The commonly accepted formation scenario of MSPs (the canonical
recycling scenario ; Alpar et al., 1982 ; Bhattacharya & van den Heuvel,
1991 ) states that MSPs form in binary systems containing a slowly
rotating NS that, during a phase of heavy mass accretion from an
evolving, non-degenerate, Roche Lobe (RL) filled companion, is
eventually spun up to millisecond spin periods. The binary system, at
its final stage, will be formed by a deeply peeled or even exhausted
star (as a white dwarf; WD) orbiting a rapidly spinning PSR (e.g. Lyne
et al., 1987 ; Alpar et al., 1982 ; Bhattacharya & van den Heuvel, 1991
; Lorimer & Kramer, 2005 , see Figure 1.2 for a schematic representation
of such scenario) . Moreover, if the companion has been completely
evaporated, the final configuration could even consists of an isolated
MSP.

MSPs are thought to be the descendants of Low Mass X-ray Binaries
(LMXBs; binary systems with an accreting NS and characterized by X-ray
luminosities larger than @xmath erg s @xmath ). Strong support to this
evolutionary scenario is given by the recently discovered transient
source IGR J18245 @xmath 2452/ PSR J1824 @xmath 2452I (Papitto et al.,
2013 ) in the Globular Cluster (GC) M28, which has been found to swing
between rotation-powered (“radio dominated”) and accretion-powered
(“X-ray dominated”) states on short timescales, providing conclusive
evidence for the evolutionary link between LMXBs and radio MSPs.

### 1.2 Demography of MSPs

The second date to remember in the history of MSP science is 1987, when
the first MSP in a GC has been discovered (Lyne et al., 1987 ) .
Currently, 132 of the 324 known MSPs are located in GCs (Patruno catalog
¹ ¹ 1 A recent compilation of MSPs both in GCs and in the GF is
available at the following web site:
http://apatruno.wordpress.com/about/millisecond-pulsar-catalogue/ ).
Finding these objects has required high-performance computing,
sophisticated algorithms, state-of-the-art instrumentation, and deep
observations with some of the largest radio telescopes on the world,
primarily Parkes, Arecibo, and the Green Bank telescope (Ransom, 2008a ,
see Figure 1.3 ) .

As shown in Figure 1.3 , 144 PSRs ² ² 2 see http://www.naic.edu/ @xmath
pfreire/GCpsr.html for an updated list , out of which @xmath are
canonical MSPs ( @xmath ms), have been detected in 28 GCs and most of
them are hosted in three clusters: Terzan 5 with 34 objects, 47 Tucanae
with 23, and M28 with 12.

Indeed Terzan 5 deserves particular attention, since it contains the
largest known population of MSPs (Ransom et al., 2005 , and Freire list)
. Interestingly, it has been recently shown that Terzan 5 is not a
genuine GC, but it more likely is the relic of a primordial building
block that contributed to the formation of the Galactic bulge (Ferraro
et al., 2009a ; Lanzoni et al., 2010 ; Origlia et al., 2011 , 2013 ) .
Two main populations with metallicities [Fe/H] @xmath and [Fe/H] @xmath
have been discovered in this system ³ ³ 3 Note that only another GC-like
stellar system has been found to show a similar behavior: @xmath
Centauri in the Galactic halo. Indeed the CMD of @xmath Centauri shows a
variety of sub populations (Lee et al., 1999 ; Pancino et al., 2002 ;
Ferraro et al., 2004 , 2006a ; Sollima et al., 2007a ) with different
iron content (Norris & Da Costa, 1995 ; Sollima et al., 2005 ; Johnson &
Pilachowski, 2010 ; Origlia et al., 2003 ) , and for this reason it is
considered to be the remnant of a disrupted dwarf galaxy accreted by the
Milky way (Bekki & Freeman, 2003 ; Romano et al., 2007 ) . (Ferraro et
al., 2009a ; Origlia et al., 2011 ) . Their iron and @xmath -element
content indicates that the metal-poorer component formed from gas
enriched by a huge amount of Supernovae II, while the metal-richer one
further requires a significant contribution of Supernovae Ia. In order
to account for its remarkably high metallicity, it has been suggested
that Terzan 5 was likely 100 times more massive in the past than
observed today (its current mass being @xmath , Lanzoni et al., 2010 ) .
Such a scenario would naturally explain also the extraordinary
population of MSPs currently observed in Terzan 5. In fact, because of
its large primordial mass and the huge amount of Supernovae II, most of
the produced NSs were likely retained within the deep potential well of
the system. In addition, its extremely large collision rate (Verbunt &
Hut, 1987 ; Lanzoni et al., 2010 ) could have favored the formation of
binary systems containing NSs and promoted the recycling process that
finally generated the large population of MSPs now observed in Terzan 5.

### 1.3 MSP preferred habitats

Although the absolute number of known MSPs is larger in the Galactic
Field (GF) than in GCs (192 MSPs and 132, resepctively), its value per
unit mass is significantly larger in GCs. In fact, about 40% of known
MSPs are found in GCs, although the Galaxy mass ( @xmath ; Little &
Tremaine, 1987 ; Kochanek, 1996 ) is 100 times larger than that of the
whole GC system.

Such a peculiarity can be explained by considering that, in the
ultra-dense GC cores, dynamical interactions can promote the formation
of binaries suitable for recycling NSs into MSPs (e.g. Davies & Hansen,
1998 ) . Indeed GCs are very efficient “furnaces” for generating exotic
objects, which are thought to be the result of the evolution of various
kinds of binary systems originated and/or hardened by stellar
interactions (e.g. Clark, 1975 ; Hills & Day, 1976 ; Bailyn, 1992 ;
Ferraro et al., 1995 , 2009b , 2012 ; Ivanova et al., 2008 ; Bellazzini
et al., 1995 ) . In fact, LMXBs, cataclysmic variables and blue
stragglers are preferentially found in GCs (e.g. Paresce et al., 1992 ;
Bailyn, 1995 ; Verbunt et al., 1997 ; Ferraro et al., 2001a , 2009b ;
Pooley et al., 2003 ; Fregeau, 2008 ) . An additional observed property
thought to be connected to the dynamical origin of MSPs in GC is the
distribution of orbital periods ( @xmath ). In fact GC MSPs have on
average shorter orbital periods than the GF population (see Figure 1.4
). This is likely due to the fact that, at least in the densest GCs,
most wide orbit binary systems are disrupted ⁴ ⁴ 4 In this respect the
empirical determination of the fraction of primordial binaries in GCs is
of paramount importance. Some progresses have been made in this issue in
the recent past (see the work by Sollima et al., 2007b and Milone et
al., 2012 ) also providing interesting relations as that found by
Sollima et al. ( 2008 ) between the blue straggler star specific
frequency and the binary fraction in low density clusters. .

Hence, the formation and evolution of MSPs in GCs are highly affected by
dynamical interactions, while in the GF they are thought to follow the
natural evolutionary paths of primordial binaries. In order to quantify
the role of dynamics in GCs, and in analogy with what done for the LMXBs
population (Katz, 1975 ; Clark, 1975 ) , several studies have been
performed to check whether the number of MSPs correlates with some GC
dynamical parameter. It has been estimated (Verbunt & Freire, 2013 , and
references therein) that the total two-body encounter rate within a GC
core of mean density @xmath , velocity dispersion @xmath and radius
@xmath is given by @xmath . Indeed, the existence of a correlation
between the number of MSPs and the @xmath parameter has been
investigated by many authors (see e.g. Pooley et al., 2003 ; Hui et al.,
2010 ; Bahramian et al., 2013 ) . The strong correlation with @xmath is
shown in Figure 1.5 .

In addition, Verbunt & Freire ( 2013 ) proposed a second order
classification. According to these authors, despite the successful use
of @xmath as indicator of the MSPs population, there are a few aspects
which @xmath does not describe. In fact, in some GCs the MSP population
is mainly contributed by binaries, in others by single and exotic
systems thought to be the result of exchange interactions. In order to
better characterize different populations, they proposed to use also the
rate of encounters of a binary with a single star, given by @xmath , as
useful indicator. In particular they found that the higher is the value
of @xmath , the higher is the number of isolated and of exchange
interaction products. Hence, Verbunt & Freire ( 2013 ) concluded that
@xmath is a reasonable indicator of the number of MSPs, while @xmath
provides a first indication of the characteristics of the PSR
populations in GCs. In particular, the larger @xmath is, the more
deviations from the canonical scenario are expected.

### 1.4 Deviations from the canonical scenario

As described above, the formation and evolution of GC MSPs are thought
to be highly affected by dynamical interactions, while in the GF they
are thought to follow the natural evolutionary paths of primordial
binaries. In addition, as suggested by Clark ( 1975 ) , given the
extremely high stellar densities in the cores of some GCs, it
occasionally happens that many old, dead NSs lurking in the core may
“collide” with a binary, disrupt it and acquire a (new) companion (the
so-called “exchange-interactions”). The latter then evolves, fills its
RL and starts transferring matter to the NS, forming a LMXB. In such a
scenario it is likely to observe a non-degenerate companion, bloated
because of the influence of the NS. Hence, a non-degenerate nature of
the companion seems to be strongly related to the cluster core dynamics
and in particular to the efficiency of exchange interactions.

Therefore the characterization of MSPs and in particular the relative
frequency of non-degenerate and canonical companions could be used as a
powerful diagnostics of GC internal dynamical processes (Ferraro et al.,
1995 ; Goodman & Hut, 1989 ; Hut et al., 1992 ; Meylan & Heggie, 1997 ;
Pooley et al., 2003 ; Fregeau, 2008 ; Ferraro et al., 2012 ) . Of course
understanding the interplay between stellar dynamics and stellar
evolution is extremely complex, and many details of the involved
processes are not well understood yet (Hut et al., 2003 ; Sills et al.,
2003 ) .

Moreover, thanks both to dedicated surveys of @xmath -ray sources and to
new blind searches (see Roberts, 2011 , and references therein) the
number of MSPs in the GF has significantly increased. In particular,
several MSPs with non-canonical companions have been identified. Since
exchange interactions are expected to be negligible in the GF, many open
questions still remain about their formation and evolutionary paths.

### 1.5 A “mass/type” Classification of MSPs

The MSP population is mainly divided in isolated and binary MSPs. Of the
known MSPs, about @xmath are isolated and @xmath are members of binary
systems. The latter group can be also divided in different classes
related to the mass range and the evolutionary stadium of the companion:

-   High Mass MSPs: characterized by a massive companion with mass
    @xmath (likely a NS) ;

-   Intermediate Mass MSPs (IMMs): they have a relatively massive
    companion with mass @xmath (likely a CO/ONe-WD) ;

-   Low Mass MSPs: characterized by a companion with mass @xmath .

This classification clearly reflects the differences in the latest
stages of evolution of stars with low, intermediate and high mass, that
evolve to Helium (He), Carbon-Oxygen (CO) or Oxigen-Neon-Magnesium
(ONeMg) WDs, and NS, respectively (van Kerkwijk & Kulkarni, 1995 ) .

#### 1.5.1 High mass MSPs

Double NS binary PSRs consist of two NSs, at least one of which is
pulsating at radio frequencies (Stairs, 2004 ) . A few high mass MSPs
with candidate NS companions are known (e.g. see Anderson et al., 1990 ;
Jacoby et al., 2006 ; Lynch et al., 2012 ) , the most secure detection
being the double PSR system J0737 @xmath 3039 (Burgay et al., 2003 ;
Lyne et al., 2004 ) . In this case a pulsating radio signal has been
detected from both NSs. As proposed by van Kerkwijk et al. ( 2005 ) ,
high mass MSPs can form in binaries with a NS and a massive star. Unless
the orbit is very wide, the massive star will overflow its RL during its
evolution and an unstable mass transfer to the NS will occur. Mass
accretion on the NS spins it up and reduces its magnetic field by still
unknown mechanisms. Finally, if the remaining core is massive enough to
experience a supernovae explosion, the resulting “recycled” PSR is left
in an eccentric binary with another NS.

#### 1.5.2 Intermediate mass MSPs

IMMs are thought to be generated from binaries with donor masses
typically of @xmath . After that the supernovae explosion generates the
primary (a NS), the secondary evolves and recycles the PSR through mass
transfer, eventually forming a CO- or ONeMg-WD with a He envelope (van
den Heuvel, 1994 ; Tauris et al., 2000 ; Taam et al., 2000 ) . The
latter scenario may be characterized by a prolonged accretion phase,
which will likely lead to spinning at shorter periods and with a more
strongly reduced magnetic field with respect to the case of a shorter
accretion phase. The WD is expected to have still a hydrogen envelope
(van Kerkwijk et al., 2005 ) . Moreover, the PSR spin periods are
usually a few tens of milliseconds, meaning that the PSRs are less
recycled that the fastest spinning ones. Seventeen candidate IMM systems
are currently known (van Kerkwijk et al., 2005 ; Jacoby et al., 2006 ;
Tauris et al., 2012 ; Burgay et al., 2012 ) .

#### 1.5.3 Low mass MSPs

The Low mass MSPs category is slightly more complex and a further
classification, likely connected to the type of the companion, is
needed:

-   “Canonical” binary MSPs likely hosting He-WD companions with masses
    @xmath , as expected in the context of the canonical recycling
    scenario ;

-   “Red back” (RB) systems in which the companion likely is a Main
    Sequence (MS) star with mass @xmath ;

-   Black widow (BW) systems in which the companion is an almost
    exhausted MS star or a brown dwarf (BD) with a very low mass, @xmath
    .

This classification is well depicted in Figure 1.6 .

##### “Canonicals”

According to the canonical recycling scenario the low mass companion to
the NS starts a stable mass transfer when it evolves and overfills its
RL. A lot of mass is transferred leading to fast spin periods (ten
milliseconds), low magnetic field, and, presumably, greatly increased
mass. If mass transfer started before the He flash, a He core WD will be
left with a H envelope. If it started afterward, a WD with a CO core
will be formed and the atmosphere may be of either H, or He. In both
cases circular orbits are expected (van Kerkwijk et al., 2005 ) .
“Canonical” low mass binary MSPs have magnetic field strengths of about
@xmath G and likely have typical He-WD companions of mass @xmath .

Moreover, in the case of canonical He-WD companions the evolutionary
scenario leads to a few predictions about the properties of the binary
pulsars: there should be a relation between the companion mass and the
orbital period, one between eccentricity and orbital period, and the
neutron star mass should have increased (Phinney & Kulkarni, 1994 ;
Tauris & Savonije, 1999 ; van Kerkwijk et al., 2005 ; Tauris, 2011 ) .
As an example, in Figure 1.7 are reported the observed orbital periods
as function of companion masses for MSPs with He-WD companions (see also
Figure 2 in van Kerkwijk et al., 2005 ) . The expected relation between
these two parameters (solid line in Figure 1.7 , Tauris & Savonije, 1999
) is in good agreement with the observations. In particular more massive
companions tend to be members of binary systems with longer periods.

##### Red Backs and Black Widows

RBs show irregular eclipses and erratic timing, often have hard X-ray
counterparts, and they likely have non-degenerate (e.g. MS) companions
with a few tenths of a solar mass (Ransom, 2008b ) . Until a few years
ago they have been observed only in GCs. For this reason they were
thought to be the result of exchange interactions, where a MSP acquires
a new MS companion. However, in the last few years, beyond the 10
observed in GCs, at least 7 RBs have been discovered in the GF (Roberts,
2013 ) thus requiring some mechanisms able to form these objects also by
the evolution of isolated binaries.

BWs have very low mass companions ( @xmath ) and they are often
characterized by eclipses of the radio signal occurring when the PSR
passes behind its companion, thus indicating that the low mass companion
is considerably bloated or is evaporating. In some cases the eclipse of
the radio signal is so extended in time that it implies a size of the
companion larger than its RL, suggesting that the obscuring material is
plasma released by the companion because of the energy injected by the
PSR. However since the size of the eclipse depends on the inclination
angle (King & Beer, 2005 ) , not all BWs are expected to show eclipses.

King et al. ( 2003 ) suggested that the formation of BWs needs two
phases: a first one in which the companion spins-up the NS to
millisecond periods and a second one where the companion is ablated by
the PSR. In general it is difficult to describe the two phases using the
same star as a companion. However, in GCs, where encounters and exchange
interactions are frequent, the WD companion responsible for the PSR
spinning-up can be replaced by a MS star via an exchange interaction.
BWs are frequently found with BDs companions (van Kerkwijk et al., 2011
; Pallanca et al., 2012 ; Romani, 2012 ; Breton et al., 2013 ; Kaplan et
al., 2013 ; Archibald et al., 2013 ; Bellm et al., 2013 ; Stappers et
al., 2001 ) . However these stars were likely captured by the PSR when
still having larger masses, but then they suffered a progressive
vaporization in a long X-ray binary phase because of the strong
irradiation flux by the PSR. While this scenario could be applied in
GCs, it is less likely in the GF where dynamical interactions are less
probable. Indeed, until recently only few BWs were known in the GF and
they were thought to be formed in GCs and then ejected. However the
increasing number of BWs discovered in the last years (to date 17 BWs
are known in the GF, while 18 are observed in GCs; Patruno catalog;
Roberts, 2013 ) asks for a new interpretative scenario able to
efficiently create BWs in the GF.

As noticed above, the formation of RBs and BWs is not well understood.
Both populations have circular orbits and periods @xmath days, but they
have companion masses of the order of @xmath and @xmath , respectively
(Chen et al., 2013 ) . Chen et al. ( 2013 ) have recently proposed a
common formation scenario for these two classes of objects. They found
that the determining factor for producing either BWs or RBs is the
different efficiency of the irradiation process. In particular this
bimodality is likely related to the geometric effect of beaming that
depends on the orientation of the PSR magnetic field axis with respect
to the direction of the companion star.

### 1.6 Eccentric MSPs

In addition to the “mass/type classification” a bimodality in the
eccentricity values could also be used as an element of classification.
In fact, most of MSPs are in circular orbits ( @xmath ), but a few
having a significantly high eccentricity value (see Figure 1.8 ).

Eccentric binary MSPs are important because in these systems it is
possible to measure at least the rate of advance of periastron. If this
is totally due to the effects of general relativity, it yields an
estimate of the total mass of the binary. Moreover, when more
post-Keplerian measurements become available, it is possible to derive
the masses of both components and in some cases to test general
relativity (Lynch et al., 2012 ; Jacoby et al., 2006 , see also
Appendix) .

In principle these systems should be rare because eccentricities should
be reduced by tidal effects in case of a bloated companion (e.g. during
the LMXB phase). The main scenario proposed to explain the existence of
eccentric binary systems requires either a recent dynamical interaction
(likely scenario in GCs), or a double NS system. This is in agreement
with the observed properties of MSPs. In fact, in the GF the fraction of
MSPs in circular orbits correspond to about @xmath of the total (with
only a few, recently detected, exceptions, Deneva et al., 2013 ; Barr et
al., 2013 ) , while in GCs it is reduced to @xmath (see Figure 1.8 ). It
is also interesting to note that almost all the RBs and BWs are in
circular orbits, likely because of circularization due to tidal effects
from their non-degenerate companion.

However, Deneva et al. ( 2013 ) and Barr et al. ( 2013 ) recently
discovered two binary MSPs with unusual eccentricities ( @xmath ) in the
GF. To explain the existence of such unexpected objects, Freire & Tauris
( 2013 ) proposed an alternative mechanism to the canonical recycling
scenario . They proposed that MSPs can also be formed directly through a
“rotationally-delayed accretion-induced collapse” of a
super-Chandrasekhar mass WD. In such a way the accretion ceases
completely before the formation of the MSP and there will be no
re-circularization.

## Chapter 2 Optical study of companions to MSPs

The identification of companions to MSPs and the study of their nature
is a fundamental step to investigate the formation and evolution of
binary MSPs, and to clarify the recycling processes occurred. In the
case of GCs (Ferraro et al., 2001b , 2003a ; Cocozza et al., 2008 ;
Pallanca et al., 2010 , 2012 , 2013a , 2013b ) , it also represents a
crucial tool for quantifying the occurrence of dynamical interactions,
understanding the effects of crowded stellar environments on the
evolution of binaries, determining the shape of the GC potential well,
and estimating the mass-to-light ratio in GC cores (e.g., Phinney, 1992
; Bellazzini et al., 1995 ; Ferraro et al., 2003b ; Possenti et al.,
2003 ) .

Typically the companion star to a MSP is expected to be a MS or a WD
(see Chapter 1 for details). Therefore its emission should peak in the
Ultraviolet-optical region of the electromagnetic spectrum. The study of
these targets essentially consists of two steps: first, the photometric
identification and characterization of the companion and then, if it is
bright enough, a spectroscopic follow-up to constrain the orbital
parameters of the system and its (likely anomalous) chemical
composition.

In this Chapter I will describe the needed data-set and the adopted
analysis procedure to perform the search and a thorough study of MSP
companions.

### 2.1 Photometric analysis

#### 2.1.1 The data-set

The photometric data-sets used in this Thesis have been obtained through
both space and ground-based telescopes (see Figure 2.1 for a
comparison). Since MSPs in GCs are typically found in the innermost and
highly crowded regions, where they sink because of their large mass,
their search requires the use of high resolution space data. At odd with
the GF, where crowding does not represent an issue, the use of
ground-based facilities guarantees a good enough quality for this kind
of studies.

The space data used in this Thesis have been obtained with the Wide
Field Camera 3 (WFC3), the Advanced Camera for Survey (ACS) and the Wide
Field Planetary Camera 2 (WFPC2) on board the Hubble Space Telescope
(HST). All these detectors are characterized by a pixel scale of the
order of @xmath /pixel and a field of view (FOV) ranging from @xmath for
the WFPC2, to @xmath for the ultraviolet visible (UVIS) channel of the
WFC3 and @xmath for the Wide Field Camera of ACS. Such characteristics
allowed to resolve the crowded stellar population in the central region
of GCs. Note that the typical Full Width Half Maximum (FWHM) of the
stellar brightness profile is about 0.06-0.08 for these data (see
Section 2.1.2 for more details).

The data-sets used to study MSPs in the GF consist of ground-based
images. Unlike the space observations, the ground-based images are
limited by the perturbative effects of the atmosphere and the FWHM is at
most of the order of @xmath . In Figure 2.1 we show a comparison between
a ground-based image (obtained with the Wide Field Imager mounted at the
MPG/ESO telescope at La Silla) and a space image of the core of the
Galactic GC NGC 6440. Clearly, stars can be properly resolved only by
using the latter.

The ground-based data-sets used in this Thesis, have been acquired with
the FOcal Reducer/low dispersion Spectrograph 2 (FORS2) mounted at the
ESO Very Large Telescope (VLT). Two resolution modes and two binnings
are available. The combination of these settings leads to different
pixel scales ( @xmath /pixel or @xmath /pixel). Moreover, in order to
obtain deep images free from the blooming due to heavy saturation of
bright stars, which can significantly limit the search for faint
objects, all the brightest stars in the FOV have been covered with
occulting masks.

In order to perform a thorough analysis in the context of the study of
MSPs, ad hoc data-sets made of deep, multi-wavelength and multi-epoch
exposures are required. In fact multi-band observations allow to derive
colors and hence to build CMDs and color-color diagrams, that are useful
diagnostics to study MSP companions (e.g. to constrain their degenerate
or non-degenerate nature). Also observations in a narrow filter,
corresponding to the H @xmath transition, are a useful diagnostic to
select objects with H @xmath excess (likely due to some ionized
material).

On the other hand also a multi-epoch data-set is an important
requirement, because it allows to detect both luminosity modulation on
time-scales of the orbital period, likely related to the orbital motion,
and possible significant changes of magnitude between different epochs.

#### 2.1.2 The photometric analysis

In order to fully exploit the telescope capabilities it is important to
adopt an accurate method for the data analysis.

In this Thesis, the photometric analysis has been carried out by using
the Point Spread Function (PSF)-fitting method, which consists in
reproducing the star brightness profile with an analytical model. The
most commonly used analytical model for resolved stars is a Moffat
function (Moffat, 1969 ) , which can be expressed in the following way:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are two parameters related to the curve width
and the height of the wings of the brightness profile, respectively. The
FWHM depends on these two quantities following the relation FWHM= @xmath
.

The crucial advantage of using the PSF-fitting method is that, once
derived a proper PSF-model, it allows to estimate the magnitude of each
star independently of the surrounding region. In particular, it allows
to reproduce the intrinsic brightness profile of each star by avoiding
the contamination from close (maybe brighter) stars and by accurately
estimating the background level. Such qualities are crucial in crowded
environments (as GCs). In fact, as shown in Figure 2.2 , even in the
case of partially overlapped stars, the PSF-fitting allows to deconvolve
the light contribution of each component, thus recovering the effect of
mutual contamination.

To apply this photometric method we used the daophot package (Stetson,
1987 ) and the software romafot (Buonanno et al., 1983 ) .

To model the PSF, it is important to use a large number ( @xmath ) of
bright, isolated and not saturated stars homogeneously distributed in
the FOV. Starting from a family of PSF-models, the most appropriate for
a given image is chosen on the basis of a @xmath -test performed on the
selected stars. This procedure is automatically performed by the PSF
routine of daophot . Once the best-fit PSF-model has been selected, it
is applied to all the sources detected in the images.

In order to obtain a list of stars as much complete as possible we
typically used the following approach. We combined all the images in the
sample by using the daophot MONTAGE2 routine, thus to obtain a
master-frame with a S/N larger that in single images. Since the
master-frame is the result of a combination of images obtained with
different filters, it also has a higher sensitivity to different stellar
spectral types. On the master-frame we performed by using the daophot
FIND routine a search for sources at @xmath from the local background
(where @xmath is the standard deviation of the measured background),
thus obtaining a master-list of stars.

Finally, starting from the master-list we forced the PSF-fitting on each
single image by using the daophot packages ALLSTAR and ALLFRAME
(Stetson, 1987 , 1994 ) . This procedure allows us to achieve an
improved determination of the star centroids and a better reconstruction
of the star intensity profiles.

In the final catalog both single image instrumental magnitudes and the
mean magnitudes in each filter are reported. In particular, for each
star the magnitudes estimated in different images are homogenized (see
Ferraro et al., 1991 , 1992 ) and their weighted mean and standard
deviation are adopted as the star magnitude and its photometric error,
respectively.

#### 2.1.3 Calibration

We reported the instrumental magnitudes to a standard photometric
system. HST data were reported to the VEGAMAG (e.g. Sirianni et al.,
2005 ) photometric system, while ground-based data to the classical
Johnson one (Johnson & Morgan, 1953 ; Johnson et al., 1966 ) .

In the case of observations made with HST, the PSF and the
instrumentation performances are very stable. Therefore the calibration
is performed by adopting very simple equations. In particular. the
calibrated magnitude ( @xmath ) is given by Holtzman et al. ( 1995 ) :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the instrumental magnitude measured as @xmath and @xmath
is the exposure time of a given observation. The Zero Point (ZP) is the
term that reports the magnitude to a particular photometric system and
it depends also on the wavelength. Its value is available at the
instrumentation web pages. The Aperture Correction (AC) quantifies the
missed light in the wings of a truncated (for computational reasons)
PSF-model.

In the case of the ground-based observations, since the PSF depends on
the photometric conditions during the observations (mainly the seeing),
proper calibration equations have to be derived every time. This can be
achieved by observing, with the same configuration of the scientific
target observations and during the same night, a few photometric
standard stars. Then, by comparing the measured instrumental magnitudes
in the standard field with those tabulated, for example in the standard
Stetson catalog available on the CADC web site ¹ ¹ 1
http://cadcwww.dao.nrc.ca/community/STETSON/standards/ (Stetson, 2000 )
, it is possible to derive the proper transformation to report the
instrumental magnitudes to the Johnson system. Finally, the derived
equations are applied to the instrumental magnitudes obtained for the
scientific targets.

#### 2.1.4 Astrometry

The astrometry is the procedure that consists in the conversion from
instrumental coordinates relative to the detector, to the absolute
coordinate system, e.g. in terms of Right Ascension and as Declination ,
commonly cited both as ( @xmath , @xmath ) and ( @xmath , @xmath ).

Since the PSR radio positions are known with a very high precision (
@xmath ), obtaining accurate astrometry is a critical requirement for
searching for the optical companions to binary MSPs.

Instrumental coordinates (x,y) are reported to the absolute coordinate
system ( @xmath , @xmath ) through the cross-correlation with catalogs
of astrometric standards (as the GSCII ² ² 2 The Guide Star Catalogue-II
is a joint project of the Space Telescope Science Institute and the
Osservatorio Astronomico di Torino. Space Telescope Science Institute is
operated by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy,
for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration under contract
NAS5-26555. The participation of the Osservatorio Astronomico di Torino
is supported by the Italian Council for Research in Astronomy.
Additional support is provided by European Southern Observatory, Space
Telescope European Coordinating Facility, the International GEMINI
project and the European Space Agency Astrophysics Division. , 2MASS and
PPMXL; Skrutskie et al., 2006 ; Roeser et al., 2010 ) . To this aim we
use CataXcorr ³ ³ 3 CataXcorr is a code aimed at cross-correlating
catalogs and finding astrometric solutions, developed by P. Montegriffo
at INAF - Osservatorio Astronomico di Bologna. This package has been
used in a large number of papers of our group in the past 10 years. , a
software that finds the best roto-translation between the (x,y) and the
( @xmath , @xmath ) coordinates by using the stars in common with the
publicly available catalogs of astrometric standards. Then the best
astrometric solution is applied to all the stars in a given catalog.
Usually, given the current instrumentations and standard catalogs, the
root mean squares of the transformations are of the order of @xmath in
both @xmath and @xmath . Hence the astrometric solution typically has an
accuracy @xmath .

ACS and WFC3 images heavily suffer from geometric distortions within
their FOVs. Hence, before reporting the instrumental coordinates to the
absolute system they have to be properly corrected. To this aim it is
possible to use equations quoted by Anderson ( 2003 ) , Bellini & Bedin
( 2009 ) and Bellini et al. ( 2011 ) .

There are cases, however, for which it is not possible to find
astrometric standards. This is typically the case for the cores of GCs
and, therefore, for the HST data-sets. In these cases, the astrometric
procedure requires an additional step. We complement the HST sample with
ground-based wide-field catalogs. We then place the latter onto the
absolute coordinate system by using the stars in common with the
available astrometric standard catalogs. Then we use the stars in common
between the HST and the ground-based data as secondary astrometric
standards. At this point we re-run the same procedure described above
and finally obtain the absolute astrometry for the HST sample.

The centre of gravity of each cluster ( @xmath ) has been determined by
averaging @xmath and @xmath coordinates of a subsample of stars
(typically the high-resolution sample) following the iterative procedure
described in Montegriffo et al. ( 1995 , see also ) .

Another important point to deal with when GF stars have to be put in the
absolute reference frame, is proper motions. Indeed, proper motions in
the GF may not be negligible, thus strongly affecting the internal
astrometric accuracy. In order to obtain a precise astrometric solution
also in these cases it is necessary to use catalogs of astrometric
standards also listing the stellar proper motions (e.g Roeser et al.,
2010 ) , and compute the absolute position of the standard stars at the
same epoch of the target observations. Then, a standard procedure can be
applied to cross-correlate the observed list of positions with the
proper motion-corrected reference catalog.

### 2.2 Photometric search for MSP companions

Starting from the information obtained with radio observations, the
identification of the optical companions to MSPs is based on three
signatures: positional coincidence, location in the CMD and optical
variability.

##### Positional coincidence

To identify a companion to MSP a necessary (but not sufficient)
condition is the positional coincidence: the candidate companion has to
lie within the astrometric error-box, as shown in Figure 2.3 . The PSR
position is accurately ( @xmath ) known from the radio observations.
Therefore it is extremely important to have a good astrometric solution
for the optical catalog. This is particularly relevant for the case of
crowded GCs, where more than one candidate within the positional error
is typically found.

##### CMD position

A data-set made of multi-band (to derive colors) and deep (to reach the
faintest objects) observations, allows us to use the CMD as an important
tool to identify and characterize MSP companions. In fact, since
different kinds of companions (likely related also to different radio
properties) are expected, the CMD position is a good indicator of the
nature (degenerate or not) of the companion. In particular it can allow
us to distinguish if the companion is a WD as predicted by the canonical
recycling scenario , or if it is a non- or semi-degenerate companion,
like a MS or a BD (see Figures 2.4 and 2.5 ).

In addition, from the CMD position, it is possible to estimate the
companion mass through the comparison with theoretical stellar
evolutionary models. In the particular case of a WD companion the
position along WD cooling sequences is a good indicator of mass and age
⁴ ⁴ 4 This is important because by comparing the derived cooling age
with the spin down age is possible to put some constrain on the
spin-down theory (see Appendix). . It is important to note, however,
that in the case of a non-degenerate star that filled its RL, the mass
estimate obtained by projecting its position on a theoretical model,
might be overestimated because the stellar structure might be not in
hydrostatic equilibrium.

In addition, when three observational bands are available the
color-color diagram can be investigated. This is particularly
advantageous in the case of MSPs in the GF because it offers the
possibility to accurately estimate the value of the stellar extinction
E(B-V).

Finally, if narrow band observations around the wavelength of the H
@xmath transition are available, it is possible to photometrically
constrain the presence of H @xmath excess, likely due to the presence of
ionized material (see Figure 2.6 for an application of this method).

##### Variability

Beside the positional coincidence, the main signature of a companion is
the presence of a magnitude modulation with a period compatible with the
PSR orbital motion (known from radio observations).

A method to identify variable stars possibly related to a given PSR
consists in using radio orbital parameters (see Appendix) to phase the
magnitude measures of stars located at the PSR nominal position and then
check if the light curve is consistent with the PSR orbital motion. Of
course a better approach would be to blindly derive orbital parameters
from optical observations and then compare them with those known from
radio. However, this procedure would require a large number of images
properly distributed in time, which often, in particular for GCs, are
not available.

Two main light curve shapes are commonly observed:

-    “single-hill” shape : characterized by one maximum and one minimum,
    typically associated to heating processes;

-    “double-hill” shape : characterized by two maxima and two
    (asymmetrical) minima, typically associated to tidal distortions.

The “single-hill” light curve shape (see an example in Figure 2.7 ) is
characterized by a minimum at the PSR superior conjunction ⁵ ⁵ 5 Note
that several phase definitions (depending on the reference @xmath
configuration) can be adopted. However, in this Thesis we adopted the
radio convention. In particular, in the case of circular orbits, @xmath
corresponds to the PSR ascending node (see the Appendix for more
details). ( @xmath ) and a maximum at the PSR inferior conjunction (
@xmath ). In particular the luminosity minimum corresponds to the phase
in which the observer is looking the back side of the companion, while
the luminosity maximum corresponds to the phase in which the observer is
looking the side of the companion facing the PSR. The explanation to
this sinusoidal shape is that the increase of luminosity is due to the
PSR flux reprocessed by the companion and, of course, this effect is
maximized at the phase during which the observer sees the larger
fraction of the surface illuminated by the PSR, while it is almost
absent when observing the companion back side.

Moreover, also the inclination angle of the binary system plays an
important role. In fact in case of a face-on ( @xmath ) configuration
the illuminated surface visible to the observer corresponds to a quarter
of the star surface and it remains constant during the entire orbit,
thus not producing any magnitude modulation. Conversely, in the case of
an edge-on ( @xmath ) configuration the illuminated surface visible to
the observer ranges between zero at the PSR superior conjunction
(minimum in the light curve), and half of the star surface at the PSR
inferior conjunction (maximum in the light curve). Hence, the larger is
the inclination angle the larger is the amplitude of the light curve.
Note that such a mechanism is able to produce variation amplitudes up to
several magnitudes, in particular when the companion is a faint cold
object.

The “double-hill” light curve shape (see an example in Figure 2.8 ) is
characterized by two maxima at the two quadratures ( @xmath and @xmath )
and two minima at the PSR superior and inferior conjunctions ( @xmath
and @xmath ). In particular, the two (asymmetrical) minima correspond to
the phases in which the observer is looking the back and the front side
of the companion, while the luminosity maxima correspond to the phases
in which the observer is looking the companion from the lateral sides.
To understand the origin of such a shape, we should first consider that
the companion is probably bloated up to fill its RL and it is suffering
from the strong gravitational field of the massive NS. As a result,
tidal distortions induce a “drop-like” shape to the companion and the
surface gravity changes along the star, with the lower gravity zones
corresponding to the back and the tip of the drop (see Figure 2.9 ).
Consequently, also stellar radiative flux, which is proportional to the
local gravity (von Zeipel, 1924 ) , changes along the star surface.
Therefore, when the system is observed from the side, the visible
surface with higher gravity is maximized, and hence the detected flux is
higher and the light curve shows the two maxima. Conversely, when the
lower gravity zones (the tip and the back of the companion) are facing
the observer, the flux is lower and the light curve shows the two
luminosity minima. In particular, the relative depth of the two minima
is slightly different: the deepest minimum occurs when the tip of the
star is visible. However, this minimum could be less deep if an extra
source of flux (the reprocessed PSR flux) is present.

The light curve is also very helpful to constrain some parameters of the
system as the mass ratio, the RL filling factor and the inclination
angle (see Figure 2.8 ). Note that, despite a weak degeneracy between
the effects of different mass ratios and inclination angles, the
amplitude of the light curve is mainly dependent on the inclination
angle and hence this is the most suitable parameter to be constrained.
Also a completely filled RL is often required to justify the observed
light curve.

Although the light curve modeling is a powerful tool to study these
objects, not all companions to MSPs show variability. In particular the
absence of variability could be related either to a selection effect
(small inclination angles), or to an intrinsic lack of variability (due
to negligible heating and tidal distortion).

### 2.3 Spectroscopic follow-up of a MSP companion

Because of the current instrumental limits, a spectroscopic follow-up
can be performed only for bright companions. In general, for very bright
companions ( @xmath ) it is possible to obtain high spectral resolution
data, while for fainter stars ( @xmath ) only low spectral resolution
observations can be performed. However, the situation is much more
complicated in GCs, where the companion stars are usually located in
very crowded regions. In fact, to the detriment of the S/N, the
observations must be planned as to avoid the contamination by close
bright stars (e.g. by using a thinner slit). Depending on the spectral
resolution, only a kinematical (for low-resolution spectra), or both a
kinematical and a chemical analysis (for high resolution spectra) can be
performed.

##### Kinematical analysis

The kinematical analysis consists in the measure of the line of sight
velocity of the target star through the Doppler shift of the central
wavelength of the detected spectral lines. To measure this shift is
possible to use the cross-correlation method (Tonry & Davis, 1979 ) , as
implemented for instance in the fxcor IRAF ⁶ ⁶ 6 IRAF is distributed by
the National Optical Astronomy Observatory, which is operated by the
Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc., under the
cooperative agreement with the National Science Foundation. task.
Basically, it consists in the cross-correlatation of the observed
spectrum with a template of known velocity computed in the same
wavelength range and with the same spectral resolution. The radial
velocity is then calculated from the value corresponding to the maximum
correlation probability.

The knowledge of the radial velocity is crucial to confirm the cluster
membership for binary MSPs in GCs. Moreover, phase resolved observations
allow us to build the radial velocity curve due to the companion star
orbiting the MSP. Hence, the radial velocity curve of a MSP companion is
expected to be periodically variable with the same orbital period of the
radio PSR. Of course, with respect to the observer line of sight, the
companion star and the PSR move in opposite directions. Thus in
correspondence of the PSR ascending node ( @xmath , when the PSR is
receding) the companion is approaching the observer, while in the
opposite configuration ( @xmath , when the PSR is approaching) the
companion star recedes. In the two quadratures both stars are moving
tangentially to the line of sight and hence no Doppler effect due to the
binary motion is detected. The resulting radial velocity curve (for
circular orbits) is a sinusoidal curve with a mean velocity
corresponding to the systemic velocity of the object (representative of
the mean motion of the binary system from/toward the Earth) and an
amplitude corresponding to the companion motion in the binary system
(see Figure 2.10 ).

Hence, first of all, if the radial velocity curve has the same orbital
period measured for the PSR and if the epoch of the companion descending
node corresponds to that of the PSR ascending node, it is possible to
confirm the membership to the same binary system. Second, the amplitude
of the light curve gives an indication of the system projected dimension
and in case of a GC the mean velocity is important to confirm the
membership to the cluster. Finally, combining the two amplitudes of the
companion and PSR radial velocity curves, the dependence on the
inclination angle is removed and it is possible to directly estimate the
mass ratio as the inverse ratio of the amplitudes of the two curves (see
Appendix).

##### Chemical analysis

The chemical analysis consists in the measure of the surface abundances
of chemical elements. To derive them, the traditional method consists in
the measure of the equivalent widths. However in the case of
low-resolution spectra affected by severe line blanketing conditions,
such a method makes difficult to accurately determine the continuum (see
the procedure described in Mucciarelli et al. 2012 for a method to
reduce such a problem).

From the detailed chemical analysis of spectral lines it is possible to
deeply look into MSP systems. In the case of low-resolution spectra and
for high @xmath , Balmer lines are the main available diagnostics to
infer the stellar parameters. For example, in the case of WD companions,
by comparing the photometric properties and H spectral lines with WD
models, it is possible to constrain the temperature, the gravity, the
radius and the mass (Antoniadis et al., 2013 ) . The latter is probably
the most important parameter. In fact, together with the knowledge of
the mass ratio (from radial velocity curve), it furnishes the NS mass.
Moreover, the characterization of the H @xmath line is important also to
detect H @xmath excess due to some ionized material (see Sabbi et al.,
2003a , and Figures 2.11 and 2.12 ) .

Finally, also the chemical abundances of heavier elements are
interesting. For example in the case of GCs, chemical abundances in
agreement with that of the parent cluster population are a good
indicator of the membership to the GC. In addition, some elements are
expected to show anomalies. In fact, the companion is expected to lose a
significant quantity of material (partially accreted by the NS) and to
be therefore deprived of its outermost layers. In the case of a strongly
peeled star the residual material is what remains of the original inner
part of the star, where the chemical composition has been previously
modified by the thermonuclear reactions. Hence the measure of chemical
abundances can give precious information about the nature of the
companion. For instance, in case of material partially processed by the
CNO cycle, Carbon depletion and Nitrogen enhancement are expected (see
Figure 2.13 ).

### 2.4 The state of the art

Despite the paramount importance of identifying the companion stars to
binary MSPs, before this Thesis work started, only 6 companions were
identified in 5 GCs (out of the known 132 GC MSPs).

Three of them had positions in the CMD consistent with the cooling
sequences of He-WDs (see Figure 2.14 ), in agreement with the
expectations of the canonical recycling scenario . These are the
companions to MSP-U in 47 Tucanae (Edmonds et al., 2001 ) , to MSP-A in
NGC 6752 (Ferraro et al., 2003a ) , and to PSR B1620 @xmath 26 in M4
(Sigurdsson et al., 2003 ) . The other identified companions showed,
instead, quite peculiar properties and positions in the CMD not
compatible with He-WD cooling sequences (see Figure 2.14 ). The
luminosity and colors of the optical companion to MSP-A in NGC 6397 are
totally incompatible with those of a WD. Indeed, this is a relatively
bright, tidally deformed star, suggesting that the system either harbors
a newly born MSP, or is the result of an exchange interaction (Ferraro
et al., 2001b ) . The companion star to MSP-B in NGC 6266 is a similarly
bright object, with luminosity comparable to the cluster MS turn-off
(TO), an anomalous red color and an optical variability suggestive of a
tidally deformed star which filled its RL (Cocozza et al., 2008 ) . This
object is also a Chandra X-ray source, thus supporting the hypothesis
that some interaction is occurring between the PSR wind and the gas
streaming off the companion. Finally the companion to MSP-W in 47
Tucanae has been identified to be a faint MS star, showing
large-amplitude, sinusoidal luminosity variations probably due to the
heating effect by the PSR (Edmonds et al., 2002 ) . The relative small
number of known companions to GC MSPs is due to the observational
difficulties to identify and to study them (see previous Sections).

On the other hand, the situation in the GF is quickly evolving with an
increasing number of new detections of MSPs by radio and @xmath -ray
searches, and the contribution to the optical identification of
companions by several ground-based telescopes. In the particular case of
exotic MSPs, the number of detected objects is significantly increased
in the last years and 7 BWs (out of the known 17) and 4 RBs (out of 7)
have identified optical companions (Kulkarni et al., 1988 ; Stappers et
al., 1996a , 2001 ; van Kerkwijk et al., 2011 ; Pallanca et al., 2012 ;
Romani, 2012 ; Breton et al., 2013 ; Kaplan et al., 2013 ; Bellm et al.,
2013 ) .

### 2.5 The targets of this Thesis

This work is part of a large project (Cosmic-Lab) aimed at exploiting
Galactic GCs as natural laboratories where to study the complex
interplay between dynamics and stellar evolution by using Blue Straggler
stars, MSPs and intermediate-mass black holes as probe particles. This
Thesis deals with MSPs.

In particular we report the identification of the companions to three
MSPs in GCs, namely

-   the RB PSR J1824 @xmath 2452H in M28 (see Chapter 3 );

-   the RB PSR J1824 @xmath 2452I in M28 (see Chapter 4 );

-   the BW PSR J1518+0204C in M5 (see Chapter 5 );

and we show the results of a spectroscopic follow up of the companion to

-   PSR J1740 @xmath 5340A in NGC 6397 (see Chapter 6 ).

Moreover, we also report the identification of the companions to two
MSPs in the GF, namely

-   the BW PSR J0610 @xmath 2100 (see Chapter 7 );

-   the IMM PSR J1439 @xmath 5501 (see Chapter 8 ).

## Chapter 3 The optical companion to the binary Millisecond Pulsar
J1824@xmath2452H in the Globular Cluster M28

In this Chapter we describe the optical identification of the companion
star to the RB eclipsing MSP J1824 @xmath 2452H in the Galactic GC M28
(NGC 6626). This star is located at only @xmath from the nominal
position of the PSR and it shows optical variability ( @xmath mag) that
nicely correlates with the PSR orbital period. It is positioned on the
blue side of the cluster MS, @xmath mag fainter than the TO point. The
observed light curve shows two distinct and asymmetric minima,
suggesting that the companion star is suffering tidal distortion from
the PSR. This discovery increases the number of non-degenerate MSP
companions in GCs, suggesting that these systems could be a common
outcome of the PSR recycling process, at least in dense environments
where they can be originated by exchange interactions. - This Chapter is
mainly based on Pallanca et al. 2010 , ApJ, 725, 1165.

### 3.1 Introduction

In this Chapter we focus our attention on M28 (NGC 6626), a Galactic GC
with intermediate central density ( @xmath in units of @xmath pc @xmath
; Pryor & Meylan, 1993 ) . It is the first GC where a MSP was discovered
(Lyne et al., 1987 ) and to date it is known to harbor a total of twelve
PSRs (Bégin, 2006 ) . This is the third largest population of known PSRs
in GCs, after that of Terzan 5 (with 33 objects; Ransom et al., 2005 ,
but see the recent results by Ferraro et al., 2009a suggesting that
Terzan 5 is not a genuine GC) and that of 47 Tuc (with 23 MSPs; Camilo
et al., 2000 ; Freire et al., 2003 ) .

Among the binary MSPs harbored in M28, J1824 @xmath 2452H (hereafter
M28H) deserves special attention since it is an eclipsing system showing
a number of timing irregularities, possibly due to the tidal effect on
the companion star (Bégin, 2006 ; Stairs et al., 2006 ) . It is located
at @xmath and @xmath , it has an orbital period @xmath days and it shows
eclipses for @xmath of it (S. Bégin et al., in preparation). There is
also an associated hard X-ray source, possibly variable at the binary
period (Bogdanov et al., 2011 ) . Such X-ray emission is likely due to
the shock between the MSP magnetospheric radiation and the matter
released by the companion, similar to that detected in the case of MSP-W
in 47 Tuc (Bogdanov et al., 2005 ) . This further suggests that the
companion to M28H is a non-degenerate star. In this Chapter we present
its optical identification, based on high-quality, phase-resolved
photometry obtained with the WFC3 on board the HST.

### 3.2 Observations and data analysis

The photometric data-set used for this work consists of HST
high-resolution images obtained with the UVIS channel of the WFC3. A set
of supplementary HST WFPC2 images, and ground-based wide-field images
obtained at the ESO have been retrieved from the Science Archive and
used for variability and astrometric purposes.

The WFC3 images have been obtained on 2009 August 8 (Prop. 11615, PI:
Ferraro) in four different bands. The data-set consists of: 6 images
obtained through the F390W filter ( @xmath ) with exposure times @xmath
s each; 7 images in F606W ( @xmath ) with @xmath s; 7 images in F814W (
@xmath ) with @xmath s; and 7 images in F656N (a narrow filter
corresponding to H @xmath ) with exposure time ranging from @xmath s, up
to @xmath s. All the images are aligned and the cluster is almost
centered in CHIP1.

Additional public WFPC2 images have been retrieved from the archive. The
first data-set (hereafter WFPC2-A) was obtained in 1997 (Prop. 6625, PI:
Buonanno) and consists of 8 images in F555W ( @xmath ) with @xmath s and
9 images in F814W ( @xmath s and @xmath s). The second sample (hereafter
WFPC2-B) consists of 13 images in F675W ( @xmath ), with @xmath s each,
secured in 2008 (Prop. 11340, PI: Grindlay).

Finally, the wide-field data-set consists of 6 images in the @xmath and
@xmath filters, obtained in August 2000 with the Wide Field Imager (WFI)
at the ESO-MPI 2.2 m telescope (La Silla, Chile). The WFI consists of a
mosaic of eight chips, for a global FOV of @xmath .

The data reduction procedure has been performed on the WFC3 “flat
fielded” (flt) images, once corrected for “Pixel-Area-Map” (PAM) by
using standard IRAF procedures. The photometric analysis has been
carried out by using the daophot package (Stetson 1987). For each image
we modeled the PSF by using a large number ( @xmath ) of bright and
nearly isolated stars. Then we performed the PSF fitting by using the
daophot packages ALLSTAR and ALLFRAME (Stetson, 1987 , 1994 ) . The
final star list consists of all the sources detected in at least 14
frames on a total number of 27. A similar procedure has been adopted to
reduce the WFPC2 images. For the WFPC2-A data-set we demanded that
sources were in at least 9 frames out of 17, whereas for the WFPC2-B
data-set in at least 7 frames out of 13. Since the WFC3 images heavily
suffer from geometric distortions within the FOV, we corrected the
instrumental positions of stars by applying the equations reported by
Bellini & Bedin ( 2009 ) for the filter F336W, neglecting any possible
dependence on the wavelengths. Standard procedure (see e.g., Lanzoni et
al., 2007a , b , c ; Dalessandro et al., 2008a , b ) has been adopted to
analyze the WFI data. Here we use this data-set only for astrometric
purposes. In fact, a very accurate astrometry is the most critical task
in searching for the optical counterparts to MSPs, especially in crowded
fields such as the central regions of GCs, where primary astrometric
standards are lacking (e.g., Ferraro et al., 2001a , 2003a ) . For this
reason we first placed the wide-field catalog obtained from the WFI
images on the absolute astrometric system, and we then used the stars in
common with the high resolution data-sets as secondary standards. In
particular, the WFI catalogue has been reported, through
cross-correlation, onto the coordinate system defined by the GSCII.
Then, we placed the WFC3 and the WFPC2 catalogs on the same system
through cross-correlation with the WFI data-set. Each transformation has
been performed by using several thousand stars in common, and at the end
of the procedure the typical accuracy of the astrometric solution was
@xmath in both @xmath and @xmath .

Finally, the WFC3 instrumental magnitudes have been calibrated to the
VEGAMAG system by using the photometric zero-points and the procedures
reported on the WFC3 web page. ¹ ¹ 1
http://www.stsci.edu/hst/wfc3/phot_zp_lbn The WFPC2 magnitudes have been
reported to the same photometric system by using the procedure described
in Holtzman et al. ( 1995 ) , with the gain settings and zero-points
listed in Tab. 28.1 of the HST data handbook.

### 3.3 The optical companion to M28H

In order to search for the optical counterpart to the M28H companion, we
carefully re-analyzed a set of @xmath WFC3 sub-images centered on the
nominal radio position of the MSP. For these sub-images the photometric
reduction has been re-performed by using both daophot (Stetson, 1987 )
and romafot (Buonanno et al., 1983 ) . In both cases, in order to
optimize the identification of faint objects, we performed the source
detection on the median image in the @xmath band, thus obtaining a
master-list. The master-list was then applied to all the single images
in each band and we performed the PSF-fitting by using appropriate PSF
models obtained in each image. The resulting instrumental magnitudes
were reported to those of a reference image in each filter, and from the
frame-to-frame scatter, a mean magnitude and a standard deviation have
been obtained for all the objects.

We then selected the stars that showed significant variations in the
@xmath band, looking for those that have a periodic variability
compatible with the orbital period of M28H. Only one object has been
found to match such requirements. This star is located at @xmath and
@xmath , just @xmath from the radio position of M28H, and @xmath from
the X-ray source (Figure 3.1 ).

In order to carefully investigate the optical modulation of this star,
we first folded all the measured data points obtained in each filter by
using the orbital period @xmath and the reference epoch ( @xmath MJD;
Bégin et al. in preparation) of the M28H radio ephemeris. Since the few
measured data points in the single bands are not sufficient to properly
cover the entire period (see dots in Figure 3.2 ), we computed the
average magnitude in each filter and the shift needed to make it match
the mean @xmath -band magnitude, which we adopted as a reference. We
thus obtained the combined light curve shown in Figure 3.3 , which well
samples the entire period of the PSR. Indeed, the optical modulation of
the identified star nicely agrees with the orbital period of the MSP,
thus fully confirming that the variability is associated with the PSR
binary motion. Hence we conclude that the identified star (hereafter
COM-M28H) is the optical companion to M28H.

This object (with average @xmath ) is @xmath mag fainter than the
cluster TO and slightly bluer than the MS (Figure 3.4 ). Clearly, it is
far too red and bright to be compatible with a WD (the typical product
expected from the canonical recycling scenario , see Chapter 1 ).
Instead, its position in the CMD is marginally consistent with a MS
star. In particular, the cluster MS is well reproduced by a @xmath Gyr
isochrone (Marigo et al., 2008 ) , with metallicity [Fe/H] @xmath (from
Zinn 1980 , after calibration to the scale of Carretta & Gratton 1997 ,
following Ferraro et al. 1999 ) and assuming a color excess @xmath and a
distance modulus (m-M) @xmath (Harris, 1996 ) . By projecting the
observed magnitudes and colours of COM-M28H onto this isochrone, the
resulting mass, temperature and radius would be @xmath , @xmath K,
@xmath , respectively. However these quantities should be considered as
just an indication, since the observational properties of this object
(see below) strongly suggest that it is a highly perturbed star.

Since the two WFPC2 data-sets have been obtained in two different epochs
with a time baseline of more than 10 years, and given the relative small
distance of M28 (d=5.6 Kpc; Harris, 1996 ) , we have been able to
perform a proper-motion analysis. As shown in Figure 3.5 , the bulk of
stars lie around the position ( @xmath , @xmath ) [mas/yr], within a
radius @xmath . These most likely are members of the cluster, while
field stars are clearly separated (the position in the CMD of these two
classes of stars further confirms such a conclusion). Since no
extra-Galactic source can be identified in the FOV adopted for this
analysis, no absolute proper motion determination can be obtained.
However a rough estimate can be derived by averaging the positions of
field stars: we obtain @xmath and @xmath [mas/yr], in agreement with
previous results (Cudworth & Hanson, 1993 ) . COM-M28H lies at @xmath ,
@xmath [mas/yr], thus fully behaving as a member of the cluster.

### 3.4 Discussion

The observed light curve of COM-M28H (Figure 3.3 ) clearly shows two
distinct and asymmetric minima, at phases @xmath and @xmath , quite
similar to what is observed for two other MSP companions (Ferraro et
al., 2001b ; Cocozza et al., 2008 ) . Such a shape is a clear signature
of ellipsoidal variations induced by the NS tidal field on a highly
perturbed, bloated star. Moreover, the relative depth of the two minima
(consistent with a light curve purely due to ellipsoidal variations)
suggests that only a marginal (if any) over-heating is affecting the
side of the companion facing the PSR. This is also supported by the
non-detection of H @xmath emission from the system (see the right panel
of Figure 3.4 ).

Given the mass function derived from the radio observations ( @xmath ;
Bégin 2006), and assuming @xmath for the MSP mass and @xmath for the
mass of COM-M28H (as derived from the cluster best-fit isochrone), the
resulting orbital inclination of the system would be @xmath . Such a low
value for the inclination angle would not produce any optical
modulation. Indeed both the light curve shape and the occurrence of
eclipses in the radio signal point toward a significantly higher value
of the orbital inclination (which corresponds to a lower companion mass
for a given mass function). By assuming @xmath (the median of all
possible inclination angles) a companion mass of @xmath is obtained. In
this configuration the corresponding total mass of the system would be
@xmath and the physical orbital separation of the system is @xmath . In
order to check whether such a configuration reproduces the observed
light curve, we employed the publicly available software NIGHTFALL ² ² 2
Available at
http://www.hs.uni-hamburg.de/DE/Ins/Per/Wichmann/Nightfall.html. . We
fixed the orbital period of the PSR to the radio value and the surface
temperature of COM-M28H to @xmath K (as inferred from the position in
the CMD). We then used an iterative procedure letting the orbital
inclination, the mass ratio ( @xmath ) and the RL filling factor vary
respectively in the ranges @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . By using as
selection criterion a @xmath -test, the best-fit model (Figures 3.2 and
3.3 ) was obtained for an inclination @xmath , a mass ratio @xmath and a
RL filling factor equal to 1. These results confirm that a configuration
with a highly distorted companion of about @xmath , orbiting a @xmath
MSP, in a plane with an orbital inclination of @xmath well reproduces
both the mass function of the system derived from the radio
observations, and the optical light curve of COM-M28H. It is worth
noticing that a good fit can be obtained only if COM-M28H completely
filled its RL, which, following Paczyński ( 1971 ) , we estimate to be
@xmath . While such a large value of the stellar radius allows to
account for the observed luminosity of COM-M28H, ³ ³ 3 Under the
assumption of black body radiation (with the luminosity @xmath given by
@xmath ), a @xmath star heated to the observed temperature ( @xmath K)
and bloated to a radius of @xmath , has a luminosity which is fully
consistent with the observed one. This reinforces the hypothesis that
COM-M28H completely filled its RL. For sake of comparison, the same
object with a radius @xmath (the value expected for a @xmath star on the
MS; Marigo et al., 2008 ) , would be a factor of @xmath too faint. it is
far too small to cause the observed radio eclipse. In fact an eclipse
lasting for @xmath of the orbital period corresponds to an eclipsing
region of @xmath size. This suggests that the eclipsing material is
extending well beyond the RL and that it is probably constantly
replenished (see also Bégin 2006). Indeed, under the influence of the
MSP intense radiation field, a (otherwise normal) MS star may expand to
fill its RL (D’Antona & Ergma, 1993 ) and even start to lose mass, while
the accretion on the PSR is inhibited by its magnetic pressure (as in
the case of MSP-A in NGC 6397; Ferraro et al. 2001b ; see also Archibald
et al. 2009 ). Moreover Bégin (2006) found a large orbital period
derivative for this system, suggesting that the binary is losing
material and is spiraling out to longer orbital period.

All these considerations indicate that COM-M28H is a highly-perturbed
star which is currently losing mass, and that the system is surrounded
by large clouds of gas. Whether or not part of the lost mass was
accreted by the NS and served to reaccelerate it in the past (as in the
case of J1023+0038; Archibald et al., 2009 ) cannot be inferred from the
available data. We note however that, while from the natural cluster
dynamical evolution massive objects are expected to be concentrated
close to the centre, M28H is the second most off-centered (after M28F)
and it is located outside the cluster core. Hence, such an offset
position may suggest the following scenario: the NS was recycled by
another companion (that eventually became a very low mass, exhausted
star, because of the heavy mass transfer); then an exchange interaction
occurred in the cluster core between the MSP binary and a MS star, thus
causing the ejection of the lightest star and kicking the newly-formed
system away from the centre; the new companion started to suffer heavy
perturbations (bloating, mass loss, etc.) induced by the MSP and we
currently observe it as COM-M28H; then it eventually will become a
He-WD. If the MSP was ejected from the cluster core in an exchange
encounter, its current position suggests a relatively recent epoch for
the formation of this system, since the expected time for such a heavy
system to sink back into the cluster centre is lower than a few Gyr.

While a spectroscopic follow-up may help to better clarify this
scenario, the identification of COM-M28H further increases the number of
MSPs with a non-degenerate companion in GCs. This likely indicates that
exchange interactions are common events in the dense environments of GC
cores and they are quite effective in modifying the “natural” outcomes
of the PSR recycling processes (Freire, 2005 ) .

## Chapter 4 The optical counterpart to the X-ray transient IGR
J18245@xmath2452 in the Globular Cluster M28

In this Chapter we describe the identification of the optical
counterpart to the recently detected INTEGRAL transient IGR J18245
@xmath 2452 in the GC M28. From the analysis of a multi-epoch HST
data-set we have identified a strongly variable star positionally
coincident with the radio and Chandra X-ray sources associated to the
INTEGRAL transient. The star has been detected during both a quiescent
and an outburst state. In the former case it appears as a faint,
unperturbed MS star, while in the latter state it is about two
magnitudes brighter and slightly bluer than MS stars. We also detected H
@xmath excess during the outburst state, suggestive of active accretion
processes by the NS. - This Chapter is mainly based on Pallanca et al.
2013b , ApJ, 773, 122.

### 4.1 Introduction

When a close binary system contains a compact object, mass transfer
processes can take place. The streaming gas, its impact on the compact
star, or the presence of an accretion disk can produce significant X-ray
and UV radiation, together with emission lines (such as the H @xmath )
or rapid luminosity variations. The first evidence of interacting
binaries in Galactic GCs was indeed obtained through the discovery of
X-ray sources. In particular, LMXBs are thought to be binary systems
with an accreting NS and are characterized by X-ray luminosities larger
than @xmath erg s @xmath . Their final stage is thought to be a binary
system containing a MSP. Moreover, during their life some LMXBs, usually
called X-ray transients (White et al., 1984 ) , show a few outbursts and
during the quiescent states their millisecond pulsations can become
detectable (Chakrabarty & Morgan, 1998 ) .

As described in Chapter 2 , the identification of the optical
counterparts is a fundamental step for characterizing these exotic
binary systems, both in quiescent and in outburst state, and for
clarifying their formation and evolutionary processes (Testa et al.,
2012 ) . Determining the nature and the properties of the companion
(which dominates the optical emission in the quiescent state) is also
very useful to tightly constrain the orbital parameters of the system
(e.g. D’Avanzo et al., 2009 ; Engel et al., 2012 ) .

A total of 46 X-ray sources, 12 of which lie within one core radius (
@xmath ; Harris, 1996 ) from the centre, has been detected with Chandra
(Becker et al., 2003 ) in the GC M28.

During the observations of the Galactic center performed on 2013 March
28 with INTEGRAL, a new hard X-ray transient (IGR J18245-2452) has been
revealed in the direction of M28 (Eckert et al., 2013 ) . Subsequent
observations with SWIFT/XRT confirmed the detection of the transient
source and its location within the core of the cluster, at @xmath and
@xmath , with error radius @xmath (at 90% confidence; Heinke et al.,
2013 ; Romano et al., 2013 ) . SWIFT/XRT time-resolved spectroscopy
performed on 2013 April 7 revealed a thermal spectrum with a “cooling
tail”, unambiguously identifying the burst as thermonuclear and
suggesting that the source is a low-luminosity LMXB in the hard state,
where a NS is accreting matter from a companion ( Linares, 2013 ; see
also Serino et al., 2013 ). A radio follow-up has been performed with
ATCA on 2013 April 5, for a total of 6 hours, at two different
frequencies (9 and 5.5 Hz). A single source has been identified at
@xmath and @xmath , with a 90% confidence error of @xmath (Pavan et al.,
2013 ) . This position is only marginally consistent with that derived
from the SWIFT/XRT data, but the detected strong variability (up to 2.5
times the mean flux density during the first 90 minutes of observations)
suggests a possible association with the X-ray transient. Its position
well corresponds to the location of the X-ray source #23 identified by
Becker et al. ( 2003 ) from Chandra observations and associated to IGR
J18245 @xmath 2452 by Homan & Pooley ( 2013 ) .

In this Chapter we report on the identification of the optical
counterpart to IGR J18245-2452, obtained from the analysis of high
resolution HST data acquired with the WFPC2, WFC3 and ACS/WFC in three
different epochs (see also Pallanca et al., 2013c , and Cohn et al.,
2013 ).

### 4.2 Observations and data analysis

For this work we adopted the same catalog used to identify the companion
to PSR J1824-2452H and fully described in Chapter 3 . In order to unveil
luminosity variations among different epochs, two additional sets of HST
data acquired with the WFPC2 and the ACS have been analyzed. In
particular, because we were interested only in the GC core, we limited
the analysis to the Planetary Camera (PC) of the WFPC2 and CHIP2 of the
ACS/WFC mosaic. The available samples have been acquired through various
filters, at three different epochs (see Table 4.1 ): the WFPC2 dataset
was collected on 2009, April 7 (epoch 1, hereafter EP1), WFC3
observations were performed on 2009, August 9 (epoch 2, EP2) and the ACS
data-set was acquired on 2010, April 26 (epoch 3, EP3).

The data reduction procedure for the ACS sample has been performed on
the charge transfer efficiency corrected (flc) images, once corrected
for Pixel-Area-Map (PAM) by using standard IRAF procedures. The
photometric analysis has been carried out by following the general
outline described in Chapter 2 . In particular we used the daophot
package (Stetson, 1987 ) . For each image we modeled the PSF by using a
large number ( @xmath ) of bright and nearly isolated stars. Then, all
F435W and F625W images have been combined with MONTAGE2 and used to
produce a master-frame on which we optimized a master-list of stars.
Finally we performed the PSF fitting on this master-list by using the
daophot packages ALLSTAR and ALLFRAME (Stetson, 1987 , 1994 ) . A
similar procedure has been adopted to reduce the flat-fielded (c0m)
WFPC2 images.

Since the ACS images heavily suffer from geometric distortions within
the FOV, we corrected the instrumental positions of stars by applying
the equations reported by Anderson ( 2003 ) . We then placed, through
cross-correlation, the ACS and the WFPC2 data sets on the same
astrometric system of the WFC3 sample, for which the astrometric
solution has an accuracy of @xmath in both @xmath and @xmath (Pallanca
et al., 2010 ) .

Finally, the instrumental magnitudes have been calibrated to the VEGAMAG
system by using the photometric zero-points reported on the instrument
web pages ¹ ¹ 1 www.stsci.edu/hst/acs/analysis/zeropoints/zpt.py and
www.stsci.edu/documents/dhb/web/c32 @xmath wfpc2 dataanal.fm1.html for
ACS and WFPC2, respectively and the procedure described in Holtzman et
al. ( 1995 ) and Sirianni et al. ( 2005 ) for WFPC2 and ACS,
respectively.

### 4.3 The optical counterpart to IGR J18245-2452

During a systematic study of the GC M28 aimed at searching for the
companion stars to binary MSPs, we found a peculiar object (see Figure
4.1 ) located at @xmath and @xmath , in very good agreement with the
position of the X-ray source #23 reported by Becker et al. ( 2003 ) and
of the variable ATCA radio source discussed by Pavan et al. ( 2013 ) .

In EP2 this star showed a strong and irregular variability in each
filter, on a timescale of @xmath hours (Figure 4.2 ). Based on the mean
magnitudes ² ² 2 It is important to note that, given the variability and
an under-sampled time coverage, the mean magnitudes (and hence the
colors) derived here could not exactly correspond to the true average
luminosities of the star over the entire variability period. (F390W
@xmath , F606W @xmath , F814W @xmath and F656N @xmath ), this star turns
out to be about 0.5-1 magnitude fainter than the MS TO and bluer than
the MS both in the (F390W, F390W-F606W) and in the (F606W, F606W-F814W)
CMDs (see Figure 4.3 ). Even more interesting is the comparison of the
photometric properties among the three epochs of observations. Unlike
the CMD location in EP2, the magnitudes derived for EP1 (F555W @xmath
and F336W @xmath ) and for EP3 (F435W @xmath , F625W @xmath and F658N
@xmath ) approximately locate the star onto the MS. Unfortunately, given
the different instruments and filters, it is not possible to directly
compare the magnitudes but, both from the visual inspection of images
(see Figure 4.1 ) and from the CMD locations with respect to the TO
point, it turns out that during EP1 and EP3 the star was about 2-3
magnitudes fainter than the TO, and hence @xmath mag fainter than in
EP2. This likely indicates that the observations during EP1 and EP3
sampled the object in quiescence, while EP2 data caught the star in an
outburst state. In addition, during each epoch a magnitude modulation is
present, with an indication of a smaller amplitude in EP3 with respect
to the variability detected during the EP2 outbursting state. In fact,
the frame to frame magnitude scatter of the peculiar star during the
outburst epoch (EP2) is @xmath larger than the scatter of normal stars
in the same magnitude bin, while this value decreases to @xmath in EP3.

In principle, for actively accreting LMXBs, H @xmath emission is
expected from the accretion disk, while the contribution from the heated
companion star should be minimal or even absent. A visual inspection of
EP2 images already suggests that this peculiar star also has H @xmath
excess: in fact, in the F656N image (panel @xmath in Figure 4.1 ) it is
significantly brighter than its southern neighbor, while these two
objects show essentially the same magnitude in broad band filters (as
the F390W, see panel @xmath in Figure 4.1 ). In order to quantify this
excess we used a photometric technique based on the comparison between
the magnitudes obtained from broad band and H @xmath narrow filters
(Cool et al., 1995 ) . In particular, in this work we used a method
commonly applied to star forming regions (De Marchi et al., 2010 ) and
recently tested for the first time in the GC 47 Tucanae (Beccari et al.,
2013 ) . First of all, we corrected all magnitudes for reddening by
adopting @xmath (Harris, 1996 ) . Then we selected the peculiar star in
the (F606W-F656N) @xmath vs (F606W-F814W) @xmath color-color diagram.
Note that this color combination well samples the continuum of stars
with no H @xmath emission for different spectral types through the
(F606W-F814W) @xmath color index, and it provides a good estimate of the
H @xmath emission through the (F606W-F656N) @xmath color index, since
the H @xmath line contribution to the F606W band is negligible. The H
@xmath excess ( @xmath H @xmath ) can be evaluated from the distance
between the (F606W-F656N) @xmath color index of the considered star and
an empirical line ³ ³ 3 The reference line for the continuum has been
determined from the median (F606W-F656N) @xmath color as function of
(F606W-F814W) @xmath for stars with combined photometric error smaller
than 0.05 magnitudes. As shown in Figure 4.4 , this empirical relation
agrees very well with the theoretical one, obtained from atmospheric
models (Bessell et al., 1998 ) . We also emphasize that, while M28 may
be affected by mild differential reddening, the reddening vector is
almost parallel to the empirical line tracing the continuum (see Figure
4.4 ). This means that even large fluctuations in the reddening of
individual stars would not significantly affect the identification of
objects with H @xmath excess (Beccari et al., 2010 ) . representative of
the continuum. In addition, the equivalent width (EW) of the H @xmath
emission can be quantitatively estimated from @xmath H @xmath by
applying equation (4) in De Marchi et al. ( 2010 ) : @xmath , where RW
is the rectangular width of the filter, (see Table 4 in De Marchi et
al., 2010 ) . With such a method we estimated a H @xmath excess @xmath ;
(upper panel in Figure 4.4 ) and an EW of the H @xmath emission @xmath
Å (where the uncertainties take into account the errors in both colors)
during the EP2 outburst state. By applying an analogous method to EP3
data, making use of a suitable combination of F435W, F625W and
F658N filters, we find that the star is located on the continuum
reference line (see the lower panel in Figure 4.4 ). Hence there is no
indication of H @xmath emission during the quiescent state.

Finally, we tried to investigate the possible presence of UV emission by
using the EP1 dataset in filters F255W and F170W. No source is detected
at the location of the peculiar star, most probably because the images
are not deep enough to reach its faint magnitudes.

### 4.4 Discussion and conclusions

The photometric analysis revealed the presence of a very peculiar star,
which underwent a strong luminosity increase and showed significant H
@xmath excess in EP2. Even if this optical outburst occurred a few years
before the INTEGRAL discovery, this evidence, combined with the
positional coincidence with the ATCA variable source recently detected
by Pavan et al. ( 2013 ) and with the Chandra X-ray source #23 revealed
by Becker et al. ( 2003 ) and firmly associated to IGR J18245 @xmath
2452 by Homan & Pooley ( 2013 ) , strongly suggests that we have
identified the optical counterpart to IGR J18245 @xmath 2452. Indeed
several outbursts separated by a few year delay are quite typical of
LMXBs containing a NS (e.g 4U 1608-52, Aquila X-1; Asai et al., 2012 ) .

Unfortunately, the poor and irregular time coverage of our data
prevented us to blindly determine the period of the magnitude
modulation, which is expected to be correlated with the binary orbital
motion.

During the quiescent state the companion star is approximately located
on the MS, @xmath magnitudes fainter than the TO, while during the
outburst it is @xmath magnitudes brighter and it is characterized by a
bluer color. As known from the study of companions to MSPs and LMXBs,
such an anomalous position is indicative of a perturbed state (see, e.g.
Ferraro et al., 2001b ; Cocozza et al., 2008 ; Pallanca et al., 2010 ;
Testa et al., 2012 ) . In fact tidal deformations, heating processes and
the presence of an accretion disk can significantly affect the magnitude
and temperature of the star, thus also altering its position in the
CMDs. The main tool to discriminate between these effects is the
determination of the light curve shape, but the available data-sets
prevent us to perform this study.

Finally, the presence of strong H @xmath emission (with @xmath Å) during
the outburst phase suggests the presence of material accreting onto the
NS. On the other hand, no H @xmath excess has been detected in
quiescence, in agreement with the fact that when the accretion rate is
low, the disk is much weaker and the companion star contributes to the
emission only through “standard” H @xmath absorption.

### 4.5 Further preliminary works about IGR J18245@xmath2452

Very recently, Papitto et al. ( 2013 ) claimed the association of IGR
J18245 @xmath 2452 with PSR J1824 @xmath 2452I in M28 on the basis of
orbital parameters coincidence. In particular, they found that in the
past decade this source swung between rotation-powered and
accretion-powered states on timescales of a few days to a few months;
this establishes the existence of an evolutionary phase during which a
source can alternate between these two states over a timescale much
shorter than the billion-year-long evolution of these binary systems, as
they are spun-up by mass accretion to millisecond spin periods
(Bhattacharya & van den Heuvel, 1991 ) . This object therefore
represents an unambiguous tracer of both rotation-powered (“radio
dominating”) and accretion-powered (“X-ray dominating”) activity and it
provides conclusive evidence for the evolutionary link between NSs in
LMXBs and radio MSPs.

In the light of the IGR J18245 @xmath 2452/PSR J1824 @xmath
2452I association, we performed a preliminary variability analysis by
adopting the orbital parameters of PSR J1824 @xmath 2452I known both
from radio and X-ray. Given the high crowding of the region and in
particular the presence of a very close and significantly brighter star
(see Figure 4.1 ), we used the software romafot (that allows a visual
check of the fit quality; Buonanno et al., 1983 ) and we limited the
analysis to the EP2 dataset (because of the relative brightness of the
target). The most reliable measures have been obtained in the F656N and
F390W bands, where the optical counterpart is brighter and the closest
star does not saturate.

With the obtained measures, we built the light curve of IGR
J18245-2452/PSR J1824-2452I in all filters for the EP2 dataset. The star
shows a clear variability in the F390W and F656N bands which seems to be
well folded with the orbital motion of PSR J1824 @xmath 2452I  (two top
panels of Figure 4.5 ). Conversely in the F606W and F814W bands (gray
open squares in the third panel from top) the magnitude modulation seems
to be dominated by random scatter, likely caused by the contamination
from the close saturated star. In order to reduce these problems we
averaged the F606W and F814W magnitudes (once referred to their
respective mean values) measured at similar orbital phases. We thus
obtained a light curve (black points of the third panel from top) with a
shape potentially in agreement with the PSR orbital period. Lastly, in
the bottom panel of Figure 4.5 , we reported a combined light curve,
obtained by averaging in bins of 0.1 in phase all the available F390W,
F656N and F606W/ F814W  measures.

The analysis of the light curve seems to suggest that the detected
variability is in agreement with the PSR orbital period, but
unfortunately the poor sampling and the large photometric uncertainties,
mainly due to the contamination by the close star, prevented us to well
constrain the light curve shape and hence to infer the source of
variability. An additional dataset, opportunely phase sampled and with
optimized exposure times long enough to detect with a proper S/N the
companion star and avoiding the saturation of the close bright star is
required to properly perform a variability analysis and possibly confirm
with good significance the agreement between the magnitude modulation
and the orbital motion periods. Moreover, from the light curve shape it
would be possible to infer some orbital and physical parameters of the
system.

Also a spectroscopic analysis, that, given the high crowding and the
relative faint magnitude, is possible only during a bright state, could
help to characterize such system and the possible presence of an
accretion disk through the study of the radial velocity curve, the
chemical abundance patterns and UV emission lines. However to properly
derive the companion radial velocity curve, it is necessary to detect
the spectral lines associated with the companion, avoiding those coming
from the accretion disk.

## Chapter 5 The Black Widow PSR 1518+0204C in the Globular Cluster M5:
optical photometry of the companion star.

In This Chapter we present the first identification of a companion to a
BW in a GC. The companion is a very faint star ( @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath ) located at 0.25 @xmath from the PSR nominal position. This star
is visible only in a sub-sample of images, while it is below the
detection threshold in the others, thus indicating that it is strongly
variable. The resulting light curve shows a maximum around the PSR
inferior conjunction and a minimum around the PSR superior conjunction,
with an amplitude of variation larger than 3 mags. We then speculate
that such a light curve is shaped by the heating processes due to the
PSR flux. We constrain the reprocessing efficiency as a function of the
inclination angle. - This chapter is mainly based on Pallanca et al.
2014, to be submitted to ApJ.

### 5.1 Introduction

M5 (NGC 5904) is a Galactic GC with intermediate central density (
@xmath in units of @xmath pc @xmath ; Pryor & Meylan, 1993 ) and
relatively high metallicity ([Fe/H] @xmath -1.3, Carretta et al., 2009 )
located at @xmath kpc from the Earth (Ferraro et al., 1999 ; Harris,
1996 , 2010 version) . M5 harbors six MSPs (Hessels et al., 2007 ;
Freire et al., 2008 ) . Among them, PSR J1518+0204C deserves special
attention since it is a BW system.

BWs are MSPs characterized by relatively small eccentricity and very
small mass function (thus indicating a companion mass smaller than
@xmath ; Roberts, 2013 ) . See Section 1.5.3 for more details.

Up to now, only a few companions to BWs have been detected and none of
them is in GCs (Fruchter et al., 1988a ; Stappers et al., 1996a , 1999 ,
2000 ; Reynolds et al., 2007 ; van Kerkwijk et al., 2011 ; Pallanca et
al., 2012 ; Romani, 2012 ; Breton et al., 2013 ) . The companions to BWs
in the GF are found to be low mass stars likely ablated and with a
filled RL. Moreover, these objects show a light modulation of a few
magnitudes correlated with the orbital motion. The light curve of BW
companions is usually characterized by a maximum around PSR inferior
conjunction ( @xmath ) and one minimum around PSR superior conjunction (
@xmath ). Such a shape is thought to be due to the reprocessing of the
PSR flux by the companion star.

PSR J1518+0204C, has a spin period of 2.48 ms and it is in a 2.1 hr
orbit with a companion of minimum mass @xmath . It shows regular
eclipses for @xmath of its orbit, as well as eclipse delays at eclipse
ingress and egress, which can last up to 0.2 ms, and are presumably due
to dispersive delays as the PSR passes through the ionized wind of its
companion (Hessels et al., 2007 ) . Moreover, the radio position of PSR
J1518+0204C  is coincident with a soft X-ray counterpart seen in a 45 ks
Chandra ACIS-S observation of the cluster (Hessels et al., 2007 ) .

In this chapter we present the identification of the companion to PSR
J1518+0204C, the first optical counterpart to a BW PSR in a GC.

### 5.2 Observations and data analysis

The photometric data-set used for this work consists of HST
high-resolution images obtained with the UVIS channel of the WFC3. Our
analysis has been focused only on CHIP1, which contains the PSR region.

The analyzed images have been acquired through four filters, in two
different epochs. The first epoch images have been obtained on 2010 July
5 (Prop. 11615, P.I. Ferraro). The data-set consists of: 6 images in the
F390W filter with an exposure time @xmath s each, 4 images in F606W with
@xmath s, 4 images in F814W with @xmath s, and 6 images in F656N (a
narrow filter corresponding to H @xmath ) with exposure time ranging
from @xmath s to @xmath s. The second epoch images have been obtained
during four visits between 2012 June 6 and 2012 June 9 (Prop. 12517,
P.I. Ferraro) and by using the same three wide filters of the first
epoch. In particular, the data-set consists of: 4 images obtained
through the F390W filter with an exposure time @xmath s each, 8 images
in F606W with @xmath s, and 12 images in F814W with @xmath s and @xmath
s.

The photometric analysis has been performed on the WFC3 “flat fielded”
(flt) images, once corrected for “Pixel-Area-Map” (PAM) by using
standard IRAF procedures, as described in Chapter 2 . In particular the
master-frame has been produced combining all the F390W, F606W and F814W
images.

The astrometry and the magnitude calibration have been performed by
following the procedures described in Chapter 2 . In particular we first
corrected the instrumental positions of stars from geometric distortions
within the FOV and we then reported the WFC3 catalog onto the absolute
astrometric system ( @xmath , @xmath ) by using the stars in common with
the HST WFPC2 catalog from Lanzoni et al. ( 2007a ) as secondary
astrometric standards. The astrometric solution has an accuracy of
@xmath in both @xmath and @xmath .

The WFC3 instrumental magnitudes have been calibrated to the VEGAMAG
system by using the photometric zero-points and the procedures reported
on the WFC3 web page. ¹ ¹ 1 http://www.stsci.edu/hst/wfc3/phot_zp_lbn

### 5.3 The companion to PSR J1518+0204C

In order to identify the companion to PSR J1518+0204C we searched for
peculiar objects located within @xmath from the nominal PSR position
(Ransom S., private communication). At a first visual inspection of the
PSR region, it was possible to identify a star showing strong
variability and lying at @xmath from the PSR nominal position. This star
is very faint and visible only in a few images, while it is below the
detection limit in the other frames (see Figure 5.1 ).

Since the master-list consisted of the only objects detected in at least
19 out of 38 images, this star was not included, because it was
detectable in a smaller number of images. Hence, we added by hand this
star to the master-list and, by following the procedure described in
Chapter 2 , we measured its magnitude in as many images as possible. We
found that its detectability is independent from exposures times,
filters and the two epochs of observations. We were able to measure its
magnitude in only 14 images (4 in the F390W, 3 in the F606W and 7 in the
F814W filters) and we observed a significant magnitude variations among
them: @xmath mag (from @xmath to @xmath ), @xmath mag (from @xmath to
@xmath ), and @xmath mag (from @xmath to @xmath ). The object is under
the detection threshold in all F656N images, hence we do not have any
@xmath measure. In the other images this star is not detected likely
because its flux is below the detection threshold. For each band, we
estimated the detection threshold as the average value of the magnitudes
of the five faintest detected stars within 20 @xmath from the PSR
position obtaining @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . In turn, these values
imply the following lower limits to the amplitudes of variation: @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath . Moreover, as shown in Figure 5.2 this star shows a
magnitude scatter larger than that computed for objects of similar
luminosity. This confirms that it is a variable object with a magnitude
modulation larger than what it is expected from the photometric errors.

In order to establish if the magnitude variation is related to the PSR
orbital phase (and hence establish a firm connection between this star
and the PSR), we computed the light curve in the three bands folding
each measurement (or magnitude upper limits of the images where the star
is not detected) with the orbital period and the ascending node of the
PSR (Ransom S., private communication). Although the available data do
not allow a complete coverage of the orbital period, the flux modulation
of the star nicely correlates with the PSR orbital phase (see Figure 5.3
). In fact the data are consistent with a luminosity maximum (in each
band) around @xmath , corresponding to the PSR inferior conjunction
(when we are observing the companion side facing the PSR) and a
luminosity minimum (at least a few mags fainter) around @xmath ,
corresponding to the PSR superior conjunction (when we are observing the
back side of the companion). Such a shape is the typical light curve
expected when the surface of the companion is heated by the PSR flux.

For reference, we over-plotted sinusoidal functions with a maximum at
@xmath and a minimum at @xmath onto the observed light curve. The first
important point to note is that in order to account for most of the
upper limits where the star is not detected, an amplitude variation of
at least three magnitudes is required (see Figure 5.3 ). Such a large
modulation ( @xmath mag @xmath mags) is in good agreement with what
observed for similar objects in the GF (e.g. Stappers et al., 1999 ,
2001 ; Pallanca et al., 2012 ) . Second, despite the low significance of
the detection, there are some hints that the light curve could be
asymmetric (e.g. the decrease to minimum is steeper than the increase to
maximum), likely due to an asynchronously rotating companion as in the
case of PSR 2051 @xmath 0827 (Doroshenko et al., 2001 ; Stappers et al.,
2001 ) .

All these pieces of evidence suggest that the identified variable star
is the companion to PSR J1518+0204C and we name it COM-M5C. Since the
available @xmath , @xmath and @xmath measurements are mainly clustered
toward the maximum of the emission, they do not allow us to have a
reliable measure of the mean magnitudes of this star. Therefore, in the
following analysis we will use the values at maxima ( @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath ) and a plausible range of magnitude variation ( @xmath
mags).

Figure 5.4 shows the position of COM-M5C  in the ( @xmath , @xmath ) and
in the ( @xmath , @xmath ) CMDs. As can be seen, COM-M5C is located at
faint magnitudes between the MS and the WD cooling sequence, thus
suggesting that it is probably a non-degenerate or a semi-degenerate,
low mass, swollen star. Indeed similar objects have been previously
identified in Galactic GCs (see Ferraro et al., 2001b ; Edmonds et al.,
2002 ; Cocozza et al., 2008 ; Pallanca et al., 2010 , 2013b ) .

### 5.4 Discussion

We have constrained mass, luminosity and temperature of COM-M5C by
comparing its position in the ( @xmath ) CMD (Figure 5.4 ) with a
reference isochrone (Girardi et al., 2000 ; Marigo et al., 2008 ) . We
adopted a metallicity [Fe/H] @xmath -1.3 (Carretta et al., 2009 ) , an
age @xmath Gyr, a distance modulus @xmath =14.37 and a color excess
@xmath (Ferraro et al., 1999 ) . In particular, for the star magnitude
we assumed the value at maximum ( @xmath ) as a lower limit and for its
color we adopted the value at maximum ( @xmath ) as a reference. The
color uncertainty has been estimated from the typical photometric error
of stars of similar magnitudes (see the gray shaded region in Figure 5.4
). The resulting effective temperature, luminosity and mass of the star
are @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

Note that if we consider the largest derived value of the mass ( @xmath
) and we combine it with the PSR mass function, we can rule out very
small inclination angles (e.g., @xmath for a @xmath NS). In addition, as
found for other companion stars (e.g. Ferraro et al., 2003c ; Pallanca
et al., 2010 ; Mucciarelli et al., 2013 ) , masses derived from the
position in CMDs might be overestimated ² ² 2 In fact, from the measured
luminosity we can directly derive the mass through comparison with
models of unperturbed MS stars, but if the star filled the RL (and thus
not follows anymore the hydrostatic equilibrium law) such a mass value
could be overestimated. and hence the limit to the inclination angle
could be even more stringent. On the other hand, when we assume the mass
lower limit to be a core hydrogen burning star ( @xmath ) we would
obtain an upper limit to the inclination angle for the system ( @xmath
). However, such inclinations are not compatible with the presence of
radio eclipse.

Under the assumption that the optical emission of COM-M5C is well
reproduced by a blackbody (BB), the stellar radius is @xmath . However,
companions to BWs are expected to be affected by the tidal distortion
exerted by the PSR and to have filled their RL or have even reached
larger dimensions. In particular to justify the presence of eclipses of
the radio signal, the size of the RL might be a more appropriate value
(e.g., see PSR J2051 @xmath 0827 and PSR J0610 @xmath 2100 Stappers et
al., 1996a , 2000 ; Pallanca et al., 2012 ) . According to Eggleton (
1983 ) the RL radius can be computed as:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the ratio between the companion and the PSR masses (
@xmath and @xmath , respectively). This relation can be combined with
the PSR mass function @xmath . By assuming a NS mass ranging from @xmath
to @xmath (Özel et al., 2012 ) , this yields @xmath , depending on the
inclination angle ( @xmath ) of the orbital system, ranging from @xmath
to @xmath , respectively.

Under the assumption that the optical variation shown in Figure 5.3 is
mainly due to irradiation from the MSP, reprocessed by the surface of
COM-M5C, we can estimate how the re-processing efficiency depends on the
inclination angle and, hence, infer the companion mass. To this end, one
can compare the observed flux variation ( @xmath ) between the maximum (
@xmath ) and the minimum ( @xmath ) of the light curve, with the
expected flux variation ( @xmath ) computed from the rotational energy
loss rate ( @xmath ). Unfortunately, @xmath is not measurable with the
available radio observations. However we took as reference the value
measured for some BWs in the GF, that typically have @xmath values
ranging from @xmath to @xmath erg s @xmath (Breton et al., 2013 ) .
Actually, since we do not observe the entire light curve, @xmath can
just put a lower limit to the reprocessing efficiency. Moreover, since
these quantities depend on the inclination angle of the system (see
below) we can just estimate the reprocessing efficiency as function of
@xmath .

At first we converted the observed @xmath modulation into a flux
variation. We assumed the maximum measured magnitude @xmath for @xmath
and an amplitude of variation @xmath between @xmath and @xmath , thus
obtaining @xmath erg s @xmath cm @xmath . On the other hand, the
expected flux variation due to irradiation between @xmath and @xmath is
given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the re-processing efficiency under the assumption of
isotropic emission, @xmath is semi-major axis of orbit, @xmath is the
radius of the companion star, which we assumed to be equal to @xmath ,
@xmath is the distance of PSR, adopted to be equal to the GC distance (
@xmath kpc; Harris, 1996 ; Ferraro et al., 1999 ) and @xmath
parametrizes the difference of the re-emitting surface visible to the
observer between maximum and minimum ³ ³ 3 In the following we assume
@xmath . Note that for a @xmath the second term reduces to zero. For the
two limit configurations we find that in the case of a face-on system (
@xmath ), the fraction of the heated surface visible to the observer is
constant and hence no flux variation is expected, while in the case of
an edge-on system ( @xmath ) the fraction of the heated surface that is
visible to the observer varies between 0.5 (for @xmath ) to 0 (for
@xmath ) and hence @xmath . . By assuming @xmath between @xmath and
@xmath , we can derive how @xmath varies as a function of @xmath . The
result is shown in Figure 5.5 . Obviously, it is important to note that
all the calculations have been performed using a lower limit ( @xmath
mag @xmath ) for the magnitude modulation and hence also the estimated
reprocessing efficiency has to be considered as a lower limit to the
true value.

As an example, the observed optical modulation can be reproduced
considering a system seen at an inclination angle of about @xmath , with
a very low mass companion ( @xmath ) that has filled its RL, and
reprocess the PSR flux with an efficiency @xmath . Similar results are
obtained performing the same calculations in the F390W and F814W bands.

On the other hand, if we use @xmath instead of @xmath for the stellar
radius, the efficiency increases and for several configurations it
becomes larger than 100%. In such cases the only possible scenario would
be that of an anisotropic PSR emission. However, given the presence of
eclipses and the observed behavior of other similar objects, @xmath is
likely too small to provide a good estimate of the star physical size.
However, future studies are needed to better constrain the system
parameters.

Unfortunately, with the current generation of telescopes the star is too
faint and located in a crowded region to perform a spectroscopical
follow-up that would be furnish to uniquely characterize this object.
However, an optimized photometric follow-up aimed to detect the star at
the minimum will give the opportunity to better constrain the light
curve shape of the companion and hence to better characterize this
binary system.

## Chapter 6 New clues on the nature of the companion to PSR
J1740@xmath5340A in NGC 6397 from XSHOOTER spectroscopy

By using XSHOOTER spectra acquired at the ESO VLT, we have studied the
surface chemical composition of the companion star to the binary MSP
J1740 @xmath 5340A in the GC NGC 6397. The measured abundances of Fe,
Mg, Al and Na confirm that the star belongs to the cluster. On the other
hand, the measured surface abundance of nitrogen ([N/Fe] @xmath dex),
combined with the carbon upper limit ( @xmath dex) previously obtained
from UVES spectra, allows us to put severe constraints on the nature of
this object, strongly suggesting that the PSR companion is a deeply
peeled star. In fact, the comparison with theoretical stellar models
indicates that the matter currently observed at the surface of this star
has been processed by the hydrogen-burning CN-cycle at equilibrium. In
turn, this evidence suggests that the PSR companion is a low mass (
@xmath ) remnant star, descending from a @xmath progenitor which lost
@xmath % of its original material because of mass transfer activity onto
the PSR. - This chapter is mainly based on Mucciarelli et al. 2013 ,
ApJ, 772, L27.

### 6.1 Introduction

The MSP J1740 @xmath 5340A in the GC NGC 6397 belongs to a binary system
with an orbital period of @xmath days (D’Amico et al., 2001a ) . At 1.4
GHz radio frequency it shows eclipses for about 40% of the orbital
period, likely due to matter released from the companion (D’Amico et
al., 2001b ) , which probably is also responsible for its X-ray emission
(see Grindlay et al., 2001 ) . The companion star (hereafter, COM J1740
@xmath 5340A) was identified by Ferraro et al. ( 2001b ) as a variable
object with a luminosity comparable to that of the MS TO and an
anomalously redder color (see right panel in Figure 6.1 ). The shape of
its light curve suggests that it is tidally distorted by the interaction
with the PSR (Ferraro et al., 2001b ; Kaluzny et al., 2003 ) .

In virtue of its brightness ( @xmath ), COM J1740 @xmath
5340A represents one of the rare cases where spectroscopy of a GC MSP
companion can be successfully performed (see Section 2.3 ). Indeed, a
detailed study of the companion radial velocity curve was performed by
Ferraro et al. ( 2003c ) and, once combined with the PSR radial velocity
curve, it allowed to derive the mass ratio of the system ( @xmath ). In
turn, this constrained the companion mass in the range @xmath (Ferraro
et al., 2003c ; Kaluzny et al., 2003 ) . In addition, also a chemical
analysis has been performed on UVES@VLT high resolution spectra,
highlighting (a) a complex structure of the H @xmath profile, well
reproduced by two different emission components (Sabbi et al., 2003a ) ,
(b) an unexpected detection of a He I line, suggesting the existence of
a hot (T @xmath 10000 K) region located on the stellar hemisphere facing
the MSP (Ferraro et al., 2003c ) , and (c) some anomalous chemical
patterns (for Li, Ca and C) with respect to the chemical composition of
normal cluster stars, in particular a significant depletion of Carbon
(Sabbi et al., 2003b ) .

Several hypotheses have been proposed to explain the nature of this
system and find a coherent picture for the observational evidence
collected (Possenti, 2002 ; Burderi et al., 2002 ; Orosz & van Kerkwijk,
2003 ) . In particular, two possible origins for COM J1740 @xmath 5340A
can be advanced: (1) it is a low mass ( @xmath ) MS star perturbed by
the PSR; (2) it is a normal star (at the TO or slightly evolved,
according to its luminosity), deeply peeled by mass loss processes.

Following the suggestions of Ergma & Sarna ( 2003 ) , the CN surface
abundances are an ideal tool to discriminate between the two proposed
scenarios: in fact, if it is a perturbed MS star, its C and N abundances
should be unmodified with respect to the pristine cluster chemical
composition. On the other hand, if it is a peeled star, its chemical
composition is expected to show the signatures of H-burning CN-cycle (in
particular, a decrease of @xmath C and an increase of @xmath N) ¹ ¹ 1
Note that this is also the chemical signature used by Ferraro et al. (
2006b ) to infer a mass-transfer origin for a sub-sample of blue
straggler stars in 47 Tucanae. . A first evidence in favor of the latter
scenario has been provided by the significant lack of C (Sabbi et al.,
2003b ) . Unfortunately, however, those spectra do not allow to measure
the N abundance. In this chapter we present XSHOOTER spectroscopic
observations of COM J1740 @xmath 5340A, focussing on the N abundance.

### 6.2 Observations

Observations of COM J1740 @xmath 5340A were secured with the XSHOOTER
spectrograph at the ESO-VLT. A second target (hereafter MS1) was
included in the same slit (Figure 6.1 , left panel) and used as
comparison star. This is a MS star with @xmath , located at @xmath from
the main target (see Figure 6.1 , right panel). A first observing run
has been performed in June 2010, enabling simultaneously the UVB (
@xmath 3300-5500 Å) and the VIS ( @xmath 5500-10000 Å) channels of
XSHOOTER. The adopted slit width was @xmath (R=6200) and @xmath
(R=11000) for the UBV and VIS channels, respectively, and the exposure
time was 1200 s in both cases. To increase the S/N in the region around
the NH band ( @xmath 3360 Å), a second observation has been secured in
July 2011, using only the UVB channel, with the same slit width and with
an exposure time of 2700 s.

The data reduction was performed with the XSHOOTER ESO pipeline, version
2.0.0, including bias subtraction, flat-fielding, wavelength
calibration, rectification and order merging. Because the pipeline does
not support efficiently the spectral extraction for many sources in the
same slit, this task was performed manually with the IRAF package apall
in optimal extraction mode. The final spectra have S/N=50-100 for COM
J1740 @xmath 5340A, and S/N=40-70 for MS1.

### 6.3 Chemical analysis

The chemical abundances of Fe, C, N, Na, Al and Mg have been derived
through a @xmath -minimization between the observed spectral features
and a grid of synthetic spectra computed with different abundances for
each species, following the procedure described in Mucciarelli et al. (
2012 ) . With respect to the traditional method of the equivalent
widths, this approach reduces the difficulties in the continuum
location, a critical task in the analysis of low-resolution spectra
because of the severe line blanketing conditions.

For the analysis of COM J1740 @xmath 5340A we adopted the atmospheric
parameters @xmath K, @xmath and @xmath km/s derived by Sabbi et al. (
2003b ) . For MS1 we derived @xmath = 6459 K and @xmath by comparing the
position of the star in the CMD with a theoretical isochrone from the
BaSTI dataset (Pietrinferni et al., 2006 ) , with Z=0.0003
(corresponding to [Fe/H]=–2.1), @xmath -enhanced chemical mixture, and
an age of 12 Gyr, assuming the reddening and the distance modulus quoted
by Ferraro et al. ( 1999 ) . The photometric value of @xmath for MS1 is
confirmed by the analysis of the wings of the H @xmath line. Since the
effective temperature of COM J1740 @xmath 5340A was also derived from
the H @xmath wings (Sabbi et al., 2003b ) , we can considered the values
of @xmath of the two objects on the same scale. For the microturbulent
velocity we assumed 1 km s @xmath , that is a reasonable value for
unevolved low mass stars (Gratton et al., 2001 ) .

The synthetic spectra have been computed with the SYNTHE code by R. L.
Kurucz (Sbordone et al., 2004 ) , including all the atomic and molecular
transitions listed in the Kurucz/Castelli line list ² ² 2
http://wwwuser.oat.ts.astro.it/castelli/linelists.html . All the
synthetic spectra have been convolved with a Gaussian profile to
reproduce the appropriate spectral resolution. The synthetic spectra
used for the analysis of COM J1740 @xmath 5340A have been also convolved
with a rotational profile with @xmath = 50 km s @xmath (Sabbi et al.,
2003b ) . Instead, for MS1 no additional rotational velocity is added,
according to the very low values ( @xmath 3-4 km s @xmath ) typically
measured in unevolved low mass stars (Lucatello & Gratton, 2003 ) . The
model atmospheres have been calculated with the atlas9 code (Castelli &
Kurucz, 2004 ) , assuming [M/H] @xmath dex and @xmath -enhanced chemical
composition (according to the analysis by Sabbi et al., 2003b ) .

The spectral lines for the analysis have been selected through the
detailed inspection of the synthetic spectra, considering only those
transitions that are unblended at the XSHOOTER resolution. A total of 15
and 13 Fe I lines have been selected in COM J1740 @xmath 5340A and in
MS1, respectively. The nitrogen abundances were derived by fitting the
band-head of the A-X (0-0) and (1-1) transitions located at 3360 Å and
3370 Å, respectively. The inspection of the solar-flux spectrum by
Neckel & Labs ( 1984 ) suggested that we need to decrease by 0.5 dex the
Kurucz value of @xmath gf, in order to properly reproduce the solar N
abundance. The carbon abundances were derived from the CH G-band at 4300
Å. The Kurucz @xmath gf for the CH transitions were decreased by 0.3
dex, in order to reproduce the G-band observed in the solar-flux
spectrum by Neckel & Labs ( 1984 ) , as discussed in Mucciarelli,
Salaris & Bonifacio ( 2012 ) . Aluminum abundances were derived from the
UV resonance line at 3961 Å, applying a non-LTE correction of +0.7 dex
for both targets, according to the calculations of Andrievsky et al. (
2008 ) . To derive the sodium abundance, we used the Na doublet at
8183-8194 Å: these lines fall in a spectral region severely contaminated
by telluric features. Despite the accuracy of the telluric subtraction
(performed with the IRAF task telluric by adopting as template the
spectrum of an early-type star observed during the observing runs), the
radial velocities of the two stars prevent a total deblending between
the Na lines and the telluric features. For both stars we therefore
provide only upper limits for the Na abundance, including the non-LTE
corrections by Lind et al. ( 2011 ) .

Abundance uncertainties have been estimated by adding in quadrature the
errors obtained from the fitting procedure and those arising from the
atmospheric parameters. The uncertainties in the fitting procedure have
been estimated by resorting to Monte Carlo simulations. Uncertainties
due to atmospheric parameters are calculated by varying one parameter at
a time, while keeping the other ones fixed, and repeating the analysis.

### 6.4 Results

Table 6.1 lists the chemical abundances derived for COM J1740 @xmath
5340A and MS1, together with their total uncertainties. The iron content
of the MSP companion is [Fe/H] @xmath dex, in agreement with both the
iron abundance of MS1 ([Fe/H] @xmath dex) and previous estimates of the
cluster metallicity (see e.g. Carretta et al., 2009 ; Lovisi et al.,
2012 ) . In addition, COM J1740 @xmath 5340A and MS1 show very similar
values of the Na, Mg and Al abundances. These elements are involved in
the chemical anomalies usually observed in GCs (Gratton et al., 2012 )
and are explained as due to two or more bursts of star formation in the
early phases of the cluster evolution (see D’Ercole et al., 2008 ) . In
particular, given the ranges of values measured in unevolved stars both
in NGC 6397 (Gratton et al., 2001 ; Carretta et al., 2005 ; Pasquini et
al., 2008 ) and in GCs of similar metallicity (Carretta et al., 2009 ) ,
the [C/Fe], [Mg/Fe] and [Al/Fe] abundance ratios, as well as the upper
limit of [Na/Fe] derived for MS1 suggest with this object belongs to the
first generation of stars ³ ³ 3 For TO stars in NGC 6397 Lind et al. (
2009 ) derive temperatures lower than those predicted by the BaSTI
isochrone. We repeated the analysis of MS1 decreasing @xmath by 250 K,
in order to match the @xmath scale by Lind et al. ( 2009 ) . The
differences in the derived [C/Fe] and [N/Fe] are smaller than 0.2 dex
and do not change our conclusions about this star. . In turn, the
observed chemical similarity indicates that this is likely the case also
for COM J1740 @xmath 5340A.

The [N/Fe] upper limit obtained for MS1 is also consistent with what
expected for the first stellar generation (see Carretta et al., 2005 ) ,
while the value measured for COM J1740 @xmath 5340A ([N/Fe] @xmath dex)
is significantly larger. Figure 6.2 shows the observed spectrum of COM
J1740 @xmath 5340A in the region around the NH band, compared with
synthetic spectra calculated with different values of [N/Fe]. Besides
the best-fit synthetic spectrum (thick solid line), two other spectra
are shown: one has been computed assuming [N/Fe] @xmath dex, consistent
with what expected on the surface of an unperturbed star and the results
obtained for MS1; the other one has [N/Fe] @xmath dex, which is the
value predicted for the NO-cycle equilibrium (see Section 6.5 ). Clearly
both these additional values are incompatible with the measured
abundance. As discussed in Section 6.5 , this provides interesting
constraints on the structure and the nature of this star.

Because of the weakness of the G-band only an upper limit for the C
abundance of COM J1740 @xmath 5340A is derived: at the XSHOOTER
resolution, we measure [C/Fe] @xmath dex. This is compatible with the
(more stringent) limit derived by Sabbi et al. ( 2003b ) from
high-resolution UVES spectra ([C/Fe] @xmath dex), which is therefore
adopted in the following discussion. Note that these upper limits are
significantly smaller than any C abundance measured in NGC 6397 stars
(e.g. Carretta et al., 2005 ) .

### 6.5 Discussion

The abundances of C and N measured for COM J1740 @xmath 5340A are
incompatible with the values expected on the surface of an unperturbed
MS star. The very low [C/Fe] is also incompatible with the C abundances
range observed in the cluster (Carretta et al., 2005 ) , thus excluding
that COM J1740 @xmath 5340A is an unperturbed second generation star.
Hence, option @xmath discussed in the Introduction can be ruled out.

In order to verify the possibility that COM J1740 @xmath 5340A is,
instead, a deeply peeled TO/sub-giant star and to put new constraints on
its nature, we compare the derived C and N abundances with the chemical
gradients predicted in theoretical stellar models. We have calculated
the evolution of a 0.8 @xmath stellar model, from the pre-MS to the red
giant branch phase, using the same code and input physics of the BaSTI
models (see e.g. Pietrinferni et al., 2004 , 2006 ) . We adopted
Z=0.0003, Y=0.245, and an @xmath -enhanced metal mixture ([ @xmath
/Fe]=+0.4), which is appropriate for the first generation of stars in
Galactic GCs (in particular, we assume [C/Fe]=0 and [N/Fe]=0, also
consistently with the abundances measured for MS1). The TO age of the
model is 12 Gyr. This value, however, depends on the efficiency of
atomic diffusion, which can be (partially or totally) inhibited by
additional turbulent mixing (for which an adequate physical description
is still lacking). We therefore calculated models both with and without
atomic diffusion, finding that they are basically indistinguishable (in
the following we therefore present only the results obtained from models
without atomic diffusion). Also the effects of radiative levitation are
totally negligible at the metallicity of NGC 6397, because the radiative
acceleration on the C and N atoms is always smaller than the
gravitational acceleration (see Figure 3 in Richard, Michaud & Richer,
2002 ) and we therefore do not include them in our models.

Figure 6.3 shows the gradients of the [ @xmath C/Fe] and [ @xmath N/Fe]
abundance ratios in the interior of a sub-giant star ⁴ ⁴ 4 It is not
easy to identify the evolutionary stage of the star in the scenario of a
peeled star. Its position in the CMD (Figure 6.1 ) suggests that the
object is a slightly evolved star (see also Burderi et al., 2002 ), but
we cannot exclude that it still belongs to the MS. In any case, its
luminosity seems to exclude that it is a giant star. , as a function of
the stellar mass, from the center to the surface ( @xmath ). As
apparent, these abundances remain constant along the entire stellar
envelope, from the surface, down to the radius including half of the
total mass. The flat chemical profiles at [N/Fe] @xmath dex and [C/Fe]
@xmath dex observed in the very central region ( @xmath ) are the
consequence of the CNO-burning that occurred in the stellar core during
the MS evolution. The gradients observed in the intermediate region (
@xmath ), instead, are due to the ongoing hydrogen burning in a thick
shell above the inactive core (with a mass of @xmath ). In particular,
the most external portion of the shell is mainly interested by the
CN-cycle and therefore shows an increase of @xmath N and a drop of
@xmath C. At @xmath the abundances of @xmath C and @xmath N reach the
equilibrium: C displays its minimum value ([C/Fe] @xmath dex) and the N
abundance profile shows a plateau at [N/Fe] @xmath dex. In the innermost
portion of the shell the NO-cycle is active, thus producing a further
increase of both @xmath N and @xmath C, up to the most central values.

The dashed vertical lines in Figure 6.3 mark the range of mass profile
where the carbon abundance of the stellar model is in agreement with the
upper limit ([C/Fe] @xmath dex) derived for COM J1740 @xmath 5340A
(Sabbi et al., 2003b ) . In this same mass range also the N abundance
shows a good agreement between the model prediction and the measured
value (black triangle in Figure 6.3 ). Instead the [N/Fe] ratio observed
in COM J1740 @xmath 5340A is incompatible with the abundance ratio
predicted in any other region of the stellar model (consistently with
what discussed above; see Figure 6.2 ). This evidence strongly suggests
that COM J1740 @xmath 5340A is a star peeled down to the region where
the CN-cycle occurs, as a result of heavy mass transfer onto the NS.

The C and N abundances allow us to also identify a reasonable mass range
for the MSP companion. Figure 6.4 shows the behavior of the discussed
stellar model in the [C/Fe]–[N/Fe] plane. The light gray box indicates
the locus corresponding to the abundances of COM J1740 @xmath
5340A (taking into account the quoted uncertainties). Clearly, only the
portion of the stellar model between 0.17 and @xmath overlaps this
region. This mass range is in very good agreement with the value (
@xmath ; Ferraro et al., 2003c ) estimated for COM J1740 @xmath
5340A from the binary system mass ratio (inferred from the radial
velocity curve of the companion) and the orbital inclination angle
(inferred from the optical light curve). In order to quantify how much
the results depend on the evolutionary phase of the star before the
onset of heavy mass transfer, we repeated the analysis by using models
on the MS, at the base of the red giant branch, before and after the
occurrence of the first dredge-up. Following the evolution from the TO
to the base of the red giant branch, the region where the NO-cycle
occurs increases in mass, thus reducing the mass range where the model C
and N abundances match the observed ones. If the MSP companion was a TO
star, COM J1740 @xmath 5340A should now have a mass between 0.13 and
@xmath , while the range decreases significantly in case of a red giant
branch star: @xmath for a star before the first dredge-up, and @xmath
for a star after the first dredge-up. Note that in all the cases, the
upper mass limit remains basically unchanged, confirming a value smaller
than @xmath , even if the upper limit for the C abundance inferred from
the XSHOOTER spectra ([C/Fe] @xmath ) is assumed. We finally stress that
different assumptions about the initial C and N abundances of the star
have the effect of rigidly shifting the model curves in both the planes
shown in Figs. 6.3 and 6.4 .

The evidence presented here adds an important piece of information to
properly characterize COM J1740 @xmath 5340A. The analysis of the C and
N surface abundances provides a diagnostic of the companion mass which
is totally independent of other, commonly used methods, well confirming
the previous estimates. In addition, the chemical patterns observed at
the surface of COM J1740 @xmath 5340A solidly confirm that this object
is a deeply peeled star, and can be even used to obtain a quantitative
evaluation of the amount of mass lost by the star. In fact, our analysis
indicates that the entire envelope of the star has been completely
removed and the peeling action has extended down to an interior layer
where the CN-cycle approximately reached the equilibrium. By assuming an
initial mass of @xmath , we estimate that COM J1740 @xmath 5340A has
lost @xmath of its initial mass during the interaction with the PSR.

## Chapter 7 The identification of the optical companion to the binary
Millisecond Pulsar J0610@xmath2100 in the Galactic Field

In this study we have used deep @xmath and @xmath images acquired at the
ESO VLT to identify the optical companion to the binary PSR J0610 @xmath
2100, one of the BW MSP recently detected by the Fermi Gamma-ray
Telescope in the Galactic plane. We found a faint star ( @xmath ) nearly
coincident ( @xmath ) with the PSR nominal position. This star is
visible only in half of the available images, while it disappears in the
deepest ones (those acquired under the best seeing conditions), thus
indicating that it is variable. Although our observations do not sample
the entire orbital period ( @xmath d) of the PSR, we found that the
optical modulation of the variable star nicely correlates with the PSR
orbital period and describes a well defined peak ( @xmath ) at @xmath ,
suggesting a modulation due to the PSR heating. We tentatively conclude
that the companion to PSR J0610 @xmath 2100 is a heavily ablated, very
low mass star ( @xmath ) that completely filled its RL. - This chapter
is mainly based on Pallanca et al. 2012 , ApJ, 755, 180.

### 7.1 Introduction

PSR J0610 @xmath 2100 is a MSP located in the GF with period @xmath ms
and a radio flux @xmath mJy at 1.4 GHz, discovered during the Parkes
High-Latitude pulsar survey (Burgay et al., 2006 , hereafter B06) . The
period derivative @xmath s s @xmath implies a characteristic age @xmath
Gyr, a magnetic field @xmath G, and a rotational energy loss rate @xmath
erg s @xmath , similar to the values measured for other MSPs. PSR J0610
@xmath 2100 is in a binary system, with an orbital period of @xmath d.
It is located at a distance of @xmath kpc, estimated from its dispersion
measure (DM=60.666 pc cm @xmath ) and the Galactic electron density
model of Cordes & Lazio ( 2002 ) . The PSR has a proper motion @xmath
mas yr @xmath and @xmath mas yr @xmath (B06), which implies a transverse
velocity of @xmath km s @xmath , one of the highest measured for
Galactic MSPs. The system mass function ( @xmath ) implies a lower limit
of @xmath for the mass of the companion, assuming @xmath for the PSR
(B06). Thus, in agreement with the definition presented in Section 1.5 ,
PSR J0610 @xmath 2100 is probably a BW seen at a low inclination angle
(in fact no eclipse is detected).

Until a few years ago just two other BWs were known in the GF, namely
PSR B1957+20 (Fruchter et al., 1988b ) and PSR J2051 @xmath 0827
(Stappers et al., 1996b ) . But very recently, thanks both to dedicated
surveys of @xmath -ray sources and to new blind searches, new BWs have
been discovered, most of them having been detected in @xmath -rays (see
Roberts, 2011 , and references therein) . Also PSR J0610 @xmath 2100 has
been detected in @xmath -rays by the Large Area Telescope (LAT) on board
the Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope. Based upon positional coincidence
with the LAT error box, it was initially associated with the @xmath -ray
source 1FGL  J0610.7 @xmath 2059 (Abdo et al., 2009 , 2010 ) . The
detection of @xmath -ray pulsations at the radio period of PSR J0610
@xmath 2100 has been recently reported and used to confirm it as the
@xmath -ray counterpart to the MSP (Espinoza et al., 2013 ) . In the
X-rays PSR J0610 @xmath 2100 has not been detected, neither by the ROSAT
All Sky Survey (Voges et al., 1999 ) , nor by Swift (Marelli, private
communication).

Studying the optical emission properties of binary MSP companions is
important to better constrain the orbital parameters and to clarify the
evolutionary status of these systems and then to track back their
history and characteristic timescales. In spite of their importance,
only a few optical companions to BWs in the GF have been detected to
date. The binary MSP B1957+20 is the first discovered BW and one of the
best studied members of this class. The optical companion to PSR
J1957+20 was identified by Kulkarni et al. ( 1988 ) , while subsequent
observations found the companion to vary by 30%-40% in flux over the
orbital period (Callanan et al., 1995 ) . Reynolds et al. ( 2007 )
modeled the light curve and thus constrained the system inclination (
@xmath ) and the filling factor of the RL ( @xmath ). Moreover, they
ruled out the possibility that the companion is a WD, suggesting that
most probably is a BD. A recent spectroscopic analysis, combined with
the knowledge of the inclination angle inferred from models of the light
curve, suggested that the PSR B1957+20 is massive, with @xmath ( @xmath
being a conservative limit; van Kerkwijk et al., 2011 ) . The optical
companion to binary PSR J2051 @xmath 0827 was identified by Stappers et
al. ( 1996a ) . They found that the amplitude of the companion’s light
curve was at least 1.2 mag, and that the variation was consistent with
the companion rotating synchronously with the PSR and one side being
heated by the impinging PSR flux. In subsequent works it has been
possible to study the entire lightcurve, measuring amplitudes of 3.3 and
1.9 magnitudes in the @xmath -band and @xmath -band respectively. The
companion has been modeled as a gravitationally distorted low mass star
which is irradiated by the impinging PSR wind. The resulting best-fit
model corresponds to a RL filling companion star, which converts
approximately 30% of the incident PSR spin down energy into optical flux
(Stappers et al., 2000 ) .

In this chapter we present the identification of the optical companion
to PSR J0610 @xmath 2100, the third discovered counterpart to a BW
system in the GF.

### 7.2 Observations and data analysis

The used photometric data set consists of a series of ground-based
optical images acquired with FORS2 mounted at the ESO-VLT. We used the
Standard Resolution Collimator, with a pixel scale of 0.25 @xmath /pixel
and a FOV of @xmath .

Six short acquisition images (of 5 s each) and a total of 29 deep images
in the @xmath and @xmath bands ( @xmath and @xmath hereafter) were
collected during six nights, from mid December 2004 to the beginning of
January 2005 (see Table 7.1 ), under program @xmath (PI: Sabbi). These
data allow us to sample @xmath of the orbital period in @xmath and
@xmath of it in @xmath (see column 4 in Table 7.1 ).

By following standard reduction procedures, we corrected the raw images
for bias and flat-field. In particular, in order to obtain high-quality
master-bias and master-flat images, we selected a large number of images
obtained during each observing night and, for each filter, we properly
combined them by using the tasks zerocombine and flatcombine in the IRAF
package ccdred . The calibration files thus obtained have been applied
to the raw images by using the dedicated task ccdproc .

Based on the Word Coordinate System (WCS) of the images, we
approximately located the PSR position and decided to limit the
photometric analysis to a region of 500 pixel @xmath 500 pixel ( @xmath
125 @xmath @xmath 125 @xmath ) centered on it.

We carried out the photometric analysis by applying the PSF-fitting
method (see Chapter 2 ). In particular, the master-frame for the object
detection has been built combining the three images obtained under the
best seeing conditions ( @xmath ) in both filters.

The photometric calibration has been performed by following the
procedure described in Chapter 2 . In particular, in this case we first
derived the calibration equation for ten standard stars in the field
PG0231 (Stetson, 2000 ) , which has been observed with FORS2 during a
photometric night (December 17, 2004) in both @xmath and @xmath under a
calibration program. To analyze the standard star field we performed an
aperture photometry with a radius @xmath pixels and we compared the
obtained magnitudes with the standard Stetson catalog available on the
CADC web site ¹ ¹ 1
http://cadcwww.dao.nrc.ca/community/STETSON/standards/ . The resulting
calibration equations are @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath
are the instrumental magnitudes. The color coefficient is very small for
the @xmath band, while it could be not negligible in the @xmath band.

The astrometry procedure has been performed as described in Chapter 2 .
In particular, since most of the astrometric standard stars are
saturated in our catalog, we used the stars detected in short @xmath
-band images as secondary astrometric standards. At the end of the
procedure the typical accuracy of the astrometric solution was @xmath in
both @xmath and @xmath .

### 7.3 The companion to PSR J0610@xmath2100

In order to identify the companion to PSR J0610 @xmath 2100 we first
searched for objects with coordinates compatible with the nominal PSR
position: @xmath , @xmath at Epoch MJD=53100 (B06). Since the epoch of
observations is within less than one year from the epoch of the
reference radio position, we neglected the effect of proper motion,
which is much smaller than the accuracy of the astrometric solution of
the FORS2 images.

A first visual inspection of the PSR region clearly shows that only one
star lies within a couple of arcseconds from the MSP radio position: it
is located at @xmath @xmath , just @xmath from PSR J0610 @xmath 2100.
Thus, from positional coincidence alone, we found a very good candidate
companion to PSR J0610 @xmath 2100. Note that the chance coincidence
probability ² ² 2 The chance coincidence probability is calculated as
@xmath where @xmath is the stellar density of stars with similar
magnitude to the candidate companion and @xmath is the accuracy of the
astrometric solution. that a star is located at the PSR position is only
@xmath . Hence, this star is the companion to PSR J0610 @xmath 2100 with
a probability of @xmath . Interestingly enough, this star was not
present in the master-list obtained from the stacking of the @xmath
-band images because it is visible in only half of the images, while it
completely disappears in the others (see Figure 7.1 ). We performed a
detailed photometric analysis of this star for measuring its magnitude
in as many images as possible, and we found that it is not detected in
the deepest @xmath images obtained under the best seeing conditions
(FWHM @xmath ). In summary, we were able to measure the magnitude of the
star in only 12 images (10 in the @xmath -band and 2 in the @xmath
-band), finding significant variations: @xmath mag (from @xmath to
@xmath ), and @xmath mag (from @xmath to @xmath ). In the remaining
images the star magnitude is below the detection thresholds ( @xmath and
@xmath ), thus suggesting a very pronounced optical variation.
Considering the entire data set, the object’s photometry shows a quite
large scatter, significantly ( @xmath ) larger than that computed for
stars of similar magnitude in the same FOV (see Figure 7.2 ). These
findings confirm that this is a variable object near the detection limit
of our sample.

In order to establish a firm connection between this star and the PSR,
we computed the @xmath and @xmath light curves folding each measurement
with the orbital period ( @xmath d) and the ascending node ( @xmath )
from the radio ephemeris (B06). As shown in Figure 7.3 , although the
available data do not allow a complete coverage of the orbital period,
the flux modulation of the star nicely correlates with the PSR orbital
phase. The available data are consistent with the rising (in the @xmath
band) and the decreasing (in @xmath -band) branches of a light curve
with a peak at @xmath . This is the typical behavior expected when the
surface of the companion is heated by the PSR flux and the orbital plane
has a sufficiently high inclination angle. In fact, in this
configuration a light curve with a maximum at @xmath (corresponding to
the PSR inferior conjunction, when the companion surface faces the
observer) and a minimum at @xmath (corresponding to the PSR superior
conjunction) is expected. Indeed the star is not detectable at the
epochs corresponding to the orbital phases where the luminosity minimum
is predicted.

Based on all these pieces of evidence we propose the identified variable
star as the companion to the PSR; following the nomenclature adopted in
some papers of our group (see Ferraro et al., 2001b , 2003a ; Cocozza et
al., 2008 ; Pallanca et al., 2010 ) , we name it COM  J0610 @xmath 2100.

Since the available @xmath and @xmath measurements are mainly clustered
toward the maximum of the emission, but do not allow to precisely
determine it, we used a simple sinusoidal function ³ ³ 3 Although this
assumption is not supported by a physical reason, it provides a first
estimate of the magnitude and color of COM J0610 @xmath 2100 at maximum.
to obtain a first-guess modeling of the light curve. In the following
analysis we will use these values, instead of the mean magnitudes
averaged over the entire orbital period, because these latter are not
available in this case. Also note that during the calibration procedure
the color term entering the equations has been computed as the
difference between the average value of the available @xmath and @xmath
instrumental magnitudes. While this is strictly correct for non variable
stars, in the case of COM  J0610 @xmath 2100 it could have introduced an
error in the estimated magnitudes. However, since in the calibrating
equations the coefficients of the color terms are very small, especially
in the @xmath -band, this uncertainty should be negligible. The
resulting magnitudes of COM  J0610 @xmath 2100 at maximum are @xmath and
@xmath . Figure 7.4 shows the position in the ( @xmath , @xmath ) CMD of
COM  J0610 @xmath 2100  and the stars detected within @xmath from it.
For the sake of clarity a simulation of the Galactic disk population in
the direction of PSR J0610 @xmath 2100 computed with the Besancon Galaxy
model (Robin et al., 2003 ) is also shown. As can be seen, COM  J0610
@xmath 2100 is located at a slightly bluer color with respect to the
reference MS, thus suggesting that it probably is a non-degenerate, low
mass, swollen star. Indeed similar objects have been previously
identified in Galactic GCs (see Ferraro et al., 2001b ; Edmonds et al.,
2002 ; Cocozza et al., 2008 ; Pallanca et al., 2010 ) .

### 7.4 Discussion

We have determined the physical parameters of COM  J0610 @xmath
2100 from the comparison of its position in the CMD (Figure 7.4 ) with a
reference zero age main sequence, assuming an interstellar extinction of
@xmath ⁴ ⁴ 4 from NED, Nasa/ipac Extragalactic Database - Galactic
Extinction Calculator available at the web site
http://ned.ipac.caltech.edu/forms/calculator.html . and the typical
metallicity of the Galactic disk ( @xmath ). The resulting effective
temperature and bolometric luminosity of the star are @xmath K and
@xmath respectively, with a conservative uncertainty of @xmath K and
@xmath . Under the assumption that the optical emission of COM  J0610
@xmath 2100 is well reproduced by a BB, it is possible to derive its
radius: @xmath . However, since the companion to a BW is expected to be
affected by tidal distortions exerted by the PSR and to have filled its
RL, the dimension of the RL might be a more appropriate value (i.e., see
PSR J2051 @xmath 0827; Stappers et al., 1996a , 2000 ) . According to
Eggleton ( 1983 ) we assume:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the ratio between the companion and the PSR masses (
@xmath and @xmath , respectively). This relation can be combined with
the PSR mass function @xmath by assuming a NS mass @xmath (as recently
estimated for recycled PSRs by Özel et al. 2012 , see also Zhang et al.
2011 and Kızıltan 2011 ), thus yielding @xmath , depending on the
inclination angle ( @xmath ) of the system. These values are about
1.7-3.4 times larger than @xmath . In the following discussion we assume
the value of the RL as a measure of the size of COM  J0610 @xmath
2100 and we discuss how the scenario would change by using @xmath
instead of @xmath . While these assumptions trace two extreme
possibilities, the situation is probably in the midway. In fact, in the
case of a completely filled RL, the mass lost from the companion should
produce some detectable signal in the radio band (unless for very small
orbital inclinations) and ellipsoidal variations could be revealed in
the light curve (unless the heating from the PSR is dominating).

Under the assumption that the optical variation shown in Figure 7.3 is
mainly due to irradiation from the MSP, reprocessed by the surface of
COM  J0610 @xmath 2100  we can estimate how the re-processing efficiency
depends on the inclination angle and, hence, on the companion mass. To
this end, we compare the observed flux variation ( @xmath ) between the
maximum ( @xmath ) and the minimum ( @xmath ) of the light curve, with
the expected flux variation ( @xmath ) computed from the rotational
energy loss rate ( @xmath ). Actually, since we do not observe the
entire light curve, @xmath can just put a lower limit to the
reprocessing efficiency. Moreover, since these quantities depend on the
inclination angle of the system (see below) we can just estimate the
reprocessing efficiency as function of @xmath .

At first we have to convert the observed magnitude variation into a
flux. We limited our analysis to the @xmath band since we have more
observations and a more reliable sampling of the light curve. At maximum
( @xmath ) we assume @xmath , and between @xmath and @xmath we estimate
an amplitude variation @xmath . Hence we obtain @xmath erg s @xmath cm
@xmath Hz @xmath and considering the filter width ( @xmath nm) we have
@xmath erg s @xmath cm @xmath .

On the other hand, the expected flux variation between @xmath and @xmath
is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the re-processing efficiency under the assumption of
isotropic emission, @xmath is semi-major axis of the orbit which depends
on the inclination angle, @xmath is the radius of the companion star,
which we assumed to be equal to @xmath , @xmath is the distance of PSR
(3.5 kpc ⁵ ⁵ 5 In these calculations we adopted a distance of 3.5 kpc,
while we discuss below how the scenario changes by varying the distance
between the range of values within the quoted uncertainty. ) and @xmath
is the fraction of the re-emitting surface visible to the observer ⁶ ⁶ 6
In the following we assume @xmath . In fact, for a face-on configuration
( @xmath ) no flux variations are expected, while for an edge-on system
( @xmath ) the fraction of the heated surface that is visible to the
observer varies between 0.5 (for @xmath ) to zero (for @xmath ). . By
assuming @xmath between @xmath and @xmath , we can derive a relation
linking the re-processing efficiency and the inclination angle. The
result is shown in Figure 7.5 . The absence of eclipses in the radio
signal allows us to exclude very high inclination angles. As shown in
Figure 7.5 , PSR companions with stellar mass above the physical limit
for core hydrogen burning star (i.e., with @xmath ) necessarily imply a
non-isotropic emission mechanism of the PSR flux (otherwise a larger
than @xmath physical efficiency would be required). On the contrary a
re-processing efficiency between 40% and 100% is sufficient for less
massive companions and intermediate inclination angles.

Taking into account the uncertainty on the PSR distance, only
re-processing efficiencies larger than @xmath for inclination angles in
excess to @xmath and companion masses lower than @xmath are allowed in
the case of the distance upper limit (5 kpc). Instead, in case of a
closer distance, @xmath decreases for all inclination angles, thus
making acceptable also companion stars with masses larger than @xmath .
For instance, for companions masses between @xmath and @xmath and a 2
kpc distant PSR, the re-processing efficiency ranges between @xmath and
@xmath for any value of @xmath .

The observed optical modulation can be reproduced considering a system
seen at an inclination angle of about @xmath , with a very low mass
companion ( @xmath ) that has filled its RL, and a re-processing
efficiency of about @xmath . On the other hand, if we use @xmath instead
of the @xmath , the efficiency becomes larger than 100% for every
inclination angle, and the only possible scenario would be that of an
anisotropic PSR emission. However, even with this assumption it is very
difficult to obtain an acceptable value for @xmath . This seems to
confirm that @xmath is too small to provide a good estimate of the star
physical size. Forthcoming studies will allow us to better constrain the
system parameters.

## Chapter 8 The optical companion to the intermediate mass Millisecond
Pulsar J1439@xmath5501 in the Galactic Field

In this chapter we describe the identification of the companion star to
the intermediate mass binary PSR J1439 @xmath 5501 obtained by means of
ground-based deep images in the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath bands,
acquired with FORS2 at the Paranal ESO observatory. The companion is a
massive WD with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , located at only @xmath from
the PSR radio position. Comparing the WD location in the ( @xmath ,
@xmath ) and ( @xmath , @xmath ) CMDs with theoretical cooling sequences
we derived a range of plausible combinations of companion masses (
@xmath ), distances ( @xmath pc), radii ( @xmath ) and temperatures (
@xmath ). From the PSR mass function and the estimated mass range we
also constrained the inclination angle ( @xmath ) and the PSR mass (
@xmath ). The comparison between the WD cooling age and the spin down
age suggests that the latter is overestimated by a factor of about ten.
- This chapter is mainly based on Pallanca et al. 2013a , ApJ, 773, 127.

### 8.1 Psr J1439@xmath5501

We have collected and analyzed a sample of deep multi band images in the
direction of the IMM J1439 @xmath 5501 in the GF, with the aim of
identifying the companion star.

The binary PSR J1439 @xmath 5501 was discovered during the first data
reprocessing (Faulkner et al., 2004 ) of the Parkes Multibeam Pulsar
Survey (Manchester et al., 2001 ) and its accurate timing parameters
were published by Lorimer et al. ( 2006 , hereafter L06) . The spin
period ( @xmath ms) and the surface magnetic field ( @xmath G) suggest
that PSR J1439 @xmath 5501 belongs to the class of the mildly recycled
PSRs, i.e. the NS that underwent a relatively short phase of mass
accretion from the companion star.

The distance of PSR J1439 @xmath 5501 can be estimated from its
dispersion measure (DM @xmath pc cm @xmath , L06) once a model for the
distribution of the electrons in the interstellar medium is adopted. In
particular, the TC93 model (Taylor & Cordes, 1993 ) predicts 760 pc, the
NE2001 model (Cordes & Lazio, 2002 ) places the PSR at a smaller
distance (600 pc), whereas applying the updated Taylor & Cordes model
(Schnitzeler, 2012 ) we obtained a larger distance, of 950 pc.
Considering these uncertainties, a possible range ¹ ¹ 1 However, for our
detailed analysis below, the range of available WD models forces us to
use a slightly reduced range, @xmath pc (but see Section 8.3 ). for the
distance is @xmath pc.

From the observed orbital period, @xmath d, and the projected semi-major
axis of the orbit, @xmath cm @xmath @xmath (where @xmath is the orbital
inclination), L06 derived a PSR mass function @xmath . This value
implies that the companion to PSR J1439 @xmath 5501 has a mass @xmath .
In particular, adopting a NS mass @xmath , the minimum companion mass is
@xmath (L06), while assuming the minimum value for radio PSR mass
measured so far ( @xmath , Faulkner et al., 2005 ) , the minimum
companion mass would be @xmath

The minimum value for the companion mass leaves 3 options for the nature
of this object: an ordinary non-degenerate star, a NS, or a very massive
CO- or ONe-WD. A MS star with mass as large as @xmath located at the
system distance would have magnitude @xmath . However, the inspection of
archive images (ESO-DSS) shows that no such a bright stars is observed
close to the nominal position of PSR J1439 @xmath 5501. On the other
hand the very small observed eccentricity of the orbit ( @xmath ; L06)
strongly argues against the hypothesis that the companion is a NS. In
fact, in this case it should be the remnant of the massive star that
first recycled PSR J1439 @xmath 5501, and then exploded as a supernova.
This should have probably left a significant eccentricity in the system,
at odds with the observations.

In view of the considerations above, the companion is most likely a
massive WD, and the system J1439 @xmath 5501 belongs to the growing
class of the so-called IMMs (Camilo et al., 1996 ) . Given its orbital
and spin period, the favored scenario, among those discussed by Tauris
et al. ( 2012 , see also Chapter 1 ) , is that the system was originated
from the evolution of an IMXB with an asymptotic giant branch companion,
through a common envelope phase.

Of the seventeen candidate IMM systems currently known in the GF (van
Kerkwijk et al., 2005 ; Jacoby et al., 2006 ; Tauris et al., 2012 ;
Burgay et al., 2012 ) , only 5 companions to IMMs have been detected so
far in the optical band: PSR B0655 @xmath 64, PSR J1022 @xmath 1001, PSR
J1528 @xmath 3146, PSR J1757 @xmath 5322 and PSR J2145 @xmath 0750 (van
Kerkwijk & Kulkarni, 1995 ; van Kerkwijk et al., 2005 ; Lundgren et al.,
1996a , b ; Löhmer et al., 2004 ; Jacoby et al., 2006 ) .

### 8.2 Observations and data analysis

The photometric data set used for this work consists of a series of
ground-based optical images acquired with FORS2. We performed the
observations in the Standard Resolution mode , with a pixel scale of
@xmath (adopting a binning of @xmath pixels) and a FOV of @xmath . All
the brightest stars in the FOV have been covered with occulting masks in
order to avoid artifacts produced by objects exceeding the detector
saturation limit in long exposures, which would have significantly
hampered the search for faint objects.

A total of 39 deep images in the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath bands were
collected during five nights in May 2009, under program @xmath (PI:
Lanzoni). Since the goal of this work is to identify the companion to
PSR J1439 @xmath 5501, only the chip containing the region around the
nominal position of the PSR has been analyzed.

By following standard reduction procedures, we corrected the raw images
for bias and flat-field as described in Chapter 7 . We then performed
the photometric analysis by applying the PSF fitting method (see Chapter
2 ). At the end of the reduction procedure we obtained a catalog of
about 4000 sources (see Table 8.1 for a small sub-sample of the
catalog).

The photometric calibration has been performed by following the
procedure described in Chapter 2 . In particular, in this case we
selected ten bright and isolated stars and, for each of them, we
performed aperture photometry with different radii ( @xmath ) and we
compared these magnitudes with those obtained with the PSF fitting. The
mean value of the differences between PSF and aperture magnitudes has
been found to be constant for @xmath pixels. Thus we used the value at
@xmath pixels as aperture correction to be applied to all the stars in
our catalog. For a straightforward comparison with theoretical models,
we decided to calibrate the instrumental magnitudes ( @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath ) to the standard Johnson photometric system ( @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath ). To this aim, we first derived the calibration equations for
ten standard stars in the field PG1323 (Stetson, 2000 ) , which has been
observed with FORS2 during the observing run under photometric
conditions. To analyze the standard star field we used the daophot PHOT
task and we performed aperture photometry with the same radius used for
the aperture correction. We then compared the obtained magnitudes with
the standard Stetson catalog available on the CADC web site ² ² 2
http://cadcwww.dao.nrc.ca/community/STETSON/standards/ . The comparison
shows a clear dependence on color. Hence we performed a linear fit in
order to derive the trend as a function of the color @xmath in the case
of @xmath and @xmath bands and of the @xmath for the @xmath -band. The
resulting calibration equations are @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and the
final uncertainties on the calibrated magnitudes are @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , respectively. We neglected the
dependence on airmass since all exposures were taken at similar values.

The astrometry procedure has been performed as described in Chapter 2 .
In particular, since in the GF proper motions may not be negligible, we
used as astrometric reference stars the objects in the catalog PPMXL
(Roeser et al., 2010 ) , where the proper motion of each star is listed.
Since the number of objects in common with our dataset is large enough
(126 stars), we could derive appropriate coordinate transformations. As
first step of the procedure we derived the position of the astrometric
stars at the epoch of the observations. Then we registered the pixel
coordinates of the reference image onto the absolute coordinate system
through the cross-correlation of the primary astrometric standards in
common with our catalog, by using CataXcorr. The root mean square of the
adopted transformations is @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , while
the typical uncertainty of the PPMXL stars in this field is @xmath .
These quantities give an accuracy of @xmath for our astrometric
solution.

### 8.3 The identification of the companion to PSR J1439@xmath5501

In order to identify the companion to PSR J1439 @xmath 5501 we focused
our attention to any object located close to the PSR nominal position,
as derived from the timing solution in the radio band: @xmath and @xmath
at the reference epoch MJD=53200 (L06). No determination of the PSR
proper motion was reported in L06. However, assuming a conservative
transverse velocity of @xmath km @xmath (Hobbs et al., 2005 ) the
expected total positional shift would be @xmath (for the system
distance) over the @xmath yr interval between the reference epoch of the
radio ephemeris and the date of the optical observations. Therefore, the
offset between the position of the system J1439 @xmath 5001 in the
optical images and the coordinates given by L06 would be at most of the
order of the astrometric solution accuracy. We also note that follow-up
timing observations of the system provide additional support to a safe
use of the coordinates reported in L06: in fact these observations
indicate a transverse velocity for PSR J1439 @xmath 5501 well below
@xmath km s @xmath (Burgay, private communication).

A visual inspection of the deep images shows that there is a star
located at only @xmath from the nominal position of PSR J1439 @xmath
5501 (see Figure 8.1 ). Moreover, no other star in our catalog is found
within an error circle centered on the PSR position and having a radius
of several times the aforementioned uncertainty in the astrometric
solution.

The comparison among the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath images shown in
Figure 8.1 clearly suggests that this star has a color bluer than most
of the others objects in the field. This feature is confirmed by the
inspection of the CMDs, where the star is located on the left side of
the bulk of the detected stars, in a region compatible with WD cooling
sequences (see Figure 8.2 ). This is in nice agreement with the scenario
proposed for the evolution of the system J1439 @xmath 5501 discussed in
Section 8.1 . The probability that any star in our catalog falls at the
PSR position by chance coincidence is low ( @xmath ), and it further
reduces to @xmath if only WDs are considered. The combination of all
these pieces of evidence strongly suggests that the detected star is the
companion to PSR J1439 @xmath 5501.

In principle, the companions to MSPs can show optical variability due to
irradiation by the PSR or by rotational modulation, as observed in the
case of PSR 0655+64 (van Kerkwijk & Kulkarni, 1995 ; van Kerkwijk, 1997
) . By comparing the flux of the PSR intercepted by the WD with the WD
flux we estimated that the flux enhancement due to re-heating is
negligible. Unfortunately we could not check if the system shows any
variability due to rotation since the largest available number of
observations is in the @xmath band, in which the object is very faint
(see Figure 8.1 ), while on the @xmath and @xmath bands the orbital
sampling is very poor and prevents any study of variability. Hence with
the available data it is not possible to set a definitive conclusion
about the presence of magnitude modulations. Therefore, in order to
detect possible variability, and eventually study its nature, future
phase resolved observations are required.

With the aim of deriving the mass and the age of the companion, we
compared its position in the CMDs ( @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ) with a
set of theoretical CO- and ONe-WD cooling sequences of different masses
(BaSTI database, Salaris et al., 2010 ; Althaus et al., 2007 ) . In
order to make consistent the ONe-WD models with the CO-WD cooling
sequences we applied to the formers the same color transformations used
for the latters. As a first step, we calculated the extinction
coefficient @xmath by generating the color-color diagram ( @xmath ),
where the dependence on distance disappears. In particular, we compared
the observed distribution of MS stars (within @xmath from PSR J1439
@xmath 5501) with the locus of theoretical models, with solar
metallicity and different ages, typical of the GF population. Different
reddening values, ranging between 0.4 and 0.7 with steps of @xmath ,
have been iteratively applied to theoretical models. By performing a
@xmath test, we found that the best-fit value ³ ³ 3 The uncertainties on
@xmath have been estimated by accounting for the magnitude errors of the
observed population. is @xmath (see Figure 8.3 ).

In the following we will adopt @xmath , keeping in mind that any
estimate of the WD mass, distance and derived quantities depends on the
@xmath value. As can be seen from Figure 8.3 , if @xmath is assumed, the
colors of the companion nicely match the theoretical sequences for WDs ⁴
⁴ 4 Note that the theoretical models shown in Figure 8.3 are for @xmath
WDs. However the dependence of the WD cooling sequences on mass is
negligible in the ( @xmath ) color-color diagram (Bergeron et al., 1995
) . .

By taking into account the absorption coefficients properly calculated
for the effective wavelengths of the filters (Cardelli et al., 1989 ) ,
we derived the unabsorbed colors @xmath and @xmath , from which we
estimated an effective temperature of the star @xmath .

By using the derived value of the reddening and the adopted range of
distances ( @xmath pc; see section 8.1 ) we placed the WD cooling
sequences for masses of @xmath and @xmath selected from the BaSTI
database (Salaris et al., 2010 ) in the ( @xmath ) and the ( @xmath )
CMDs. As can be seen from Figure 8.2 , the companion is clearly not
compatible with low mass WDs, while it appears to be slightly more
massive than @xmath .

In order to better constrain the mass of the companion we needed a tight
sampling in mass. Starting from the available tracks for CO- and ONe-WDs
in the mass range @xmath (Salaris et al., 2010 ; Althaus et al., 2007 )
and assuming as a first approximation a linear relation between
magnitude, color and mass in such a small range, we derived cooling
sequences between @xmath and @xmath at regular steps. By using the same
linear relation we obtained tracks up to @xmath . For each mass ( @xmath
) step we varied the PSR distance ( @xmath ) in the range @xmath pc, and
we calculated the difference ( @xmath expressed in magnitude units)
between the observed location of the companion in the CMD and its
perpendicular projection onto the cooling sequence. We applied this
method in both the ( @xmath ) and ( @xmath ) CMDs, thus obtaining @xmath
and @xmath , respectively, for any @xmath - @xmath pair. For each value
of @xmath we then selected the value of @xmath which minimizes the sum
of @xmath and we associated a confidence value to each @xmath - @xmath
pair. In each CMD the confidence value is calculated as @xmath
normalized to the photometric combined error @xmath of the star. In this
way, the smaller is the confidence value, the larger is the probability
associated to that configuration. In particular, a confidence value
@xmath means that the cooling sequence and the observed position are in
agreement within the photometric errors. The resulting confidence value,
when information from both CMDs is combined, is the sum of the
confidence values derived from the two CMDs. The resulting distribution
of confidence values in the @xmath - @xmath plane is plotted in Figure
8.4 . All the @xmath - @xmath couples for which the confidence value is
@xmath in both CMDs, have been selected as plausible combinations of
@xmath and @xmath for the companion (they are encircled by the white
contour in Figure 8.4 ).

From this analysis we find that, for the considered upper limit to the
distance ( @xmath pc), @xmath (see Figure 8.4 ). Considering the
constraint on the minimum companion mass from the PSR mass function (
@xmath ), we can safely confirm that @xmath pc. At small distances, the
analysis is limited by the availability of WD models (see above).
However, the adopted upper limit for the mass in our analysis ( @xmath )
likely does not affect the results, even if we cannot definitely rule
out a more massive companion in the range @xmath , where @xmath is the
Chandrasekhar mass limit for a WD (Chandrasekhar, 1935 ) . If the
companion is a CO-WD it would have a mass @xmath , and it would be
located at a distance @xmath pc (see Figure 8.4 ), which imply a radius
in the range @xmath . In the case of ONe-WDs models, we found @xmath -
@xmath configurations as probable as those obtained for CO-WDs. Hence,
the companion to PSR J1439 @xmath 5501 could also be a ONe-WD with mass
@xmath , radius in the range @xmath and located at distance @xmath pc.
Note that, because of the larger molecular weight of the ONe-WDs with
respect to the CO-WDs, the former have a smaller radius and hence, for a
fixed mass, to fit the observed properties they should be located closer
than CO-WDs.

### 8.4 Discussion and conclusions

From the PSR mass function @xmath (L06) and the range of permitted
companion masses and radii derived in the previous Section, we
constrained @xmath and the inclination of the system, as summarized in
Figure 8.5 . First of all, given the relatively large orbital separation
( @xmath ) and the small radius of the companion, the absence of
observed eclipses of the radio signal along the orbit only constraints
@xmath . The observation of the Shapiro delay effect could allow one to
impose further constraints on the inclination. Unfortunately, the
quality of the available radio timing (with a non uniform orbital
coverage especially close to superior conjunction, where the effect of
the Shapiro delay is maximum) does not allow at the moment to accurately
determine the Shapiro delay parameters in this system. However,
simulations show that, even with the few radio measures (times of
arrival) obtained around orbital phase 0.25, a signature of an almost
edge-on orbit would be detectable. We can hence constrain the
inclination angle to be @xmath . Simulating a data set with monthly
observations and the current instrumentation, a determination of the
Shapiro delay would take from @xmath to 3 decades, depending on the
inclination of the source (in the range from 60 to 85 degrees). Instead,
a lower limit of @xmath for @xmath results from the assumption that
@xmath and that the PSR has a mass larger than @xmath (see Section 8.1
). Moreover, by adopting @xmath and @xmath , an upper limit of @xmath
can be inferred for the PSR mass.

Of all the CO-WD companions to IMBPs identified so far, the companion to
PSR J1439 @xmath 5501  is one of the few with a mass estimate. Moreover,
comparing its estimated mass with the median of companion masses of
previously identified CO-WDs (see Tauris et al., 2012 ) , it turns out
to be among the most massive.

Although the cooling age of a WD suffers from uncertainties, it is the
only reliable age indicator of a PSR binary system (Tauris et al., 2012
) . Hence, the optical identification of a WD companion to a binary MSP
and its cooling age estimate are of crucial importance to constrain the
spin-down theory through comparison with the PSR characteristic age (see
Appendix). Kulkarni ( 1986 ) proposed for the first time a comparison
between these two ages, finding a quite good agreement. However, there
is an increasing body of evidence (see e.g. Tauris et al., 2012 ) that
the characteristic age is a very poor measure of the time that a
recycled PSR spent since the completion of mass transfer. In fact, in
most cases WDs are observed to be younger than the MSPs (Hansen &
Phinney, 1998a , b ) , thus suggesting that the standard spin-down model
may overestimate the PSR age (Jacoby et al., 2006 ) . For the parameters
inferred above, the cooling age of the companion is in the range @xmath
Gyr and @xmath Gyr for CO- and ONe-WD respectively (and up to @xmath Gyr
for the minimum reddening configuration) and it is several times smaller
than its estimated spin-down age ( @xmath Gyr; Kiziltan & Thorsett, 2010
) . This discrepancy can be explained by considering that the
characteristic age for PSRs in the millisecond regime could not be a
proper estimate of the PSR age, since the hypothesis that @xmath is
negligible with respect to the current @xmath is not applicable to
recycled PSRs. Such a scenario is in agreement with the results of
simulations of an evolved synthetic population of MSPs (Kiziltan &
Thorsett, 2010 ) , which show that the characteristic ages could either
over- or under-estimate the true age of MSPs by more than a factor of
ten. Hence, we stress that the identification of the companion and its
age estimate (e.g. from the cooling sequences for WD companions) could
be a powerful tool to derive the true age of a recycled PSR.

While a spectroscopic analysis, both for the radial velocity curve and
the chemical analysis, is hardly feasible with the current generation of
instrumentation, a photometric follow-up could provide plenty of useful
information. In particular, phase resolved data-sets could lead to the
possibility of revealing any optical variability of the companion, while
multi-band photometry could allow to better estimate the reddening and,
by applying the same method used in this work, to better constrain the
mass and the distance of the companion.

## Chapter 9 Conclusions

MSPs are fast rotating, highly magnetized NSs. They are thought to form
in binary systems containing a slowly rotating NS that, during a phase
of heavy mass accretion from an evolving companion, is spun up to
millisecond period. The final stage consists of a binary made of a fast
rotating PSR (a MSP) and a deeply peeled or even exhausted star (as a
WD). This theoretical scenario of MSP formation is known as “canonical
recycling scenario” . In the last years, however an increasing number of
systems deviating from the expectations of the canonical recycling
scenario has been discovered and the formation and evolution of such
exotic objects still remain unclear.

The identification of companion stars to MSPs is useful to fully
characterize the binary systems and to constrain the formation and
evolution of these objects. In dense environments such as GCs, the
identification of the companion stars is helpful also to understand the
interplay between dynamics and the evolution of binary systems.

##### Summary of the results

In this Thesis we report the identification of 5 new companions to
binary MSPs located both in GCs and in the GF:

-    J1824 @xmath 2452H in M28 - The identified companion to this RB is
    a RL filled, bloated star, highly perturbed by the NS tidal field.
    Likely, it is a @xmath , orbiting a @xmath MSP, in a plane with an
    orbital inclination of @xmath . The results obtained suggest that,
    it is currently losing mass, and that the system is surrounded by
    large clouds of gas extending well beyond the RL which probably is
    constantly replenished. Its location outside the cluster core
    suggests that the NS was recycled by another companion (that
    eventually became a very low mass, exhausted star, because of the
    heavy mass transfer). Then an exchange interaction occurred in the
    cluster core between the MSP binary and a MS star, causing the
    ejection of the lightest star and kicking the newly-formed system
    away from the centre. The new companion started to suffer heavy
    perturbations (bloating, mass loss, etc.) induced by the MSP. We
    currently observe it as the detected @xmath , bloated companion, and
    it eventually will become a He-WD.

-    J1824 @xmath 2452I in M28 - The identified companion to this RB
    X-ray transient is a star that showed a strong variability and
    underwent a significant increase of optical magnitude a few years
    before the recently detected X-ray outburst. In particular, during
    the quiescent state the companion is approximately located along the
    MS, @xmath magnitudes fainter than the TO, while during the optical
    burst it is @xmath magnitudes brighter and it is characterized by a
    bluer color, indicating a perturbed state. Moreover, the presence of
    strong H @xmath emission during the optical outburst phase suggests
    the presence of material accreting onto the NS. Finally, on the
    light of the association of IGR J18245 @xmath 2452 with PSR J1824
    @xmath 2452I (Papitto et al., 2013 ) , we performed a preliminary
    light curve study finding a possible correlation between the orbital
    period and the magnitude modulation.

-    J1518 @xmath 0204C in M5 - Its companion is the first identified
    companion to a BW in a GC. It is a very faint and strongly variable
    star, located between the MS and the WD cooling sequences in the
    CMD. By comparing its position in the CMD with a reference isochrone
    we constrained the effective temperature, luminosity and mass of the
    star. Considering the largest permitted mass value ( @xmath ) and
    the PSR mass function, it is possible to rule out very small
    inclination angles of the system (e.g. @xmath for a @xmath NS). The
    magnitudes of this star have been measured in 14 out of 44 analyzed
    images. In particular, the star has been detected around the PSR
    inferior conjunction, while it is under the detection limit at the
    PSR superior conjunction. A simple sinusoidal model suggests an
    amplitude of the light curve larger than 3 mags. Since the flux
    variation seems to be mainly due to irradiation from the MSP, we
    estimated a lower limit to the reprocessing efficiency as a function
    of @xmath . As an example configuration, the observed optical
    modulation can be reproduced by considering a system seen at an
    inclination angle of about @xmath , with a very low mass RL filled
    companion ( @xmath ), that is reprocessing the PSR flux with an
    efficiency @xmath .

-    J0610 @xmath 2100 in the GF - The companion to this BW is a faint,
    very low mass object. It has been detected only in images obtained
    at the phase corresponding to the PSR inferior conjunction. Its
    magnitude modulation seems to be mainly due to irradiation from the
    MSP, reprocessed by its surface. For the lower limit to the observed
    flux variation, we thus estimated the reprocessing efficiency as
    function of the inclination angle. As an example configuration, the
    observed optical modulation can be reproduced by considering a
    system seen at an inclination angle of about @xmath , with a very
    low mass companion ( @xmath ) that has filled its RL, and with a
    reprocessing efficiency of about @xmath .

-    J1439 @xmath 5501 in the GF - The identified companion to this IMM
    is a massive WD ( @xmath ). Because of the relatively large orbital
    separation, the small radius of the companion and the absence of
    observed eclipses of the radio signal along the orbit allow us to
    derive only a weak constraint to the inclination angle, @xmath .
    Moreover, from the non-determination of the Shapiro delay the
    inclination angle is constrained to be @xmath . Instead, a lower
    limit of @xmath for @xmath results from the assumption that @xmath
    and that the PSR has a mass larger than @xmath . On the other hand,
    by adopting @xmath and @xmath , an upper limit of @xmath is obtained
    for the PSR mass. Of all the WD companions to IMMs identified so
    far, the companion to PSR J1439 @xmath 5501  is one of the few with
    a mass estimate. Moreover, comparing its estimated mass with the
    median of companion masses of previously identified CO-WDs, it turns
    out to be among the most massive. For the parameters inferred above,
    the cooling age of the companion is in the range @xmath Gyr and
    @xmath Gyr for CO- and ONe-WD respectively (and up to @xmath Gyr for
    the minimum reddening configuration). This is several times smaller
    than the estimated spin-down age, @xmath Gyr. After other similar
    results in the literature, such a discrepancy further confirms that
    the characteristic ages could either over- or under-estimate the
    true age of MSPs by more than a factor of ten.

In this Thesis work we also performed a spectroscopical follow-up of COM
J1740-5340A in NGC 6397 - We measured the abundances of C and N, finding
that they are incompatible with the values expected on the surface of a
normal MS star. The [C/Fe] is also incompatible with the C abundance
range observed in the parent GC. By comparing the C and N abundances
with the chemical gradients predicted by theoretical stellar models, we
were able to put new constraints on the nature of this object. In
particular, it seems to be a star peeled down to an interior layer where
the CN-cycle approximately reached the equilibrium. The entire envelope
of the star has been completely removed and, assuming an initial mass of
@xmath , we estimated that it likely lost @xmath of its initial mass
during the interaction with the PSR. The C and N abundances also allowed
us to identify a reasonable mass range for the MSP companion: only the
portion of the stellar model between 0.17 and @xmath are in agreement
with both the observed C and N abundances. This confirms previous mass
estimates, demonstrating that the analysis of the C and N surface
abundances provides a powerful diagnostic of the companion mass which is
totally independent of other, commonly used methods.

##### The used method

The identification and characterization of MSP companions in this Thesis
work are based on the careful photometric analysis of multi-wavelength
and multi-epoch images (see Chapter 2 ). The identifications are based
on the positional coincidence and the measurement of a flux modulation
with the same period of the MSP orbital period. Then, the information
from the CMD location is combined with that from the light curve shape
(in the case of a variable star) to derive the nature of the companion
and to constrain the binary system parameters.

As discussed above, in this Thesis we performed a search for MSP
companions in both GCs and the GF. As emerged from the previous
Chapters, in the case of MSPs located in the GF, the data reduction
procedures can be easily performed, because of the low crowding
conditions and the absence of cosmic rays. However, with respect to the
case of GCs, the situation is slightly more complicated in the following
steps of the analysis. For example, dedicated observations to perform
the photometric calibration are needed. Moreover, once the companion has
been identified there are still several uncertainties, which can be only
partially constrained, such as the system distance, the reddening and
the metallicity. This prevents a full characterization of the companion
star. On the other hand, in GCs this kind of study is complicated by the
severe stellar crowding conditions which make observations from the
space mandatory. However, after the first steps of the analysis, the
advantage is that quantities such as distance, reddening and metallicity
are reasonably well known from previous detailed studies of the host
cluster.

In general, however, it is important to keep in mind that the adopted
method suffers from a selection effect. In fact, non-degenerate MS
companions are easier to detect than WDs because they are brighter at
any given distance. Moreover, a magnitude variability in agreement with
the orbital period is typically present in the case of non-degenerate
companions but see the notable exception of PSR J1911-5958A in NGC 6752
(Ferraro et al., 2003a ; Cocozza et al., 2006 ) . Hence search for this
signature preferentially leads to discover such kind of companion stars.

We also used a spectroscopic approach for the chemical characterization
of MSP companions, with the aim of better clarifying the evolutionary
processes of these objects and to provide an alternative method for the
mass estimate in the case of a peeled star.

##### Different classes of MSPs

The results of this Thesis well fit in the context of the MSP
classification outlined in Chapter 1 . In fact the studied companions to
the RB systems are low mass ( @xmath ) stars, a few magnitudes fainter
than the TO, probably peeled because of mass loss. The companions to BWs
are very low mass objects, likely below the mass limit for hydrogen
burning, and they appear to be heated by the PSR flux. Instead, the
companion to the IMM is a massive WD, as expected.

The companions to both the BWs discussed here have been detected only at
the PSR inferior conjunction, while they are under the detection limit
at the PSR superior conjunction. The few magnitude measures show a
maximum at @xmath , thus suggesting “single-hill” light curve shapes.
Such a behavior is indicative of reprocessing mechanisms of the PSR flux
by a faint cold companion (as a BD). Moreover the magnitude modulation
between minimum and maximum is larger than a few magnitudes for both
objects, thus suggesting a quite large inclination angle and a RL filled
companion.

The two companions to RBs both appear to be perturbed non-degenerate
objects. However, they show significantly different properties. In
particular, the companion to M28H has physical properties stable in
time, while the companion to M28I (in agreement with the X-ray/radio
behavior) showed an optical outburst phase characterized by a high H
@xmath excess, likely due to an accretion event (e.g. characterized by
the presence of a disk). Moreover, also the location in the GC is
different and seems to suggest a different scenario for the two objects.
In fact the position of M28H out of the cluster core ( @xmath ) has been
interpreted as the result of a very recent exchange interaction, while
M28I (at least in projection) is located in the innermost region (
@xmath ) where it probably formed. Hence, they could be similar
companions but looking different because they are undergoing different
evolutionary phases. Interestingly, also the companions to the two RBs
in NGC 6397 and NGC 6266 are non-degenerate stars, but they show
different optical properties (e.g. the CMD location) with respect to
those in M28. An explanation could be that all these objects are located
along the same evolutionary path but at different phases. In addition,
the spectroscopic study of COM J1740 @xmath 5340A  added a few pieces of
information to the currently known scenario: the C and N abundances
suggested that it is a star peeled up to the innermost region.

##### The state of the art

Depending on the environment, the study of MSP companions has different
applications. Both in GCs and in the GF it is useful to understand the
formation and evolution of MSPs descending from primordial binaries. In
addition, such an investigation in GCs is useful to clarify the role and
the efficiency of dynamical processes.

In this Thesis we identified 2 new companions belonging to two different
mass classes of MSPs located in the GF:

-   1 massive WD companion;

-   1 very low mass object.

We also discovered 3 new companions in GCs. Thanks to this study, the
number of known MSP companions in GCs has increased by 50%, bringing the
current total number to 9 (see Figure 9.1 ):

-   3 are He-WDs (blue points in Figure 9.1 );

-   5 are non-degenerate, likely peeled stars (red points in Figure 9.1
    );

-   1 is a very low mass object (black point in Figure 9.1 ).

Therefore, only 3 (out of 9) are He-WD companions, the product expected
by the canonical recycling scenario . This strongly indicates that
exchange interactions are common events in the dense environments of GC
cores and they are quite effective in modifying the “natural” outcomes
of the pulsar recycling processes. However, it is important to remember
that this number could be affected by some observational biases, as
discussed in the previous paragraph.

On the other hand, the increasing number of non “canonical” MSPs in the
GF (see the companion to PSR J0610 @xmath 2100 as a specific
contribution of this Thesis) suggests that also the evolution of
primordial binaries could lead to the formation of such objects. Hence,
despite the high probability of dynamical interactions, also a
non-degenerate companion in GCs could be the result of the evolution of
primordial binaries.

##### The proposed evolutionary scenario

In order to clarify the evolutionary history of binary low mass MSPs we
tried to sketch a possible scenario in the cartoon reported in Figure
9.2 .

In the top panel we schematically report the “rotationally-delayed
accretion-induced collapse” formation mechanism proposed by Freire &
Tauris ( 2013 ) , to account for a few eccentric binary systems made of
MSPs and He-WDs recently detected in the GF (note that, following the
standard expectations, these systems should have non eccentric orbits
because of circularization during the mass transfer phase; see also
Section 1.6 ).

The lower panel of this cartoon is an extension of Figure 1.2
(representative of the three key phases of the canonical recycling
scenario ). In the top-left part we show a binary system made of a
slowly rotating NS and an unevolved MS companion star. Then the systems
evolves through a LMXB phase characterized by X-ray emission, and the
final stage consists of a binary made of a MSP and a He-WD (top square
in the right part of the plot labelled by “Canonical”).

However, the evolution between the LMXB phase and the final stage of the
system is still shady and several pieces of evidence, both from radio
and X-ray observations of the NSs and from the optical detection of the
companions, suggest that the evolution could follow different channels.
We tentatively considered the observed properties of different classes
as representative of different evolutionary paths. From top to bottom we
reported the Accreting-MSPs (A-MSPs), the RBs and the BWs. In
particular, from the LMXB phase, MSPs can evolve through a RB phase,
during which the MSP is active in radio band and the companion is
bloated (thus producing the typical “double-hill” light curve) and
likely it is losing material causing radio eclipses (as in the case of
PSR J1824 @xmath 2452H). However, as observed for PSR J1824 @xmath
2452I there are a few systems swinging between a radio dominated phase
(as the RB phase) and a X-ray dominated phase (as the A-MSP phase),
during which the NS is accreting material. The final stage of these
systems is characterized by what remains of the companion star: likely
the He-core. On the other hand, from the LMXB phase, MSPs can evolve
through BW systems, in which the companions are ablated and probably are
semi-degenerate stars, like BDs surrounded of lost material that
produces the long lasting observed radio eclipses (as PSR J1518+0204C).
Moreover given the relative faintness of these objects, the illumination
by the PSR flux is responsible of the “single-hill” light curve commonly
observed for such systems. These systems likely evolve in binaries
containing a MSP and a very low mass object (a BD). If the companions
have been completely ablated, they could also evolve in isolated MSPs.

Of course in GCs the scenario is even more complex because if an evolved
MSPs (one of the three scenarios reported in the rightmost squares of
the plot) run into another star (or even a binary system) an exchange
interaction can happen. Likely, the MSP acquires a new (more massive)
companion, while the original light companion is ejected from the
system. In particular, if the MSP acquires a NS, what remain is probably
an eccentric double NS binary system, while if the MSP acquires a MS,
the recycling process can start again. Moreover during the evolution,
the orbit (originally eccentric as a consequence of the exchange
interaction) becomes circular due to tidal effects during the mass
transfer.

Summarizing, the proposed scenario tentatively includes exotic RBs and
BWs in the canonical evolutionary path. In the past years, the
non-degenerate companions to such exotic objects were interpreted as the
result of exchange interactions. However, the increasing number of
similar systems in the GF seems to suggest that MSPs with non-degenerate
companions could be also a transitory stage of not fully recycled MSPs.
Therefore a crucial step forward in our knowledge of MSP formation would
be the definition of a diagnostic able to discriminate between the
original companion of the NS and a star acquired because of an exchange
interaction. A possible clue could be obtained from the location in the
GC and the three-dimensional motion in the cluster. In fact, in the case
of an exchange interaction, the binary system could be expelled out of
the core and still have a residual kick. For example, PSR J1824 @xmath
2452H was suggested to be the product of a recent exchange interaction
because it is located out of the core and, in absence of perturbations,
it would have already sunk in the innermost region under the effect of
mass segregation.

Also the timescales of each phase are unknown. Hence catching a large
sample of systems in these peculiar phases and determining their
relative frequency would be crucial.

##### Future works

In the light of this Thesis results, we can outline future crucial steps
in the optical study of MSP companions. Spectroscopic data for the
companion to PSR J1824 @xmath 2452H have been already acquired and will
be soon analyzed. Moreover, fine-tuned observations (in order to measure
with a good S/N and avoid the saturation of close stars, as in the
particular case of PSR J1824 @xmath 2452I) can be performed for most of
the object studied in order to better constrain their variability. In
particular, for the two BWs (PSR J1518+0204C and PSR J0610 @xmath 2100)
it would be interesting to detect the companion flux at minimum, so to
derive the exact amplitude of variation (instead of only a lower limit
as in this Thesis). In the case of the companion to PSR J1439 @xmath
5501, further observations could help to detect (if present) a magnitude
modulation and, thanks to a multi-band analysis, to precisely constrain
the distance and thereby the WD mass. In turn, this would allow us to
derive a more precise estimate of the age, to be compared with the
characteristic age. Also radio follow-up could be useful to characterize
even better the identified companions. For example, in the case of the
MSPs in the GF a more precise distance is useful to reduce the
uncertainties on the physical parameters of the companion.

On the other hand, it will be crucial to apply the same method used in
this Thesis to other MSPs in GCs, thus to increase the number of
identified companions (note that proper observations have been already
secured for a few cases). In particular, with a larger sample of
companions it will be possible to understand how many are the product of
exchange interactions and to better characterize recycling scenario.
This could help to indirectly quantify the occurrence of dynamical
interactions in GCs.

Moreover, the study of the companion to IGR J18245 @xmath 2452/PSR J1824
@xmath 2452I could be considered as a pilot case. In fact, objects
similar to IGR J18245 @xmath 2452/PSR J1824 @xmath 2452I (likely
precursors to transient X-ray sources), might be identified in advance
thanks to multi-epoch scheduled observations in the most promising GCs.

## Appendix

This appendix is denoted to report a few useful definitions (as the
characteristic age and characteristic magnetic field of a PSR) and to
define the formalism used to characterize MSPs in binary systems. It is
mainly based on the thorough book “Handbbok of pulsar astronomy”
(Lorimer & Kramer, 2005 , and references therein) .

### Characteristic age of PSRs

A PSR, during its evolution, spins-down with a rate @xmath that is
related to the loss of rotational kinetic energy. In particular from the
spin down theoretical model of a PSR, it is possible to express the PSR
age as the so called spin down age

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (I)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath is the spin period at birth and @xmath is the braking
index. Under the assumption that @xmath and that the spin down is due to
magnetic dipole radiation ( @xmath ), equation ( I ) simplifies to the
characteristic age

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (II)
  -- -------- -- ------

Of course equation ( II ) depends on the adopted assumptions. Indeed,
when an independent estimate of the age is available (as the cooling age
of a WD companion) the comparison with the characteristic age can
provide indirect constrain to the breaking index @xmath . For example a
value @xmath typical of pure magnetic dipole could be not a proper
assumption (as found for a few objects for which a direct measure of the
braking index @xmath is available). Moreover, in the particular case of
recycled PSRs, also @xmath could not be a proper assumption.

### Characteristic magnetic field of PSRs

As for the characteristic age, assuming that the spin down process is
dominated by dipole braking, it is possible to estimate the magnetic
field strength. From a few theoretical equations and by assuming typical
values for the main NS physical parameters, it is possible to estimate
the characteristic magnetic field as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (III)
  -- -------- -- -------

### Orbit description

In the case of a non relativistic binary system, the orbit can be
described by Kepler’s laws, through six so called “Keplerian
parameters”:

-   the orbital period, @xmath ;

-   the projected semi-major axis, @xmath ;

-   the orbital eccentricity, @xmath ;

-   the longitude of periastron, @xmath ;

-   the epoch of periastron passage, @xmath ;

-   the position angle of the ascending node, @xmath .

The “Keplerian parameters” are related to the eccentric anomaly @xmath ,
and the true anomaly @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (IV)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (V)
  -- -------- -- -----

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (VI)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the mean angular velocity. The quantity @xmath is known
as the mean anomaly .

Kepler’ third law relates the size of the semi-major axis of the
relative orbit ( @xmath ), to the mean angular velocity ( @xmath ), and
the total mass of the system as follows

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (VII)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the masses of the PSR and of the companion,
respectively and the constant @xmath s is used to express these masses
in solar units. Moreover the semi-major axes of the orbits of the two
objects around the common centre of mass are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (VIII)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which the relation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (IX)
  -- -------- -- ------

can be derived.

It is important to remind that the orbital parameters of a PSR binary
system are derived from the variation of the observed pulse period,
which changes in time due to Doppler effect. In particular the velocity
along the line of sight is:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (X)
  -- -------- -- -----

and, if it is small compared to @xmath , the observed Doppler-shifted
pulse period can be written as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (XI)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the pulse period in the PSR rest frame.

One more important quantity, very helpful to constrain the companion
mass, is the PSR mass function:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (XII)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the measurable projected semi axis of the PSR orbit. In
particular, at a given PSR mass, solving this equation for an
inclination angle of @xmath (corresponding to a system seen edge-on)
gives the minimum possible value for the companion mass.

#### Post keplerian parameters

When a PSR is in a close binary system with a WD or a NS or a black hole
the relativistic effects are non negligible. These systems are
particularly important because, thanks to a parametrization of the
timing model through “post-Keplerian” parameters, they offer the
opportunity to derive the masses of the two components of the binary
system and to test the gravity theories. In fact, in each gravity theory
the “post-Keplerian” parameters should depends only on the two masses of
the binary and on the Keplerian parameters. Hence, if the measure of at
least two “post-Keplerian” parameters is available, the two masses are
univocally determined, while the measure of a third or more parameters
provides a check of the assumed theory.

To date general relativity appears to be the best description of strong
gravitational field regime. In this scenario the post Keplerian
parameters are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (XIII)
     @xmath      (XIV)
     @xmath      (XV)
     @xmath      (XVI)
     @xmath      (XVII)
  -- -------- -- --------

where all masses are expressed in solar units, G is the Newton
gravitational constant, c the speed of light and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (XVIII)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In particular, @xmath describes the relativistic advance of periastron
and its measure directly gives the total mass of the system. The
parameter @xmath is the change of the orbital period and it represents
the orbital decay due to gravitational-wave damping, while @xmath and
@xmath are the range and the shape of the Shapiro delay, which is a
measure of the delay of the pulse due to the time needed to travel
through the curved space-time. Finally, @xmath is the Einstein delay.

One of the most exemplar cases in which a test of general relativity has
been applied thanks to the measure of post Keplerian parameters is the
case of the double PSR system (e.g. see Kramer et al., 2006 ) .

### The case of circular orbits

Most MSPs are observed in circular orbits. Hence all the equations above
are simplified. In particular, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is assumed to
be the time of passage at the ascending node @xmath .

In this Thesis the phase is defined as @xmath , that for circular orbits
is simply:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (XIX)
  -- -------- -- -------

ranging between 0 and 1. In particular with this phase definition, the
orbital phase is a linear function of time and @xmath corresponds to the
PSR ascending node, @xmath to the PSR superior conjunction, @xmath to
the PSR descending node and @xmath to the PSR inferior conjunction.

Also equation ( X ) is simpler in the case of circular orbits. In fact

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (XX)
  -- -------- -- ------

It is important to note that, if the measure of the velocity along the
line of sight is available for both the stars of the binary system, from
equations ( IX ) and ( XX ) it is possible to directly obtain the mass
ratio of the system from the ratio of the amplitudes of the two radial
velocity curves:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (XXI)
  -- -------- -- -------