We present a catalogue of X-ray selected galaxy clusters and groups as a
first release of the 2XMMi/SDSS Galaxy Cluster Survey. The survey is a
search for galaxy clusters detected serendipitously in observations with
XMM-Newton in the footprint of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS). The
main aims of the survey are to identify new X-ray galaxy clusters,
investigate their X-ray scaling relations, identify distant cluster
candidates, and study the correlation of the X-ray and optical
properties. In this paper, we describe the basic strategy to identify
and characterize the X-ray cluster candidates that currently comprise
1180 objects selected from the second XMM-Newton serendipitous source
catalogue (2XMMi-DR3). Cross-correlation of the initial catalogue with
recently published optically selected SDSS galaxy cluster catalogues
yields photometric redshifts for 275 objects. Of these, 182 clusters
have at least one member with a spectroscopic redshift from existing
public data (SDSS-DR8). We developed an automated method to reprocess
the XMM-Newton X-ray observations, determine the optimum source
extraction radius, generate source and background spectra, and derive
the temperatures and luminosities of the optically confirmed clusters.
Here we present the X-ray properties of the first cluster sample, which
comprises 175 clusters, among which 139 objects are new X-ray
discoveries while the others were previously known as X-ray sources. For
each cluster, the catalogue provides: two identifiers, coordinates,
temperature, flux [0.5-2] keV, luminosity [0.5-2] keV extracted from an
optimum aperture, bolometric luminosity @xmath , total mass @xmath ,
radius @xmath , and the optical properties of the counterpart. The first
cluster sample from the survey covers a wide range of redshifts from
0.09 to 0.61, bolometric luminosities @xmath erg s @xmath , and masses
@xmath M @xmath . We extend the relation between the X-ray bolometric
luminosity @xmath and the X-ray temperature towards significantly lower
@xmath and @xmath and still find that the slope of the linear @xmath
relation is consistent with values published for high luminosities.
