Quantum speed limits are relations yielding lower bounds on the
evolution time of quantum systems. This kind of result was started by
Mandelstam and Tamm, who associated the minimal time needed for a state
to turn orthogonal with the energy variance of said state. Another lower
bound, of much later obtention, was that of Margolus and Levitin, who
related this minimal time to the average energy of the quantum system.
These bounds are commonly used to discuss the role of entanglement in
the evolution speed of quantum systems, and have the potential to be
applied to extremely fast-evolving systems, such as those in both
classical and quantum computation or in the explanatory schemes for how
classical behavior arises from a quantum substrate, which depend on an
exceedingly fast decoherence.

These results, especially that of Mandelstam and Tamm, have been
generalized in some ways, in particular by including evolutions to
non-orthogonal states. However, there was a gap in the literature on
this area, for only unitary evolutions – closed quantum systems – had
been considered. On this thesis, such limitation is overcome: our main
result is a bound for quantum-system evolutions in general, whether
unitary or not, and correctly recovers the Mandelstam-Tamm bounds in the
unitary case. Applications of this bound to several concrete cases of
interest are herein presented. This bound is also used to extend to the
non-unitary case the discussion of the role of entanglement in fast
evolutions, leading to nontrivial results.

For the derivation of the results, a geometric approach has been
employed, which had already shown to be extremely useful for unitary
evolutions when developed by Anandan and Aharonov, especially for
allowing a clear interpretation of the bounds and the discussion of the
criteria for their saturation. It should be noted that in this work no
previous knowledge of quantum-state geometry by the reader is assumed.
An important remark is that the problem of lower bounds on evolution
time is closely related to quantum metrology, in particular, to quantum
parameter estimation. Perhaps the most manifest sign of such proximity
is the utilization, in our geometric bound, of the quantum Fisher
information, a quantity largely applied in quantum metrology.

Finally, additional results towards obtaining a geometric interpretation
of Margolus-Levitin bounds are presented.
