###### Contents

-    Preface
-    1 Calogero–Sutherland models
    -    1.1 Introduction
    -    1.2 Scalar CS models
    -    1.3 Integrability and solvability
    -    1.4 Orthogonal polynomials
    -    1.5 A classical detour
    -    1.6 Dunkl operators
    -    1.7 Spin CS models
    -    1.8 Solvable spin chains
-    2 HS spin chains of @xmath type
    -    2.1 Introduction
    -    2.2 The spin @xmath Sutherland model
    -    2.3 @xmath Dunkl operators
    -    2.4 Spectrum of the dynamical model
    -    2.5 The spin chain
    -    2.6 Statistical properties of the spectrum
    -    2.7 Models with constant magnetic fields
-    3 Spin models with NN interactions
    -    3.1 Introduction
    -    3.2 The NN models
    -    3.3 The invariant spaces
    -    3.4 The algebraic eigenfunctions
-    4 NN spin chains of HS type
    -    4.1 Introduction
    -    4.2 The chain sites
    -    4.3 Quasi-exact solvability of the NN chain
    -    4.4 Qualitative properties of the algebraic spectrum
-    5 Conclusions and perspectives

## Preface

This dissertation intends to present a unified view of my research in
the area of integrable systems, which has been carried out over the last
four years under the insightful supervision of Profs. F. Finkel,
A. González-López and M. A. Rodríguez. Particular emphasis has been laid
on the connection between (partially) solvable spin models of
Calogero–Sutherland (CS) type and Haldane–Shastry (HS) chains, which can
be rightly regarded as the leitmotif of this thesis.

The dissertation is divided into five chapters. In the first one we
summarize some aspects of the theory of CS and HS models that are needed
in later chapters and introduce some notation. Related original results
are introduced when appropriate. In Chapter 2 we rigorously analyze the
CS/HS connection, which enables us to compute the partition function of
the @xmath HS chain in closed form. In Chapter 3 we turn our attention
to quasi-exactly solvable (QES) generalizations of the standard CS
models presenting only near-neighbors interactions. A systematic
explanation of their quasi-exact solvability is given in terms of known
invariant flags. In Chapter 4 we make use of the results in the two
preceding chapters to analyze the algebraic spectrum of a novel spin
chain with nearest-neighbors interactions which is naturally related to
a QES Schrödinger operator of CS type. This work ends with a short
summary and a concluding note on future projects.

The most remarkable contributions presented in this thesis are the
following:

1.  We complete the first mathematically rigorous treatment of the CS/HS
    connection. Our approach hinges on several convergence results that
    make Polychronakos’s “freezing trick” precise.

2.  We provide the first systematic analysis of spin QES models of CS
    type presenting near-neighbors interactions, thereby obtaining
    several families of totally explicit eigenfunctions.

3.  We define an HS chain with nearest-neighbors interactions that
    presents some of the features of a QES system. The study of its
    algebraic states relies on a nontrivial refinement of the freezing
    trick and on the explicit results obtained in Chapter 3 .

4.  We introduce a natural Hamiltonian system admitting the maximum
    number of independent first integrals, just as the original Calogero
    and hyperbolic Sutherland models. This is the first example of a
    maximally superintegrable system in an @xmath -dimensional space of
    nonconstant curvature.

A significant part of the material presented in this memoir has been
adapted from Refs. [ 15 , 70 , 69 , 67 , 63 , 68 , 64 , 65 , 66 ] . The
presentation of the main results in Chapters 2 and 4 , however, greatly
differs from that of the original articles. In particular, most of the
rigorous proofs provided in these chapters appear in printed form here
for the first time.

## Chapter 1 Calogero–Sutherland models

### 1.1 Introduction

The discovery of Calogero–Sutherland (CS) models [ 35 , 186 , 187 ] is a
landmark in the theory of integrable systems which has exerted a
far-reaching influence on many different areas of Mathematics and
Physics. The intrinsic mathematical interest of these models and their
classical analogs [ 153 , 157 ] lies in their manifold connections with
such disparate topics as representation theory [ 22 , 80 , 177 , 72 ] ,
the theory of special functions and orthogonal polynomials [ 14 , 60 ,
190 , 191 ] , harmonic analysis [ 108 , 40 , 174 ] , and complex and
algebraic geometry [ 114 , 119 , 154 , 202 , 71 ] . On the other hand,
CS models have found a wide variety of applications to diverse areas of
Physics, including quantum field and string theory [ 151 , 95 , 85 , 54
, 149 , 8 ] , the quantum Hall effect [ 11 , 169 , 127 ] , soliton
theory [ 128 , 1 , 33 , 133 ] , fractionary statistics [ 163 , 99 , 37 ]
and random matrix theory [ 181 , 38 ] .

In this chapter we summarize the basic properties of CS models that
shall be needed in the sequel. We prefer not to follow a historical
approach to this subject, but rather to develop a modern bird’s-eye
presentation of the essentials of the theory. Thus the most advanced
machinery becomes available from the very beginning, while the interest
of the reader is not suffocated by unnecessary details. Our survey of CS
models does not intend to be exhaustive. In particular, we have omitted
several aspects of the theory (e.g., spin CM models [ 204 , 142 , 121 ,
140 ] , Ruijsenaars–Schneider systems and @xmath -Dunkl operators [ 141
, 176 , 9 , 198 , 13 , 43 ] , supersymmetry [ 93 , 51 , 48 ] and
connections with random matrix theory [ 181 , 38 , 44 ] ), which could
fit perfectly within the mainstream of this dissertation and will indeed
have some bearing on the content of Chapter 5 .

The core of this section is the brief survey of spin CS models and Dunkl
operators developed in Sections 1.6 and 1.7 . While we introduce a
wealth of relevant concepts, we do not include a single rigorous proof
or statement: our presentation of these topics should be regarded as a
large dry bone that will be fleshed in Chapters 2 and 3 .

We occasionally present some original results as we go along; these are
mainly taken from Refs. [ 70 , 15 , 69 ] .

### 1.2 Scalar CS models

Let @xmath be a (crystallographic, possibly nonreduced) root system,
which we assume to be irreducible without loss of generality, and let
@xmath a subsystem of positive roots [ 118 ] . Given @xmath , we
represent by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the reflection across the hyperplane orthogonal to @xmath . The Weyl
group corresponding to @xmath is denoted by @xmath .

Consider a function @xmath of one of the following forms:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The (scalar) @xmath -body CS model of type @xmath is defined by the
Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the coupling constants @xmath are assumed to take the same value for
roots of the same length. In the rational case we shall frequently
include a confining harmonic term, i.e.,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . If we define a unitary action @xmath of @xmath on @xmath
by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

it is clear that @xmath is a symmetry group of the Hamiltonian ( 1.2 ).

###### Remark 1.1.

More generally [ 158 ] , the function @xmath in Eq. ( 1.1 ) can be taken
to be a Weierstrass @xmath function with suitable periods. Despite the
relevance of this case and the abundant related literature (cf. e.g. [
135 , 136 ] and references therein), we have preferred to omit elliptic
potentials in our presentation of CS models. On the one hand, they do
not appear anywhere in the sequel; on the other, their solvability and
integrability properties are rather different from those of their
limiting cases listed in Eq. ( 1.1 ) (with @xmath set to zero). The
conditions on the root system can be also relaxed somewhat [ 158 , 29 ]
.

The double pole that @xmath possesses at 0 imposes that any function
@xmath in the domain of @xmath must vanish at the hyperplanes @xmath
with @xmath , which means that the particles cannot overtake one
another. Hence one can assume that the configuration space for @xmath is
the Weyl chamber

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the rational and hyperbolic cases, and the Weyl alcove

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the trigonometric one. Here we denote by @xmath the highest root of
the system @xmath .

###### Remark 1.2.

The symmetry of @xmath under @xmath guarantees the equivalence of the
eigenvalue problems for @xmath in @xmath and in @xmath . Namely, for any
eigenfunction @xmath of @xmath there exists an eigenfunction @xmath of
@xmath with the same eigenvalue and a one-dimensional representation
@xmath of the Weyl group such that for any @xmath satisfying @xmath one
has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Clearly, the inclusion map defines a one-to-one correspondence between
the eigenfunctions of @xmath on @xmath and its eigenfunctions on @xmath
with a given symmetry.

We shall be mainly interested in the root systems @xmath and @xmath ,
which are respectively given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

@xmath being the canonical basis of @xmath . An appropriate choice of
the coupling constants of the CS models associated with these systems
suffices to exhaust all the possibilities arising from the
non-exceptional Lie algebras. Physically, these systems are important
because they are the only ones which allow for an arbitrary number
@xmath of particles, given by the rank of the algebra. For the sake of
completeness and future reference, let us mention that set of positive
roots @xmath and the highest root @xmath for the @xmath and @xmath
systems can be taken as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The @xmath and @xmath scalar CS models ( 1.2 ) with rational and
trigonometric potentials can therefore be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the potential is in each case given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.7a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.7b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.7c)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (1.7d)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here and in what follows the indices in all sums and products range from
1 to @xmath unless otherwise stated.

### 1.3 Integrability and solvability

CS models are the paradigm of quantum integrable @xmath -body problems.
The first satisfactory explanation of their remarkable algebraic
properties was given by Olshanetsky and Perelomov [ 158 ] , who
constructed @xmath commuting first integrals for the Hamiltonian ( 1.2 )
associated with any non-exceptional root system. A new proof of the
integrability of these systems (which applies even to the case of
non-crystallographic root systems) has been recently developed by
Bordner, Manton and Sasaki [ 31 ] using universal quantum Lax pairs, and
previously by Heckman and Opdam [ 106 , 107 ] (in the context of
degenerate Hecke algebras) and by Oshima and Sekiguchi [ 162 ] . For
simplicity, we shall henceforth assume that @xmath is a non-exceptional
root system, typically @xmath or @xmath .

For these root systems, the models ( 1.2 ) are exactly solvable in the
sense that all their eigenvalues and eigenfunctions can be computed in
closed form. (The solvability properties of CS models associated with
exceptional Lie algebras are still uncertain, even though there have
been some recent developments in this area [ 32 ] .) The eigenfunctions
@xmath are labeled by integer multiindices @xmath and factorize as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the ground state function, @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath is a polynomial of degree

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Physically, the multiindex @xmath can be thought of as the quasimomentum
of the particles [ 168 , 171 ] , and the energy of the corresponding
eigenfunction can be expressed neatly in terms of this quantity and the
parameters appearing in the Hamiltonian.

###### Example 1.3.

The original Calogero model ( 1.7a ) is obtained by setting @xmath and
choosing the rational potential with a harmonic term. Its eigenfunctions
are labeled by a multiindex @xmath and can be written as @xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the ground state function and @xmath is a homogeneous polynomial of
degree @xmath ). These polynomials are known as generalized Hermite
polynomials [ 137 , 200 ] , since when @xmath they reduce to Hermite
polynomials. Explicit formulas can be consulted, e.g., in Refs. [ 34 ,
125 , 103 ] . The energy of the eigenfunction @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath .

###### Example 1.4.

If we keep the @xmath root system and choose the trigonometric
potential, we obtain the original Sutherland model . Its eigenfunctions
can be written as @xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath , and @xmath is a polynomial of degree @xmath in @xmath . These
polynomials are called Jack polynomials [ 123 ] , and play a fundamental
role in Heckman and Opdam’s theory of hypergeometric functions for root
systems [ 159 , 160 , 109 , 104 ] .

A hyperbolic version of the trigonometric Sutherland system can be
readily obtained. Its spectrum, however, is not discrete, and in fact
this model only has a finite number of eigenvalues.

### 1.4 Orthogonal polynomials

Whereas the theory of orthogonal polynomials in one variable is a
classical branch of Mathematics, significant results on multivariate
polynomials were not obtained until the second half of the XX century [
61 ] . Since then, orthogonal polynomials of several variables have
become a major field of research in modern analysis and combinatorics [
146 , 199 , 19 , 185 , 43 ] . As can be seen from Eq. ( 1.8 ),
multivariate orthogonal polynomials appear as eigenfunctions of CS
models, and the role that these models play in the latter theory is
analogous to that of the Laguerre, Hermite or Jacobi equations in the
case of classical orthogonal polynomials in one variable.

As a matter of fact, the analogy between the eigenfunctions of CS models
and classical orthogonal polynomials is even closer. We showed in
Example 1.3 that the eigenfunctions of the rational @xmath CS model (the
Hi-Jack polynomials) reduce to the Hermite polynomials in the case
@xmath and indeed coincide with their multivariate generalization [ 137
] . It is also well known [ 14 ] that the multivariate generalizations
of the Laguerre [ 139 ] and Jacobi [ 138 ] polynomials are similarly
recovered from the @xmath rational and trigonometric CS models,
respectively. Generally, CS models give rise to generalized
hypergeometric functions associated with root systems, as extensively
studied by Heckman and Opdam [ 104 , 109 , 159 , 160 ] .

A recent development is some kind of converse statement to the latter
comment. Hallnäs and Langmann have constructed an algorithm that allows
one to go from a family of orthogonal polynomials in one variable to an
@xmath -body Hamiltonian whose eigenfunctions are a symmetric
generalization of this family to @xmath variables. The @xmath -body
models associated with the classical families of orthogonal polynomials
are in fact previously known CS Hamiltonians.

The fruitful connection between CS models and the theory of orthogonal
polynomials has lead to a plethora of closed formulas for the
eigenfunctions of these Hamiltonians (cf. [ 61 , 146 , 103 ] and
references therein). Furthermore, an exciting new ingredient of this
theory are supersymmetric (spin) polynomials [ 52 , 53 ] , related
directly to the spin CS models which will be the main subject of the
remaining chapters of this memoir.

### 1.5 A classical detour

It can be argued that the conceptually simplest approach to the
exceptional solvability properties of CS models is through their
classical counterparts, the Calogero–Moser (CM) models. Hence, we deem
it important to present a brief account of the theory of CM models,
which, apart from its academic interest, is essential in order to
understand some recent developments on classical Haldane–Shastry spin
chains [ 122 ] .

CM models [ 157 ] are the Hamiltonian systems on @xmath whose
Hamiltonian function is obtained from Eq. ( 1.2 ) by substitution of the
quantum kinetic energy (the Laplacian @xmath ) for the classical one
(the squared momentum @xmath ). The mathematical intricacies that lurk
behind quantum integrability [ 69 , 201 , 134 , 45 ] are absent in the
classical setting, the Liouville integrability of CM models being
related to the existence of an invariant foliation by Lagrangian
cylinders in phase space [ 2 ] . The Liouville integrability of CM
models for any (generalized) root system stems from Bordner, Corrigan
and Sasaki’s construction [ 30 ] of a universal Lax representation for
these systems. Nonetheless, their integrability was also explicitly
obtained [ 160 ] as a corollary in a series of papers by Heckman and
Opdam ten years earlier by means of a detailed study of the
corresponding CS models and a suitable theorem on the classical limit of
their quantum first integrals. An advantage of the first authors’
approach is that the equations of motion of the system can be explicitly
integrated for any root system (resp. for root systems associated with
classical Lie algebras) when the potential is rational
(resp. trigonometric or hyperbolic.)

Most remarkably, the @xmath CM Hamiltonians with rational and hyperbolic
potentials are also maximally superintegrable for any value of @xmath ,
i.e., they admit the maximum number @xmath of functionally independent
global first integrals. This property is quite exceptional: apart from
these two models, the only known (natural) Hamiltonian systems which are
maximally superintegrable in arbitrary dimension are the geodesic flow
on the simply connected space forms, the (generalized) Kepler problem [
73 ] , the Smorodinsky–Winternitz system [ 90 , 74 ] , their
generalizations to the simply connected spaces of constant sectional
curvature (cf. [ 16 ] and references therein), the nonisotropic
oscillator with rational frequencies, the nonperiodic @xmath Toda
lattice [ 194 , 5 ] , and a very recent example living on a manifold of
nonconstant curvature [ 15 ] , namely

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This system can be understood as the intrinsic Smorodinsky–Winternitz
model on an @xmath -dimensional generalization of the Darboux space of
type III [ 131 ] .

The exceptional properties of the CM models can be understood by means
of (singular) Hamiltonian reduction [ 161 ] . This technique,
independently developed by Olshanetsky and Perelomov [ 155 , 156 ] and
by Kazhdan, Konstant and Sternberg [ 130 ] , was recently clarified and
placed in a broader context by Fehér and Pusztai [ 78 , 77 , 76 ] . The
latter works provide some kind of symplectic analog of Harish-Chandra’s
theory of @xmath -functions [ 112 , 72 ] .

We sketch the gist of the method for the simple case of the @xmath
trigonometric Sutherland model ¹ ¹ 1 I am indebted to Prof. L. Fehér for
valuable discussions on the state of the art of the projection method in
CM models. (cf. Example 1.4 ), as developed by Kazhdan, Konstant and
Sternberg [ 130 ] . Let us consider the geodesic motion on @xmath ,
which is given by the free Hamiltonian

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

on @xmath , where we trivialize @xmath (with @xmath ) by right
translations and identify @xmath by means of the inner product. Here the
invariant symplectic form on @xmath is @xmath . The Hamiltonian action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a symmetry of @xmath and gives rise to a momentum map @xmath defined
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now let us look at the (singular) Marsden–Weinstein reduced phase spaces

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the isotropy group of @xmath . (Generally speaking,
these symplectic spaces are not manifolds, but stratified sets whose
strata are differentiable manifolds.) The easiest nontrivial choice for
@xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath being an arbitrary vector of norm @xmath . In this case, the
reduced phase space actually turns out to be @xmath , @xmath being a
Weyl alcove, and the reduced Hamiltonian is given by the trigonometric
Sutherland model, with @xmath . The integrability and solvability
properties of the latter system now follow from those of the geodesic
flow on @xmath . As a matter of fact [ 77 ] , these ideas can be also
applied to obtain a Lax representation. These ideas apply to any
compact, connected simple Lie group @xmath , but actually it can be
proved that a scalar CM model is only obtained in the case that we have
reviewed, whereas for a general @xmath a spin CM model arises.

The above construction can be reinterpreted as follows. Let @xmath and
consider its involution @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath (resp. @xmath )
denotes its right (resp. left) action on @xmath , it is clear that
geodesic motion on @xmath enjoys a @xmath symmetry. If we reduce @xmath
using the @xmath symmetry at the zero value of the momentum map, we
arrive precisely at the symplectic system @xmath analyzed in the
preceding paragraph. Moreover, the @xmath symmetry still survives, and
its action on @xmath in fact coincides with the conjugation action (
1.10 ) of @xmath on itself. In this framework, hyperbolic CS models
(possibly with spin) are obtained when considering the complexification
@xmath of @xmath given by @xmath , @xmath being a Cartan involution of
@xmath . The hyperbolic Sutherland model is obtained when @xmath , so
that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath for the above prescription for @xmath ,
@xmath now being a Weyl chamber.

The above results also hold true, mutatis mutandis, if we take @xmath to
be any noncompact simple Lie group with finite center, @xmath a Cartan
involution, and @xmath , so that it is a maximal compact subgroup. Any
element @xmath can be uniquely decomposed as @xmath , where @xmath and
@xmath is diffeomorphic to @xmath via the exponential map. In this
framework, one usually obtains spin CM models on @xmath , and further
generalizations have been also considered. Moreover, the quantum analogs
of these results are being actively pursued by the same authors, and
connections with flat symmetric spaces have also been studied recently [
6 , 115 ] .

The related topic of the reduction of CS models by discrete symmetries
has also been considered in the Physics literature [ 167 , 170 ] , both
in the spin and spinless cases. A wide panoply of CS models can be
obtained from the original Calogero model through this procedure,
partially explaining why this system (with or without the harmonic
confining potential) is sometimes regarded as the mother of all CM
systems [ 171 ] .

Interestingly, some purely quantum mechanical techniques in CS models
were originally suggested by a careful analysis of their classical
analogs. For instance, Polychronakos’s rediscovery of Dunkl operators [
164 ] was motivated by a careful derivation of the scattering Calogero
model by reduction of free motion. Moreover, a short calculation allows
one to prove that the only asymptotic effect of the interaction with the
potential ( 1.7a ) is an effective reshuffling of the particles. This
property carries over to the quantum case, where it acquires an even
greater relevance through the concept of identical particles. It is
therefore amusing that some “physical” effects of the CS models were
first observed at a classical level but only become really fundamental
in the quantum realm. For instance, the ideas that we have just sketched
lie at the heart of the applications of CS models to generalized
statistics in one dimension.

Another fruitful connection between CM and CS models, which actually
holds for a wide variety of one-dimensional quantum systems, appears
when considering the exact bosonization of one such model. This
technique essentially consists [ 27 , 195 , 203 ] in describing a
fermionic system by means of a bosonic field theory. More precisely, we
require that the algebra of bosonic operators be irreducible on the
fermionic Hilbert space and that the bosonic field theory reproduce the
exact eigenvalues of the system up to non-perturbative effects. It has
been recently discovered [ 70 ] that an exact one-dimensional
bosonization can be constructed via Weyl quantization of the classical
picture, thus obtaining a new realization of the @xmath algebra. This
result is expected to shed new light on higher dimensional bosonization,
but the difficulties encountered in this case are considerable.

### 1.6 Dunkl operators

The first attempt to provide a conceptual explanation of the exact
solvability of CS models was made by Olshanetsky and Perelomov [ 158 ] .
In the rational (with @xmath ) and trigonometric cases, they showed that
there exist some particular values of the coupling constants for which
the Hamiltonian ( 1.2 ) is equivalent to the radial part of the
Laplacian on a symmetric space associated with the root system @xmath .
The radial parts of the Laplacians on these spaces have been thoroughly
studied [ 112 ] , and quite explicit formulas are available. The general
rational ( @xmath ) and hyperbolic cases could also be dealt with using
appropriate modifications. The main drawback of Olshanetsky and
Perelomov’s approach was that for the @xmath case and arbitrary coupling
constants one did not obtain the radial Laplacian. This, however, has
been recently amended by Fehér and Pusztai (although so far only the
classical case has been carried out in detail [ 78 ] ).

Concerning the connection between CS models and the theory of orthogonal
polynomials, a major breakthrough was the introduction of Dunkl (or
exchange ) operators [ 59 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

to study spherical harmonics associated with measures invariant under
the Weyl group @xmath . Dunkl operators have become an essential tool in
harmonic analysis, combinatorics and CS models [ 107 , 175 ] . The
differential-difference operators ( 1.11 ) have two key properties: they
are homogeneous of degree @xmath , i.e., their action on a polynomial
lowers its degree by one, and are mutually commutative. In this sense,
one can think of the Dunkl operators as deformations of the usual
partial derivatives that preserve most of their analytic properties. In
fact, one can construct a Dunkl transform [ 46 , 47 ] using the spectral
resolution of the anti-self-adjoint operator @xmath , and the resulting
properties are fairly similar to those of the usual Fourier transform.

In the Physics community, Dunkl operators were rediscovered by
Polychronakos [ 164 ] within the context of CS models. To explain the
essentials of the connection between these objects, let us restrict
ourselves to the case @xmath and define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A simple link can now be established through the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a constant and the constants @xmath are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This equation is known to hold true [ 92 ] on the space @xmath of @xmath
-invariant square-integrable functions on @xmath , which is canonically
isometric to our (reduced) Hilbert space @xmath . Hence Dunkl operators
appear in the rational ( @xmath ) case (the scattering Calogero model )
as first integrals of the system, and have the physical interpretation
of (conserved) asymptotic momenta. Furthermore, Eq. ( 1.12 ) partially
accounts for the relevance of CS models in harmonic analysis. External
harmonic potentials can be introduced in this picture using either
deformed destruction operators @xmath [ 164 ] or auxiliary differential
operators [ 81 ] .

In the trigonometric case one can define an analogous set of commuting
differential-difference operators by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The relation between the Sutherland system of type @xmath and the sum of
squares of these Dunkl operators goes along the lines of the rational
case ( 1.12 ), with gauge factor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

It can be readily verified that the operators ( 1.13 ) leave invariant
the subspace of polynomials in @xmath of degree not higher than @xmath ,
for all @xmath .

As a matter of fact, the trigonometric Dunkl operators ( 1.13 ) were
introduced by Cherednik [ 41 , 42 ] , while a closely related set of
differential-difference operators has been previously considered by
Heckman [ 105 ] . Several analogous families of operators are currently
known, both in the rational and trigonometric cases. For simplicity, we
shall understand by (generalized) Dunkl operators of type @xmath [ 107 ,
175 , 81 ] any set of first order differential-difference operators
@xmath ( @xmath ) in @xmath variables @xmath satisfying:

1.  The operators @xmath map the space of polynomials @xmath into itself
    and leave invariant finite-dimensional subspaces @xmath .

2.  The operators @xmath span a degenerate Hecke algebra.

Degenerate (or graded) Hecke algebras were defined independently by
Drinfeld [ 58 ] and Lusztig [ 144 ] . For the sake of completeness, let
us recall that the degenerate Hecke algebra @xmath associated with the
system of positive roots @xmath and the parameters @xmath is the linear
space @xmath endowed with the unique graded algebra structure satisfying

1.  @xmath and @xmath are subalgebras, so that @xmath and @xmath can be
    identified with their images in @xmath .

2.  If @xmath is a simple root, then @xmath for all @xmath .

Here @xmath is assumed to span @xmath , @xmath denotes the algebra of
symmetric tensors in the complex linear space @xmath , and the grading
in @xmath is in fact inherited from that of @xmath . Clearly one can
identify @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath .

As in Eq. ( 1.12 ), Dunkl operators happen to give rise to (generalized)
CS models through the addition of auxiliary operators, a similarity
transformation and a global change of variables. Full details can be
consulted in Refs. [ 82 , 81 ] and in Chapter 3 .

### 1.7 Spin CS models

We shall comment now on another benefit granted by the Dunkl operator
formalism that is essential for all the forthcoming sections: the
definition of spin CS models . Since the study of (generalizations of)
such models could be rightly considered to be the core of this
Ph. D. dissertation, we shall have many opportunities in the following
chapters to elaborate on this topic. Our goal in this section is to
define the basic operators and present the fundamentals of the theory
without providing any details on the computational difficulties
involved. This and other aspects shall be covered in detail in Chapter 2
.

For the sake of simplicity, we shall restrict ourselves to the
non-exceptional root systems @xmath and @xmath , which are the only ones
that have been considered in the literature up to now. (In fact, we
shall make use of the root system @xmath embedded in @xmath , not of
@xmath . Nevertheless, we shall hereafter drop the subscript @xmath and
regard the subscript @xmath as an abstract index.)

Let @xmath be the Hilbert space of the internal degrees of freedom of
@xmath particles of spin @xmath , and let

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

be the canonical basis of @xmath . Let us define the spin permutation
and reversal operators by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.16a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.16b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.16c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

One can easily verify that they satisfy the algebraic relations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the indices @xmath take distinct values in the range @xmath .

The one-dimensional representations @xmath of the Weyl group @xmath are
given by [ 118 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in the @xmath case and by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in the @xmath case. For each of these one-dimensional representations
@xmath , one can define the spin CS model with scalar counterpart ( 1.6
) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the spin potentials @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.18a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.18b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.18c)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (1.18d)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

We shall frequently omit the subscript if there is no risk of confusion.
The extension to the hyperbolic case is straightforward.

Let us introduce the coordinate permutation and sign reversal operators

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.19a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.19b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.19c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

which are the reflection operators associated with the root systems
@xmath and @xmath . One obviously has the group isomorphisms @xmath and
@xmath . We shall denote by @xmath , @xmath and @xmath respectively the
realizations of @xmath generated by the operators ( 1.19 ), ( 1.16 ),
and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

When notationally convenient, we shall regard these realizations as
unitary representations

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.21a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.21b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.21c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath . Moreover, we shall not distinguish between a character of
@xmath and its isomorphic extension to @xmath or @xmath .

The key property of the spin models ( 1.18 ) is their connection with
Dunkl operators. This connection is implemented via the star mapping
@xmath associated with the one-dimensional representation @xmath , which
is the antihomomorphism defined by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.22a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.22b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Here @xmath stands for the (real) universal enveloping algebra of @xmath
, and the second equation ( 1.22b ) is to be omitted in the @xmath case.
We shall also consider the extension of ( 1.22 ) to @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is the space of (scalar) smooth differential operators, and
@xmath and @xmath belong to @xmath and @xmath respectively. It is easy
to show that the spin CS models ( 1.17 ) are obtained by applying the
star mapping associated with @xmath to the exchange Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.24a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.24b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.24c)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (1.24d)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Since these are essentially the operators obtained from the sum of the
squares of the Dunkl operators ( 1.11 ) and ( 1.13 ) through a gauge
transformation and a change of variables, the eigenvalue problem for the
spin Hamiltonian ( 1.17 ) can be effectively reduced to the analogous
problem for a quadratic polynomial in the Dunkl operators plus, perhaps,
some simple auxiliary operators.

The connection between CS models and Dunkl operators can also be used to
define generalizations of the above solvable Hamiltonians (with or
without spin). Such an operator @xmath is called of CS type . Its
spectrum cannot be generally computed by algebraic methods, but by
construction [ 81 , 82 ] @xmath remains partially solvable in the sense
that it leaves invariant some known finite-dimensional subspace of
@xmath ; in this case, @xmath is said to be quasi-exactly solvable
(QES), and the eigenvalues that one can obtain from the latter subspaces
are called algebraic .

###### Remark 1.5.

A particularly interesting situation [ 196 , 197 ] arises when one can
find explicitly an infinite flag (i.e., a sequence @xmath , where @xmath
is finite-dimensional) invariant under @xmath . In this case, the
corresponding Hamiltonian @xmath is sometimes said to be exactly
solvable in the sense of Turbiner [ 196 ] . This expression is certainly
misleading, the latter condition does not imply by any means that
algebraic eigenvalues cover the whole point spectrum of @xmath . In this
dissertation we shall be interested in this stronger type of quasi-exact
solvability, and in fact all the QES Hamiltonians that we shall
encounter in Chapter 3 will indeed preserve an infinite-dimensional
invariant flag.

### 1.8 Solvable spin chains

Solvable spin chains have enjoyed a growing popularity in the last few
years, due in part to their novel applications to SUSY Yang–Mills and
string theories [ 150 , 21 , 173 , 20 , 89 , 94 ] . The role of CS spin
models in the study of solvable spin chains was unveiled by
Polychronakos [ 164 , 166 ] in a couple of insightful papers from the
mid 90s which elucidated the connection between the original Sutherland
model and the recently discovered Haldane–Shastry (HS) chain [ 100 , 178
] . We shall conclude this chapter with an overview of the essentials of
the CS/HS connection and the definition of some celebrated spin chains
that shall be frequently referred to in forthcoming chapters.

The Heisenberg chain [ 110 ] , which was born as an attempt to model
ferromagnetic materials, describes @xmath particles on a lattice with
isotropic near-neighbor interactions independent of the site. For
particles of spin @xmath , the Hamiltonian of the system is customarily
written as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the (vector) spin operator of the particle @xmath ,
@xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For each fixed particle label @xmath , we denote by @xmath ( @xmath ) a
basis of the fundamental representation of @xmath , which we assume to
be orthonormal with respect to the bilinear form @xmath . It is
straightforward to write the Hamiltonian ( 1.25 ) in terms of the spin
exchange operators ( 1.16a ) using that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that for spin @xmath particles we have @xmath , where @xmath is the
@xmath -th Pauli matrix acting on the spin space of the @xmath -th
particle.

It is well known [ 25 , 117 , 50 ] that the spin @xmath Heisenberg chain
can be solved exactly using the Bethe ansatz. Several (partially)
solvable generalizations of the Heisenberg chain ( 1.25 ) with
short-range interactions (at most between next-to-nearest neighbors)
have been subsequently proposed in the literature. These include, in
particular, the family of chains with arbitrary spin and
nearest-neighbors interactions polynomial in @xmath of Refs. [ 12 , 192
] , as well as several models whose ground state can be written in terms
of “valence bonds” [ 147 , 148 , 3 ] .

The Haldane–Shastry model [ 100 , 178 ] is the prime example of solvable
spin chain with long-range interactions. It describes an arrangement of
@xmath equally spaced spins on a circle which interact pairwise with a
strength proportional to the inverse square of their chord distance. The
Hamiltonian of the HS chain can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the positions of the sites are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This system quickly attracted considerable attention [ 120 , 101 , 129 ,
86 , 188 ] due to its remarkable algebraic properties and its connection
with conformal field theory [ 55 ] and the symplectic Dyson model [ 62 ]
. The original interest of this model, however, lies in the fact that
Gutzwiller’s variational wave function for the Hubbard model [ 98 , 91 ,
97 ] , which also coincides with the one-dimensional version of the
resonating valence bond state introduced by Anderson [ 7 ] and with the
one-dimensional version of the Kalmeyer–Laughlin state [ 126 ] , becomes
an exact eigenfunction of the HS chain as the strength of the on-site
interaction tends to infinity.

In the early nineties the integrability of the Hamiltonian ( 1.27 ) was
rigorously proved and its Yangian symmetry [ 102 , 87 ] was established.
Not surprisingly, the Yangian algebra [ 57 ] also appears as the
symmetry algebra [ 23 , 9 , 113 ] of the Sutherland model ( 1.7b ).
Although the obvious relationship between this model and the chain (
1.27 ) was already remarked by Shastry in his original paper, their
connection was first made explicit by Polychronakos through the
so-called freezing trick [ 165 ] . This technique formally allows one to
recover the HS Hamiltonian from the Sutherland spin model ( 1.18b )
(with @xmath ) in the large coupling constant limit, which is clearly
tantamount to the classical limit @xmath . A rigorous proof of the
classical limit and some extensions and improvements will be presented
in Chapters 2 and 4 .

A further application of the freezing trick enabled Polychronakos to
obtain the integrable spin chain with long-range interactions given by
the Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the sites @xmath satisfy the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

This system is usually referred to as the Polychronakos–Frahm (PF) chain
, and relates to the spin Calogero model ( 1.18a ) as the HS chain does
to the Sutherland model ( 1.18b ).

As remarked by Frahm [ 88 ] , the sites of the PF chain are no longer
equally spaced, but Eq. ( 1.29 ) shows that they are given by the zeros
of the @xmath -th Hermite polynomial [ 189 ] . In particular [ 36 ] ,
this implies that the density of sites for large @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Remark 1.6.

The CS/HS correspondence casts the original model of Haldane and Shastry
into a much wider framework. Consequently, we shall say that a spin
chain is of HS type if it can be derived from a spin Schrödinger
operator of CS type via the freezing limit. In particular, both the HS
and the PF chains are of HS type.

Interestingly, we shall see in Chapters 2 and 4 (cf. also [ 166 , 84 ] )
that the chains of HS type, featuring long-range position-dependent
interactions, seem to enjoy stronger solvability properties than those
of Heisenberg type, characterized by the short range and position
independence of the interactions.

## Chapter 2 HS spin chains of @xmath type

### 2.1 Introduction

In the previous chapter we saw that the connection between @xmath CS
models and spin chains of HS type has been thoroughly studied. In
contrast, @xmath spin models [ 205 , 60 , 82 , 122 , 39 ] had received
comparatively little attention. Two main reasons were responsible for
this fact. On one hand, @xmath HS chains depend nontrivially on free
parameters (one in the rational case and two in the trigonometric one).
On the other hand, the sites of the @xmath chain are not equally spaced
and no explicit description of their positions is available.

Let us give a very brief review of the existing results on these models.
The integrability of the rational @xmath HS chain was established by
Yamamoto and Tsuchiya [ 206 ] using Dunkl operators, but its spectrum
has not been computed so far. The HS trigonometric spin chain of @xmath
type was discussed by Bernard, Pasquier and Serban [ 24 ] , but only for
spin @xmath and with the assumption that the sites are equally spaced,
which restricts the space of free parameters in the model to just three
particular values. Finkel et al. [ 83 ] discussed the integrability of
the hyperbolic HS chain of @xmath type, but did not examine its spectrum
either.

The main result of this chapter is the exact computation of the spectrum
of the @xmath HS chain. In fact, four chains associated with the @xmath
Sutherland model are considered, two of which are essentially different.
This computation is based on a rigorous study of Polychronakos’s
“freezing trick”, which is in fact promoted to a “freezing lemma” in
Section 2.5 .

The organization of this chapter is as follows. In Sections 2.2 to 2.4
we present a detailed study of the @xmath Sutherland spin model and
prove its exact solvability using Dunkl operators. In Section 2.5 we
introduce the @xmath HS chains and compute their spectrum, whose
statistical properties we analyze carefully in the following section.
Finally, in Section 2.7 we consider the addition of a constant magnetic
field to this picture.

The material presented in this chapter is based on Refs. [ 65 , 64 , 63
] .

### 2.2 The spin @xmath Sutherland model

In this section we shall study in some detail the spin @xmath CS models
associated with the one-dimensional representations @xmath of @xmath .
Physically, the parameter @xmath determines the ferromagnetic ( @xmath )
or antiferromagnetic ( @xmath ) behavior of the associated spin chains.

Let us recall that the potential @xmath of the spin @xmath Sutherland
model was given in Eq. ( 1.18d ). For reasons that will be apparent by
the end of this chapter, it is convenient to define the @xmath
Sutherland Hamiltonian by the action of the differential operator

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

on the “reduced” Hilbert space

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here the Weyl alcove ( 1.5 ) reads

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the sake of completeness, we shall prove rigorously that this choice
of domain is perfectly admissible from a mathematical point of view. To
this end, let us define the @xmath function @xmath as in Eq. ( 1.14 ),
so that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here we are assuming that @xmath . It can be readily verified that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the scalar Hamiltonian @xmath is defined on @xmath by Eqs. ( 1.6
)-( 1.7d ) and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath does not vanish on @xmath , @xmath is the ground state
function of @xmath [ 143 ] .

###### Proposition 2.1.

If @xmath , @xmath is essentially self-adjoint on @xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

A theorem of Komori and Takemura [ 132 ] shows that @xmath is a core for
the operator @xmath ( 1.7d ). Since @xmath is @xmath -bounded with
relative bound

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the Kato–Rellich theorem [ 172 ] shows that @xmath is essentially
self-adjoint on @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 2.2.

Although its proof is simple (in fact, a direct proof could have been
provided without much additional effort, and the conditions on @xmath
could have be easily relaxed), the inverse-square singularity prevents
us from obtaining Proposition 2.1 from the usual theorems on
self-adjointness [ 184 ] . Interestingly, the proof of this result is
essentially algebraic, and leans on our precise knowledge of the
eigenfunctions of the @xmath scalar Sutherland model.

Although it has some applications to CS models [ 18 , 17 , 79 ] ,
hereafter we shall not touch upon this topic, and by “self-adjoint” we
shall always mean “formally self-adjoint”.

Some words on the choice of Hilbert space are in order. Consider the
orthogonal projectors

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.5a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.5b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which we shall call symmetrizers , and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the flat @xmath -torus. Observe that the angle coordinates of the
torus are given by @xmath , so that every function in @xmath will be
@xmath -periodic in @xmath . Define the “physical” Hilbert spaces of
@xmath distinguishable particles as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is a standard result in representation theory [ 183 ] that @xmath can
be decomposed into the direct sum

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

of the auxiliary spaces

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which are given by the image of the symmetrizers ( 2.5 ). We shall also
be interested in the subspaces

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

i.e., the fermionic ( @xmath ) and bosonic ( @xmath ) sectors of @xmath
.

It is technically convenient to define other two self-adjoint operators
defined by the differential operator ( 2.1 ). We shall denote by @xmath
(resp. @xmath ) the Hamiltonian defined by the action of ( 2.1 ) on
@xmath (resp. @xmath ). In the next proposition we summarize some
elementary results relating the “physical” Hamiltonians to the “reduced”
ones.

###### Proposition 2.3.

The following statements hold:

1.  @xmath maps @xmath into itself.

2.  @xmath is a symmetry group of the physical Hamiltonian @xmath .

3.   The decompositions ( 2.6 ) and ( 2.7 ) are invariant under the
    physical Hamiltonians.

4.  @xmath and @xmath are isospectral, and the corresponding
    eigenfunctions @xmath and @xmath are related by

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.8)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where @xmath is such that @xmath .

###### Proof.

The first part of the lemma follows most easily from Lemma 2.5 in the
next section. To prove the remaining points it is convenient to keep the
abstract root formulation, with @xmath , and use the representation (
1.21b ). Then one can write

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.9)
              @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

so that @xmath . Since the decompositions ( 2.6 ) and ( 2.7 ) are
associated with a symmetry group of @xmath , they are invariant under
this operator.

Each eigenfunction @xmath of @xmath with energy @xmath belongs to some
subspace @xmath by the @xmath symmetry. The potential diverging
quadratically at @xmath , @xmath must vanish at @xmath , and therefore
@xmath must be an @xmath solution to the PDE

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Hence @xmath is an eigenfunction of the self-adjoint operator @xmath and
@xmath can be recovered from @xmath through Eq. ( 2.8 ). ∎

###### Corollary 2.4.

@xmath .

### 2.3 @xmath Dunkl operators

In this section we shall make use of the Dunkl operator formalism to
compute the spectrum of the spin model @xmath in closed form. Following
Refs. [ 205 , 83 ] and Eq. ( 1.13 ), let us consider the following set
of commutative Dunkl operators

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath               
              @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The following commutation relations with the exchange operators @xmath
can be readily checked:

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (2.12a)
                 (2.12b)
                 (2.12c)
                 
     @xmath      (2.12d)
     @xmath      (2.12e)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here we assume that @xmath and @xmath are distinct indices in the range
@xmath .

As an application of the Dunkl operator formalism, let us show the
complete integrability of the spin Hamiltonian @xmath . The proof is
based on the following lemma, which has been essentially taken from Ref.
[ 83 ] . The definitions of the spaces @xmath and @xmath and of the star
mapping were given in Section 1.7 .

###### Lemma 2.5.

Let @xmath and @xmath . Then the following statements hold:

1.  @xmath .

2.   If @xmath , then @xmath .

3.   If @xmath commutes with @xmath , then @xmath .

4.   If @xmath commute with @xmath , then @xmath .

5.   If @xmath commutes with @xmath for some @xmath , then @xmath
    commutes with @xmath .

###### Proof.

1.  Let us write

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.13)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath takes values in @xmath . By definition, @xmath , so

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.  Write @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . The statement follows by
    choosing a finite set of functions @xmath such that the matrix
    @xmath is nonsingular.

3.  It follows from (i) and (ii) using that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

4.  It is a direct consequence of (iii).

5.  Let us denote by @xmath the automorphism of @xmath given by @xmath .
    By hypothesis, and using the notation ( 2.13 ),

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    so @xmath for each @xmath . Hence

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath            
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

    as we wanted to prove.

∎

Let us define the operators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

acting on @xmath . It can be readily verified that @xmath coincides with
the exchange Hamiltonian ( 1.24d ), so that the spin Hamiltonian ( 1.18d
) can be recovered as a differential operator from the relation @xmath .
Since the Dunkl operators ( 2.3 ) are self-adjoint and commute among
them, so do the positive operators @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.6.

The operators ( 2.14 ) are @xmath -invariant.

###### Proof.

Let us prove that the elementary permutation @xmath commutes with @xmath
. Eq. ( 2.12a ) shows that @xmath for @xmath . Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it stems that @xmath . @xmath also commutes with @xmath by virtue of the
relations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here we have used that @xmath . Now it immediately follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 2.7.

The operator @xmath is self-adjoint.

###### Proof.

Proposition 2.6 shows that @xmath commutes with @xmath . Using Lemma 2.5
and the self-adjointness of @xmath and @xmath , one can see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so @xmath as a consequence of Lemma 2.5 . ∎

Thus we have proved the following

###### Theorem 2.8.

The self-adjoint operators @xmath ( @xmath ) form a commuting family
which includes the Hamiltonian @xmath .

### 2.4 Spectrum of the dynamical model

There are two steps in the computation of the spectrum of @xmath .
First, a key observation is that the gauge Hamiltonian is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and that @xmath leaves invariant an infinite flag

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of finite-dimensional subspaces. The action of @xmath is triangular in a
suitably chosen basis and the eigenvalues can be read off the diagonal
elements. Second, a careful analysis allows us to extend these results
to the spin Hamiltonian @xmath .

Let us begin with some definitions. Let us consider the flag

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath , @xmath is defined as in Eq. ( 1.9 ) and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the gauge factor @xmath given by Eq. ( 2.3 ) and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using Fourier analysis it is easy to see that the countable union @xmath
is dense in @xmath , and that one can obtain a Hilbert basis @xmath of
this space by applying the Gram–Schmidt procedure to the functions (
2.17 ).

Given a multiindex @xmath , we shall define the non-negative,
nonincreasing multiindex

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the permutation @xmath is chosen so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The set of non-negative, nonincreasing multiindices will be denoted by
@xmath . We shall order @xmath by defining @xmath if there exists a
number @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath
denotes the @xmath th component of @xmath . This partial order can be
naturally extended to @xmath and hence to @xmath . We shall assume that
the ordering of @xmath is compatible with this partial order.

In the following lemma we show that the order relations do in fact hold
on orbits of @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.9.

For each @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . In particular, there exists as
element @xmath such that @xmath .

###### Proof.

The first part is trivial from the fact that @xmath is a reflection, and
thus @xmath . The second statement holds because @xmath is generated by
@xmath and @xmath , i.e., by permutations and sign reversals. ∎

Now let us introduce some more notation. Given @xmath and @xmath , we
define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now one can characterize the action of the Dunkl operators ( 2.3 ) on
the functions ( 2.17 ) as follows.

###### Proposition 2.10.

For each @xmath , the action of @xmath on the function @xmath is given
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath y @xmath . A tedious but straightforward computation shows
that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

It can be readily verified that all the multiindices appearing in this
formula are smaller than or equal to @xmath . In particular, the value
of @xmath can be computed from the constant terms in the above formula.
∎

###### Corollary 2.11.

For all @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some real constants @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be defined as in Lemma 2.9 . Then @xmath is given by
Proposition 2.10 , and the result follows from the commutation relations
( 2.12a )–( 2.12e ) and the invariance of the partial order under the
Weyl group (cf. Lemma 2.9 ). ∎

###### Proposition 2.12.

For all @xmath there exist some real constants @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

only depends on @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Proposition 2.6 , @xmath is @xmath -invariant, so @xmath . By Lemma
2.9 , one can assume that @xmath . By Proposition 2.10 ,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

By Lemma 2.9 and Corollary 2.11 , it suffices to show that @xmath is
given by Eq. ( 2.18 ).

There is no loss of generality in assuming that @xmath . To compute the
sum, let us gather those components of the multiindex that have the same
value. Thus, take those components of the non-negative, nonincreasing
multiindex @xmath such that @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath for all
@xmath . If @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath , Proposition 2.10 shows directly that Eq. ( 2.19 ) also holds
in this case. ∎

###### Corollary 2.13.

The spectrum of @xmath as a self-adjoint operator on @xmath is given by
@xmath . Thus the degeneracy of each eigenvalue is at least @xmath .

###### Proof.

It follows from the density of the flag ( 2.16 ) and the fact that
@xmath is a triangular matrix in the basis @xmath with diagonal elements
given by @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 2.14.

Here we loosely (but safely) regard the spectra of the models @xmath as
“sets with multiplicities”. We shall use this convention whenever
appropriate.

Our goal now is to extend Corollary 2.13 to the spin and spinless
Hamiltonians @xmath and @xmath . For simplicity, let us start with the
latter, considered as an operator on @xmath .

###### Theorem 2.15.

@xmath .

###### Proof.

By definition of the Weyl alcove, @xmath times the inclusion @xmath
yields a unitary transformation @xmath from @xmath to the space of
@xmath -invariant functions @xmath . Its inverse is given by @xmath
times the symmetric extension @xmath (for all @xmath ). Since the action
of @xmath and @xmath agree on @xmath -invariant functions, @xmath and
@xmath are isospectral.

For each @xmath , the orbit @xmath intersects @xmath exactly once, at
@xmath . By Lemma 2.9 , this implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a basis of @xmath , yielding a Hilbert basis of @xmath via the
Gram–Schmidt procedure. By Proposition 2.12 , the matrix of @xmath is
triangular in an ordered basis and its eigenvalues are given by @xmath ,
where now @xmath . ∎

The computation of the spectrum of @xmath is similar, although the
characterization of the bases is considerably more involved.

###### Lemma 2.16.

A basis of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

it is clear that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

must span the whole @xmath . Moreover, a state of the form @xmath (
@xmath ) vanishes if and only if some of the following conditions hold:

1.  @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

2.  @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

3.  @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

It is easy to check that the above states do not vanish and are in fact
linearly independent modulo @xmath . Furthermore, it is immediate to see
that for any element @xmath not satisfying any of the above conditions
one can use permutations and sign reversals to construct an element
@xmath in the stabilizer of @xmath such that @xmath belongs to the
basis ( 2.20 ). By  Eq. ( 2.21 ), the claim follows. ∎

###### Corollary 2.17.

For each element @xmath of the basis @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath and @xmath respectively denote the integer part of @xmath and
the smallest integer greater than or equal to @xmath .

###### Theorem 2.18.

@xmath .

###### Proof.

By Proposition 2.3 , @xmath and @xmath are isospectral. We can assume
that the basis ( 2.20 ) of @xmath is ordered according to the partial
order @xmath . By Lemma 2.5 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath . Now the same arguments used in the proofs of Corollary
2.13 and Theorem 2.15 show that the action of @xmath in the basis given
by Lemma 2.16 is triangular with diagonal elements @xmath . ∎

### 2.5 The spin chain

We define the @xmath spin chain Hamiltonian as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the spin sites @xmath satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Remark 2.19.

A cursory glance at the spin chain ( 1.27 ) reveals that the
Hamiltonian ( 2.23 ) is in fact the appropriate @xmath version of the
celebrated HS chain.

In this section we shall study the Hamiltonian ( 2.23 ) and compute its
spectrum by taking the large coupling constant limit of the model (
1.18d ). To this end, let us rescale the parameters of the @xmath
Sutherland Hamiltonian as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The ground state function ( 2.3 ) can thus be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the smooth function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

is independent of the coupling parameter @xmath . It is immediate to
show that Eq. ( 2.24 ) merely states that @xmath is a critical point of
@xmath . In the following proposition we shall prove an existence and
uniqueness result for the solutions of this equation.

###### Proposition 2.20.

The function @xmath has a unique critical point @xmath in @xmath , which
is a hyperbolic maximum.

###### Proof.

Since @xmath is bounded and @xmath tends to @xmath at @xmath , @xmath
must attain its maximum in @xmath . Uniqueness shall follow easily from
the fact that the Hessian @xmath is negative definite in the convex
domain @xmath . To show the definiteness of @xmath , let us compute

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Gerschgorin’s theorem [ 96 , Theorem 15.814] , the eigenvalues of
@xmath lie in

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath , @xmath is negative definite. Hence, any critical point of
@xmath must be a hyperbolic maximum.

To complete the proof of uniqueness, let us suppose that @xmath and
@xmath are two critical points of @xmath . Consider the segment @xmath
and set @xmath . Clearly @xmath , so there must exist @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

contradicting the fact that @xmath is negative definite in @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 2.21.

It can be proved [ 116 , 182 ] that @xmath is also a (global) minimum of
the part of the potential @xmath quadratic in @xmath , namely

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us now consider the positive function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is intuitively obvious that @xmath concentrates near its maximum
@xmath as @xmath . More precise, one can prove the following

###### Lemma 2.22.

Let @xmath be the unique maximum of @xmath . Then @xmath converges to
@xmath in the sense of distributions and falls off exponentially fast
away from @xmath .

###### Proof.

We shall show that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath . By continuity, for any @xmath there exists @xmath such
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath in the ball @xmath centered at @xmath and of radius
@xmath . Furthermore, one can assume that @xmath , with @xmath . Since
the ground state function @xmath is only defined up to a multiplicative
constant and the claim obviously applies to constant functions, we can
assume that @xmath and @xmath . The method of steepest descent ensures
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as @xmath , so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

for any @xmath . ∎

###### Proposition 2.23.

Let @xmath be a normalized eigenfunction of @xmath . Then @xmath as
@xmath and @xmath falls off exponentially fast away from @xmath .

###### Proof.

It is well known [ 109 , 104 , 159 , 160 ] that @xmath is a
hypergeometric polynomial in @xmath associated with the @xmath root
system. Therefore, @xmath is polynomially bounded in @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

exponentially fast as @xmath on account of Lemma 2.22 . Since @xmath is
obviously positive and @xmath , the previous argument shows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath , as claimed. ∎

###### Remark 2.24.

Finer control of the decay could have been obtained if needed [ 4 , 111
] .

We shall use the above lemma to relate the spectrum of the @xmath chain
with those of the @xmath scalar and spin Sutherland models. The precise
relationship can be introduced by means of the partition function of
these systems, i.e., the trace of the exponential of minus their
Hamiltonian operators. In the large coupling constant limit, we obtain
an exact formula for the eigenvalues of the @xmath chain Hamiltonian.

To this end, let us write the spin differential operator ( 1.18d ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

is an @xmath -valued multiplication operator and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Gloss 2.25.

The essence of Polychronakos’s freezing trick is that the eigenfunctions
of @xmath become sharply peaked at @xmath as @xmath , so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in view of Eqs. ( 2.29 ) and ( 2.31 ). This idea suggests that the
eigenvalue equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

should yield approximate eigenfunctions of @xmath and @xmath , i.e.,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some eigenvalues @xmath . This leads to Polychronakos’s heuristic
formula [ 166 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

relating the spectra of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . A major drawback of
this relation is that it does not determine a priori which eigenvalues
of the spin and scalar models should be combined to obtain an eigenvalue
of the spin chain in the large coupling constant limit. This difficulty
can be overcome [ 166 , 65 , 84 ] by summing over the spectra of these
operators and promoting the above relation to the more precise formula (
2.34 ) relating the partition functions of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
respectively. In what follows, we provide a full proof of this technique
and apply it to compute the spectrum of the @xmath chain.

The partition function of a self-adjoint operator @xmath acting on a
Hilbert space @xmath is the map @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

provided that the above sum converges (i.e., that @xmath is trace class
for all @xmath .) Here @xmath is an orthonormal basis of @xmath .
Clearly the above definition amounts to setting

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

when @xmath has a pure point spectrum. We shall use the shorthand
notation @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and define the equivalence relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Moreover, in the rest of this chapter we shall set @xmath by adding a
constant term to the Hamiltonians @xmath and @xmath . The relation (
2.29 ) is not modified by this rescaling.

###### Lemma 2.26 (Freezing trick).

For all @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and @xmath be orthonormal eigenbases of @xmath and @xmath
respectively, and consider the orthonormal basis of @xmath given by the
tensor product of these bases, i.e., @xmath . As we have set @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Theorem 2.18 , the eigenvalues of @xmath with @xmath depend linearly
on @xmath , and hence it is not difficult to check that the sum defining
@xmath converges uniformly on compact sets. In particular, the limit

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

exists and depends continuously on @xmath . The same result holds for
the scalar Hamiltonian @xmath .

Let us estimate the value of @xmath . By continuity and the fact that
@xmath is the unique maximum of @xmath , for any @xmath there exist
@xmath and an open neighborhood @xmath of @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . As @xmath , it follows from Proposition
2.23 that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as @xmath . Therefore,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

and similarly for @xmath ( @xmath ) since it only differs from @xmath by
@xmath times a relatively bounded operator. Moreover, Eq. ( 2.35 )
implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

for each @xmath , on account of Eq. ( 2.36 ). As we have uniform
convergence in compact sets we can exchange limits, so that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

as claimed. ∎

We shall now compute the partition functions of @xmath and @xmath and
obtain the spectrum of the spin chain ( 2.23 ) using the freezing trick.
A first observation is that the eigenvalues ( 2.18 ) can be written in a
more compact form as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath was defined in Eq. ( 2.4 ).

###### Proposition 2.27.

Set @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

By Theorem 2.15 and Eq. ( 2.38 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Defining @xmath for @xmath and @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

∎

The computation of the partition function of the spin model is
considerably more involved. First, let us define the set of partitions
of a natural number @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . We find it convenient to represent each positive
nonincreasing multiindex @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . In particular, @xmath and condition ( 2.17 )
is satisfied if @xmath .

###### Example 2.28.

@xmath . For @xmath one has @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.29.

Given @xmath , set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is the length of @xmath . Then one can write the
large @xmath limit of the partition function of the Hamiltonian ( 1.18d
) as

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.42)
  -- -- -- --------

###### Proof.

It follows from Eq. ( 2.40 ) that the eigenvalues ( 2.38 ) can be
written as

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

since we have set @xmath . The degeneracy @xmath of each eigenvalue
@xmath is given by the cardinal of the set @xmath introduced in Lemma
2.16 . It is not difficult to check that @xmath solely depends on
whether @xmath or not, and is in fact given by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The partition function can thus be written as

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Since

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

we easily obtain Eq. ( 2.42 ). ∎

From Propositions 2.27 and 2.29 we immediately derive the following
theorem, which is the main result of this chapter.

###### Theorem 2.30.

The partition function of the spin chain ( 2.23 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Remark 2.31.

The eigenvalues @xmath of the spin chain Hamiltonian and their
degeneracies @xmath can be recovered by identifying

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the sum runs over distinct eigenvalues.

### 2.6 Statistical properties of the spectrum

Several remarkable properties of the spectrum of the spin chain ( 2.23 )
can be inferred from Theorem 2.30 . First of all, for half-integer spin
the partition function ( 2.44 ) does not depend on @xmath , since in
this case @xmath . Hence the spectrum of the spin chain is independent
of @xmath when @xmath is a half-integer, a property that is not apparent
from the expression of the Hamiltonian ( 2.23 ). Secondly, all the
denominators @xmath , @xmath , appearing in Eq. ( 2.44 ) are included as
factors in the product in the first line. Hence the partition function (
2.44 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.47)
  -- -- -- --------

and the degeneracy factor @xmath is a polynomial of degree @xmath in
@xmath . Therefore,

###### Proposition 2.32.

For all values of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , the following
statements hold:

1.   For half-integer spin, @xmath and @xmath are isospectral.

2.  @xmath , and it exactly coincides with this set (of cardinal at most
    @xmath ) for sufficiently large @xmath .

3.   Set @xmath . Then

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.48)
      -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

The first two statements follow from the above discussion. Let us prove
the last claim. First, observe that the above equation holds with the
constant

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

by the definition of the spin chains. Since @xmath and @xmath is
nontrivial for sufficiently high @xmath , @xmath must coincide with the
highest possible eigenvalue of @xmath , which can be easily obtained
using Eq. ( 2.47 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note, however, that in the antisymmetric case some of the possible
energies may not be attained if @xmath is kept fixed and @xmath
increases. For instance, it is obvious that the kernel @xmath becomes
trivial in this case. ∎

###### Remark 2.33.

Eq. ( 2.48 ) allows us to restrict our attention to the ferromagnetic
chains @xmath without loss of generality. Moreover, @xmath .

We shall now present several concrete examples where we analyze the
spectrum of the chains by means of Theorem 2.30 .

###### Example 2.34.

The structure of Eq. ( 2.44 ) makes it straightforward to compute the
spectrum of the spin chains for any fixed number of particles as a
function of the spin. For instance, for @xmath sites and integer @xmath
the eigenvalues of the spin chain @xmath are @xmath , with respective
degeneracies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that in this case @xmath for @xmath , in agreement Proposition 2.32
. The above results have been numerically checked for @xmath and a few
values of @xmath and @xmath by representing the operators @xmath and
@xmath as @xmath matrices. The obtained results are in complete
agreement with those listed above.

For a fixed value of the spin @xmath , it is not apparent how to derive
an explicit formula expressing the eigenvalues and their multiplicities
in terms of the number of particles @xmath . We shall next present two
concrete examples for the cases @xmath and @xmath .

###### Example 2.35 (Spin 1/2).

By Proposition 2.32 , @xmath and @xmath are isospectral. We have
computed the partition function @xmath for up to 20 particles. For
instance, for @xmath the antiferromagnetic spin chain eigenvalues and
their corresponding multiplicities (denoted by subindices) are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The number of energy levels increases rapidly with the number of
particles @xmath . For example, if @xmath the number of distinct
eigenvalues (for generic values of @xmath ) is @xmath , while for @xmath
this number becomes @xmath . It is therefore convenient to plot the
eigenvalues @xmath and their corresponding degeneracies @xmath , as is
done in Fig. 2.1 for @xmath particles. Note that Eq. ( 2.47 ) implies
that when @xmath the levels cluster around integer multiples of @xmath .
In fact, for all @xmath up to @xmath we have observed that these
integers take all values in a certain range @xmath . For example, in the
case @xmath presented above, @xmath .

###### Example 2.36 (Spin 1).

We have computed the partition functions @xmath of the spin chains
@xmath with spin @xmath for up to @xmath particles. As remarked in the
previous section, for integer @xmath the partition functions @xmath are
expected to be essentially different. This is immediately apparent from
Fig. 2.2 , where the energy spectra of the even and odd spin chains
@xmath with @xmath for @xmath particles are graphically compared.
However, the standard deviation of the energy is exactly the same for
both chains. This rather unexpected result will be relevant in the
ensuing discussion of the level density (see Conjecture 2.39 below). We
also note that, just as for spin @xmath , for @xmath up to (at least)
@xmath and @xmath the energy levels cluster around an equally spaced set
of nonnegative integer multiples of @xmath .

The numerical explorations that we have carried off naturally give rise
to several conjectures that we shall now discuss in detail.

###### Conjecture 2.37.

For @xmath , the eigenvalues cluster around an equally spaced set of
levels of the form @xmath , with @xmath

###### Remark 2.38.

For sufficiently large values of the spin @xmath this conjecture (with
@xmath ) follows directly from Eq. ( 2.47 ). Numerical calculations for
a wide range of values of @xmath and @xmath fully corroborate the above
conjecture.

###### Conjecture 2.39.

For @xmath , the level density follows a Gaussian distribution

More precisely, we claim that the number of eigenvalues (counting their
degeneracies) in an interval @xmath is approximately given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the normal (Gaussian) distribution with parameters @xmath and @xmath
respectively equal to the mean and standard deviation of the spectrum of
the spin chain. Although the shape of the plots in Figs. 2.1 and 2.2
make this conjecture quite plausible, for its precise numerical
verification it is preferable to compare the distribution function

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.52)
  -- -- -- --------

of the Gaussian probability density with its discrete analog

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the degeneracy of the eigenvalue @xmath . Indeed,
our computations for a wide range of values of @xmath and @xmath are in
total agreement with the latter conjecture for all four chains ( 2.23 ).
This is apparent, for instance, in the case @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
presented in Fig. 2.3 . The agreement between the distribution
functions ( 2.52 ) and ( 2.53 ) improves dramatically as @xmath
increases. In fact, their plots are virtually indistinguishable for
@xmath .

It is well known in this respect that a Gaussian level density is a
characteristic feature of the embedded Gaussian ensemble (EGOE) in
Random Matrix Theory [ 152 ] . It should be noted, however, that the
EGOE applies to a system of @xmath particles with up to @xmath -body
interactions ( @xmath ) in the high dilution regime @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , where @xmath is the number of one-particle states. Since in our
case @xmath is fixed, the fact that the level density is Gaussian does
not follow from the above general result.

If Conjecture 2.39 is true, the spectrum for large @xmath is completely
characterized by the parameters @xmath and @xmath through the Gaussian
law ( 2.51 ). It is therefore of great interest to compute these
parameters in closed form as functions of @xmath and @xmath . To this
end, let us write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the constants @xmath , @xmath and @xmath can be easily read off
from Eq. ( 2.23 ). We shall denote by @xmath the average energy of
@xmath .

###### Proposition 2.40.

If the spin @xmath is an integer,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
                 (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . If it is a half-integer,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

We shall begin with the case of integer spin. Using the formulas for the
traces of the spin operators given in Table 2.1 we immediately obtain

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Here we have used Proposition 2.32 and Eq. ( 2.49 ) to compute the sum.

On the other hand, the average energy @xmath of the chain @xmath is
given by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath .

When @xmath is a half-integer, @xmath due to Proposition 2.32 . A
similar calculation shows that the formulas for the traces of the spin
operators in Table 2.1 yield the expression ( 2.57 ) for the mean
energy. ∎

Let us turn now to the (squared) standard deviation of the spectrum of
@xmath , which is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A long but straightforward calculation using the formulas in Table 2.1
yields the following

###### Proposition 2.41.

For integer spin, the standard deviation is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . If @xmath is a half-integer, then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

Since @xmath , @xmath and @xmath do not depend on @xmath , the above
propositions completely determine the dependence of @xmath and @xmath on
the spin. A nontrivial consequence of Proposition 2.41 is the equality
of the standard deviation of the energy for the even and odd
antiferromagnetic chains (for half-integer spin, this trivially follows
from the fact that the even and odd chains have the same spectrum). This
result is quite surprising, since for integer spin the energy spectra of
the chains @xmath are essentially different, as shown in Fig. 2.2 .

To analyze the dependence on the number of particles of the spectrum we
still need to evaluate @xmath , @xmath and @xmath as functions of @xmath
. Although it is not at all apparent how to compute these quantities in
closed form, in view of Eqs. ( 2.55 )–( 2.57 ) one is lead to formulate
a natural

###### Conjecture 2.42.

The average energy @xmath and its squared standard deviation @xmath
depend polynomially on @xmath .

In fact, since @xmath is a polynomial of degree @xmath in @xmath by
Proposition 2.32 , it follows that the degrees in @xmath of @xmath and
@xmath cannot exceed @xmath and @xmath , respectively. The latter
conjecture and this fact allow us to determine the quantities @xmath by
evaluating @xmath and @xmath for @xmath and @xmath using Theorem 2.30
(cf. Eqs. ( 2.6 ), ( 2.58 ) and ( 2.59 )). Hence one immediately proves
the following

###### Proposition 2.43.

If Conjecture 2.42 is true, then

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath               
              @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

These expressions, together with Eqs. ( 2.55 )–( 2.59 ), completely
determine @xmath and @xmath for all values of @xmath and @xmath . It has
been numerically verified that the resulting formulas yield the exact
values of @xmath and @xmath computed from the partition function ( 2.44
) for a wide range of values of @xmath and @xmath . This provides a very
solid confirmation of Conjecture 2.42 . Let us mention, in closing, that
formulas analogous to ( 2.55 )–( 2.59 ) expressing the mean and standard
deviations of the energy for the ferromagnetic chains @xmath can be
immediately deduced from the previous expressions and Eq. ( 2.48 ).

### 2.7 Models with constant magnetic fields

In this section we shall briefly show how a constant magnetic field can
be added into the picture that we have presented in the previous
sections. For the sake of simplicity, we restrict ourselves to the case
@xmath , @xmath (“one-dimensional electrons”), and define the magnetic
@xmath Hamiltonian as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Gloss 2.44.

The motion of a (three-dimensional) electron in the presence of static
magnetic and electric fields @xmath and @xmath in @xmath is governed by
the Pauli operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is the nonrelativistic limit (in the resolvent norm topology) of
the Dirac operator [ 193 ] . Here @xmath , @xmath is the electric charge
of the electron, @xmath is the spin operator of the particle and @xmath
are the Pauli matrices. If @xmath is constant, one can take @xmath , so
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since we are interested in a one-dimensional scenario, we drop the
second and third summands in order to preserve the symmetries @xmath and
@xmath . This is a priori a good approximation to the problem when the
angular momentum and the charge is small and the electric potential is
strongly binding.

Hence one is led to define the magnetic @xmath Hamiltonian for spin
@xmath particles as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As the exchange operator @xmath is written in terms of the @xmath
-invariant product as in Eq. ( 1.26 ), in this model of one-dimensional
particles there is only one privileged direction @xmath , namely, the
one which implements the Weyl reflections in spin space via

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore it is natural to choose @xmath parallel to this direction, so
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we now rescale @xmath to @xmath as in Eqs. ( 2.25 ) we arrive at
Eq. ( 2.61 ).

Since @xmath and @xmath commute, they possess a common basis of
eigenfunctions. Let @xmath and @xmath (cf. Eq. Lemma 2.16 ), and define

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is defined as in Eq. ( 2.40 ). Then one can easily prove
the following

###### Theorem 2.45.

Let @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the one-particle spin space, so that @xmath , and define
the basis of one-particle states

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Clearly @xmath . Now define the one- and two-particle operators

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

with @xmath . By Propositions 2.3 one can consider the action of the
differential operator ( 2.61 ) on @xmath . Theorem 2.18 states that
@xmath is diagonal in the basis ( 2.20 ). Expressing the nonnegative,
nonincreasing multiindex @xmath in terms of @xmath and @xmath as in
Eq. ( 2.40 ), one can use Conditions (i)–(iii) in Lemma 2.16 to readily
verify that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here we have set

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

so that for each @xmath one has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath commutes with the symmetrizer and @xmath , one immediately
derives from these equations that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

i.e., @xmath is diagonal in this basis. As the action of @xmath and
@xmath agree on @xmath and, on account of Proposition 2.12 , the action
of the latter operator on @xmath is triangular with diagonal elements
@xmath , the result follows. ∎

The spin chain associated with the magnetic Hamiltonian ( 2.61 ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is straightforward to show that Lemma 2.26 also applies, mutatis
mutandis, to the magnetic Hamiltonian ( 2.61 ). Hence we shall compute
its spectrum by means of the freezing trick. To this end, let us denote
by @xmath and @xmath the partition functions of ( 2.61 ) and ( 2.62 ),
and again we shall set the ground state energy @xmath equal to 0. We
shall freely use the notation of Section 2.5 .

###### Proposition 2.46.

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the set of partitions of @xmath by @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

From Proposition 2.29 one immediately obtains

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that the sum over @xmath depends on whether @xmath or not. If this is
the case,

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.64)
  -- -- -- --------

for any @xmath , so

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

If, on the contrary, @xmath , then @xmath and it is not difficult to see
that the formula ( 2.64 ) becomes

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where @xmath . Hence in this case

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and therefore

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Taking Eqs. ( 2.41 ) and ( 2.43 ) into account we obtain the desired
formula. ∎

The freezing trick formula ( 2.34 ) and the scalar partition function
(cf. Proposition 2.27 ) then yield the following

###### Theorem 2.47.

When @xmath , the partition function of the spin chain ( 2.62 ) is given
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

## Chapter 3 Spin models with NN interactions

### 3.1 Introduction

In this chapter we analyze in detail three QES @xmath -body spin models
which can be regarded as cyclic versions of (generalized) CS models, as
constructed by Finkel et al. [ 81 ] . As this kind of systems feature
only near-neighbors interactions, we shall generically call them NN
models . There are two reasons that make this kind of systems very
promising from a physical point of view. First, some of them are related
to the short-range Dyson model in random matrix theory [ 28 ] . Second,
the HS chains associated with these models occupy an interesting
intermediate position between the Heisenberg chain (short-range,
position-independent interactions) and the usual HS chains (long-range,
position-dependent interactions). We shall consider this latter aspect
in detail in the next chapter.

The study of these systems was initiated a few years ago, when Jain and
Khare presented a novel class of partially solvable models in which each
particle interacted only with its nearest and next-to-nearest neighbors
[ 124 ] . In a subsequent paper [ 10 ] , Auberson, Jain and Khare
discussed a generalization of these models to the @xmath root system and
to higher dimensions. The latter papers, however, left open some
important issues, such as the exact or quasi-exact solvability of these
models, the derivation of general explicit formulas for their
eigenfunctions, or even the existence of similar models for particles
with spin. The last question was first addressed by Deguchi and Ghosh [
48 ] , who introduced spin @xmath extensions of the scalar models of
Jain and Khare and used the supersymmetric approach to obtain some
eigenfunctions. All these authors solely managed to construct a few
exact solutions, with trivial spin dependence. Moreover, their approach
was by no means systematic.

Our construction of NN models is based on a nontrivial modification of
the Dunkl operator technique and yields fully explicit formulas for a
wide variety of spin eigenfunctions. The presentation of these results
is organized as follows. In Section 3.2 we define the Hamiltonians of
the spin @xmath -body models which are the subject of this chapter
(cf. Eqs. ( 3.1 )-( 3.2 )), and show that they can be expressed in terms
of suitable differential operators with near-neighbors exchange terms.
Section 3.3 is entirely devoted to the characterization of certain
finite-dimensional spaces of polynomial spin functions invariant under
the latter operators. In Section 3.4 we show that the eigenvalue
problems for the Hamiltonians of the models ( 3.2 ) restricted to their
invariant spaces reduce to finding the polynomial solutions of a
corresponding system of partial differential equations. By completely
solving the latter problem, we obtain several (infinite) families of
eigenfunctions of the models ( 3.2 ) in closed form.

The material presented in this chapter is taken from Refs. [ 66 , 67 ,
68 ] .

### 3.2 The NN models

In this chapter we shall study in detail the @xmath -body NN spin models
defined by the Schrödinger operators

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
                 
     @xmath      (3.2a)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.2b)
     @xmath      (3.2c)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we identify @xmath and @xmath . As we did in the study of CS
models, we shall assume @xmath and take into account the inverse-square
singularities to consider the above Hamiltonians as self-adjoint
operators on

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the “reduced” configuration spaces are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3c)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

###### Remark 3.1.

Unlike CS models, the Hamiltonians defined by ( 3.2 ) on @xmath and on
@xmath (or @xmath for the third potential) are a priori different. This
is due to the fact that the Weyl symmetry present in CS models has been
replaced in the NN case by the cyclic group

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and this latter group does not tessellate @xmath (or @xmath ).
Nonetheless, all the eigenfunctions presented in Theorems 3.17 , 3.19
and 3.23 can be clearly extended to eigenfunctions of @xmath on the
“unreduced” Hilbert space since all our developments are essentially
algebraic.

We shall also make use of the scalar reductions of these models, which
are the self-adjoint operators on @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath a symmetric spin vector, is obvious.

The models ( 3.1 ) share a common property that is ultimately
responsible for their partial solvability, namely that each Hamiltonian
@xmath is related to a scalar differential-difference operator involving
near-neighbors exchange operators. In fact, consider the operators

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Each Hamiltonian @xmath is related to a linear combination

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

of its corresponding operator @xmath and the first-order differential
operators

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

through the star mapping ( 1.22 ), a change of variables and a gauge
transformation. More precisely,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the constants @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , the gauge factor
@xmath , and the change of variables @xmath for each model are listed in
Table 3.1 . Here and in what follows we write the star mapping and the
symmetrizer as @xmath and @xmath , since for the sake of concreteness we
shall restrict our attention to the symmetric case.

From Lemma 2.5 and Eq. ( 3.9 ) it follows that if @xmath is a symmetric
(formal) eigenfunction of @xmath , then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a (formal) eigenfunction of @xmath with the same eigenvalue. In the
next section we shall construct a flag @xmath of finite-dimensional
subspaces of @xmath invariant under each @xmath . We will show that the
problem of diagonalizing @xmath in each subspace @xmath is equivalent to
the computation of the polynomial solutions of a system of linear
differential equations. We shall completely solve this problem, thereby
obtaining several infinite families of eigenfunctions of @xmath for each
@xmath . From the expressions for the change of variable and the gauge
factor in Table 3.1 , and the fact that the functions @xmath in Eq. (
3.10 ) are in all cases polynomials, it immediately follows that the
eigenfunctions thus obtained are in fact normalizable.

###### Gloss 3.2.

The above procedure parallels the construction of (generalized) CS
models of @xmath type [ 81 ] , which also applies to the @xmath case [
82 ] . Each operator @xmath is the NN analog of the sum of squares of
one of the three known families of @xmath Dunkl operators. E.g., the
operator @xmath is to be compared with the sum of the squares of the
Dunkl operators ( 1.11 ) associated with the @xmath system, i.e.,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, one can regard @xmath as the proper NN analog of the Calogero
model from the point of view of quasi-exact solvability. In contrast
with the usual CS models, however, the physical Hamiltonians @xmath
associated with the cyclic differential-difference operators @xmath
include a three-body term which turns out to be crucial in the analysis
of the solvability properties of these models.

Two natural questions arise from the above discussion. First, it should
be ascertained whether the full Dunkl operator approach can be extended
to the NN setting or one is actually obliged to do without it. Secondly,
one could wonder whether one would be able to use the above construction
to prove the quasi-exact solvability of the models ( 3.1 ) as in the
case of CS models. The answer to both questions is negative. Since
@xmath is not a Coxeter group, there are no known procedures to
construct a set of Dunkl operators associated with this problem.
Moreover, a couple of technical details prevents the usual approach to
CS systems to work successfully in the NN context. Let us elaborate on
this.

The proof of the quasi-exact solvability of the Hamiltonian obtained
from @xmath (or a linear combination similar to ( 3.9 )) through a gauge
transformation is based on two facts:

1.  @xmath leaves invariant the space of polynomials

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for any @xmath , where here and in what follows we denote by @xmath
    the degree in @xmath of the polynomial @xmath .

2.  @xmath commutes with the symmetrizer @xmath , which satisfies @xmath
    .

These conditions immediately imply that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath , @xmath . Whereas @xmath certainly satisfies the first
condition, it does not commute with @xmath , as it is not invariant
under arbitrary permutations of the particles. It is also clear that any
attempt of replacing @xmath by the symmetrizer under the cyclic group (
3.4 ) is doomed to fail, as this symmetry is not enough to exchange
@xmath by @xmath , and thus @xmath by @xmath .

Hence, the extension of the CS methods to the context of NN models is
not at all trivial, and in fact @xmath is not a priori guaranteed to
admit finite-dimensional invariant subspaces of @xmath . We shall next
show that this is the case nonetheless.

### 3.3 The invariant spaces

In this section we shall prove that each operator @xmath leaves
invariant a flag @xmath , where @xmath is a finite-dimensional subspace
of @xmath . This result will then be used to construct a corresponding
invariant flag @xmath for the operator @xmath , where @xmath for all
@xmath .

Let us first introduce the following two sets of elementary symmetric
polynomials:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is well known [ 145 ] that any symmetric polynomial in @xmath can be
expressed as a polynomial in either @xmath or @xmath .

We shall denote by @xmath the terms of @xmath linear in derivatives,
that is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the next lemma we show that each vector field @xmath leaves invariant
a corresponding flag @xmath of finite-dimensional subspaces of the space
@xmath of symmetric polynomials in @xmath . If @xmath is a function of
the symmetric variables @xmath , we shall use from now on the convenient
notation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 3.3.

For each @xmath , the operator @xmath leaves invariant the linear space
@xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let us first consider the vector field @xmath . Since

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

if @xmath we have

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                                                              @xmath                        (3.11a)
  The proof for the remaining two cases follows from the analogous formulas                                 
                                                                                                            
                                                                              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.11b)
                                                                              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.11c)
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

∎

###### Remark 3.4.

It should be noted that these flags cannot be trivially enlarged, since,
e.g.,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath                     
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

are not symmetric polynomials.

We note that the restriction of @xmath to @xmath obviously satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The second-order terms of the operator ( 3.12 ), however, do not
preserve the corresponding space @xmath , unless one imposes the
additional restrictions specified in the following proposition:

###### Proposition 3.5.

For each @xmath , the operator @xmath leaves invariant the linear space
@xmath , where

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let us begin with the operator @xmath . If @xmath , an elementary
computation shows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

and therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the previous formula and Eq. ( 3.11a ) it follows that @xmath
whenever @xmath . Similarly, if @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

which together with Eq. ( 3.11b ) implies that @xmath for all @xmath .
Finally, if @xmath then

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.17)
  -- -- -- --------

and hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The statement follows again from the previous equation and Eq. ( 3.11c
). ∎

The last proposition implies that each operator @xmath preserves
“trivial” symmetric spaces @xmath spanned by factorized states. The main
theorem of this section shows that in fact the latter operator leaves
invariant a flag of nontrivial finite-dimensional subspaces of @xmath .
Before stating this theorem we need to make a few preliminary
definitions. Given a spin state @xmath , we set

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.19)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath is the symmetric group on @xmath elements and we identify
an abstract permutation @xmath with its realization as a permutation of
the particles’ spins. From Eq. ( 3.19 ) we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last identity holds if @xmath . We also define the subspace

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Theorem 3.6.

Let

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . Then @xmath is invariant under @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Proposition 3.5 it suffices to show that @xmath maps @xmath into
@xmath . We shall first deal with the operator @xmath . Consider the
states of the form @xmath , with @xmath . Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Calling

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

from Eqs. ( 3.13 ) and ( 3.20 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly, if @xmath , the identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and therefore

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

belongs to @xmath on account of Eqs. ( 3.11a ) and ( 3.14 ). On the
other hand, from the equality

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Setting

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

and using again Eqs. ( 3.13 ) and ( 3.20 ) we then have

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath , the RHS of Eq. ( 3.26 ) belongs to @xmath if and only if
@xmath . The last type of states generating the module @xmath are of the
form @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the equality

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using again Eqs. ( 3.13 ) and ( 3.20 ) we obtain

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.29)
  -- -- -- --------

Since @xmath , the RHS of the latter equation clearly belongs to @xmath
. This shows that @xmath .

Consider next the action of the operator @xmath on a state of the form
@xmath , with @xmath . From the identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we easily obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and therefore, by Eqs. ( 3.11b ), ( 3.15 ) and ( 3.16 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus @xmath , as claimed.

Consider, finally, the operator @xmath . If @xmath , the identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence, by Eq. ( 3.17 ),

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

clearly belongs to @xmath on account of Eqs. ( 3.11c ) and ( 3.18 ). The
last type of spin states we need to study are of the form @xmath , where
@xmath with @xmath . Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and thus, by Eqs. ( 3.17 ) and ( 3.20 ),

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.32)
  -- -- -- --------

From Eqs. ( 3.11c ) and ( 3.18 ), it follows that the RHS of the
previous equation belongs to @xmath . Hence @xmath , which concludes the
proof. ∎

###### Remark 3.7.

We have chosen to allow a certain overlap between the different types of
states spanning the spaces @xmath . For instance, if @xmath is symmetric
a state @xmath is also of the form @xmath . Less trivially, in the case
of spin @xmath the identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are respectively defined in Eqs. ( 3.22 ) and (
3.27 ), implies that the states of the form @xmath in the space @xmath
can be expressed in terms of the other generators of this space.

###### Corollary 3.8.

For each @xmath , the gauge Hamiltonian @xmath leaves invariant the
space @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We shall begin by showing that each space @xmath is invariant under the
operator @xmath . Note first that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the states @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are defined in Eqs. ( 3.22
), ( 3.25 ) and ( 3.27 ), respectively. Using Eqs. ( 3.13 ), ( 3.15 )
and ( 3.17 ) one can immediately establish the identities

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.34a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.34b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.34c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

From Eqs. ( 3.33 )-( 3.34 ) and the fact that @xmath is a derivation it
follows that @xmath leaves invariant the spaces @xmath for all @xmath .
This implies that @xmath preserves @xmath for @xmath , since the
coefficient @xmath vanishes in these cases (cf. Table 3.1 ). On the
other hand, for @xmath the coefficient @xmath is nonzero, and thus we
have to consider the action of the operator @xmath on the space @xmath .
We now have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

and, from Eq. ( 3.15 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence @xmath leaves invariant the subspace @xmath of @xmath defined by
the restrictions @xmath . From the obvious identity @xmath and Eq. (
3.30 ), together with ( 3.11b ), ( 3.12 ) and ( 3.16 ), it follows that
the operator @xmath also preserves @xmath . Likewise, Eqs. ( 3.33 )
and ( 3.34b ) imply that @xmath is invariant under @xmath , and hence
under the gauge Hamiltonian @xmath . ∎

Theorem 3.6 characterizes the invariant space @xmath in terms of the
subspace @xmath in Eq. ( 3.21 ) that we shall now study in detail. In
fact, from the definition of the invariant space @xmath it follows that
we can consider without loss of generality the quotient space @xmath ,
where @xmath if @xmath . For instance, from Eq. ( 3.19 ) it immediately
follows that if @xmath and @xmath is a permutation such that @xmath for
@xmath , then @xmath belongs to @xmath and is equivalent to @xmath .

In the rest of this section, we shall denote @xmath simply as @xmath for
the sake of conciseness. From Eq. ( 3.19 ) it easily follows that any
symmetric state belongs to @xmath , since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand, if @xmath the corresponding state @xmath is a trivial
(factorized) state. We shall next show that the reciprocal of this
statement is also true, up to equivalence.

###### Lemma 3.9.

For every @xmath , @xmath is a factorized state if and only if @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a factorized state. Since the LHS of the previous formula is
symmetric, @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath . By absorbing the constant
@xmath into @xmath we can take @xmath without loss of generality, and
therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From Eq. ( 3.20 ) with @xmath it then follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Setting @xmath and using the previous identity we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath , as claimed. ∎

By the previous lemma, it suffices to characterize the nonsymmetric
states in @xmath . To this end, let us introduce the linear operator
@xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Given an element @xmath of the canonical basis of @xmath , we shall also
denote by @xmath the set of distinct components of @xmath , and by
@xmath the number of times that @xmath appears among the components of
@xmath . For instance, if @xmath , then we can take @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , so that @xmath , @xmath . Consider the spin states @xmath ,
@xmath , given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.39a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.39b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Here we have adopted the following convention: an ellipsis inside a ket
stands for an arbitrary ordering of the components in @xmath not
indicated explicitly. Note that the states ( 3.39 ) are defined only up
to equivalence, and that @xmath for any permutation @xmath .

###### Proposition 3.10.

Given a basic spin state @xmath , the associated spin states @xmath are
all in @xmath .

###### Proof.

Consider first a state @xmath of the type ( 3.39a ). Using the
definition of the operator @xmath in Eq. ( 3.38 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the permutations @xmath act only on the @xmath spin components
specified by an ellipsis. On the other hand, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Comparing Eqs. ( 3.40 ) and ( 3.41 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

This shows that any state of the form ( 3.39a ) belongs to @xmath .
Suppose next that @xmath , so that @xmath is given by Eq. ( 3.39b ).
Since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

it follows that in this case @xmath is also in @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 3.11.

Just as symmetric spin states, cf. Eq. ( 3.37 ), the states @xmath
satisfy the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Indeed, if @xmath , from Eqs. ( 3.39a ) and ( 3.42 ) we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

On the other hand, if @xmath Eqs. ( 3.39b ) and ( 3.43 ) imply that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Example 3.12.

We shall now present all the states of the form ( 3.39 ) for spin @xmath
. In this case, up to a permutation the basic state @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath is either @xmath or @xmath , then @xmath and thus @xmath is of
the type ( 3.39a ) and proportional to @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath
and we can take (dropping inessential factors)

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Although the states @xmath and @xmath are linearly independent, the
combination @xmath is equivalent to a symmetric state. In the case
@xmath the states @xmath are obtained from the previous ones by flipping
the spins. Finally, if @xmath then @xmath and the states @xmath are now
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

According to the previous example, for spin @xmath there are exactly
@xmath independent states of the form ( 3.39 ) associated with each
basic state @xmath , up to symmetric states. We shall see next that this
fact actually holds for arbitrary spin:

###### Proposition 3.13.

Let @xmath be a basic spin state. If @xmath is the number of distinct
components of @xmath , there are exactly @xmath independent states of
the form ( 3.39 ) modulo symmetric states.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the number of distinct components @xmath of @xmath such
that @xmath . A straightforward computation shows that the combination

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

is equivalent to a symmetric state. Suppose first that @xmath . It is
immediate to check that in this case the set @xmath is linearly
independent. If a linear combination @xmath is equivalent to a symmetric
state @xmath , then @xmath must be proportional to @xmath , so that we
can write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath , and the linear independence of the states @xmath implies
that @xmath for all @xmath . On the other hand, if @xmath the set @xmath
is linearly dependent on account of Eq. ( 3.47 ), but removing one of
the two states with @xmath clearly yields a linearly independent set. It
is also obvious from the coefficients of the states @xmath that no
linear combination @xmath can be equivalent to a nonzero symmetric
state. ∎

The next natural question to be addressed is whether the states of the
form ( 3.39 ) span the space @xmath up to symmetric states:

###### Proposition 3.14.

The space @xmath is spanned by states of the form ( 3.39 ).

###### Proof.

For conciseness, we present the proof of this result only for the case
@xmath . Let @xmath denote the subspace of @xmath spanned by basic spin
states with @xmath “ @xmath ” spins, and set @xmath . Since the
operators @xmath and @xmath involved in the definition ( 3.21 ) of
@xmath clearly preserve @xmath , it suffices to show that the states
@xmath with @xmath given by ( 3.45 ) span the space @xmath up to
symmetric states. Note first that the statement is trivial for @xmath ,
since in this case the states of the form ( 3.39 ) obviously generate
the whole space @xmath . Suppose, therefore, that @xmath , so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since the state ( 3.46 ) and the symmetric state (up to equivalence)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

both belong to @xmath , we need only show that (for instance) @xmath is
not in @xmath , i.e., that @xmath is not symmetric. But this is
certainly the case, since a state of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

appears in @xmath with coefficient @xmath depending on @xmath . ∎

### 3.4 The algebraic eigenfunctions

In the previous section we have provided a detailed description of the
spaces @xmath invariant under the corresponding gauge Hamiltonian @xmath
. In this section we shall explicitly compute all the eigenfunctions of
the restrictions of the operators @xmath to their invariant spaces
@xmath . This yields several infinite ¹ ¹ 1 For the model ( 3.2c ) we
shall see below that the number of eigenfunctions with a given total
momentum is finite. families of eigenfunctions for each of the models (
3.2 ), which is the main result of this paper. We shall use the term
algebraic to refer to these eigenfunctions and their corresponding
energies. It is important to observe that the eigenfunctions of the
gauge Hamiltonian @xmath that can be constructed in this way are
necessarily invariant under the whole symmetric group, in spite of the
fact that @xmath is symmetric only under cyclic permutations. In fact,
the explicit solutions of all known CS models with near-neighbors
interactions (both in the scalar and spin cases) can be factorized as
the product of a simple gauge factor analogous to @xmath times a
completely symmetric function [ 124 , 10 , 48 , 75 ] . This, however,
does not rule out the existence of other eigenfunctions of the gauge
Hamiltonian @xmath invariant only under the subgroup of cyclic
permutations, which is indeed an interesting open problem.

#### Case a

We shall begin with the model ( 3.2a ), which is probably the most
interesting one due to the rich structure of its associated invariant
flag. In order to find the algebraic energies of the model, note first
that one can clearly construct a basis @xmath of @xmath whose elements
are homogeneous polynomials in @xmath with coefficients in @xmath . If
@xmath has degree @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath has degree at most
@xmath . If @xmath is ordered according to the degree, the operator
@xmath is represented in this basis by a triangular matrix with diagonal
elements @xmath , where @xmath is the degree. Thus the algebraic
eigenfunctions are the numbers

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We shall next show that the algebraic eigenfunctions of @xmath can be
expressed in closed form in terms of generalized Laguerre and Jacobi
polynomials. The computation is basically a two-step procedure. In the
first place, one encodes the eigenvalue problem in the invariant space
@xmath as a system of linear partial differential equations. The second
step then consists in finding the polynomial solutions of this system.

Regarding the first step, we shall need the following preliminary lemma:

###### Lemma 3.15.

The operator @xmath preserves the following subspaces of @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.48)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.49)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are as in the
definition of @xmath in Theorem 3.6 , and @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are
respectively given by ( 3.22 ), ( 3.25 ) and ( 3.27 ).

###### Proof.

The identity @xmath and Eqs. ( 3.23 ), ( 3.24 ) and ( 3.33 ) clearly
imply that the subspace @xmath is invariant under @xmath . Consider next
the action of @xmath on a function of the form @xmath . Since @xmath is
symmetric under @xmath , we can replace @xmath by @xmath in Eq. ( 3.26
). Secondly, any state @xmath satisfies the identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Indeed, we already know that the previous identity holds for symmetric
states (cf. Eq. ( 3.37 )) and for states of the form ( 3.39 )
(cf. Eqs. ( 3.38 ) and ( 3.44 )). On the other hand, by Proposition 3.14
every state in @xmath is a linear combination of a symmetric state,
states of the form ( 3.39 ), and a state @xmath such that @xmath . But
for the latter “null” state @xmath for all @xmath , and hence @xmath .
Therefore, Eq. ( 3.26 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the previous equation and Eq. ( 3.33 ) it follows that @xmath .
Finally, if @xmath , Eq. ( 3.29 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

which, together with Eq. ( 3.33 ), implies that @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 3.16.

The requirement that @xmath be symmetric (respectively antisymmetric)
under @xmath in the definition of the space @xmath (respectively @xmath
) is no real restriction, since the antisymmetric (respectively
symmetric) part of @xmath does not contribute to the state @xmath
(respectively @xmath ).

By the previous lemma, we can consider without loss of generality
eigenfunctions of @xmath of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the spin functions @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are all built from
the same spin state @xmath . Note that we can assume that @xmath , and
that the spin state @xmath is symmetric under @xmath and belongs to
@xmath if @xmath , whereas it is antisymmetric under @xmath if @xmath .

Using Eqs. ( 3.23 ), ( 3.24 ), ( 3.33 ), ( 3.52 ) and ( 3.53 ), it is
straightforward to show that the eigenvalue equation @xmath is
equivalent to the system

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (3.55a)
     @xmath      (3.55b)
     @xmath      (3.55c)
     @xmath      (3.55d)
     @xmath      (3.55e)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since @xmath and @xmath are linear in @xmath , we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are polynomials in @xmath and
@xmath . Taking into account that the action of @xmath on scalar
symmetric functions is given by the RHS of Eq. ( 3.12 ) with @xmath ,
and using Eqs. ( 3.11a ), ( 3.14 ) and ( 3.34a ), we finally obtain the
following linear system of PDEs:

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (3.57a)
     @xmath      (3.57b)
     @xmath      (3.57c)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.57d)
     @xmath      (3.57e)
     @xmath      (3.57f)
     @xmath      (3.57g)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

As a consequence of the general discussion of the previous Section, the
latter system is guaranteed to possess polynomials solutions. In fact,
these polynomial solutions can be expressed in closed form in terms of
generalized Laguerre polynomials @xmath and Jacobi polynomials @xmath .

###### Theorem 3.17.

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the center of mass coordinate. The Hamiltonian @xmath
possesses the following families of spin eigenfunctions with eigenvalue
@xmath , with @xmath and @xmath as indicated in each case:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
     @xmath            
                       
     @xmath            
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Here

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the spin state @xmath is symmetric under @xmath and belongs to
@xmath for the eigenfunction @xmath , and is antisymmetric under @xmath
for the eigenfunction @xmath . The functions @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
are polynomials given explicitly by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

for even @xmath , and

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

for odd @xmath . For every @xmath , the above eigenfunctions with @xmath
span the whole @xmath -invariant space @xmath .

###### Proof.

Recall, to begin with, that the algebraic eigenfunctions of @xmath are
of the form @xmath , with @xmath given in Table 3.1 and @xmath an
eigenfunction of @xmath of the form ( 3.54 )-( 3.56 ). In order to
determine @xmath , we must find the most general polynomial solution of
the inhomogeneous linear system ( 3.57 ). From the structure of this
system it follows that there are seven types of independent solutions,
characterized by the vanishing of certain subsets of the unknown
functions @xmath . These types are listed in Table 3.2 , where in the
last column we have indicated the eigenfunction of @xmath obtained from
each case.

We shall present here in detail the solution of the system ( 3.57 ) for
the case @xmath and @xmath , which yields the eigenfunctions of the form
@xmath (the procedure for the other cases is essentially the same). In
this case the system ( 3.57 ) reduces to

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.59)
  -- -- -- --------

Let us begin with the homogeneous equation for @xmath . We shall look
for polynomial solutions of this equation of the form @xmath , where
@xmath is a homogeneous polynomial of degree @xmath in @xmath and @xmath
is a polynomial of degree @xmath in @xmath , so that @xmath by Eq. (
3.54 ). From Eq. ( 3.58 ) and the homogeneity of @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Hence the equation for @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . Since @xmath is a homogeneous polynomial of degree @xmath
in @xmath , both sides of the latter equation must vanish separately. We
are thus led to the following decoupled equations for @xmath and @xmath
:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
     @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

In terms of the variable @xmath , Eq. ( 3.61 ) can be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the generalized Laguerre operator. Hence @xmath is proportional to
the generalized Laguerre polynomial @xmath . On the other hand, we can
write @xmath where @xmath is a polynomial in the homogeneous variable
@xmath . With this substitution, Eq. ( 3.60 ) becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the Jacobi operator @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath is proportional to the Jacobi polynomial @xmath , so that we
can take

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

We must next find a particular solution of the inhomogeneous equation
for @xmath in ( 3.59 ), since the general solution of the corresponding
homogeneous equation yields an eigenfunction of the simpler type @xmath
. Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(where the dot denotes derivative with respect to @xmath ), we make the
ansatz @xmath , where @xmath is a homogeneous polynomial of degree
@xmath in @xmath and @xmath is a polynomial of degree @xmath in @xmath .
Substituting this ansatz into the second equation in ( 3.59 ) and
proceeding as before we immediately obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we set @xmath the second term of the LHS vanishes, and canceling the
common factor @xmath we are left with the following equation for @xmath
:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The form of the RHS of this equation suggests the ansatz @xmath , with
@xmath a polynomial in the variable @xmath . The previous equation then
yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the definition of the Jacobi operator we easily obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which implies that @xmath is a particular solution of Eq. ( 3.64 ).
Hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a particular solution of the inhomogeneous equation in ( 3.59 ). We
have thus shown that @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath respectively given
by Eqs. ( 3.63 ) and ( 3.65 ), is an eigenfunction of @xmath with
eigenvalue @xmath . Multiplying @xmath by the gauge factor @xmath we
obtain the eigenfunction @xmath of @xmath in the statement.

It remains to show that the states @xmath ( @xmath ), @xmath and @xmath
with @xmath generate the spaces ( 3.48 )–( 3.50 ). Consider first the
“monomials” of the form @xmath , which belong to @xmath if @xmath . We
can order such monomials as follows: we say that @xmath if @xmath , or
@xmath and @xmath . From the expansion [ 96 , Eq. 8.962.1]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Pochhammer symbol

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it follows that @xmath provided that @xmath and @xmath . In particular,
@xmath since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence we can write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Likewise, a similar argument shows that for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proceeding in the same way with the remaining spin eigenfunctions we can
finally show that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as claimed. ∎

#### Case b

Since @xmath in this case, reasoning as before we conclude that the
algebraic energies are the numbers

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the degree in @xmath of the corresponding eigenfunctions
of @xmath . We shall see below that these eigenfunctions can be written
in terms of generalized Laguerre polynomials. To this end, we begin by
identifying certain subspaces of @xmath invariant under @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.18.

For any given spin state @xmath , the operator @xmath preserves the
subspace

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are polynomials of degrees at most @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath , respectively, and @xmath is given by ( 3.22 ).

###### Proof.

The statement follows from the obvious identity @xmath and Eqs. ( 3.11b
), ( 3.12 ), ( 3.16 ), ( 3.30 ), ( 3.33 ) and ( 3.35 ). ∎

By the previous lemma we can assume that the eigenfunctions of @xmath in
@xmath are of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

From Eqs. ( 3.30 ), ( 3.33 ) and ( 3.35 ) it easily follows that the
eigenvalue equation @xmath can be cast into the system

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (3.68a)
     @xmath      (3.68b)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since @xmath is linear in @xmath (cf. Eq. ( 3.66 )), we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are polynomials in @xmath . Using Eqs. ( 3.11b
), ( 3.12 ), ( 3.16 ), ( 3.34b ) and ( 3.36 ) we can easily rewrite the
system ( 3.68 ) as follows:

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (3.70a)
     @xmath      (3.70b)
     @xmath      (3.70c)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last step is to construct the polynomials solutions of the system (
3.70 ), which can be expressed in terms of generalized Laguerre
polynomials, according to the following theorem.

###### Theorem 3.19.

The Hamiltonian @xmath possesses the following families of spin
eigenfunctions with eigenvalue @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath . For each
@xmath and @xmath , the above eigenfunctions with @xmath span the whole
@xmath -invariant space @xmath .

###### Proof.

As in the previous case, the algebraic eigenfunctions of @xmath are of
the form @xmath , where @xmath is given in Table 3.1 and @xmath is an
eigenfunction of @xmath of the form ( 3.67 )-( 3.69 ). The functions
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are polynomials in @xmath determined by the
system ( 3.70 ), which in terms of the variable @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the generalized Laguerre operator (cf. Eq. ( 3.62 )).
The general polynomial solutions of the first two equations in ( 3.72 )
are respectively given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand, from the elementary identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it follows that the general polynomial solution of the third equation
in ( 3.72 ) is given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.74)
  -- -- -- --------

Equations ( 3.73 ) and ( 3.74 ) immediately yield the formulas of the
eigenfunctions in this case. The last assertion in the statement of the
theorem follows from the fact that the functions @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath in Eqs. ( 3.73 ) and ( 3.74 ) are the most general polynomial
solution of the system ( 3.72 ). ∎

###### Remark 3.20.

It should be noted that for @xmath the potentials ( 3.2a ) and ( 3.2b )
scale as @xmath under dilations of the coordinates (as is the case for
the original Calogero model). The standard argument used in the solution
of the Calogero model shows that there is a basis of eigenfunctions of
these models of the form @xmath , where @xmath is a homogeneous
spin-valued function. The eigenfunctions presented in Theorems 3.17 and
3.19 are indeed of this form.

#### Case c

In this case the number of independent algebraic eigenfunctions is
essentially finite. We shall take, for definiteness, the plus sign in
the change of variable listed in Table 3.1 (it will be apparent from the
discussion that follows that the minus sign does not yield additional
solutions).

Let us first note that the potential for this model is translationally
invariant, so that the total momentum operator @xmath commutes with the
Hamiltonian @xmath . Hence the eigenfunctions of @xmath can be assumed
to have well-defined total momentum. Equivalently, since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

the eigenfunctions of @xmath can be assumed to be homogeneous in @xmath
. Let @xmath be a homogeneous eigenfunction of @xmath of degree @xmath
and eigenvalue @xmath , so that @xmath is an eigenfunction of @xmath
with total momentum @xmath (cf. Eq. ( 3.75 )) and energy @xmath . By
Eq. ( 3.75 ), the function @xmath clearly has total momentum @xmath . In
fact, the following lemma implies that @xmath is also an eigenfunction
of @xmath with a suitably boosted energy:

###### Lemma 3.21.

Let @xmath be a homogeneous eigenfunction of @xmath of degree @xmath and
eigenvalue @xmath . Then @xmath is an eigenfunction of @xmath with
eigenvalue @xmath .

###### Proof.

From the identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , we immediately obtain the following expression for the
gauge Hamiltonian @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath for any real @xmath , it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Taking into account that @xmath , we conclude that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as claimed. ∎

By the previous discussion, in what follows any two eigenfunctions of
@xmath that differ by a power of @xmath shall be considered equivalent.
From Theorem 3.6 and Corollary 3.8 it easily follows that in this case
the number of independent algebraic eigenfunctions is finite, up to
equivalence. More precisely:

###### Lemma 3.22.

Up to equivalence, the algebraic eigenfunctions of @xmath can be assumed
to belong to a space of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some spin state @xmath , where @xmath is given by ( 3.22 ).

###### Proof.

Given a spin state @xmath , the obvious identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

and Eqs. ( 3.7 ), ( 3.31 ), ( 3.32 ), and ( 3.33 ) imply that the gauge
Hamiltonian @xmath preserves the space

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.79)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are as in the definition of @xmath in
Theorem 3.6 . Let @xmath be an eigenfunction of @xmath , which as
explained above can be taken as a homogeneous function of @xmath . From
the conditions satisfied by the functions @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
in ( 3.79 ) and the homogeneity of @xmath , it readily follows that
@xmath for some @xmath , as claimed. ∎

###### Theorem 3.23.

The Hamiltonian @xmath possesses the following spin eigenfunctions with
zero momentum

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the center of mass coordinate. Their energies are
respectively given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Any algebraic eigenfunction with well-defined total momentum is
equivalent to a linear combination of the above eigenfunctions.

###### Proof.

By Lemma 3.22 , in order to compute the algebraic eigenfunctions of
@xmath it suffices to diagonalize @xmath in the spaces @xmath given by (
3.77 ). Equations ( 3.31 ), ( 3.32 ), ( 3.33 ) and ( 3.78 ), and the
fact that @xmath preserves the degree of homogeneity, imply that the
following subspaces of @xmath are invariant under @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (3.80a)
     @xmath      (3.80b)
     @xmath      (3.80c)
  -- -------- -- ---------

From Eqs. ( 3.80 ) it follows that the alternative change of variables
@xmath does not yield additional eigenfunctions of @xmath . Indeed, the
latter change corresponds to the mapping @xmath , which up to
equivalence leaves the subspace ( 3.80a ) invariant and exchanges each
subspace in ( 3.80b ) with the corresponding one in ( 3.80c ). For this
reason, we can safely ignore the subspaces ( 3.80c ) in the computation
that follows, provided that we add to the eigenfunctions of @xmath
obtained from the subspaces ( 3.80b ) their images under the mapping
@xmath .

For the subspaces ( 3.80a )-( 3.80b ), using Eqs. ( 3.7 ), ( 3.12 ), (
3.18 ), ( 3.31 ), ( 3.33 ), and ( 3.34c ) we easily obtain the following
eigenfunctions of @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.81a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.81b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.81c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

We have omitted the two additional eigenfunctions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from the above list, since they are respectively obtained from ( 3.81b )
and ( 3.81c ) when the spin state @xmath is symmetric. The
eigenfunctions ( 3.81 ) are equivalent to the following “zero momentum”
eigenfunctions:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.82a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.82b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.82c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the energies have been computed from those in Eqs. ( 3.81 ) using
Lemma 3.21 . The eigenfunctions of @xmath listed in the statement are
readily obtained from these spin functions together with the transforms
of ( 3.82b ) and ( 3.82c ) under the mapping @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 3.24.

If the spin state @xmath is symmetric, then @xmath for all @xmath , and
one easily obtains from Theorem 3.23 the following eigenfunctions of the
scalar Hamiltonian @xmath :

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

## Chapter 4 NN spin chains of HS type

### 4.1 Introduction

As we saw in Chapter 2 , one can successfully solve spin chains of HS
type by means of Polychronakos’s freezing trick, which essentially
consists in computing the large coupling constant limit of the quotient
of the partition functions of a spin CS model and its scalar
counterpart.

In the present chapter we shall extend this technique to the case of QES
models of CS type with spin. This extension will prove crucial in the
analysis of the spectrum of the novel @xmath -site chain

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

with sites @xmath defined by the algebraic system

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here and in what follows, we identify @xmath , @xmath (and similarly for
@xmath and @xmath ), and keep denoting by @xmath the domain ( 3.3a ) and
by @xmath the particles’ spin. It is not difficult to check that the
spin chain ( 4.1 ), which we shall simply call the NN chain , is related
to the NN Hamiltonian @xmath in Eq. ( 3.2a ) along the lines of the
freezing trick.

We shall see in this chapter that this spin chain is in some sense
intermediate between the Heisenberg chain (short-range,
position-independent interactions) and the PF chain (long-range,
position-dependent interactions), from which one can derive the
Hamiltonian ( 4.1 ) by retaining only nearest-neighbors interactions.
Moreover, @xmath turns out to be QES in the sense that a nontrivial
proper subset of the spectrum can be explicitly computed for any value
of @xmath and @xmath . While QES models have long played a relevant role
in the theory of CS systems [ 179 , 180 ] , this is to our best
knowledge the first QES phenomenon spotted in the (as has been made
clear in this dissertation) closely related field of HS spin chains.

The results in this chapter can be easily modified to deal with the NN
chains

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where the chain sites are respectively defined by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

These spin chains are obtained from the NN models ( 3.2b ) and ( 3.2c )
respectively by a freezing trick argument. Note, however, that the sites
of the second chain turn out to be equally spaced, so @xmath is
essentially the Heisenberg chain.

This chapter is organized as follows. In Section 4.2 we analyze the
distribution of the chain sites using both exact results and numerical
calculations. In Section 4.3 we show the QES nature of the chain by
providing several families of eigenvectors, valid for any choice of
@xmath and @xmath . The main technical tool is a nontrivial refinement
of the freezing trick developed in Chapter 2 which also applies to QES
systems. Finally, we discuss some qualitative properties of the spectrum
and formulate an intriguing conjecture claiming that an eigenvalue of
the chain is algebraic if and only if it is an integer.

The material presented in this chapter is taken from Ref. [ 63 ] .

### 4.2 The chain sites

We shall begin with a detailed analysis of the distribution of the chain
sites on the line in which we shall combine exact results and numerical
computations to extract as much information as possible. An easy
observation, which stems from the spin chain’s connection with the
dynamical model ( 3.2a ) that will be developed in the next section, is
that the sites are given by the coordinates of a critical point of the
function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is the scaled logarithm of the ground state function of the NN
Hamiltonian ( 3.2a ).

The first questions to ascertain refer to the existence and uniqueness
of the critical points of @xmath . In this direction we have the
following result, which is roughly analogous to Proposition ( 2.20 ):

###### Proposition 4.1.

The function @xmath has a unique critical point @xmath in @xmath , which
is a hyperbolic maximum. Moreover, @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Proof.

The existence of a maximum of @xmath in @xmath is clear, since it is
continuous in @xmath and tends to @xmath both on its boundary and as
@xmath . Uniqueness and hyperbolicity follow from the fact that the
Hessian of @xmath is negative definite in @xmath . Indeed, by
Gerschgorin’s theorem [ 96 , 15.814] , the eigenvalues of the Hessian of
@xmath at @xmath lie in the union of the intervals

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and thus all the eigenvalues of the Hessian of @xmath are strictly
negative.

Furthermore, the mapping

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a symmetry of @xmath and maps the domain @xmath into itself. Since
@xmath is the unique critical point of @xmath in @xmath , it must be a
fixed point of the above transformation, and thus Eqs. ( 4.4 ) follow. ∎

From the previous proposition (and also directly from Eq. ( 4.2 )), it
immediately follows that the center of mass of the spins vanishes, i.e.,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Proposition 4.2.

@xmath .

###### Proof.

Let us write @xmath in terms of the variables @xmath and @xmath , i.e.,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Obviously

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as we wanted to show. ∎

It is convenient to think of the spins as if located on a circle. In
this way, the chain ( 4.1 ) truly presents only near-neighbors
interactions in spite of the fact that the first spin interacts with the
last one. Indeed, if the site coordinate @xmath is understood as an arc
length in a circle of radius

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

as shown in Fig. 4.1 , the spins at the sites @xmath and @xmath become
nearest-neighbors and, moreover, the strength of the interaction is
inversely proportional to the squared distance between the spins,
measured along the arc.

We saw in Section 1.8 that the site coordinates of the PF chain define
the @xmath -th Hermite polynomial. It is natural to wonder whether a
similar result holds for the family of monic polynomials

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

defined by @xmath , which can be regarded as the closest NN analog of
the PF chain. In the following proposition we answer this question
negatively:

###### Proposition 4.3.

The polynomials ( 4.7 ) do not form an orthogonal family.

###### Proof.

In order to show that the family @xmath is not orthogonal, it suffices
to prove that the polynomials ( 4.7 ) do not satisfy a three-term
recursion relation of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath constant. In fact, solving the system ( 4.2 ) for @xmath one
immediately obtains

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus the previous recursion relation already fails for @xmath . ∎

The sites are certainly not equally spaced; in fact, our numerical
computations lead to the following

###### Claim 4.4.

For @xmath , the site distribution follows the Gaussian law with zero
mean and unit variance.

Note that, should the site distribution follow a Gaussian law, its mean
would be zero on account of Corollary 4.5 . We have solved numerically
Eq. ( 4.2 ) for the positions of the chain sites for up to @xmath spins,
and the results completely support the validity of the above conjecture.
More precisely, we claim that the cumulative density of sites

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is Heaviside’s step function, is asymptotically given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The agreement between the functions @xmath and @xmath is remarkably good
for @xmath (see Fig. 4.2 for the case @xmath ) and increases steadily
with @xmath . For example, the mean square error of the fit for @xmath ,
@xmath and 200 spins is respectively @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

###### Heuristic proof of Claim 4.4.

The fact that for large @xmath the cumulative density of sites is well
approximated by the Gaussian law ( 4.9 ) can be justified by the
following semi-rigorous argument. Let @xmath be a smooth function such
that @xmath for @xmath , and define the rescaled function @xmath . By
Eq. ( 4.2 ), the latter function must satisfy the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath and @xmath . Let us now assume that Eq. ( 4.10 ) holds for
all @xmath and all @xmath . Writing

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and using the expansion

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the leading term in Eq. ( 4.10 ) yields the differential equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The general solution of this equation is implicitly given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.11)
  -- -- -- --------

Hence, up to terms of order @xmath , the cumulative distribution
function of the chain sites (normalized to unity) is approximated by the
continuous function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The normalization conditions @xmath and @xmath imply that @xmath , and
thus the empiric law ( 4.9 ) is recovered.

From Eq. ( 4.11 ) (with @xmath ) it follows that the site @xmath can be
determined up to terms of order @xmath by the formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that, were the sites @xmath exactly given by the previous formula,
they would satisfy the identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is clearly inconsistent with the exact relation ( 4.4 ). However,
the slightly modified formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

differs from ( 4.12 ) by a term of order @xmath and is fully consistent
with the relation ( 4.4 ). Although both ( 4.12 ) and ( 4.13 ) provide
an excellent approximation to the chain sites for large @xmath , the
latter equation is always more accurate than the former, and can be used
to estimate @xmath with remarkable precision even for relatively low
values of @xmath , cf. Fig. 4.3 .

∎

In the rest of this section we shall analyze several relevant features
of the site distribution using the above heuristic approach. It is
certainly of interest to determine whether the position of the last spin
tends to infinity as @xmath , since according to our interpretation of
the chain’s geometry the number @xmath is the radius of the circle on
which the spins lie. According to Eq. ( 4.13 ), for large @xmath the
last spin’s coordinate @xmath is approximately given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that @xmath should diverge as @xmath . Of course, this assertion
should be taken with some caution, since in Eq. ( 4.13 ) the argument of
the inverse error function is correct only up to terms of order @xmath .
In order to check the correctness of the approximation ( 4.14 ), we use
the asymptotic expansion of @xmath for @xmath in Ref. [ 26 ] to
replace ( 4.14 ) by the simpler formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As can be seen in Fig. 4.4 , the approximate formula ( 4.15 )
qualitatively reproduces the growth of @xmath when @xmath ranges from
@xmath to @xmath . A greater accuracy can be achieved by introducing an
adjustable parameter in Eq. ( 4.14 ) through the replacement @xmath , so
that in Eq. ( 4.15 ) @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Fig. 4.4 , we have also plotted the law ( 4.15 )-( 4.16 ) with the
optimal value @xmath , which is in excellent agreement with the
numerical values of @xmath for @xmath .

The last property of the spin chain ( 4.1 ) that we shall analyze in
this section is the dependence of the coupling between neighboring spins
on their mean coordinate. Calling

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we shall now see that when @xmath the Gaussian law

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.17)
  -- -- -- --------

holds with remarkable precision, cf. Fig. 4.5 . Indeed, if @xmath
denotes the RHS of Eq. ( 4.13 ) we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is of order @xmath . Hence, up to terms of order @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since (up to terms of order @xmath )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Eq. ( 4.17 ) follows from ( 4.18 ) replacing @xmath by @xmath .

A brief comparison of the previous properties with those of the PF chain
( 1.28 ) is in order. For large @xmath , the density of sites of the PF
chain (normalized to unity), that is the density of zeros of the @xmath
-th Hermite polynomial, is asymptotically given by [ 36 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last site @xmath of the PF chain grows with @xmath much faster than
the corresponding site @xmath of the chain ( 4.1 ), for the largest zero
of the @xmath -th Hermite polynomial behaves as @xmath ; see, for
instance, the recent paper [ 56 ] .

### 4.3 Quasi-exact solvability of the NN chain

In this section we shall explore the solvability properties of the spin
chain ( 4.1 ) by exploiting its connection with the QES model @xmath
defined in ( 3.2a ). As in Section 2.5 , we shall rescale the constant
@xmath in the latter Schrödinger operator and its scalar counterpart
@xmath and remove the ground state energy, defining

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In terms of the matrix multiplication operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the connection between @xmath and @xmath can be simply written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

whereas the spin chain Hamiltonian ( 4.1 ) is recovered as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Recall that the ground state function of the scalar Hamiltonian @xmath
can be written as @xmath , cf. Table 3.1 and Eq. ( 4.3 ). We shall also
denote by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

its normalized square. The following result is easily established by
repeating the proof of Lemma 2.22 .

###### Lemma 4.5.

@xmath converges to the delta distribution supported at @xmath and
decays exponentially fast away from @xmath .

One would be tempted to believe that, mutatis mutandis, the discussion
of Section ( 2.5 ) would provide an appropriate bridge to link the
algebraic states of @xmath and @xmath . However, the fact that the
dynamical models @xmath and @xmath are only quasi-exactly solvable, and
thus only a proper subset of their spectra is known, makes it impossible
to compute their partition functions from their algebraic energies.
Hence Lemma 2.26 , which constitutes the core of the application of CS
models to the study of spin chains, cannot be invoked in this case.

In the rest of this chapter we shall develop a finer version of the
freezing trick that will enable us to circumvent this limitation. We
shall obtain a number of eigenstates of the chain (which we call
algebraic ), valid for any choice of @xmath and @xmath . As mentioned in
the introduction, these algebraic states do not span the whole spin
space, the chain Hamiltonian ( 4.1 ) thus inheriting the QES structure
of the dynamical model.

In the following lemma we prove the key convergence result (“freezing
trick”) that shall enable us to compute the algebraic eigenvectors of
@xmath in closed form. This result is most easily stated in terms of the
function @xmath , that is, the normalized ground state of @xmath .
Moreover, given a scalar function @xmath and a spin state @xmath , we
shall use the notation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to denote their @xmath -valued scalar product.

###### Lemma 4.6.

Let @xmath be an algebraic eigenfunction of @xmath with energy @xmath
(cf. Theorem 3.17 ). Assume that there exists an eigenfunction @xmath of
@xmath and a @xmath -valued polynomial @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

and suppose, moreover, that these eigenfunctions can be normalized so
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then the limits

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

exist, and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

The existence of the above limits trivially follows from the polynomial
dependence of @xmath and @xmath on @xmath and the fact that @xmath is
linear in @xmath . Furthermore, the self-adjointness of @xmath , Eqs. (
4.21 )-( 4.22 ) and Lemma 4.5 readily imply that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- --

If we now use Eq. ( 4.20 ) and Lemma 4.5 to write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

substitute the former equations into this identity and take the limit
@xmath , we readily derive Eq. ( 4.24 ). ∎

###### Corollary 4.7.

If @xmath , then @xmath is an eigenvector of @xmath with energy @xmath .

###### Remark 4.8.

Since, by Lemma 4.5 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the previous corollary is of no practical use unless @xmath can be taken
as the normalized ground state @xmath , in which case @xmath .

We are now ready to prove the main result of this chapter.

###### Theorem 4.9.

If @xmath and @xmath , the states

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.25a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.25b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.25c)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.25d)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

satisfy the equations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The proof consists in the application of Lemma 4.6 to appropriate
triples @xmath , where in fact @xmath (and hence @xmath ) in view of the
previous remark.

In the first place, it is easy to show that @xmath directly. However, we
prefer to prove it using the same freezing trick argument as in the
other cases. To this end, consider the functions

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

which trivially satisfy the hypotheses in Lemma 4.6 with @xmath and
@xmath . Since in this case

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from Corollary 4.7 it follows that @xmath , if non-vanishing, is an
eigenvector of @xmath with eigenvalue @xmath .

The next case is slightly more complicated. Let us set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is not difficult to show that @xmath satisfies the hypotheses in
Lemma 4.6 with @xmath . Since @xmath in this case, Corollary 4.7 shows
that the state

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

is either zero or an eigenvector of @xmath with energy 1. Here we have
used the identity @xmath , cf. Corollary 4.5 .

The other two states are obtained in a similar manner starting with
@xmath and the functions

  -- -------- --
              
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in each case. Indeed, with the former set of functions we immediately
arrive at

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

while in the latter case we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using Proposition 4.2 , the result follows. ∎

###### Remark 4.10.

All the algebraic energies of @xmath being integral multiples of @xmath
, it follows that any eigenvalue of the chain constructed from them via
a freezing argument must be an integer.

###### Remark 4.11.

The linear combinations of eigenfunctions with energy 2 and 3 used in
Theorem 4.9 are not casual. Should one start, e.g., with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for which @xmath and @xmath , one would be lead to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The above linear combinations have been chosen so as to suppress the
dominant parts in @xmath and @xmath , which respectively are
proportional to @xmath and @xmath .

It is also clear that the state @xmath (resp. @xmath ) is zero whenever
the spin vector @xmath (resp. @xmath ) is not symmetric
(resp. antisymmetric) under @xmath , which accounts for the condition on
@xmath and @xmath imposed in Eqs. ( 4.25b ) and ( 4.25d ).

It is natural to wonder whether additional eigenvectors of the chain can
be computed using some different linear combinations of the algebraic
eigenfunctions of @xmath listed in Theorem 3.17 . Nevertheless, since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it is clear that an algebraic eigenfunction in the linear span of @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath can only give rise to a nonvanishing vector @xmath
when @xmath and @xmath . Indeed, @xmath , with @xmath , is an
eigenfunction of @xmath with energy @xmath , which implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as @xmath , proving the former statement. The latter condition follows
directly from the factor @xmath present at the above eigenfunctions of
@xmath . This discussion strongly suggests (albeit does not rigorously
prove) that one cannot obtain any additional eigenvectors of @xmath
using the technique developed in Lemma 4.6 and Theorem 4.9 .

### 4.4 Qualitative properties of the algebraic spectrum

In this section we shall analyze which portion of the spectrum of ( 4.1
) is algebraic and how the algebraic eigenvalues are embedded into the
whole spectrum. Regarding the first point, it is convenient to start
with the following states @xmath , whose evaluation at @xmath yields the
chain eigenvectors ( 4.25 ):

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

It may be easily shown that if @xmath is symmetric then @xmath and
@xmath vanish at @xmath . Likewise, if @xmath then @xmath is also zero
when @xmath . For this reason, we shall consider the following spaces:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Proposition 4.12.

The dimensions of the spaces @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.26)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.27)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

First of all, the dimension of @xmath is simply the number of
permutations with repetitions of @xmath elements from @xmath .

Consider next the space @xmath . If two basic states @xmath and @xmath
differ by a permutation of the last @xmath spins, then @xmath . Hence
the dimension of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the first quantity is the number of possible choices for @xmath ,
the second one is that of symmetric states of @xmath particles, and the
last one, that of symmetric states of @xmath particles.

The dimension of @xmath coincides with that of the space @xmath , a
basis of which was computed in Propositions 3.10 and 3.13 . Using the
previous notation we can say that, for a given spin content @xmath with
multiplicities @xmath (with @xmath ), there are @xmath independent
states in @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the binomial term accounts for the different choices of @xmath ,
and the cardinal for all the possible values of the multiplicities.
Noting @xmath and using the identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we arrive at the desired formula.

It only remains to prove Eq. ( 4.28 ). To this end, let us concentrate
on the spin vectors @xmath with a fixed spin content @xmath , @xmath .
It is clear that @xmath is spanned by the @xmath states

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We shall shortly show that, for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

By antisymmetry, the double sum @xmath vanishes, so there are at most
@xmath independent relations of the above form. It can be verified that
@xmath is in fact a basis of @xmath , so the dimension of @xmath is
obtained from (ii) by substituting @xmath for @xmath .

Finally, let us prove ( 4.29 ). A first observation is that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first two terms of the RHS obviously cancel, and the last one
vanishes by antisymmetry. ∎

This proposition, which is interesting in its own right because of its
connection with the dynamical model ( 3.2a ), has the following
consequences for the spin chain ( 4.1 ):

###### Corollary 4.13.

For each @xmath , the number of algebraic eigenvectors with energy
@xmath is bounded by @xmath .

###### Corollary 4.14.

The ratio

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

tends to zero as @xmath . The whole kernel of @xmath is composed of
algebraic eigenvectors.

###### Proof.

The first part of the statement follows by direct comparison with the
total number of states @xmath . The second part is due to the fact that
@xmath is a linear combination with positive coefficients of the
nonnegative operators @xmath , which implies that @xmath . ∎

These observations are corroborated by our numerical simulations: the
number of algebraic levels increase as @xmath and @xmath become larger,
but nevertheless they span a lesser and lesser part of the spin space.
The kernel of the chain, e.g., shows clearly this behavior. But most
remarkable is the following conjecture regarding the embedding of the
algebraic eigenvalues in the spectrum.

###### Conjecture 4.15.

The algebraic eigenvectors ( 4.25a )–( 4.25c ) span the three lowest
levels of the spin chain ( 4.1 ). When @xmath the fourth algebraic
energy, @xmath , is however the fifth lowest level of the chain, and its
whole eigenspace is spanned by the states of the form ( 4.25d ). The
algebraic energies are singled out in the spectrum of @xmath as being
the only integer ones, i.e.,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have numerically diagonalized the matrix representing the Hamiltonian
@xmath for @xmath and up to @xmath particles, and our results fully
support the above conjecture. Another important observation is that the
standard freezing trick relation between the energies of the spin chain
@xmath and of the dynamical models @xmath and @xmath , namely

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the fact that @xmath has noninteger eigenvalues imply that the spin
dynamical model ( 3.2a ) has noninteger energies, and hence that some of
its eigenfunctions are not among those listed in Theorem 3.17 .

## Chapter 5 Conclusions and perspectives

In this thesis we have studied three QES models of CS type presenting
short-range interactions and developed a rigorous treatment of the CS/HS
correspondence, valid for both ES and QES Hamiltonians. In a nutshell,
the main conclusions and results that one should extract from this
dissertation are the following:

1.  On the @xmath HS spin chain: We have computed the spectrum of the
    trigonometric @xmath Sutherland model by expressing its Hamiltonian
    as the sum of squares of an appropriate set of commuting Dunkl
    operators. The @xmath HS chain is obtained from this system by
    “freezing” the particles at their classical equilibrium positions.
    We have proved a rigorous version of the freezing trick which has
    enabled us to compute the partition function of the chain in terms
    of those of the corresponding scalar and spin models. We have
    resorted to numerical computations to explore the level distribution
    of the chain, finding out that the energies accurately follow the
    Gaussian law. A constant magnetic field was added to the picture in
    a rather straightforward way.

2.  On NN spin models: We defined three QES spin models with
    near-neighbors interactions that are related to NN versions of the
    sum of the squares of appropriate sets of @xmath Dunkl operators.
    Furthermore, we have obtained infinite flags of finite-dimensional
    spaces invariant under these models, and computed several families
    of eigenfunctions in closed form by diagonalizing the restriction of
    the Hamiltonians to these spaces. All the algebraic solutions, whose
    energies are integers, can be expressed as the ground state times a
    symmetric function. We conjecture that some of their eigenfunctions
    are not of this form, and that their corresponding eigenvalues are
    not natural numbers.

3.  On NN spin chains: We have defined a spin chain presenting
    nearest-neighbors interactions that is related to one of the
    previous NN models by a freezing trick argument. We have discussed
    its site distribution in detail, both analytically and numerically,
    and obtained a number of algebraic eigenvectors and energies using a
    refinement of the techniques developed in Chapter 2 that also
    applies to QES systems. We have raised the conjecture that the only
    integer energies of this chain are @xmath and @xmath , and that the
    eigenstates corresponding to these energies are all algebraic.

The conjectures scattered throughout the text do not exhaust all the
open questions that we find worth exploring in connection with our work.
In what follows, we shall briefly mention some wide research lines that
in our opinion would be of interest, and that we intend to follow in the
near future:

1.  The structure of the (non-algebraic) eigenfunctions of @xmath (and
    other QES operators): From the previous discussion, it looks
    unlikely that all the eigenfunctions of @xmath admit the ground
    state as a Jastrow factor. Nevertheless, this does happen in the
    theory of CS models, and the functions that are explicitly
    constructed in the usual QES models are generally of this form. A
    thorough study of this phenomenon is, to the best of our knowledge,
    still lacking, and would probably shed some light on the connections
    between Schrödinger operators and orthogonal polynomials. The
    particular case of @xmath would be of special interest.

2.  HS/CS and symmetric spaces: A powerful procedure for constructing CS
    models with spin starting out with a symmetric space of nonpositive
    curvature has been recently developed by Fehér and Pusztai, as
    described in Section 1.5 . It should not be difficult to extend the
    techniques described in this thesis to solve the associated spin
    chains.

3.  Statistical properties of the spectrum of CS models: The remarkable
    statistical properties of the @xmath HS chain occupied a significant
    portion of Section 2.6 . It is difficult to obtain pen and paper
    results on these aspects, but the rigorous literature studying these
    topics is always increasing (see [ 38 , 49 ] and references
    therein). Further study of the topics mentioned in this section and
    extensions to the case of NN models would make a valuable addition
    to the existing literature.

4.  Integrability vs. solvability in spin chains of HS type: A
    satisfactory analysis of the integrability of the chains of HS type
    has only been accomplished in a few instances. A natural approach to
    this problem would be to define a set of integrals of the chain
    using the freezing trick, but in general it is not easy to grant the
    linear independence of these conserved operators. If one managed to
    overcome these technical problems, this method (which has already
    been exploited in the study of some particular models) would provide
    a clean proof of the integrability of the chains associated with
    integrable spin models.
