# Chapter 2 Many-body Green’s functions

Green’s functions (GFs) or propagators can be considered as the heroes
of the many-body problem ( Mat1992 ) . These mathematical tools
incorporate by definition the correlated behavior of an interacting
many-body system. For this reason they are particularly useful to
characterize the properties of complex many-particle systems, whether of
nuclear, atomic or molecular nature. The great advantage of using GFs
lies in the possibility to carry out the many-body problem in a general,
systematic and graphical way through the use of Feynman diagrams . A
Feynman diagram can be seen as a graphical representation of a
transition amplitude from an initial to a final state of the system. In
systems where infinite series of transition amplitudes need to be summed
up, as in the case of nuclear matter, diagrammatic techniques turn out
to be indispensable. A graphical interface is then necessary to keep
track of all the terms summed up in the infinite series. Furthermore, it
is vital to control the approximations so far made via truncations of
the series itself. For this reason the diagrammatic representation will
be used throughout the entire thesis. This will lead to a direct
interpretation of the specific processes under study.

The original many-body Green’s functions formalism dates back to the
1960s ( Mart1959 ; Kad1962 ; Noz1963 ; Abr1975 ) . At that time, it was
impossible to implement it numerically, but provided a unique
theoretical insight. In the past few decades, the rise of computational
power has gradually improved to the point of allowing for ab-initio
studies which take into account the strong interacting characteristics
of many-body systems. First principles calculations in the Green’s
functions framework are now routinely performed in solid state ( Ary1998
; Oni2002 ) , atomic and molecular physics ( vNie1984 ; Bar2007 ;
Deg2011 ; Bar2012 ; Ort2013 ) and nuclear structure ( Mut2000 ; Dic2004
) .

In nuclear physics, GFs have been used to study the properties of finite
nuclei. A variety of techniques, including the SCGF approach, have been
exploited to study in detail the behavior of nuclei beyond the
independent particle model approximation ( Bar2009Nov ) . The Faddeev
random phase approximation (FRPA), which includes both particle-particle
and particle-hole phonons in the SP self-energy, has been used to
describe closed-shell isotopes ( Bar2002PhD ; Bar2002 ; Bar2009Jun ) .
Besides, within the Gorkov-Green’s function method, semi-magic nuclei
have been studied up to second order in the self-energy expansion (
Som2011 ; Som2013Nov ) . Moreover, the problem of medium-mass nuclei
with open shells has been also tackled down ( Som2013Jan ) . Very
recently, the effect of 3BFs has been addressed for medium-mass nuclei
within an extended Gorkov-Green’s function method ( Som2013Dec ) .

In addition to finite nuclei, as presented in the introduction to the
thesis, SCGF formalism has also been used extensively to study infinite
nuclear matter, mainly in the so-called ladder approximation . In this
approximation, an effective interaction in the medium, the @xmath
-matrix, is constructed in order to take into account the repeated
scattering in between two nucleons. The necessity to implement this
approximation comes from the strong short-range behavior which
characterizes the nuclear force and which cannot be disregarded in
high-density systems such as nuclear matter. This behavior cannot be
treated perturbatively and therefore needs an infinite summation of
terms to be handled correctly. Nevertheless, the sole use of two-body
interactions doesn’t provide the correct reproduction of empirical
properties, such as the energy/density saturation point of nuclear
matter. Saturation densities are too large and saturation energies too
attractive, with calculations falling in the so-called Coester band (
Coester1970 ) . The inclusion of 3BFs is then necessary to avoid this
trend.

However, the many-body Green’s functions framework has been originally
developed with Hamiltonians containing up to 2B interactions in mind (
Fet1971 ; Rin1984 ; Bla1986 ; Dic2008 ) . The first implementations in
infinite nuclear systems to include 3BFs were successfully brought
forward by the Krakow group ( Som2009PhD ) . A correlated average of the
Urbana IX ( Pie2001Jun ) force was included to define an effective 2B
potential. This density-dependent force yielded strong improvements in
properties of symmetric nuclear and pure neutron matter, for both zero (
Som2008 ) and finite temperature ( Som2009 ) .

In this thesis we want to propose a more thorough analysis on how the
SCGF method is extended to account for 3BFs ( Car2013Nov ) . While the
main motivation to do so are nuclear systems, the formalism can be
easily applied to other many-body systems. Such an approach is pivotal
both to provide theoretical foundations to approximations made so far
and to advance the many-body formalisms for much-needed ab-initio
nuclear structure calculations. With a pedagogical perspective, the
extension of the SCGF formalism to include 3BFs will be presented in
Chap. 3 . This will be done by working out in full the first orders of
the self-energy perturbative expansion and solving the self-consistent
equations of motion for the propagators.

In this chapter, we will revise the basis of the Green’s functions
formalism, drawing attention to the self-consistency which is achieved
through the solution of the Dyson equation. We will especially focus on
the calculation of the total energy of the system which, when including
3BFs, requires a corrected energy sum rule.

### 2.1 Green’s functions formalism with three-body forces

The starting point for the analysis of a many-body system, in our case
of a nuclear kind, is the description of the particles which compose it
and how they interact in between each other. We consider a group of
@xmath non-relativistic nucleons. The Hamiltonian @xmath , in second
quantization formalism, is the sum of a one-, two- and a three-body
term. It is useful to separate the Hamiltonian into two parts, @xmath .
@xmath is a 1B contribution, it is the sum of the kinetic term, @xmath ,
and an auxiliary 1B potential, @xmath . This potential defines the
reference state for the perturbative expansion, @xmath , on top of which
correlations will be added ¹ ¹ 1 A typical choice in nuclear physics
would be a Slater determinant of SP harmonic oscillator or Woods-Saxon
wave functions. . The second term of the Hamiltonian, @xmath , describes
the interactions. @xmath and @xmath denote, respectively, the two- and
three-body interaction operators. The full Hamiltonian reads:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.1)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The greek indices @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , etc. label a complete set
of SP states which diagonalize the unperturbed Hamiltonian, @xmath ,
with eigenvalues @xmath . @xmath and @xmath are creation and
annihilation operators for a particle in state @xmath . The matrix
elements of the 1B operator @xmath are given by @xmath . Equivalently,
the matrix elements of the 2B and 3B forces are @xmath and @xmath . In
the following, we work with antisymmetrized matrix elements in both the
2B and the 3B sector, i.e.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.2)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The main ingredient of the formalism is the 1B GF, also called SP
propagator or 2-point GF, which provides a complete description of
one-particle and one-hole excitations of the many-body system. More
specifically, the SP propagator is defined as the expectation value of
the time-ordered product of an annihilation and a creation operators in
the Heisenberg picture:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the interacting @xmath -body ground state of the system.
The time ordering operator brings operators with earlier times to the
right, with the corresponding fermionic permutation sign. For @xmath ,
this results in the addition of a particle to the state @xmath at time
@xmath and its removal from state @xmath at time @xmath . Alternatively,
for @xmath , the removal of a particle from state @xmath occurs at time
@xmath and its addition to state @xmath at time @xmath . These
correspond, respectively, to the propagation of a particle or a hole
excitation through the system. We can also introduce the 4-point and
6-point GFs which will be useful in the following:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Physically, the interpretation of Eq. ( 2.5 ) and Eq. ( 2.6 ) follows
that of the 2-point GF in Eq. ( 2.4 ). In these cases, more combinations
of particle and hole excitations are encountered depending on the
ordering of the several time arguments. The extension to formal
expressions for higher many-body GFs is straightforward.

In the following, we will consider propagators both in time
representation, as defined above, or in energy representation. Note
that, due to time-translation invariance, the @xmath -point GF depends
only on @xmath time differences or, equivalently, @xmath independent
frequencies. Hence the Fourier transform to the energy representation is
well-defined when the total energy is conserved:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the 1B GFs of Eq. ( 2.4 ) one also considers the Lehmann
representation, that gives physical insight to the SP propagator:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.8)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath label the many-body eigenstates of
the system with @xmath or @xmath particles. The sum is intended over all
discrete/continuum states of the energy spectrum. The poles in Eq. ( 2.8
) represent the energies of the excited states of the system. Namely,
@xmath corresponds to the excitation energy of the system with an added
particle @xmath , with respect to the energy of the @xmath -particle
many-body ground state. @xmath corresponds to minus the excitation
energy of the system with a removed particle @xmath , with respect to
the energy of the @xmath -particle many-body ground state.

The information enclosed in Eq. ( 2.8 ), about the transition amplitudes
of an added or removed particle from the system, illustrates the
potential power of the SP propagator and, for finite systems, its direct
connection to experimental data. In fact, the poles in the denominators
of Eq. ( 2.8 ) signal the position in energy space of the @xmath or
@xmath excited states of the system. Furthermore, the numerators define
the corresponding transition amplitudes from the ground state with
@xmath particles to the excited states of the @xmath systems.
Experimentally, this information is related to the hole spectral
function , which can be extracted from the strength of the removed
particle in ( e,e’ p ) knockout reactions ( Mou1980 ; Lap1993 ) .
Mathematically this quantity corresponds to the residue of the poles of
the 1B GF and is then related to the imaginary part of the 1B GF. It can
be obtained from Eq. ( 2.8 ) by means of the Plemejl identity:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the energy which corresponds respectively to the poles
in the particle and hole part of Eq. ( 2.8 ), and @xmath defines the
principal value. Hence one can write for the hole spectral function:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.10)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

for @xmath , with @xmath . @xmath corresponds to the minimum energy to
remove a particle from the @xmath -body ground state into the @xmath
-body ground state. In finite systems, the transition amplitude between
the @xmath and the @xmath body systems is closely related to the
definition of the theoretical spectroscopic factor ( Dic2004 ;
Bar2009Nov ) . This factor provides a measure of the correlations
present in the system which induce its behavior to deviate form the
independent-particle model description.

The corresponding part of the hole spectral function in the particle
domain is the particle spectral function . This quantity represents the
probability to add a particle to the many-body ground state and,
analogously to Eq. ( 2.10 ), it is defined as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.11)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

for @xmath , with @xmath . @xmath corresponds to the minimum energy
necessary to add a particle to the @xmath -body ground state into the
@xmath -body ground state. In finite systems there can be a considerable
difference in between @xmath and @xmath . In normal infinite systems,
i.e. neither superfluid nor superconducting, which are the object of
this thesis, the difference between @xmath and @xmath vanishes in the
thermodynamical limit and approaches the value of the chemical
potential.

For an infinite system, translational invariance suggests the use of
momentum states for the SP basis. In this case the greek index
identifies the quantum numbers of momentum, spin and isospin @xmath .
Consequently we can recast the Lehmann representation ( 2.8 ) for the 1B
propagator as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where for convenience we omit spin/isospin indices. Notice that we have
introduced the Fermi energy @xmath which, in an uncorrelated system,
defines the last filled energy level and hence corresponds to the energy
needed to remove a particle from the many-body ground state. In the
present case of an interacting system, @xmath equals the chemical
potential @xmath , and corresponds to the minimum energy necessary to
add or remove a particle to/from the system.

Furthermore, the knowledge of the hole spectral function gives access to
the SP momentum occupation number in the many-body ground state. For an
infinite system this can be written as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The study of the occupation number, especially at low-momentum, is a
meaningful way to quantify the correlations present in the system. As a
matter of fact, short-range and tensor correlations embodied in the
nuclear potential increase the depletion observed at zero SP momentum.
Consequently, they introduce high-momentum states in the distribution
function, Eq. ( 2.13 ) ( Rio2009Apr ; Car2012 ) . This can have a direct
effect on bulk properties of nuclear matter, such as the symmetry energy
( Vid2011 ) .

As a concluding remark to this section, we would like to stress that the
SCGF formalism aims at providing a reliable calculation of the SP
propagator, and hence of the spectral function, in correlated systems.
As we will see, an efficient way to achieve this purpose is by means of
diagrammatic techniques. The use of a graphical interface can highly
simplify the analysis of the dressed propagator and help to enumerate
all contributions which are taken into account in the many-body
approximation under hand.

### 2.2 The Galistkii-Migdal-Koltun sum rule

The SP propagator provides access to expectation values of all 1B
operators and hence is a useful tool to characterize a wide range of the
properties of the system. Furthermore, if only up to 2B terms are
considered in the Hamiltionian, the ground-state energy can be computed
from the 1B GF itself. This is a crucial result that arises from the
Galitskii-Migdal-Koltun (GMK) sum rule ( Gal1958 ; Kol1974 ) . In this
section we will see how the inclusion of 3B interaction terms alter the
form of the GMK sum rule. Hence we will need to derive a modified sum
rule.

As outlined, the energy of an interacting system via 2BFs can be
obtained within the SCGF approach by means of the GMK sum rule, which
reads ( Gal1958 ; Kol1974 ) :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Observing Eq. ( 2.14 ), we note that not all the information content
from the propagator is needed to obtain the ground-state energy. The
hole part (see Eq. ( 2.10 )), which includes details about the
transition amplitude for the removal of a particle from the many-body
system, is enough for this purpose. To derive the GMK sum rule, one
starts by considering the first moment of the hole spectral function:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the spectral representation of Eq. ( 2.10 ), one can see that this
integral is also the expectation value over the many-body ground state
of the commutator:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( 2.1 ), one can evaluate the commutator to
find:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.17)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Note that, in general, @xmath represents the 1B part of the Hamiltonian
which, in addition to the kinetic energy, might also contain a 1B
potential. Summing over all the external SP states, @xmath , one finds,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

In other words, the sum over all SP states of the first moment of the
spectral function yields a particular linear combination of the
contributions of the 1B, 2B and 3B potentials to the ground-state
energy,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath is a 1B operator, one can actually compute its expectation
value from the SP propagator itself:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The energy integral on the right-hand side yields the reduced 1B density
matrix:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can then be used to simplify the previous expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the 2B case, this is enough to provide an independent constraint and
hence allows for the calculation of the total energy (see Eq. ( 2.14 )).
The ground-state energy can then be computed from the 1B propagator
alone.

When 3BF are present, however, one needs a third independent linear
combination of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Knowledge of the 1B
propagator is therefore not enough to compute the total energy, since
either the 2B or the 3B propagators are needed to compute @xmath or
@xmath exactly. Depending on which of the two operators is chosen, one
is left with different expressions for the energy of the ground state.
This freedom in choice could in principle be exploited to test the
validity of different approximations. In practical applications,
however, one should choose the combination that provides minimum
uncertainty.

Let us start by considering the case where the 3B operator is
eliminated. Adding @xmath and @xmath to Eq. ( 2.18 ), one finds the
following exact expression for the total ground-state energy:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.23)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The calculation of this expression requires the hole part of the 1B
propagator and the two-hole part of the 2B propagator, which would
appear in the second term. We note that this expression is somewhat
equivalent to the original GMK, in that the ground-state energy is
computed from 1B and 2B operators, even though the Hamiltonian itself is
a 3B operator. This might prove advantageous in calculations where the
2B propagator is computed explicitly.

Alternatively, one can eliminate the 2B contribution from the GMK sum
rule by adding @xmath and subtracting @xmath to Eq. ( 2.18 ). This leads
to the expression:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath               (2.24)
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- --------

The first term in this expression is formally the same as that obtained
in the case where only 2BFs are present in the Hamiltonian. Note,
however, that the 3BF does influence the 1B propagator in the first term
and hence the correction should be applied at the very end of the
self-consistent procedure. The second term in Eq. ( 2.24 ) requires the
knowledge of the three-hole part of the 3B propagator. If the 3B
expectation value results as a small contribution to the total energy of
the many-body ground state, Eq. ( 2.24 ) can be favored compared to
Eq. ( 2.23 ) to compute the total energy of the system.

Eqs. ( 2.23 ) and ( 2.24 ) are both exact. Which of the two is employed
in actual calculations will mostly depend on the accuracy associated
with the evaluation of the expectation values, @xmath and @xmath . If
the 2B interaction is dominant with respect to the 3BF, for instance,
the former will be a large contribution. Small errors in the calculation
of the 2B propagator could eventually yield artificially large
corrections in the ground-state energy. In nuclear physics, the 3BF
expectation value is expected to provide a smaller contribution than the
2BF one ( Gra1989 ; Epe2009Oct ) . Consequently, approximations in Eq. (
2.24 ) should lead to smaller absolute errors. This was the approach
that was recently followed in both finite nuclei and infinite nuclear
matter calculations ( Cip2013 ; Car2013Oct ; Som2013Dec ) . In finite
nuclei, evaluating @xmath at first order in terms of dressed propagators
leads to satisfactory results. However, accuracy is lost if free
propagators, @xmath , are used instead ( Cip2013 ) . Eq. ( 2.23 ) may
eventually be useful in calculations of infinite matter, in which the 2B
propagator can be computed nonpertubatively by means of the @xmath
-matrix. Therefore, one could explicitly evaluate the expectation value
of the 2BF in the many-body ground state and compute directly Eq. ( 2.23
).

Even though Eq. ( 2.23 ) can prove to be more accurate to study the
energy of infinite matter, in the following we use the prescription
presented in Eq. ( 2.24 ). The main motivation for doing so is related
to the approximation with which the second term in Eq. ( 2.24 ) is
computed. In the present calculations we estimate the 3BF expectation
value computing it only at first order, i.e. in the HF approximation.
Applying this same approximation to the 2BF expectation value in Eq. (
2.23 ) would lead to higher errors in the estimation of the total energy
of the system (typically, @xmath for nuclear interactions ( Epe2009Oct )
). To avoid this drawback, and due to the fact that in the present state
of the numerical code we only compute the 2B propagator at the HF level,
we then rely on Eq. ( 2.24 ) to evaluate the energy of the many-body
ground state.

### 2.3 Dyson’s equation and self-consistency

It has been pointed out that perturbation theory is helpless when
confronted with the strong interaction in nuclear many-body systems. In
the case of nuclear matter, where the strong short-range behavior of the
force has to be treated, an infinite series of interacting terms must be
summed up. For this reason, methods which perform all-order summations
of Feynman diagrams are necessary, in order to correctly appreciate the
correlated behavior of such systems.

Let’s start by defining the perturbative expansion of the 1B propagator.
This reads ( Mat1992 ; Dic2008 ) :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the unperturbed many-body ground state. @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath are now operators in the interaction picture with respect to
@xmath . The subscript “conn” implies that only connected contributions
(diagrams) have to be considered when performing the Wick contractions
of the time-ordered product. As an example, a connected and a
disconnected diagram are shown in Fig. LABEL:sub@conn and
LABEL:sub@disconn .

The interacting part of the Hamiltonian @xmath (see Eq. ( 2.1 ))
contains contributions from 1B, 2B and 3B interactions. Thus, the
expansion in perturbation theory of the GF involves terms with
individual contributions of each force, as well as combinations of
these. Feynman diagrams are essential to keep track of such a variety of
different contributions. The rules for Feynman diagrams used in this
thesis are reported in App. A .

A first reorganization of all the contributions generated in the
perturbative expansion of the SP propagator given in Eq. ( 2.25 ), is
obtained by considering only those terms which are one-particle
irreducible (1PI) diagrams. These diagrams cannot be disconnected by
cutting a single fermionic line. On the other hand, a one-particle
reducible contribution is a diagram which can be split into two
separated terms by cutting one single fermionic line. In Fig. 2.1 , we
depict with diagram Fig. LABEL:sub@conn an example of an irreducible
contribution to the 1B propagator expansion, and with Fig.
LABEL:sub@1pred an example of a reducible one. Reducible diagrams are
generated by an all-order summation through Dyson’s equation ( Dys1949 )
,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath corresponds to the energy variable of the propagator. A
diagrammatic representation of the Dyson equation is depicted in Fig.
2.2 . The process of carrying out infinite summations is often called
renormalization . In this case, the renormalized quantity is the
undressed propagator @xmath , which is dressed up through an infinite
summation of contributions, which are grouped together in the so called
irreducible self-energy , @xmath . In fact, to sum properly all infinite
diagrams by means of the irreducible self-energy, all reducible terms
can be disregarded. The complete summation of these reducible
contributions provides the definition of the reducible self-energy ,
@xmath . The diagrammatic definition of the reducible self-energy would
correspond to the second term on the right-hand side in Fig. 2.2 , where
the dressed propagator @xmath entering the self-energy is replaced with
a undressed one, @xmath .

In Eq. ( 2.26 ), the uncorrelated SP propagator, @xmath , is associated
with the system governed by the @xmath Hamiltonian and represents the
@xmath order in the expansion of Eq. ( 2.25 ). For an infinite system,
following Eq. ( 2.12 ), the unperturbed or free propagator can be
written in the Lehmann representation as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath represents the Fermi momentum, which corresponds to the last
occupied SP state in a system of non-interacting particles. @xmath is
the energy of the SP state above ( @xmath ) and below ( @xmath ) the
Fermi level. In Eq. ( 2.27 ) and in the following we omit explicitly
spin/isospin indices.

In a infinite system we can restate Dyson’s equation (see Eq. 2.26 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be solved algebraically:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The irreducible self-energy @xmath describes the kernel that includes
all 1PI diagrams. This operator plays a central role in the GFs
formalism and can be interpreted as the non-local and energy-dependent
interaction that each particle feels due to the interaction with the
medium. At positive energies, @xmath is also identified with the optical
potential that the scattered particle feels from the many-body target (
Bla1986 ; Cap1996 ; Ced2001 ; Bar2005 ; Cha2006 ) .

The knowledge of the self-energy, @xmath , then provides direct access
to the spectral functions. According to Eqs. ( 2.10 ) and ( 2.11 ),
through the use of Eq. ( 2.29 ), it can be demonstrated that ( Lut1961 )
:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The numerator in Eqs. ( 2.30 - 2.31 ) is related to the width of the
spectral function in energy space. A vanishing width would result in a
delta-like spectral function, and this corresponds to the case of a
system in the non-interacting or mean-field picture. In this picture,
each SP momentum is associated to one SP energy state. Conversely, in
the correlated system, a finite width for the spectral function involves
SP momentum states which are spread in the energy space, and therefore
present a given lifetime when propagating through the system. The value
of this life-time is then inversely proportional to the width of the
spectral function.

In Sec. 3.3 we will clearly see how the computation of the imaginary
part of the self-energy requires the knowledge of the spectral function.
This indeed demands a self-consistent iteration for the solution of the
spectral function Eqs. ( 2.30 - 2.31 ). We want to point out that, in
the SCGF approach, the complete spectral decomposition of the propagator
is kept throughout the entire self-consistent procedure, applying no
approximations of the quasi-particle kind.

#### 2.3.1 The self-consistent propagator

In the previous section we saw how, by means of the iterative scheme
defined by Dyson’s equation, Eq. ( 2.26 ), the unperturbed SP
propagator, @xmath , gets renormalized into a dressed one, @xmath , via
an infinite summation. In order to correctly iterate the equation
through the use of the irreducible self-energy (see Fig. 2.2 ), the
summations must only take into account the 1PI contributions.

Nevertheless, one can further develop the description of the irreducible
self-energy. This is achieved by including in its contributions the use
of the same dressed propagator of which the self-energy provides the
value through the solution of the Dyson equation. This is defined as a
self-consistent renormalization of the propagator, in which the dressed
propagator is not only the solution of the iterative procedure, but
furthermore generates the terms which are included in the irreducible
self-energy. In some sense this leads to a further level of
reorganization of the diagrams in the self-energy expansion.

In practice, this self-consistent renormalization is obtained by means
of the so called skeleton diagrams ( Bla1986 ; Dic2008 ) . The use of
these kind of diagrams ensures that the unperturbed propagators, @xmath
, in the internal fermionic lines of the irreducible self-energy can be
safely replaced with dressed GFs, @xmath . These are defined as 1PI
diagrams that do not contain any portion that can be disconnected by
cutting a fermion loop twice at two different points. This portion would
be defined as a self-energy insertion . Therefore a skeleton diagram is
such if no self-energy insertions can be encountered. In fact, these
insertions are already resummed into the dressed propagators which build
the skeleton diagram.

An example of a skeleton and a non skeleton diagram is depicted in Fig.
2.3 . The SCGF approach is based on a diagrammatic expansion of such
skeleton diagrams with renormalized propagators. When using skeleton
diagrams in the irreducible self-energy, special care must be put when
performing the iterative summation of the Dyson equation. As an example,
a contribution like the one depicted in Fig. LABEL:sub@nonskel , if
included in the irreducible self-energy as a skeleton diagram, i.e. with
dressed propagators in both fermion loops, would be counted twice. In
fact diagram Fig. LABEL:sub@nonskel is already accounted for by the
contribution depicted in Fig. LABEL:sub@skel .

The number of diagrams which one sums up with the use of the skeleton
irreducible self-energy is much larger than the number that one would
obtain with the ordinary solution of the Dyson equation, Eq. ( 2.26 ).
Therefore, skeleton diagrams are not only a way to reorganize
contributions in the self-energy, but above all a way to sum up big
groups of diagrams hidden in the self-consistent dressed propagator.

## Chapter 3 Three-body forces in the SCGF approach

In the introduction to this thesis we have underlined the necessity to
consider 3BFs in order to obtain results both for finite and infinite
nuclear systems which can resemble those obtained experimentally. As it
has mostly been done in infinite nuclear matter calculations, 3BFs have
been considered in the theoretical many-body approximation only by means
of effective interactions. Nevertheless, even under these conditions,
the 3B operators should be introduced in the formalism from first
principles, i.e. from the definition of the Hamiltonian. This is crucial
in order to avoid errors in the evaluation of the 3B contributions at
the microscopic and macroscopic level.

Starting with the Hamiltonian described in Eq. ( 2.1 ), we want to
derive in this chapter the perturbative expansion of the irreducible
self-energy @xmath up to third order. We will show how the description
of the self-energy can be further reorganized thanks to the definition
of a new class of irreducible contributions to the self-energy, the
interaction-irreducible diagrams. The comprehensive class of 1PI,
skeleton and interaction-irreducible diagrams leads to a simplified
description of the irreducible self-energy, which proves to be very
useful in view of applying the hierarchy of equations of motion to the
propagators. This hierarchy provides an all-order description not only
for the SP self-energy but furthermore for the interacting vertex
functions. Having control over these quantities allows us to define
specific truncations which lead to well defined many-body
approximations.

Such a formal approach to the problem is a much needed step in many-body
calculations. In fact, the various @xmath -body terms, which form the
Hamiltonian, contribute with different factors to the single-particle or
bulk properties of the system ( Bog2010 ; Heb2010Jul ) . If not treated
properly, these factors can be often mistaken in the process of the
calculation. Special attention must be payed when dealing with effective
interactions at a given @xmath -body level. In fact, the physics of
higher body operators included effectively in these quantities must
preserve all the way its characteristics. In other words, the
performance of contractions which turn higher body contributions into
lower body ones must not alter the intrinsic multiplicity of the
original operator.

For the specific purpose of the work presented in this thesis, the newly
defined irreducible self-energy helps us to define in a consistent
manner the ladder approximation for infinite nuclear systems when
including 3B forces, giving theoretical foundations to the calculations
implemented numerically.

### 3.1 Interaction-irreducible diagrams

The best way to define the contributions which form the irreducible SP
self-energy is by means of Feynman diagrams. All parts which compose a
given diagram correspond to a specific mathematical expression and, once
rules are defined, it is straightforward to associate a mathematical
expression to a diagram. The rules used in this thesis are reported in
App. A .

In the following, we will work mostly with unlabeled Feynman diagrams,
where unlabeled means that no time is specified for a given interaction
vertex. According to Eq. ( 2.25 ), for a given order of expansion @xmath
, there are @xmath interacting terms @xmath , with @xmath going from 1
to @xmath . Permutation of these operators gives rise to @xmath equal
diagrams, which can be considered as a unique diagram, a single “time”
unlabeled diagram.

We also work with antisymmetrized potential matrix elements, as defined
in Eq. ( 2.2 - 2.3 ). This leads to consider as a unique diagram those
contributions which come from the interchange of two incoming lines to a
same interaction. An example of an antisymmetrized diagram is presented
in Fig. 3.1 . Special attention has to be payed when considering
antisymmetrized matrix elements, in fact the correct counting of
diagrams gives rise to specific multiplying factors which are usually
not easy to define straightforwardly. This issue will be treated in
detail in App. B .

To go on and introduce the new class of interaction-irreducible diagrams
let us first consider an articulation vertex in a generic Feynman
diagram. A 2B, 3B or higher interaction vertex is an articulation vertex
if, when cut, it gives rise to a disconnected section where all
propagating lines enter and exit a portion of this same interaction
vertex ¹ ¹ 1 1B vertices cannot be split and therefore cannot be
articulations. . Formally, a diagram is said to be
interaction-irreducible if it contains no articulation vertices.
Equivalently, a diagram is interaction-reducible if there exist a group
of fermion lines (either interacting or not) that leave one interaction
vertex and eventually all return to it. When an articulation vertex is
cut, one is left with a cycle of fermion lines that all connect to the
same interaction. If there were @xmath lines connected to this
interaction vertex, this set of closed lines would necessarily be part
of a @xmath -point GF ² ² 2 More specifically, these fermion lines
contain an instantaneous contribution of the many-body GF that enters
and exits the same interaction vertex, corresponding to a @xmath body
reduced density matrix. . An example of an articulation vertex is shown
in Fig. 3.2 . In this case, the second set of diagrams on the right-hand
side of the figure belongs to a 4-point GF or a 2-body reduced density
matrix. If this GF is computed explicitly in the calculation, one can
use it to evaluate all these contributions straight away. This
eliminates the need for computing all the diagrams looping in and out of
the articulation vertex, at the expense of having to find the many-body
propagator.

An @xmath -body interaction vertex with @xmath fermion lines looping
over it is an @xmath effective interaction operator. Infinite sets of
interaction-reducible diagrams can be sub-summed by means of effective
contributions. The two cases of effective interactions which are of
interest when 2B and 3B forces are present in the Hamiltonian are shown
in Figs. 3.3 and 3.4 . These give, respectively, the diagrammatic
definition of the 1B and 2B effective interactions. The 1B effective
potential is obtained by adding up three contributions: the original 1B
interaction; a 1B average over the 2B interaction; and a 2B average over
the 3B force. The 1B and 2B averages are performed using fully dressed
propagators. Similarly, the effective 2B force is obtained from the
original 2B interaction plus a 1B average over the 3B force. Similar
definitions would hold for higher-order forces and effective
interactions beyond the 3B level.

Hence, for a system with up to 3BFs, we define an effective Hamiltonian,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath represent effective interaction operators. The
diagrammatic expansion arising from Eq. ( 2.25 ) with the effective
Hamiltonian @xmath is formed only of (1PI, skeleton)
interaction-irreducible diagrams to avoid any possible double counting.
Note that, in Eq. ( 3.1 ), the 3B interaction, @xmath , remains the same
as in Eq. ( 2.1 ) but enters only the interaction-irreducible diagrams
with respect to 3B interactions. The explicit expressions for the 1B and
2B effective interaction operators are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.2)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

We have introduced a specific component of the 4-point GFs of Eq. ( 2.5
),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

which involves two-particle and two-hole propagation. This is the
so-called two-particle and two-time Green’s function. Let us also note
that the contracted propagators in Eqs. ( 3.2 ) and ( 3.3 ) correspond
to the full 1B and 2B reduced density matrices of the many-body system:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

In a self-consistent calculation, effective interactions should be
computed iteratively at each step, using correlated 1B and 2B
propagators as input. All in all, the effective Hamiltonian of Eq. ( 3.1
) not only regroups Feynman diagrams in a more efficient way, but also
defines the effective 1B and 2B terms from higher-order interactions.
Averaging the 3BF over one and two spectator particles in the medium is
expected to yield the most important contributions to the many-body
dynamics in nuclei ( Hag2007 ; Rot2012 ) . We note that Eqs. ( 3.2 )
and ( 3.3 ) are exact and can be derived rigorously from the
perturbative expansion. Details of the proof are discussed in App. B .
As long as interaction-irreducible diagrams are used together with the
effective Hamiltonian, @xmath , this approach provides a systematic way
to incorporate many-body forces in the calculations and to generate
effective in-medium interactions. More importantly, the formalism is
such that symmetry factors are properly considered and no diagram is
over-counted.

This approach can be seen as a generalization of the normal ordering of
the Hamiltonian with respect to the reference state @xmath , a procedure
that has already been used in nuclear physics applications with 3BFs (
Hag2007 ; Bog2010 ; Rot2012 ) . The normal ordered interactions affect
only excited configurations with respect to @xmath , but not the
reference state itself. Similarly, the effective operators discussed
above only enter interaction-irreducible diagrams. In both the
traditional normal ordering and our approach, the @xmath and @xmath
operators contain contributions from higher-order forces, while @xmath
remains unchanged. Note however that in the latter we go beyond usual
normal-ordering “averages”, in that they are performed over
fully-correlated many-body propagators. If the unperturbed 1B and 2B
propagators were used in Eqs. ( 3.2 ) and ( 3.3 ), the effective
operators @xmath and @xmath would trivially reduce to the contracted 1B
and 2B terms of normal ordering. In the present case the contraction is
improved because it is performed with respect to the exact correlated
density matrices. To some extent, one can think of the effective
Hamiltonian, @xmath , as being reordered with respect to the interacting
many-body ground state @xmath , rather than the non-interacting @xmath .
This effectively incorporates correlations that, in the normal ordering
procedure, must be instead calculated explicitly by the many-body
approach. Calculations indicate that such correlated averages are
important in both the saturation mechanism of nuclei and nuclear matter
( Cip2013 ; Car2013Oct ) .

Note that a normal ordered Hamiltonian also contains a 0B term equal to
the expectation value of the original Hamiltonian @xmath with respect to
@xmath . Likewise, in our case, the full contraction of @xmath in Eq. (
2.1 ) according to the normal-ordering procedure of App. B , will yield
a 0B term equal to the exact ground-state energy:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.7)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

This is in accordance with our analogy between the effective
Hamiltonian, @xmath , and the usual normal ordered one.

#### 3.1.1 Self-energy expansion up to third order

As a demonstration of the simplification introduced by the effective
interactions approach, we want to derive all interaction-irreducible
contributions to the proper self-energy up to third order in
perturbation theory. We will discuss these contributions order by order,
thus providing an overview of how the approach can be extended to
higher-order perturbative and also to nonperturbative calculations.
Among other things, this exercise will illustrate the amount and variety
of new diagrams that need to be considered when 3BFs are used.

For a pure 2B Hamiltonian, the only possible interaction-reducible
contribution to the self-energy is the generalized Hartree-Fock diagram.
This corresponds to the second term on the right-hand side of Eq. ( 3.2
) (see also Fig. 3.3 ). Note that this can go beyond the usual
Hartree-Fock term in that the internal propagator is dressed. This
diagram appears at first order in any SCGF expansion and it is routinely
included in most GF calculations with 2B forces. Thus, regrouping
diagrams in terms of effective interactions, such as Eqs. ( 3.2 ) and (
3.3 ), give no practical advantages unless 3BFs (or higher-body forces)
are present.

If 3BFs are considered, the only first-order, interaction-irreducible
contribution is given by the one-body effective interaction depicted in
Fig. 3.3 ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath is in itself a self-energy insertion, it will not appear in
any other, higher-order skeleton diagram. Even though it only
contributes to Eq. ( 3.8 ), the effective 1B potential is very important
since it determines the energy-independent part of the self-energy. It
therefore represents the (static) mean-field seen by every particle, due
to both 2B and 3B interactions. As already mentioned, Eq. ( 3.2 ) shows
that this potential incorporates three separate terms, including the
Hartree-Fock potentials due to both 2B and 3BFs and higher-order and
interaction-reducible contributions due to the dressed @xmath and @xmath
propagators. Thus, even the calculation of this lowest-order term @xmath
requires an iterative procedure to evaluate the internal many-body
propagators self-consistently.

Note that, if one were to stop at the Hartree-Fock level, the 4-point GF
would reduce to the direct and exchange product of two 1B propagators.
In that case, the last term of Eq. ( 3.2 ) (or Fig. 3.3 ) would reduce
to the pure 3BF Hartree-Fock contribution with the correct @xmath factor
in front, due to the two equivalent fermionic lines (see Fig. 5.3 at the
beginning of Chap. 5 ). This approximate treatment of the 2B propagator
in the 1B effective interaction has been employed in most nuclear
physics calculations up to date, including both finite nuclei ( Ots2010
; Rot2012 ; Cip2013 ) and nuclear matter ( Som2009 ; Heb2010Jul ;
Heb2011 ; Lov2012 ; Car2013Oct ; Koh2013 ; Coraggio2014 ) applications.

Before we move on, let us mention a subtlety arising in the Hartree-Fock
(or lowest-order) approximation to the two-body propagator. If one were
to insert @xmath into the second term of the right-hand side of Eq. (
3.2 ), one would introduce a double counting of the pure 3BF
Hartree-Fock component. This is forbidden because the diagram in
question would be interaction-reducible. The correct 3BF Hartree-Fock
term is actually included as part of the last term of Eq. ( 3.2 ) (see
also Fig. 3.3 ). Consequently, there is no Hartree-Fock term arising
from the effective interactions. Instead, this lowest-order contribution
is fully taken into account within the 1B effective interaction.

At second order, there are only two interaction-irreducible diagrams,
that we show in Fig. 3.5 . Diagram Fig. LABEL:sub@2ord_2B has the same
structure as the well-known contribution due to 2BFs only, involving
two-particle–one-hole ( @xmath ) and two-hole–one-particle ( @xmath )
intermediate states. This diagram, however, is computed with the 2B
effective interaction (notice the wiggly line) instead of the original
2B force and hence it corresponds to further interaction-reducible
diagrams. By expanding the effective 2B interaction according to Eq. (
3.3 ), the contribution of Fig. LABEL:sub@2ord_2B splits into the four
diagrams of Fig. 3.6 .

The second interaction-irreducible diagram arises from explicit 3BFs and
it is given in Fig. LABEL:sub@2ord_3B . One may expect this contribution
to play a minor role due to phase space arguments, as it involves @xmath
and @xmath excitations at higher excitation energies. Moreover, 3BFs are
generally weaker than the corresponding 2BFs (typically, @xmath for
nuclear interactions ( Gra1989 ; Epe2009Oct ) ). Summarizing, at second
order in standard self-consistent perturbation theory, one would find a
total of 5 skeleton diagrams. Of these, only 2 are
interaction-irreducible and need to be calculated when effective
interactions are considered.

Fig. 3.7 shows all the 17 interaction-irreducible diagrams appearing at
third order. Again, note that, expanding the effective interaction
@xmath , would generate a much larger number of diagrams (53 in total).
Diagrams Figs. LABEL:sub@3ord_2B_1 and LABEL:sub@3ord_2B_2 are the only
third-order terms that would appear in the 2BF case. Numerically, these
two diagrams only require evaluating Eq. ( 3.3 ) beforehand, but can
otherwise be dealt with using existing 2BF codes. They have already been
exploited to include 3BFs in nuclear structure studies ( Som2008 ;
Heb2010Jul ; Heb2011 ; Cip2013 ; Car2013Oct ) .

The remaining 15 diagrams, from Figs. LABEL:sub@3ord_232B to
LABEL:sub@3ord_333B_3 , appear when irreducible 3BFs are introduced.
These third-order diagrams are ordered in Fig. 3.7 in terms of
increasing numbers of 3B interactions and, within these, in terms of
increasing number of particle-hole excitations. Qualitatively, one would
expect that this should correspond to a decreasing importance of their
contributions. Diagrams Figs. LABEL:sub@3ord_2B_1 - LABEL:sub@3ord_232B
, for instance, only involve @xmath and @xmath intermediate
configurations, normally needed to describe particle addition and
removal energies to dominant quasiparticle peaks as well as total
ground-state energies. Diagram Fig. LABEL:sub@3ord_232B includes one 3B
irreducible interaction term and still needs to be investigated within
the SCGF method. Normal-ordered Hamiltonian studies ( Hag2007 ; Rot2012
) clearly suggest that this brings in a small correction to the total
energy with respect to diagrams Figs. LABEL:sub@3ord_2B_1 and
LABEL:sub@3ord_2B_2 . This is in line with the qualitative analysis of
the number of @xmath and @xmath interactions entering these diagrams.
The remaining diagrams of Fig. 3.7 all include @xmath and @xmath
configurations. Diagrams Fig. LABEL:sub@3ord_223B_1 to
LABEL:sub@3ord_332B_2 all describe interaction between @xmath ( @xmath )
and @xmath ( @xmath ) configurations. These are split into two groups,
four contributions containing two effective 2BFs and other four
conatining two irreducible 3B interactions. Similarly, diagrams Figs.
LABEL:sub@3ord_323B_1 to LABEL:sub@3ord_333B_3 are the first
contributions to the configuration mixing among @xmath or @xmath states.

App. A provides the Feynman diagram rules to compute the contribution
associated with these diagrams. Specific expressions for some diagrams
in Fig. 3.7 are given. We note that the Feynman rules remain unaltered
whether one uses the original, @xmath and @xmath , or the effective,
@xmath or @xmath , interactions. Hence, symmetry factors due to
equivalent lines remain unchanged. However, we provide in App. A a few
examples to illustrate the appearance of non-trivial symmetry factors
when 3BFs are considered. This complicates the rules of the symmetry
factors and illustrates some of the difficulties associated with
many-particle interactions.

### 3.2 Hierarchy of equations of motion

The perturbation theory expansion outlined in the previous section is
useful to identify new contributions arising from the inclusion of 3B
interactions. However, diagrams up to third order alone do not
necessarily incorporate all the necessary information to describe
strongly correlated quantum many-body systems. For example, the strong
repulsive character of the nuclear force at short distances requires
explicit all-order summations of ladder series. All-order summations of
@xmath and @xmath are also required in finite systems to achieve
accuracy for the predicted ground-state and separation energies, as well
as to preserve the correct analytic properties of the self-energy beyond
second order.

To investigate approximation schemes for all-order summations including
3BFs, we now develop the EOM method. This will provide special insight
into possible self-consistent expansions of the irreducible self-energy,
@xmath . For 2B forces only, the EOM technique defines a hierarchy of
equations that link each @xmath -body GF to the @xmath - and the @xmath
-body GFs. When extended to include 3BFs, the hierarchy also involves
the @xmath -body GF. A truncation of this Martin-Schwinger hierarchy is
necessary to solve the system of equations ( Mart1959 ) and can
potentially give rise to physically relevant resummation schemes. Here,
we will follow the footprints of Ref. ( Mat1971 ) and apply truncations
to obtain explicit equations for the 4-point (and 6-point, in the 3BF
case) vertex functions.

The EOM for a given propagator is found by taking the derivative of its
time arguments. The time arguments are linked to the creation and
annihilation operators in Eqs. ( 2.4 ) to ( 2.6 ), and hence the time
dependence of these operators will drive that of the propagator (
Bla1986 ) . The unperturbed 1B propagator can be written as the @xmath
order term of Eq. ( 2.25 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Its time derivative will be given by the von Neumann equation for the
operators in the interaction picture ( Abr1975 ) :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking the derivative of @xmath with respect to time and using Eq. (
3.10 ), we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the delta functions in time arise from the derivatives of the
step-functions involved in the time-ordered product.

The same procedure applied to the exact 1B propagator, @xmath , requires
the time-derivative of the operators in the Heisenberg picture. For the
original Hamiltonian of Eq. ( 2.1 ), the EOM for the annihilation
operator reads:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

This can now be used to take the derivative of the full 1B propagator in
Eq. ( 2.4 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation links the 2-point GF to both the 4- and the 6-point GFs.
Note that the connection with the latter is mediated by the 3BF and
hence does not appear in the pure 2BF case. Regarding the time-arguments
in Eq. ( 3.13 ), the @xmath and @xmath in the 4- and 6-point GFs are
necessary to keep the correct time-ordering in the creation operators
when going from Eq. ( 3.12 ) to Eq. ( 3.13 ). An analogous equation can
be obtained for the derivative of the time argument @xmath . After some
manipulation, involving the Fourier transforms of Eqs. ( 2.7 ) and ( 2.8
), one obtains the equation of motion for the SP propagator in frequency
representation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again, this involves both the 4- and the 6-point GFs, which appear due
to the 2B and 3B interactions, respectively. The equation now involves
@xmath frequency integrals for the @xmath -point GFs. The diagrammatic
representation of this equation is given in Fig. 3.8 .

The EOMs, Eqs. ( 3.13 ) and ( 3.14 ), connect the 1B propagator to GFs
of different @xmath -body orders. In general, starting from an @xmath
-body GF, the derivative of the time-ordering operator generates a delta
function between an incoming and outgoing particle, effectively
separating a line and leaving an ( @xmath )-body propagator. Conversely,
the 2B part of the Hamiltonian introduces an extra pair of creation and
annihilation operators that adds another particle and leads to an (
@xmath )-body GF. For a 3B Hamiltonian, the ( @xmath )-body GF enters
the EOM due to the commutator in Eq. ( 3.12 ). This implies that
higher-order GFs will be needed, at the same level of approximation, in
the EOMs hierarchy when considering 3BFs.

Eq. ( 3.14 ) gives an exact equation for the SP propagator @xmath that,
however, requires the knowledge of both the 4-point and 6-point GFs.
Full equations for the latter require applying the EOMs to these
propagators as well. Before that, however, it is possible to further
simplify contributions in Eq. ( 3.14 ) by splitting the @xmath -point
GFs into two terms. The first one is relatively simple, involving the
properly antisymmetrized independent propagation of @xmath dressed
particles, with @xmath equal to two and three for respectively the
4-point and 6-point GFs. The second term will involve the interaction
vertices, @xmath and @xmath , 1PI vertex functions that include all
interaction effects ( Bla1986 ) . These can be neatly connected to the
irreducible self-energy.

For the 4-point GF, this separation is shown diagrammatically in Fig.
3.9 . The first two terms involve two dressed fermion lines propagating
independently, and their exchange as required by the Pauli principle.
The remaining part, stripped off its external legs, can contain only 1PI
diagrams which are collected in a vertex function, @xmath . This is
associated with interactions and, at lowest level, it would correspond
to a 2BF. As we will see in the following, however, 3B interactions also
provide contributions to @xmath . The 4-point vertex function is defined
by the following equation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Eq. ( LABEL:g4ptgamma ) is exact and is an implicit definition of @xmath
. Different many-body approximations arise when approximations are
performed on this vertex function ( Dic2004 ; Dic2008 ) .

A similar expression holds for the 6-point GF. In this case, the
diagrams that involve non interacting lines can contain either all 3
dressed propagators moving independently from each other or groups of
two lines interacting through a 4-point vertex function. The remaining
terms are collected in a 6-point vertex function, @xmath , which
contains terms where all 3 lines are interacting. This separation is
demonstrated diagrammatically in Fig. 3.10 . The Pauli principle
requires a complete antisymmetrization of these diagrams. For the “free
propagating” term, this implies all @xmath permutations of the 3 lines.
The second term, involving @xmath , requires @xmath cyclic permutations
within both incoming and outgoing legs. The 6-point vertex function is
already antisymmetrized and hence no permutations are needed. The
equation corresponding to Fig. 3.10 is exact and provides an implicit
definition of the @xmath vertex function:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, we have introduced the antisymmetrization operator, @xmath , which
sums all possible permutations of pairs of indices and frequencies,
@xmath , with their corresponding sign. Likewise, @xmath sums all
possible cyclic permutations of the index-frequency pairs. Again, let us
stress that both @xmath and @xmath are formed of 1PI diagrams only,
since they are defined by removing all external dressed legs from the
@xmath and @xmath propagators. However, they can be still two-particle
reducible, since they include diagrams that can be split by cutting two
lines. In general, @xmath and @xmath are solution of all-order
summations analogous to the Bethe-Salpeter equation, in which the
kernels are 2PI and 3PI vertices (see Eqs. ( 3.19 ) to ( 3.21 ) below).

Inserting Eqs. ( LABEL:g4ptgamma ) and ( 3.2 ) into Eq. ( 3.14 ), and
exploiting the effective 1B and 2B operators defined in Eqs. ( 3.2 ) and
( 3.3 ), one recovers the Dyson equation, Eq. ( 2.26 ). One can
therefore identify the exact expression of the irreducible self-energy
@xmath in terms of 1PI vertex functions:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.17)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The diagrammatic representation of Eq. ( 3.17 ) is shown in Fig. 3.11 .
We note that, as an irreducible self-energy, this should include all the
connected, 1PI diagrams. These can be regrouped in terms of skeleton and
interaction-irreducible contributions, as long as @xmath and @xmath are
expressed that way. Note that effective interactions are used here. The
interaction-reducible components of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
actually generated by contributions involving partially non-interacting
propagators contributions inside @xmath and @xmath . The first two terms
in both Eqs. ( LABEL:g4ptgamma ) and ( 3.2 ) only contribute to generate
effective interactions. Note, however, that the 2B effective interaction
does receive contributions from both @xmath and @xmath in the
self-consistent procedure, as will be clear in the following.

The first term entering Eq. ( 3.17 ) is the energy-independent
contribution to the irreducible self-energy, already found in Eq. ( 3.8
). This includes the subtraction of the auxiliary field, @xmath , as
well as the 1B interaction-irreducible contributions due to the 2B and
3BFs. Once again, we note that the definition of this term, shown in
Fig. 3.3 , involves fully correlated density matrices. Consequently,
even though this is a static contribution, it goes beyond the
Hartree-Fock approximation. The dispersive part of the self-energy is
described by the second and third terms on the right side of Eq. ( 3.17
). These account for all higher-order contributions and incorporate
correlations on a 2B and 3B level associated with the vertex functions
@xmath and @xmath , respectively.

#### 3.2.1 Interaction vertices: the @xmath

We now apply the EOM method to the 4-point GF. This will provide insight
into approximation schemes that involve correlations at or beyond the
2B-level. Let us stress that our final aim is to obtain generic
nonperturbative approximation schemes in the many-body sector. Taking
the time derivative of the first argument in Eq. ( 2.5 ) and following
the same procedure as for the 2-point GF, we find:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is the analogous, in the case of the 2-body GF, of Eq. ( 3.14 )
for the SP propagator. As expected, the EOM connects the 2-body
(4-point) GF to other propagators. The 1B propagator term just provides
the non-interacting dynamics, with the proper antisymmetrization. The
interactions bring in admixtures with the 4-point GF itself, via the
one-body potential, but also with the 6- and 8-point GFs, via the the 2B
and the 3B interactions, respectively. Similarly to what we observed in
Eq. ( 3.14 ), the dynamics involve @xmath frequency integrals for the
@xmath -point GFs. The diagrammatic representation of this equation is
given in Fig. 3.12 .

To proceed further, as done for the analysis of the 1B GF and following
the steps of Ref. ( Mat1971 ) , we split the 8-point GF into free
dressed propagators and 1PI vertex functions. This decomposition is
shown in Fig. 3.13 . In addition to the already-defined vertex
functions, one needs 1PI objects with 4 incoming and outgoing indices.
To this end, we introduce the 8-point vertex function @xmath in the last
term. Note that due care has to be taken in enumerating all
antisymmetrization possibilities when groups of fermion lines that are
not connected by @xmath are considered. The first term in Fig. 3.13 ,
for instance, involves 4 non-interacting but dressed fermion lines, and
there are @xmath possible combinations. There are @xmath equivalent
terms involving two non-interacting lines and a single @xmath , as in
the second term of Fig. 3.13 . The double @xmath contribution (third
term) can be obtained in @xmath equivalent ways. For the term with an
independent line and three interacting lines through a @xmath vertex
function there are @xmath equivalent terms.

With this decomposition at hand, one can now proceed and find an
equation for the 4-point vertex function, @xmath . Inserting the exact
decompositions of the 4-, 6- and 8-point GFs, given respectively by
Figs. 3.9 , 3.10 and 3.13 , into the EOM of the 2B propagator, Eq. (
3.2.1 ), one obtains an equation with @xmath on both sides. The
diagrammatic representation of this self-consistent equation is shown in
Fig. 3.14 .

A few comments are in order at this point. The left-hand side of Eq. (
3.2.1 ) in principle contains two dressed and non interacting
propagators, as shown in the first two terms of Fig. 3.9 . On the
right-hand side of Eq. ( 3.2.1 ), however, one of the 1B propagators is
not dressed. However, when expanding the GFs in terms of the @xmath
vertex functions, the remaining contributions to the Dyson equation
arise automatically (see Fig. 3.8 ). The free unperturbed line,
therefore, becomes dressed. As a consequence, the pair of dressed
non-interacting propagators cancel out exactly on both sides of Eq. (
3.2.1 ). This dressing procedure of the @xmath propagator happens only
partially in the last three terms of Eq. ( 3.2.1 ) and has been
disregarded in our derivation. In this sense, Fig. 3.14 should be taken
as an approximation to the exact EOM for @xmath .

Eq. ( 3.2.1 ) links 1B, 2B, 3B and 4B propagators. Correspondingly, Fig.
3.14 involves higher-order vertex functions, such as @xmath and @xmath ,
which are in principle coupled, through their own EOMs, to more complex
GFs. The hierarchy of these equations has to be necessarily truncated.
In Ref. ( Mat1971 ) , truncation schemes were explored by neglecting the
@xmath vertex function at the level of Fig. 3.14 ( @xmath did not appear
in the 2BF-only case). This level of truncation is already sufficient to
retain physically-relevant subsets of diagrams, such as ladders and
rings. Let us note, in particular, that the summation of these infinite
series leads to nonperturbative many-body schemes. For completeness, we
show in Fig. 3.14 all contributions coming also from the @xmath and
@xmath vertices, many of them arising from 3BFs.

We have ordered the diagrams in Fig. 3.14 in terms of increasing
contributions from 3BFs, and in the order of expansion in perturbation
theory at which they start contributing to @xmath . Intuitively, we
expect that this should arrange them in decreasing importance. Diagrams
Figs. 3.14 (a), 3.14 (b), 3.14 (c) and 3.14 (f) are those that are also
present in the 2BF-only case. Diagram Fig. 3.14 (f), however, is of a
mixed nature: it can contribute only at third order with effective 2BFs,
but does contain interaction-irreducible 3BF contributions at second
order that are similar to diagrams Figs. 3.14 (d) and 3.14 (e). Diagrams
Figs. 3.14 (d)-(h) all contribute to @xmath at second order, although
the first three require a combination of a @xmath and a @xmath term. The
remaining diagrams in this group, Figs. 3.14 (g) and 3.14 (h), require
two 3B interactions at second order and are expected to be subleading.
Note that diagram Fig. 3.14 (d) is antisymmetric in @xmath and @xmath ,
but it must also be antisymmetrized with respect to @xmath and @xmath .
Its conjugate contribution, diagram Fig. 3.14 (e), should not be further
antisymmetrized in @xmath and @xmath , because such exchange term is
already included in Fig. 3.14 (f). All the remaining terms, diagrams
Figs. 3.14 (i)-(k), only contribute from the third order on.

In this section we saw how the hierarchy of EOMs links different @xmath
-body GFs to each other, increasing the complexity of the solution
together with the growing of the @xmath -body interacting terms which
appear in the description of the system. We demonstrated how solution of
the EOM for the 2-point GF yields the formulation of the irreducible
self-energy, and how following the same pattern for the 4-point GF
provides an expression for the @xmath vertex function.

#### 3.2.2 Interaction vertices truncations

We now want to demonstrate the correspondence between the techniques
derived in Sec. 3.1 and the EOM method described in Sec. 3.2 . In
particular, we want to show how the self-energy obtained with the EOM
expression, Eq. ( 3.17 ), leads to the perturbative expansion of Eq. (
2.25 ). We will do this by expanding the self-energy up to third order
and showing the equivalence of both approaches at this order. To this
end, we need to expand the vertex functions in terms of the effective
Hamiltonian, @xmath . The lowest-order terms entering @xmath can be
easily read from Fig. 3.14 . We show these second-order, skeleton and
interaction-irreducible diagrams in Fig. 3.15 . Only the first three
terms would contribute in a 2BF calculation. There are two terms
involving mixed 2BFs and 3BFs, whereas the final two contributions come
from two independent 3BFs. Note that, to get the third-order expressions
of the self-energy, we expand the vertex functions to second order, i.e.
one order less.

Analogously, we display the expansion up to second order of @xmath in
Fig. 3.16 . Most contributions to this vertex function contain 3BFs. The
lowest-order term, for instance, is given by the 3B interaction itself.
Note, however, that second-order terms formed only by 2B effective
interactions are possible, such as the second term on the right-hand
side of Fig. 3.16 . These will eventually be connected with a 3BF to
give a mixed self-energy contribution (see Eq. ( 3.17 ) and Fig. 3.11 ).

If one includes the diagrams in Figs. 3.15 and 3.16 into the irreducible
self-energy @xmath of Fig. 3.11 , all the diagrams discussed in Eq. 3.8
, Fig. 3.5 and Fig. 3.7 of Sec. 3.1 are recovered. This does prove, at
least up to third order, the correspondence between the perturbative
expansion approach and the EOM method for the GFs. Proceeding in this
manner to higher orders, one should obtain equivalent diagrams all the
way through.

It is important to note that diagrams representing conjugate
contributions to @xmath are generated by different, not necessarily
conjugate, terms of @xmath and @xmath . For instance, diagram Fig.
LABEL:sub@3ord_223B_1 is the result of the term 3.15 ( @xmath ) and its
exchange, on the right-hand side of Fig. 3.15 . Its conjugate
self-energy diagram Fig. LABEL:sub@3ord_322B_1 , however, is generated
by the second contribution to @xmath , Fig. 3.16 (b). This term is also
related to diagram Fig. LABEL:sub@3ord_322B_2 . More specifically, the
term in Fig. 3.16 (b) has 9 cyclic permutations of its indices, of which
6 contribute to diagram Fig. LABEL:sub@3ord_322B_1 and 3 to diagram Fig.
LABEL:sub@3ord_322B_2 . On the other hand, the conjugate of diagram Fig.
LABEL:sub@3ord_322B_2 is diagram Fig. LABEL:sub@3ord_223B_2 , which is
entirely due to the exchange contribution of the Fig. 3.15 (d) term in
@xmath . The direct contribution of this same term leads to diagram Fig.
LABEL:sub@3ord_232B , which is already self-conjugate.

More importantly, nonperturbative self-energy expansions can be obtained
by means of other hierarchy truncations at the level of @xmath and
@xmath . Translating these into self-energy expansions is then just an
issue of introducing them in Eq. ( 3.17 ). According to the
approximation chosen for the vertex functions appearing in Fig. 3.11 ,
we will be summing specific sets of diagrams when solving Dyson’s
equation, Eq. ( 2.26 ). However, from the above discussion it should be
clear that extra care must be taken to guarantee that the truncations
lead to physically coherent results. In particular, it is not always
possible to naively neglect @xmath . The last two terms of the
self-energy equation, Eq. ( 3.17 ), generate conjugate contributions.
Hence, neglecting one term or the other will spoil the analytic
properties of the self-energy which require an Hermitian real part and
an anti-Hermitian imaginary part. In the examples discussed above,
diagrams Fig. LABEL:sub@3ord_322B_1 and Fig. LABEL:sub@3ord_322B_2 would
be missing if @xmath had not been considered.

When no irreducible 3B interaction terms are present in the hierarchy
truncation, only the @xmath term contributes to Eq. ( 3.17 ). The ladder
and the ring truncations, (see further down in Eqs. ( 3.19 ) and ( 3.20
)), generate their own conjugate diagrams and can be used on their own
to obtain physical approximations to the self-energy. However, this need
not be true in general. A counterexample is actually provided by the
truncation of Eq. ( 3.22 ) (see further down in Sec. 3.3 ) which, if
inserted in Eq. ( 3.17 ) without the corresponding contributions to
@xmath , cannot generate a correct self-energy. Because of its
diagrammatic content, Eq. ( 3.22 ) can only be used as a correction to
@xmath .

### 3.3 Ladder and other approximations

Let us now introduce truncations on the @xmath derived in the previous
section, which will lead us to define specific approximations in the
many-body calculation. The simplest truncation schemes to @xmath come
from considering the first three terms of Fig. 3.14 , which involve
effective 2BFs only. In the pure 2B case, these have already been
discussed in the literature ( Mat1971 ) . Retaining diagrams Figs. 3.14
(a) and 3.14 (b) leads to the ladder resummation to include effectively
3BFs, used in recent studies of infinite nucleonic matter ( Som2008 ;
Car2013Oct ) :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have explicitly used the fact that @xmath , for a vertex
function connecting @xmath incoming and outgoing lines, is only defined
when incoming and outgoing energies are conserved. Likewise, diagrams
Figs. 3.14 (a) and the direct contribution of 3.14 (c) generate a series
of ring diagram which correspond to the antisymmetrized version of the
random phase approximation (RPA):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Adding up the first three contributions together, 3.14 (a)-(c), and
including the exchange, will generate a Parquet-type of resummation,
with ladders and rings embedded into each other:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eqs. ( 3.19 ) and ( 3.20 ) can be solved in a more or less simple
fashion because the corresponding vertex functions effectively depend on
only one frequency ( @xmath and @xmath , respectively). Hence these two
resummation schemes have been traditionally used to study extended
systems ( Dic2004 ; Ary1998 ; Oni2002 ) . The simultaneous resummation
of both rings and ladders within the self-energy is possible for finite
systems, and it is routinely used in both quantum chemistry and nuclear
physics ( Sch1983 ; Dan2011 ; Bar2007 ; Cip2013 ) . The Parquet
summation, as shown in Eq. ( 3.21 ), does require all three independent
frequencies and it is difficult to implement numerically. Specific
approximations to rewrite these in terms of two-time vertex functions
have been recently attempted ( Ber2011 ) , but further developments are
still required.

The next approximation to @xmath would involve diagrams Figs. 3.14 (d),
3.14 (e), and the exchange part included in 3.14 (f). All these should
be added together to preserve the antisymmetry and conjugate properties
of the vertex function. The resulting contributions still depend on all
three frequencies and cannot be simply embedded in all-order summations
such as the ladder, Eq. ( 3.19 ), or the ring, Eq. ( 3.20 ),
approximations. However, these diagrams could be used to obtain
corrections, at first order in the interaction-irreducible @xmath , to
the previously calculated 4-point vertices. The explicit expression for
these terms is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 3.22 ) has some very attractive features. First, it should provide
the dominant contribution beyond those associated with the effective 2B
interaction, @xmath . Perhaps more importantly, this contribution can be
easily calculated in terms of one of the two-time vertex functions,
@xmath and @xmath . This could then be inserted in Eq. ( LABEL:g4ptgamma
) to generate corrections of expectation values of 2B operators stemming
from purely irreducible 3B contributions.

Once a truncation scheme is chosen at the level of the vertex functions,
one can immediately derive a diagrammatic approximation for the
self-energy ( Dic2008 ) . In the case of the present work, where we deal
with infinite nuclear matter, we want to focus on the dominant effect of
short-range correlations which characterizes the repulsion at small
distances between nucleons. To take this effect into account we choose
to work within the ladder summation of diagrams described by Eq. ( 3.19
). To analyze more in detail the analytic structure of the ladder vertex
function, let’s introduce the Lehman representation, in the specific
case of an infinite system, of the 2B propagator of Eq. ( 3.4 ). We
focus on the specific case of particle-particle @xmath and hole-hole
@xmath propagation for the @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

@xmath defines the energy variable for a 2B state. We must point out
that for the specific purpose of the ladder approximation we only need
the first order approximation of the expectation values that appear in
the numerators of Eq. ( LABEL:G2B_Lehm ). This corresponds to
considering the HF approximation for the @xmath , namely the independent
propagation of two correlated SP states (see the first two terms on the
right-hand side of Fig. 3.9 ). Let’s define relative incoming and
outgoing momenta of the two particles as @xmath and @xmath , and the
momenta of the center of mass as @xmath . @xmath are momenta of each
single incoming nucleon, and @xmath of each outgoing nucleon. In the
following equations we omit the use of spin/isospin indices for
convenience. Making use of Eq. ( 2.10 ) and Eq. ( 2.11 ), we can rewrite
the first order approximation of Eq. ( LABEL:G2B_Lehm ) as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the transferred momentum. Diagrammatically the previous
expression corresponds to the first two diagrams in Fig. 3.9 .

Let’s now restate Eq. ( 3.19 ) as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have introduced the dispersive energy-dependent part of the
ladder vertex function, @xmath . Eq. ( 3.25 ) is a
Lippman-Schwinger-type equation that defines the ladder vertex function
@xmath as an in-medium @xmath -matrix. This quantity can be seen as the
analogous to the scattering @xmath -matrix in free space. But, in the
present context, it takes into account the medium through the repeated
scattering to all orders of two independent but fully dressed particles.
This is described by the 2B propagator @xmath included in its dispersive
energy-dependent part, @xmath . Making use of Eq. ( 3.24 ) and combining
Eqs. ( 3.19 ) and ( 3.25 ), we can write this quantity as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The notation with @xmath and @xmath signals that the corresponding
contributions to @xmath has poles in the lower or upper half of the
complex energy plane. Poles in the lower half plane are associated with
forward @xmath propagation, i.e. energies above @xmath , while poles in
the upper half plane apply for backward @xmath propagation, i.e.
energies below @xmath . This distinction is helpful to allow the proper
construction of the ladder self-energy which can be defined as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath defines SP momentum. The first term corresponds to the HF
self-energy, which is included in the first term of Eq. ( 3.17 ). In the
present work, the HF self-energy is calculated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the SP momentum distribution function has been introduced in Eq. (
2.13 ). Diagrammatically this contribution to the self-energy
corresponds to the first order approximation of Fig. 3.3 stripped off
the 1B term. The second term in Eq. ( 3.27 ) can be obtained by
considering the pole structure defined in Eq. ( 3.26 ), and can be
written as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that conversely to Eq. ( 3.26 ), the ladder self-energy is now
defined in terms of SP momenta. Eq. ( 3.29 ) tells us that a
self-consistent solution for the system is indeed required, given that
the spectral functions are functions of the self-energy itself through
Dyson’s equation (see Eqs. ( 2.30 )-( 2.31 )). A diagrammatic
representation of the previous equation is shown by the second term in
Fig. 3.11 . Consequently, it is clear how the dispersive part of the
ladder self-energy, Eq. ( 3.29 ), is connected to the in-medium @xmath
-matrix.

In Sec. 2.3 we saw how the spectral functions are given by a combination
of the real and imaginary part of the self-energy (see Eqs. ( 2.30 )-(
2.31 )). For this reason, it is useful to introduce the expression for
Eq. ( 3.29 ) in which the imaginary and real part are defined
separately. Plugging the spectral decomposition of the @xmath vertex
function, given in Eq. ( 3.26 ), into Eq. ( 3.29 ), leads us to write
the imaginary part of the ladder self-energy:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

The real part of the ladder self-energy can then be obtained through a
dispersion relation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

to which the HF self-energy, Eq. ( 3.28 ), must be summed up to obtain
the total real part of the self-energy.

To conclude this chapter, we would like to stress the fact that
extensions to include 3BFs beyond effective 2B interactions, like @xmath
, are a completely virgin territory. To our knowledge, these have not
been evaluated for nuclear systems (or any other system, for that
matter) with diagrammatic formalisms. Truncation schemes, like those
proposed here, should provide insight on in-medium 3B correlations. The
advantage that the SCGF formalism provides is the access to
nonperturbative, conserving approximations that contain pure 3B dynamics
without the need for ad hoc assumptions.

## Chapter 4 Effective two-body chiral interaction

Exploiting the extended SCGF formalism to include 3B forces, we want to
obtain results in the ladder approximation for infinite nuclear matter,
as described in Sec. 3.3 . To achieve this goal, we calculate an
effective 2B potential, sum of a 2NF and a contracted 3NF, as the one
defined in Eq. ( 3.3 ) and depicted in Fig. 3.4 . This effective
potential will then be used in the dispersive part of the SP
self-energy, Eq. ( 3.29 ). In order to compute the HF part of the
self-energy, Eq. ( 3.28 ), we furthermore need to calculate a 1B
effective potential. In the present calculations, however, we don’t
compute the complete 1B effective potential, as described in Eq. ( 3.2 )
and graphically shown in Fig. 3.3 , but only its HF approximation,
stripped off the 1B part (see Fig. 5.3 in the introduction to Chap. 5 ).
In this case, as we have already pointed out in Sec. 3.1 , the factor in
front of the contracted 3B term in Eq. ( 3.2 ) must change from a 1/4 to
a 1/2. Hence, to calculate the 1B effective potential we can resume to
use the same 2B effective potential defined for the dispersive part, but
carefully correct the contracted 3NF term with a factor 1/2. The use of
these effective interactions will then lead to a correct evaluation of
the complete SP self-energy, Eq. ( 3.27 ).

Consequently, the necessary step, which we will perform in this chapter,
is the calculation of an averaged 3NF via the contraction with a 1B
propagator (see second term on right-hand side in Fig. 3.4 ). The
advantage of using a density-dependent 2NF constructed from three-body
physics is clear. The definition of an effective potential is the
easiest way to include, at the lowest order in 3B correlations, the
effect of 3NFs. In fact this, quick fix , provides the effect of 3B
forces without the need, given a specific many-body approximation, to
alter the overall construction of the theory built for the 2B sector
only. Nevertheless, as explained in detail in Sec. 3.1 , caution must be
kept when defining the effective terms at the 1B or 2B level.

The Krakow group paved the way for calculations in the SCGF approach
including three-body forces. In their works they built a contracted
version of the Urbana IX force ( Pie2001Jun ) , obtained with an average
that included the effect of correlations. ( Som2008 ; Som2009 ;
Som2009PhD ) . This density-dependent potential was then summed to
different 2NFs, such as the Nijmegen ( Sto1994 ) , CdBonn ( Mac2001 )
and Argonne @xmath ( Wir1995 ) potentials, to define an effective 2B
interaction as the one described in Eq. ( 3.3 ).

In this thesis we want to employ interactions at the 2B and 3B level
obtained from the same approach, @xmath EFT. We choose to construct our
density-dependent 2B force from a 3NF obtained at N2LO in @xmath EFT (
vKol1994 ; Epe2002Dec2 ) . This order corresponds to the leading order
for 3B chiral forces. We reduce the 3NF to a density-dependent effective
interaction through a correlated SP average over the third particle.
This represents in some sense the lowest-order contribution of the
three-body force in the many-body system. This is formally defined by
the second term in Eq. ( 3.3 ) and diagrammatically represented by the
second contribution in Fig. 3.4 . As we will see in the following
sections, three of the five LECs appearing in the three leading-order 3B
terms are known from the corresponding two-body potential. The remaining
two low-energy constants need to be obtained by fits in the few-body
sector ( Nog2006 ; Nav2007Jul ; Heb2011 ; Mar2013 ) .

In the past, most calculations for infinite matter where performed using
forces for the 2B and 3B sector derived in different model spaces, and
at the three-body level often included phenomenological ingredients (
Car1983 ) . A density-dependent 2NF, arising from three-body physics,
was added to the original 2NF to provide an interaction that effectively
included both two- and three-body effects, in a similar fashion to what
is presented in this work. Within the CBF theory, phenomenological
density-dependent 3NFs ( Lag1981 ; Frie1981 ) have been used for over 30
years ( Fan1984 ; Fan1987 ; Fab1989 ; Ben1989 ; Ben1992 ; Ben2007 ;
Car2011pr ) . Recently, further static and dynamical correlations have
been introduced in the density-dependent force within the FHNC approach
( Lov2011 ; Lov2012 ; Lov2012PhD ) , for Urbana IX, a chiral inspired
revision of the Tucson Melbourne potential ( Coo1981 ) and for a local
version of the N2LO chiral 3NF ( Nav2007Nov ) . Urbana IX has also been
used extensively within the BHF approach ( Bal1999 ; Zuo2002Aug ;
Zuo2002b ; Vid2009 ) . Within this approach, most results have been
derived from a density-dependent 2NF following the prescription of Ref.
( Gra1989 ) . Modern calculations also include a consistent defect
function in the averaging procedure for other 3NF ( Li2008Mar ;
Li2008Aug ) .

Density-dependent effective 2NF have been recently constructed from
chiral 3NFs at N2LO in Refs. ( JWHol2010 ; Heb2010Jul ) . In both cases,
the average is performed using a non-interacting propagator. This
averaged force has been used in perturbative calculations of infinite (
Heb2011 ; Heb2013Jul ; Coraggio2014 ) and finite nuclear systems (
JWHol2009 ) . BHF calculations, based on the same chiral 3NF but with an
alternative averaging procedure, indicate a very strong overbinding of
nuclear matter ( Li2012 ) . In contrast, within the same approach, a
recent calculation which follows a similar procedure for the
construction of the density-dependent chiral force to the one presented
in Ref. ( JWHol2010 ) , obtains good saturation properties for nuclear
matter ( Koh2013 ) .

In this chapter we describe the construction of the density-dependent
force from 3NF at N2LO in the chiral expansion. We then analyze in
detail its effect on the partial wave matrix elements.

### 4.1 Density-dependent potential at N2LO

The 3NF at third order in chiral perturbation theory is given by three
terms: a two-pion-exchange (TPE) contribution, which corresponds to the
Fujita-Miyazawa original @xmath exchange term ( Fuj1957 ) ; an iterated
one-pion-exchange (OPE); and a contact (cont) term ( vKol1994 ;
Epe2002Dec2 ) . These three contributions are diagrammatically
represented in Fig. 4.1 . Their analytical expressions are given by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the TPE 3B contribution of Eq. ( 4.1 ), the quantity @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the previous expressions, @xmath is the transferred momentum between
incoming particle and outgoing particle @xmath ; @xmath and @xmath are
SP initial and final momentum of nucleon @xmath as depicted in Fig. 4.1
. @xmath and @xmath define the isospin and spin matrices for particle
@xmath . @xmath is the axial-vector coupling constant, @xmath MeV the
pion mass, @xmath MeV the weak pion decay constant and @xmath MeV is the
chosen chiral symmetry breaking constant, of the order of the @xmath
meson mass.

The LECs appearing in the two-pion exchange term, @xmath , are the same
as those appearing in the original 2NF at N3LO. These are fixed by
experimental NN phase-shifts and deuteron properties ( Ent2002 ;
Epe2002Dec1 ) . In contrast, the two LECs appearing in the one-pion and
contact 3NF terms, @xmath and @xmath , remain undetermined and have to
be fit to further experimental values in the few-body sector. Their
value can be obtained from fits to the triton binding energy and to the
value of the nd scattering lenght ( Epe2002Dec2 ) . Fits to both the
binding energies of @xmath He and @xmath H can be exploited ( Nog2004 ;
Nog2006 ) , or in some cases even to 3B systems binding energies alone (
Nav2007Jul ; Nav2007Nov ) . Fitting procedures to @xmath H binding
energy and the radii of the @xmath particle have also been implemented (
Heb2011 ) . Furthermore, the triton binding energy together with
magnetic moments and the Gamow-Teller in tritium @xmath -decay have also
been used to constrain the value of these LECs ( Mar2013 ) . In the next
chapter we will analyze the dependence of our results on different
couples of LECs @xmath and @xmath .

It must be noted that the leading-order 3NF contributions appearing in
Eqs. ( 4.1 - 4.3 ) are antisymmetrized terms ( Epe2002Dec2 ) . In other
words, the 3B antisymmetrization operator @xmath is applied to the
potential term which, being a symmetric operator, leaves unaltered the
following quantity:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Hence one can work equally well with forces which are antisymmetrized or
not. @xmath represents an antisymmetric many-body state. In the specific
case of a 3-particle normalized antisymmetric state we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the three-particle antisymmetrization operator reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is the permutation operator of momentum and spin/isospin of
particles 1 and 2, which in spin/isospin space reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The density-dependent 2NF is obtained by tracing over spin/isospin
indices and integrating over the correlated momentum occupation @xmath ,
Eq ( 2.13 ), of the averaged particle, here identified as the third
particle:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the previous equation we used the antisymmetric potential matrix
elements which have been already introduced in Eq. ( 2.2 - 2.3 ). For
practical reasons from now on we will write @xmath . When calculating
Eq. ( 4.9 ), only part of the exchange which characterizes the 3B state
@xmath has to be considered in the averaging procedure, i.e. on the
right-hand side of Eq. ( 4.9 ). The exchange concerning particles 1 and
2 should in fact be included only in the final result, i.e. on the
left-hand side of Eq. ( 4.9 ), because this interchange doesn’t affect
the contraction over the third particle. Namely, only the @xmath
exchange part of the antisymmetrization operator @xmath , see Eq. ( 4.7
), has to be considered in the average. We can then rewrite Eq. ( 4.9 )
as:

  -- -------- -- --------
                 
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have written @xmath , and the same for the isospin space.
@xmath on the right-hand side matrix element means that the
three-particle ket is antisymmetrized only with respect to particles
1,2. The application of the interchange @xmath when calculating Eq. (
4.10 ) is a must in order to obtain a density-dependent force which
takes into account correctly all possible permutations. If neglected, it
leads to the definition of an incorrect density-dependent force which
has lost part of the permutation which characterized the original 3B
matrix element.

In this work, the in-medium NN contributions have been derived in the
approximation of zero centre of mass momentum, i.e. @xmath , which has
been shown to drive small errors on bulk properties of infinite matter (
Heb2010Jul ) . In the process of integration given in Eq. ( 4.10 ), the
3NF has been regularized with a function that reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are, only in this expression, identified as the
Jacobi momenta. @xmath defines the cutoff value applied to the 3NF in
order to obtain a 3B contribution which dies down similarly to the 2B
part one. The regulator function is applied both on incoming @xmath and
outgoing @xmath Jacobi momenta. In the approximation of @xmath , we have
for the complete regulator function:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.12)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

@xmath and @xmath are the modules of the relative incoming and outgoing
momenta. @xmath is the module of the SP momentum of the averaged
particle. The first exponential term on the right-hand side of Eq. (
4.12 ) only affects external relative incoming and outgoing momenta and
is similar to the regulator function applied on the 2B part of the
chiral potential ( Ent2003 ) . The second term in Eq. ( 4.12 ) also
affects the momentum of the averaged particle. In Ref. ( JWHol2010 ) the
authors use a regulator function which is equal only to the first
exponential term in Eq. ( 4.12 ). For this reason they obtain
semi-analytical expressions for the integrals of Eq. ( 4.10 ). The
authors of Ref. ( Heb2010Jul ) use a regulator function equal to the
full Eq. ( 4.12 ). We will see in the following section the effect of
using these two different regulator functions in the averaging
procedure. Note that the function in Eq. ( 4.12 ) is symmetric in the
interchange of the three particles, hence it is not affected by the
permutations performed in the average (see Eq. ( 4.10 )).

In the following we present the in-medium density-dependent
contributions in the specific case of diagonal matrix elements, i.e.
equal relative incoming and outgoing momentum @xmath . We calculate
these contributions for both cases of symmetric nuclear and pure neutron
matter. We want to underline that the expressions that will be presented
are formally equivalent to those obtained in Ref. ( JWHol2010 ) , whose
method we followed to calculate our density-dependent contributions. We
will see however, that our expressions differ with respect to those in
Ref. ( JWHol2010 ) , because of a different treatment of regulators and
correlations in the construction of the in-medium contributions. We must
also point out that in our present calculations, the off-diagonal
elements of the density-dependent potential are extrapolated from the
on-diagonal ones following the prescription given in Ref. ( JWHol2010 )
. We follow this approach because it greatly simplifies the evaluation
of the density-dependent terms, and avoids the inclusion of additional
operatorial structures in the definition of the general NN potential (
Erk1971 ) (see Eq. ( 4.13 ) further down). We will comment more on this
extrapolation at the end of this chapter. Nevertheless, we write
complete off-diagonal potential elements for the density-dependent 2NF
at N2LO in App. C .

The most general form for a two-nucleon potential, in diagonal momenta,
which is charge independent, Hermitian and invariant under translation,
particle exchange, rotation, space reflection and time reversal is given
by ( Erk1971 ) :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.13)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We highlight this expression because it will be useful in identifying
the different contributions of the density-dependent interaction which
arise from contraction of the 3NF terms written in Eqs.( 4.1 - 4.3 ).
Furthermore, following Refs. ( Erk1971 ; Kaiser1997 ; JWHol2010 ) , the
choice to express the density-dependent force in the form presented in
Eq. ( 4.13 ), turns out to be helpful when defining the partial wave
decomposition of the matrix elements. In Eq. ( 4.13 ), the subscripts
identify respectively: @xmath for the central term; @xmath the spin-spin
term; @xmath the tensor term; @xmath spin-orbit and @xmath quadratic
spin-orbit terms. All contributions are present in an isoscalar @xmath
and isovector @xmath form. For non-diagonal momentum matrix elements,
Eq. ( 4.13 ) would include a further operatorial structure ( Erk1971 ) ,
leading to a more complicated treatment when performing the partial wave
decomposition (see App. C for a detailed description for off-diagonal
momentum elements).

##### Symmetric nuclear matter

Let’s start with the isospin-symmetric case of nuclear matter.
Evaluating Eq. ( 4.10 ) for the TPE term of Eq. ( 4.1 ), depicted in
Fig. LABEL:sub@TPE-3B , leads to three contracted in-medium 2B
interactions. These are represented in Figs. LABEL:sub@TPE-1 -
LABEL:sub@TPE-3 .

The first term, Fig. LABEL:sub@TPE-1 , is an isovector tensor term, i.e.
will only contribute to @xmath in Eq. ( 4.13 ). This corresponds to a 1
@xmath exchange contribution with an in-medium pion propagator:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath defines the integral of the correlated momentum distribution
function weighed by the regulator function @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the degeneracy of the system, @xmath in the isospin
symmetric case. If the regulator function included in Eq. ( 4.15 ) were
not dependent on the internal integrated momentum @xmath , the integral
would reduce to the value of the total density of the system, @xmath ,
divided by the degeneracy and multiplied by an external regulator
function. Consequently, the expression in Eq. ( 4.15 ) would exactly
equal the one presented in Ref. ( JWHol2010 ) , even though in our case
we use a correlated momentum distribution function, while a step
function up to the Fermi level is used in the latter.

The second term, Fig. LABEL:sub@TPE-2 , is also a tensor contribution to
the in-medium NN interaction. It adds up to the previous term and
contributes to @xmath in Eq. ( 4.13 ). This term includes vertex
corrections to the 1 @xmath exchange due to the presence of the nuclear
medium:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have introduced the functions @xmath , which are integrals over a
single pion propagator:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

These integrals are formally equal to those presented in Ref. (
JWHol2010 ) , but differ in that a dressed propagator is used in our
average, and the expressions are weighed with an internal regulator
function.

The last TPE contracted term, depicted in Fig. LABEL:sub@TPE-3 ,
includes in-medium effects for a 2 @xmath exchange 2B term. This
expression contributes to all operatorial structures of Eq. ( 4.13 ).
Specifically it contributes to the scalar central term @xmath , to the
isovector spin-spin @xmath and tensor term @xmath , to the spin-orbit in
both isoscalar @xmath and isovector form @xmath , and to the isovector
quadratic spin-orbit term @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
                 (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here we have introduced the function @xmath , which is an integral over
the product of two different pion propagators:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The functions @xmath have been introduced to define the rest of the
functions, @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath is needed only to define @xmath .

Integrating Eq. ( 4.10 ) for the OPE 3NF term, given in Eq. ( 4.2 ),
leads to two contributions, shown in Figs. LABEL:sub@OPE-1 -
LABEL:sub@OPE-2 . The first one, Fig. LABEL:sub@OPE-1 , is a tensor
contribution which defines a vertex correction to a 1 @xmath exchange NN
term. It is proportional to the quantity @xmath , similar to what was
obtained for the TPE 3NF contracted term @xmath (see Eq. 4.14 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

As for the @xmath term, @xmath contributes uniquely to the isovector
tensor term @xmath of Eq. ( 4.13 ).

The second term derived from the 3NF OPE is depicted in Fig.
LABEL:sub@OPE-2 . It defines a vertex correction to the short-range
contact NN interaction. This in-medium interaction contribution is
formed of terms of various kinds: a central scalar @xmath , a spin-spin
@xmath , a tensor @xmath and quadratic spin-orbit @xmath terms, all
contributions in the isovector form (see Eq. ( 4.13 )). It reads:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last density-dependent term, shown in Fig. LABEL:sub@contact ,
arises from a contraction of the contact 3NF term given in Eq. ( 4.3 ).
This yields a scalar central contribution to the in-medium NN
interaction, i.e. a @xmath term, proportional to @xmath . Hence, being
momentum independent it will contribute only to @xmath partial waves, as
we will see in the following section. Its formal expression is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

We would like to underline once more that the obtained in-medium NN
interaction terms, Eqs. ( 4.14 ), ( 4.16 ), ( 4.22 ), ( 4.28 ), ( 4.29 )
and ( 4.30 ) are formally the same to those obtained by the authors in
Ref. ( JWHol2010 ) . The difference lies in the integrals over a single
and a product of pion propagators and in the function @xmath . These
integrals differ not only in that our averaging procedure is performed
using the correlated momentum distribution function @xmath , but
furthermore in the weighing of the integrand with the full regulator
function @xmath presented in Eq. ( 4.12 ). In the next section we will
test the discrepancies obtained on the effective 2B potential given by
different averaging procedures.

##### Pure neutron matter

In the case of pure neutron matter, the evaluation of Eq. ( 4.10 ) is
simplified. In fact, the trace over isospin is trivial, neutron matter
can only be in total isospin @xmath , i.e. @xmath . Consequently the
exchange operator of Eq. ( 4.8 ) reduces only to the momentum and spin
part, i.e. in spin space it reads:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

It can then be proved that in-medium terms proportional to @xmath go to
zero ( Tolos2008 ; Heb2010Jul ; JWHol2010 ) .

In fact, for the term proportional to @xmath , the contact contribution
in Eq. ( 4.3 ), the permutation of spin indices leads to equal direct
and exchange terms which directly cancel one another. Physically this is
a consequence of the Pauli principle which neutrons, being fermions,
must respect. In other words, @xmath vanishes between antisymmetrized
three-nucleon states.

For the OPE term proportional to @xmath , Eq. ( 4.2 ), it can be
demonstrated that the spin-momentum structure of this contribution leads
to a vanishing quantity when the trace over spin is applied (for further
details see App. C ). As explained in ( Heb2010Jul ) , the physical
reason lies in the fact that both spin and relative momentum state of
the two-neutron system interacting via the contact term in Eq. ( 4.2 )
is symmetric, which cannot be the case for an overall wave function for
a two-fermion state.

The other vanishing term, the @xmath part of the TPE contribution in
Eq. ( 4.1 ), contains an operatorial structure of the kind @xmath , and
further permutations of particles 1,3 and 2,3. This structure is zero in
a three neutron system.

Therefore the only density-dependent contributions, which are non-zero
in neutron matter, are those proportional to LECs @xmath and @xmath in
Eqs. ( 4.1 )-( 4.4 ). The density-dependent interacting terms obtained
in neutron matter will only differ with respect to the symmetric case
ones by different pre-factors. This is due to the fact that the only
part which changes from the symmetric to the pure neutron matter case is
the trace over isospin indices.

In order to obtain the correct degeneracy for neutron matter, i.e.
@xmath , we need to replace @xmath in the @xmath contribution of Eq. (
4.14 ), (see also Eq. ( 4.15 )). The isovector tensor terms @xmath and
@xmath , given in Eqs. ( 4.14 )-( 4.16 ), which contribute to @xmath in
Eq. ( 4.13 ), must then change prefactor according to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The isoscalar part of the density-dependent potential appearing in
@xmath , which contributes to both the central @xmath and the spin-orbit
@xmath terms in Eq. ( 4.13 ), must change prefactor according to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Neutron matter represents a very interesting and unique system for
chiral forces. All many-body forces up to N3LO in the chiral expansion
are predicted. Complete calculations including sub-leading three-nucleon
forces and leading four-nucleon forces can then be performed without the
need to adjust further LECs, except for those obtained in the 2B sector,
i.e. @xmath and @xmath . Recent results presented by the Darmstadt group
( Tew2013 ; Kru2013 ) found significant contributions from sub-leading
chiral 3NFs, i.e. 3NF at N3LO. Results obtained at complete N3LO level
are indeed a major step forward in providing further constrains for the
definition of the neutron matter equation of state.

### 4.2 Partial-wave matrix elements

We now want to analyze the different partial wave components of the six
in-medium NN interacting contributions obtained in the previous section.
The partial wave analysis is performed following the prescription
presented in Ref. ( JWHol2010 ) . Given the general formulation for the
NN interaction of Eq. ( 4.13 ), each of the 5 operatorial structures is
expanded into eigenstates of the @xmath basis. To do this, one first
evaluates the matrix elements in the helicity basis and then rotates
with Wigner @xmath -functions to the @xmath basis (for details see
Sec. 4 in Ref. ( Erk1971 ) ). To follow this approach, we first define
the quantities @xmath , where @xmath (see Eq. ( 4.13 )) and @xmath is
the total isospin of the pair (for details see Sec. 3 of Ref. (
Kaiser1997 ) ). We then apply strictly the projection formulas given in
Sec. IVA of Ref. ( JWHol2010 ) .

In the @xmath basis we consider six different matrix elements:

-   single matrix element with @xmath and @xmath ;

-   triple matrix element with @xmath and @xmath ;

-   triple matrix elements with @xmath and @xmath ;

-   triple mixing matrix elements with @xmath and @xmath , @xmath and
    its reverse.

Note that the reverse mixing matrix element, i.e. @xmath , @xmath , is
equal to the former one only for diagonal momentum elements, but it
differs in the off-diagonal ones.

The effect of the density-dependent 2NF is tested on top of the N3LO NN
force of Ref. ( Ent2003 ) . Low-energy constants coming from the 2B
sector are chosen accordingly, @xmath . The remaining LECs, @xmath and
@xmath , are taken from fits to ground-state properties of @xmath H and
@xmath He ( Nog2006 ) , obtained with the same chiral 2NF and 3NF used
in this thesis. The cutoff on the 3NF included in the regulator function
Eq. ( 4.12 ) is also chosen accordingly, i.e. @xmath . Now and in the
following, unless specified otherwise, calculations are performed with
full regulator function given in Eq. ( 4.12 ).

#### 4.2.1 The six terms of the density-dependent 2NF at N2LO

Let us start by analyzing the effect of each of the six components of
the in-medium interaction @xmath . We do it for the specific case of
symmetric nuclear matter at empirical saturation density @xmath fm
@xmath . Figs. 4.3 reports the effect for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
mixing partial waves.

For @xmath -waves (see upper left and right panels of Fig.
LABEL:sub@pot_123_S ), the tensor components derived from the long-range
chiral 3NF, @xmath and @xmath , present in all waves a similar
modification but with opposite sign. On one side, @xmath adds repulsion,
reaching an approximate maximum value of @xmath fm at intermediate
relative momentum. On the other side, @xmath contributes attractively
showing similar values. Therefore their combined modification to the NN
potential will be small, usually providing less than @xmath fm of
attraction due to the slightly higher values of @xmath . These
components go to zero for zero transferred momentum, hence vanish for
@xmath . The other contribution derived from the 3NF long-range term,
@xmath , has a repulsive effect for all momenta. It contributes strongly
at low momentum, weighing up to @xmath of the value of the NN N3LO force
at @xmath . This modification is the main cause for the suppression of
the attraction of the bare 2B potential. Repulsion goes down as the
relative momentum increases. 3NF medium-range contracted components (see
upper left and right panels of Fig. LABEL:sub@pot_456_S ), @xmath and
@xmath , give a small constant attractive contribution for all momenta,
of the order of @xmath fm for the sum of the two. Conversely, @xmath ,
coming from the contraction of the contact 3NF, weakens the attraction
of the NN N3LO potential, adding an average constant value of 0.35 fm in
repulsion, a bit higher for the @xmath wave. Its effect diminishes only
at high relative momentum. Combined with @xmath , these two
contributions to the in-medium potential have the dominant effect,
providing an overall strong repulsion. We want to point out that the
contracted contact term, @xmath , is proportional to the low-energy
constant @xmath , and changes sign accordingly to the sign of @xmath .
Hence it can give an attractive or a repulsive effect.

For the @xmath -wave (see lower left panel of Fig. LABEL:sub@pot_123_S )
the combined effect of @xmath and @xmath is also small. At intermediate
relative momenta, the former adds an 0.1 fm of repulsion, while the
latter a 0.2 fm of attraction, leading to a small combined attractive
effect similar to what is observed for @xmath -waves. The repulsive
effect of the @xmath appears mainly in the range of @xmath fm @xmath
relative momenta, reaching a maximum repulsion of @xmath fm on top of
the NN N3LO. For terms derived from the medium-range 3NF (see lower left
panel of Fig. LABEL:sub@pot_456_S ), @xmath adds a more or less constant
attraction of 0.02 fm at intermediate momentum ranges, diminishing the
repulsion of the @xmath . @xmath has a negligible but non zero effect.

The mixing @xmath -wave (see lower right panel of Fig.
LABEL:sub@pot_123_S - LABEL:sub@pot_456_S ) is the result of a strict
balance in between the different components. This balance results in
repulsion at low momenta, and attraction at intermediate and high
momenta, with respect to the NN N3LO force. As can be observed from Fig.
LABEL:sub@pot_123_S - LABEL:sub@pot_456_S (lower right panels), the
attractive sum of the density-dependent contributions @xmath and @xmath
balances the repulsion coming from the @xmath term. A similar behavior
is observed for the contributions derived from the medium-range 3NF,
where the attraction of @xmath is opposed by the repulsion of @xmath .

Let’s now analyze the effect of each in-medium contribution on @xmath
partial waves. In all waves (see Fig. 4.4 ), the major change with
respect to the bare NN potential is given by a combined effect of the
three 3NF TPE contracted in-medium contributions. To this combined
effect, the 2NFdd medium-range term, @xmath , adds small modifications.
The effect due to @xmath is negligible but non zero in all @xmath
partial waves.

For the uncoupled singlet @xmath , see upper left panel in Fig.
LABEL:sub@pot_123_P , we have that the @xmath adds a repulsion of @xmath
fm around relative momentum of 1 fm @xmath . This is compensated by the
joint attraction of @xmath and @xmath which is approximately @xmath fm.
@xmath , in upper left panel of Fig. LABEL:sub@pot_456_P , is then the
contribution which provides a small visible attraction, @xmath fm. This
behavior is maintained up to relative momenta of 1.5 fm @xmath ,
subsequently the repulsive effect of @xmath wins over the other
contributions.

In the triplet @xmath partial wave the changes due to each component are
similar to the ones observed for the former one, except for the 3NF
long-range contracted contribution @xmath , see lower left panel of Fig.
LABEL:sub@pot_123_P . This terms presents in this case a reversed
behavior, with respect to the @xmath wave, being repulsive for all
momenta. At intermediate momenta, the repulsion obtained by the sum of
@xmath and @xmath is stronger than the attraction coming from @xmath and
@xmath , see lower left panel in Fig. LABEL:sub@pot_456_P for the latter
contribution. This provides an overall enhancement for the NN N3LO at
@xmath fm @xmath of @xmath fm. In this range of relative momenta is
where the main modifications for the @xmath partial wave are observed.

In the remaining @xmath partial waves the changes provided by each
contribution are mainly similar. In both @xmath and @xmath , right
panels in Fig. LABEL:sub@pot_123_P , the averaged TPE contribution,
@xmath and @xmath , sum up to add repulsion to the bare NN N3LO. For
intermediate relative momentum, the repulsion can grow up to maximum
values of @xmath fm in the @xmath wave. In the @xmath wave this is much
less, of around @xmath fm for @xmath fm @xmath relative momenta. This
effect is enhanced in both partial waves by the OPE in-medium term
@xmath , right panels in Fig. LABEL:sub@pot_456_P , especially in the
@xmath , where it adds a further 0.02 fm repulsion to the NN potential.
The joint effect of these terms is proportionally balanced in each
partial wave by the attraction of the density-dependent contribution
@xmath . However, the attraction provided by this contribution is not
enough, and both partial waves result less attractive at all momenta
when considering the inclusion of the complete density-dependent
interaction.

As a concluding remark, we would like to underline that the terms
dependent on the LECs @xmath and @xmath can change substantially
depending on the value of these constants. While the effect of the
vertex correction to the short-range contact NN term, @xmath in Eq. (
4.29 ), is always negligible, the other terms can greatly influence the
total modification of the partial waves. In fact, according to the sign
of @xmath and @xmath , the vertex correction to the @xmath exchange
term, @xmath in Eq. ( 4.28 ), and the vertex correction to the contact
NN interaction, @xmath in Eq. ( 4.30 ), can yield an attractive or
repulsive effect, whose strength varies with the modules of the LECs,
@xmath and @xmath respectively. Therefore fitting procedures to obtain
these constants must be precise, in order to obtain reliable results for
nuclear structure calculations.

#### 4.2.2 The effect of correlations on the density-dependent 2NF

In Fig. 4.5 we plot at empirical saturation density the complete effect
of the in-medium NN interaction on top of the NN N3LO chiral force.
Curves obtained using both a correlated and a free distribution function
in Eq. ( 4.10 ) are presented. The correlated distribution function is
the self-consistent momentum distribution obtained at each iteration in
the solution of the Dyson equation, Eq. ( ), considering both 2NFs and
3NFs in the calculation. The use of a free in-medium propagator
corresponds to replacing @xmath by a step function up to the Fermi
momentum @xmath in Eq. ( 4.15 ), Eq. ( 4.17 - 4.21 ) and Eq.( 4.23 ).

Focusing on the @xmath partial waves, upper panels in Fig.
LABEL:sub@S_freevsmed_reg2 , the NN N3LO potential is pushed to less
attractive values for all momenta. As we previously analyzed, this
effect is mainly provided by the term including medium effects in a
@xmath exchange 2B term, @xmath of Eq. ( 4.22 ), and by the contact
term, @xmath given in Eq. ( 4.30 ). The repulsion provided by the
density-dependent force is as large as @xmath of the value of the bare
NN force at zero momentum. If we now turn to the @xmath -wave, lower
left panel in Fig. LABEL:sub@S_freevsmed_reg2 , we observe a small
attraction at low-momenta, @xmath fm, which evolves in a stronger
repulsion at intermediate momenta, @xmath fm. Also in this case, the
@xmath term plays a substantial role in providing this repulsion.

The modifications on @xmath and @xmath waves are dominant. We have
checked that the repulsive change which characterizes these partial
waves increases with the density. This promotes the total energy of the
system to more repulsive values, providing the mechanism for nuclear
matter saturation. While for the 3NF TPE contracted term, @xmath in
Eq. ( 4.22 ), this enhancement is difficult to see from its formal
expression, for the contact term, @xmath , it’s easy to verify. As a
matter of fact, this contribution is proportional to the quantity @xmath
, which directly grows with density (see Eq. ( 4.30 )).

The behavior of the mixing @xmath wave is reversed with respect to the
one of the @xmath wave. A small repulsion of the order of @xmath fm is
observed at momenta up to @xmath fm @xmath , and a similar value but in
attraction is seen for higher momenta. This is given by the combined
effect of all in-medium terms which contribute to this partial wave.

We can observe that the main effect coming from the use of a free or
dressed nucleon propagator appears in the @xmath and @xmath mixing
waves. Due to the use of the free propagator, the change is repulsive in
the previous and attractive in the latter, i.e. it enhances in both
cases the absolute value of the potential matrix element. For the @xmath
waves the modifications are negligible, less than 0.03 fm in attraction
with the use of the free in-medium propagator. From an analysis of each
of the six density-dependent components, it arises that the major
effect, due to the use of different in-medium propagators, is observed
for the @xmath contribution. This term increases in absolute value when
going from the correlated to the free average. This is a consequence of
the availability of momenta below the Fermi momentum. In other words,
the more momentum states are available below @xmath , i.e. free
in-medium propagator, the more the partial waves increase in absolute
values. This will be clear from the analysis that we will perform in the
next section on the different internal regulators used in the average.

In Fig. LABEL:sub@P_freevsmed_reg2 we show for @xmath waves, the sum of
the six in-medium NN contributions on top of the NN N3LO potential. The
effect is mainly given by the relative effect of the three contributions
derived from averaging the TPE 3NF, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . As
expected from the previous analysis performed on each contribution, in
waves @xmath and @xmath this effect is to add repulsion at all momenta
with respect to the bare NN N3LO potential. In the @xmath wave, the
average enhancement is @xmath fm, which dies at small and high relative
momenta. In the @xmath this value is a bit smaller, reaching its maximum
at @xmath fm at intermediate momenta. In @xmath partial wave, the effect
is attractive at low momenta and repulsive for higher; the behavior is
reversed in wave @xmath . In both cases, the modification is never
higher than @xmath fm in absolute value.

In @xmath partial waves, results obtained performing the calculation
with a free or dressed in-medium nucleon propagator present small
differences. In @xmath and @xmath waves, the change due to the use of a
step function up to the Fermi momentum adds a repulsion for all momenta
of the size of @xmath fm. In the @xmath the effect is slightly smaller
but with the opposite sign.

Finally, according to Fig. 4.5 , we can conclude that, except for the
@xmath partial wave, the effect of using a free propagator in the
averaging procedure is to enhance the absolute value of the potential
matrix elements in all partial waves. Similar conclusions as for the
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath waves can be drawn. The global effect will be
visible in the next chapter, where we will analyze the bulk properties
of nuclear matter. We will see how, at saturation density, the effect of
using the correlated average, with respect to the free one, lowers the
attraction provided by the 3BF, while at double saturation energy it
lowers its repulsion.

#### 4.2.3 The effect of the regulator function

We now want to analyze the effect of using different regulator functions
when performing the average over the third particle, as explained in the
previous section (see Eq. ( 4.12 ) and paragraph thereafter). We will
refer to full regulator when the calculation is computed using the
complete function given in Eq. ( 4.12 ). Conversely, we will refer to
external regulator when the average is computed using only the first
exponential term in Eq. ( 4.12 ). In both cases the self-consistent
correlated momentum distribution function is used. We present in Fig.
4.6 the curves obtained with the use of the external regulator compared
to those obtained with the full function. From a global perspective, it
is interesting to observe the similarities with the modifications which
were obtained when performing the average with a free in-medium
propagator (see Fig. ( 4.5 )). This is a consequence of how momenta
below @xmath are available in the integration of 3NFs. In the present
case, momenta are not internally regulated. They appear to be more
available with respect to the other averaging procedures. As a matter a
fact, an even stronger enhancement, with respect to the other cases, is
observed on the absolute values of the partial waves.

If we look at partial waves depicted in Fig. LABEL:sub@S_reg1vsreg2_med
, we see a negligible effect for the @xmath waves (upper panels), while
an appreciable change is observed in @xmath and @xmath mixing waves
(lower panels). For the latter waves, the modifications observed with
respect to the average with full regulator are similar to those seen in
Fig. LABEL:sub@S_freevsmed_reg2 (lower panels) when using the free
propagator. With respect to the values in Fig.
LABEL:sub@S_freevsmed_reg2 , in the present case we observe a further
enhancement of the absolute quantities at intermediate momenta of
approximately @xmath fm. For @xmath waves, Fig.
LABEL:sub@P_reg1vsreg2_med , a similar behavior is also observed with
respect to changes seen in Fig. LABEL:sub@P_freevsmed_reg2 . For the
@xmath and @xmath waves, the use of an external regulator in the average
provides repulsion for all momenta, while it has the opposite effect for
the @xmath partial wave. The effect is negligible in the @xmath wave.
With respect to Fig. LABEL:sub@P_freevsmed_reg2 , the change observed in
Fig. LABEL:sub@P_reg1vsreg2_med on the @xmath and @xmath is higher. Not
weighing the internal integrated momentum results in a repulsion in the
@xmath wave which can reach values of @xmath fm at relative momenta
@xmath fm @xmath . In the @xmath , for similar relative momenta, an
attractive shift of the same strength as the previous one is observed.

We can affirm that the use of an external regulator function drives an
overall enhancement in the absolute values of the potential partial
waves. Using an external regulator results in a less depleted momentum
distribution function in the integral of Eq. ( 4.10 ). We can conclude
that the non regulation of internal momenta below the Fermi momentum is
what provides an enhanced effect of the density-dependent force. In
other words, the fact that momenta below @xmath are more available in
the averaging procedure, provides a stronger attraction for negative
values and a stronger repulsion for positive values of the partial
waves. The effect will be clearer when we will look at the total energy
of nuclear matter in the next chapter. We will see that, when using the
external regulator, stronger attraction is observed at saturation
density, while higher repulsion is observed at double saturation energy,
with respect to the full regulator calculation. This behavior is similar
to what we will observe for results obtained with the free in-medium
propagator with respect to the correlated average with internal
regulator. Conversely, the free in-medium propagator calculations will
yield less attractive negative energy values, and less repulsive
positive energy values with respect to the ones obtained with the
correlated average with external regulator. As momenta become more and
more depleted below @xmath , from the free average to the correlated
average both internally regulated, the effect of 3B forces is less
attractive for negative energy values and less repulsive for positive
energy values. This once again leads us to the conclusion that the most
important role in the integrated functions is provided by momenta below
@xmath .

The explanation for this behavior could be drawn from the analysis of
the integrated functions which are present in the averaging procedure,
Eqs. ( 4.17 - 4.21 ). In Fig. 4.7 we plot, as functions of relative
momenta, the quantities @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , given
respectively in Eqs. ( 4.17 ), ( 4.18 ), ( 4.19 ) and ( 4.20 ).

For all the depicted functions, the main effect of using the external
regulator is to enhance the absolute value of the integrals for all
relative momenta. Consequently the effect observed on the partial waves,
Fig. 4.6 , is due to this enhancement. This increased value for the
functions plotted in Fig. 4.7 is to be expected given that the external
regulator doesn’t weigh the internal integrated momenta, providing
larger values for these integrated quantities.

In contrast, the effect of using a free propagator in the integrating
procedure results in a non unique behavior. For the @xmath the effect is
to increase the value of the integral for small momenta, while the
effect is the inverse for the @xmath . This modification dies for both
functions with increasing relative momenta. For the @xmath and @xmath ,
we observe equal modifications in the curves absolute values: as a
consequence of using a free propagator, higher values are seen for small
relative momenta and slight lower for intermediate ones. In this case,
it is then not directly predictable how the interplay of these and the
other integrated functions, (see for example Eqs. ( 4.15 ), ( 4.21 ) and
( 4.23 )), provides the effect observed on the partial waves, Fig. 4.5 .

All in all, we can conclude that the effect of the density-dependent
2NFs is mostly given by the weight of momenta below the Fermi momentum.
This implies variations on all the integrated quantities presented in
the previous section and, consequently, the interplay of all of these
provides the effect observed on the partial waves.

#### 4.2.4 Partial waves in neutron matter

We will now proceed with the analysis of the in-medium interaction in
the specific case of totally asymmetric isospin matter. In the case of
pure neutron matter, some partial waves are blocked in the
antisymmetrization procedure of the two-neutron wave function, i.e. they
can only be in total @xmath isospin state. We plot in Fig. 4.8 the
dominant partial wave matrix elements in PNM. In Fig. LABEL:sub@3b_pnm
we present the curves for the complete density-dependent potential
@xmath calculated at the empirical saturation density value, @xmath . In
a similar fashion to the analysis we followed for the case of SNM, we
present all cases of averaging procedures: the ones obtained with a
correlated or a free momentum distribution function with full regulator
and the correlated average but with external regulator. As a starting
remark, we observe that for all averaging cases the contribution of the
contracted 3NFs is a positive value, meaning that repulsion will be
added to the bare NN N3LO potential. The only distinction is presented
by the @xmath partial wave at high momenta.

The dominant repulsive effect is observed for the @xmath partial wave,
with values up to @xmath fm at zero relative momentum. This repulsion
decreases with increasing momenta. The enhancement provided by the other
waves decreases in order starting from the effect of the @xmath , to the
@xmath and finally to the @xmath partial wave, whose maximum effect is
an order of magnitude less than the @xmath wave.

It is interesting to observe that for all partial waves, except for the
singlet @xmath , the modifications due to the different averaging
procedures seem to be a consequence of the availability of the complete
range of SP momenta, not only of those below @xmath . In other words, if
states over @xmath are present, the 3NF has a higher repulsive effect,
if furthermore states are not internally regulated the effect is even
stronger. Nevertheless the dominant effect for the potential
modification comes from the sinlget @xmath , in which this behavior is
not respected. In this partial wave, on the contrary, the biggest
modification is observed in repulsion, at high relative momenta, for the
correlated average with full regulator. The modification decreases for
the same average but with external regulator, and decreases even more
with the free average. We can derive the same conclusion already stated
in the previous section, whereby the effect is due to an interplay of
all the integrated quantities playing in the averaging of 3NFs. However,
when we will look at the total energy of the system, we will see that
the comprehensive repulsive effect of 3NFs increases according to the
same analysis that was drawn in the previous section, i.e. it depends on
the availability of momentum states below the Fermi momentum.

In Fig. LABEL:sub@2b+3b_pnm , we plot the effect of the
density-dependent force summed to the NN N3LO potential. As expected,
the major change is observed in the @xmath partial wave, where an
increase in the 2B potential matrix element is observed, with values
that range from 0.45 fm to 0.1 fm in a spread of relative momenta of
@xmath fm @xmath . The other visible effect is in the @xmath wave, where
the strongest repulsion is observed around @xmath fm @xmath with a
positive value of 0.15 fm, more or less the 30% of the effect of the
previous partial wave. The effect is orders of magnitude smaller in the
other two waves.

The overall repulsive effect provided by the density-dependent force in
all partial waves is what accounts for the enhancement of the total
energy of PNM. In other words, what drives the stiffening of the
equation of state of the isospin asymmetric system. As in the symmetric
matter case, changes in pure neutron matter provided by the inclusion of
the density-dependent 2NF will be of a repulsive kind for all densities.

#### 4.2.5 Non-diagonal momentum matrix elements

All results presented in this chapter where obtained for the specific
case of diagonal potential matrix elements in relative momentum space,
that is equal relative incoming and outgoing momenta, i.e. @xmath .
Complete off-diagonal expressions for the six density-dependent
potential contributions are nevertheless necessary to perform nuclear
structure calculations. We present in App. C the complete expressions in
momentum space for the six density-dependent terms, Eqs ( 4.14 ), ( 4.16
), ( 4.22 ), ( 4.28 ), ( 4.29 ) and ( 4.30 ) . For the case of non
diagonal potential matrix elements in relative momentum space, @xmath ,
the general formulation given in Eq. ( 4.13 ) for the NN potential
acquires a further operatorial structure ( Erk1971 ) . Instead of
performing the partial wave decomposition of the potential for all
non-diagonal matrix elements, in the present thesis we decided to follow
the approach presented in Refs. ( Kaiser1997 ; JWHol2009 ; JWHol2010 ) .
We have performed the average only for diagonal momentum matrix
elements. The off-diagonal elements are then extrapolated from the
diagonal ones, with the substitution @xmath .

In Ref. ( JWHol2009 ) , it is observed that the strongest off-diagonal
dependency is provided by the vertex correction to the @xmath exchange
2B term which includes the presence of the medium, i.e. @xmath in Eq. (
4.16 ). This term decreases the value of the bare 2B @xmath exchange in
@xmath waves, it has hence an attractive modification (see also Fig.
LABEL:sub@pot_123_S , upper panels). We can then consider the bare NN
@xmath exchange contribution:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

and compare its off-diagonal dependency in @xmath waves to the one
obtained for the @xmath contribution, applying the outlined off-diagonal
extrapolation. When performing the off-diagonal partial wave analysis of
the NN OPE term of Eq. ( 4.35 ) no approximation is performed ( Erk1971
; JWHol2010 ) .

As depicted in Fig. 4.9 , the qualitative behavior of the two matrix
elements, presented for a fixed incoming relative momentum @xmath fm
@xmath and as a function of the outgoing momenta @xmath , is in good
agreement (note that the NN OPE term is plotted with an overall negative
sign). As already discussed previously, we observe that the vertex
correction to the 1 @xmath exchange term, @xmath , has an attractive
effect (see also Fig. LABEL:sub@pot_123_S ).

Therefore, in the results of the next chapter, we employ this
off-diagonal momentum extrapolation for all potential matrix elements.

## Chapter 5 Nuclear and Neutron matter with three-body forces

In this chapter we present the results obtained for microscopic and
macroscopic properties of SNM and PNM. We will use the extended SCGF
approach to include consistently 3BFs and analyze the effect of this
inclusion in the properties of the many-body system.

Using a variety of many-body approaches ( Mut2000 ; Dew2003 ; Bal2012 )
, it has been demonstrated that saturation properties of nuclear matter
fail to be reproduced whatever realistic 2NF is used in the calculation.
This deficiency can be cured by the addition of 3NF in the Hamiltonian.
In fact, it is proved that the inclusion of three-body forces has a
crucial effect on bulk properties of both symmetric nuclear and pure
neutron matter ( Akm1998 ; Zuo2002Aug ; Li2006 ; Som2008 ; Heb2010Jul ;
Heb2011 ; Lov2012 ; Car2013Oct ; Koh2013 ; Hag2013 ; Coraggio2014 ) .

Following the partial wave analysis of the potential matrix elements
presented in the previous chapter, we will observe the striking effect
of the inclusion of the density-dependent force for the total energy of
the many-body ground state. Exploiting the extended SCGF approach
presented in this thesis, we will see how the modifications induced by
the 3B force are larger as the density increases. This density
dependence is what provides the saturation mechanism for nuclear matter.
In pure neutron matter, 3NFs are the main cause for the stiffening of
the equation of state. In view of astrophysical studies for neutron star
masses, this stiffening is a major ingredient for the achievement of
theoretical results which can better match recent astrophysical
observations ( Dem2010 ; Ant2013 ) . We will furthermore analyze the
variation of the symmetry energy due to the inclusion of 3B forces. The
symmetry energy determines to a large extent the composition of @xmath
-stable matter and therefore the structure and mass of neutron stars (
Sch2006 ) . Its density dependence is a crucial ingredient to understand
many properties of isospin-rich nuclei and neutron stars ( BALi2008 ;
Ste2005 ) . A detailed study of this quantity from fully microscopic
approaches ( Vid2009 ; Car2012 ; Heb2013Jul ) , can be seen as a safe
and necessary alternative to the variety of phenomenological methods
which yield a large dispersion in the symmetry energy values.

As a starting point, we will first analyze in this chapter the
microscopic properties. In the Green’s functions method, the knowledge
of the spectral function gives direct access to the calculation of
microscopic quantities, such as the momentum distribution function. We
study the behavior of the self-energy, separating the real and imaginary
parts. Looking at the real part of the self-energy, it will be clear how
the inclusion of the density-dependent 2NF influences the momentum
dependency of the quasi-particle spectra. Conversely, we will observe
how the inclusion of the density-dependent force has very little effect
on the spectral function itself and hence on the momentum distribution.

Before going into the details of our calculations, let us first comment
on the temperature dependence of the results we present. As explained in
the introduction to the thesis, calculations are performed at finite
temperature to avoid pairing instabilities. Thermal effects can be
estimated using the Sommerfeld expansion ( Rio2009Feb ) . At low
temperatures, the Sommerfeld expansion indicates that the effect of
temperature is quadratic for both the energy and the free energy but
with opposite sign. These read respectively @xmath and @xmath , where
@xmath and @xmath ( Rio2009Feb ) . Consequently, the semi-sum of both
quantities is an estimate of the zero-temperature energy. This expansion
is only valid if @xmath , which is the case under study. In other words,
as the density gets higher for a fixed @xmath , the energy temperature
dependence gets milder ( Rio2007PhD ) .

In Fig. 5.1 we plot, for symmetric nuclear and pure neutron matter, the
density dependence of the total energy per nucleon for two different
temperatures. The @xmath MeV corresponds to the calculation of the
energy via the GMK sum rule, once self-consistency for the spectral
function is achieved. The @xmath MeV curve is given by the semi-sum of
total energy and total free energy per nucleon both obtained at @xmath
MeV. Calculations are performed with the use of the 2B N3LO force and
including the density-dependent force presented in the previous chapter,
performing the correlated average with full regulator. For SNM,
temperature drives an enhancement of less than 5 MeV at very low
densities for results calculated at @xmath MeV. As expected from the
Sommerfeld expansion, the thermal repulsion is reduced with density,
approaching approximately 1 MeV around empirical saturation density, and
further diminishes as the density increases. A similar behavior is
observed for pure neutron matter, here the spread of the curves due to
the temperature is already small at low densities, @xmath MeV, and
quickly decreases as density increases.

We want to stress once again that all expressions, for both microscopic
and macroscopic properties, discussed in chapter 2 and 3, were derived
at zero temperature. In the following, in order to prevent the pairing
instability and also due to practical advantages in the construction of
the numerical code, all microscopic and bulk results will be derived at
temperature @xmath MeV, unless otherwise stated.

##### Numerical inclusion of 3BFs in the SCGF approach

A detailed description of the numerical implementation of the complete
SCGF method at finite temperature when considering only 2NFs can be
found in ( Rio2007PhD ) . The code has been written in FORTRAN
programming language.

We show in Fig. 5.2 a schematic representation of how the code works
when considering both 2B and 3B forces. The thick external arrows
correspond to the input quantities: the density and temperature of the
system on one side, and the nuclear potential on the other. Further on,
we will explain how the potential has to be included when considering
3BFs. The external density and temperature of the system, together with
the spectral function obtained from the previous iterative step, are
needed to calculate the chemical potential ( Rio2007PhD ) . Once this is
known, the first-order 2B GF can be calculated. This quantity, together
with the nuclear potential chosen, are used to obtain the @xmath
-matrix, i.e. the ladder approximation for the @xmath vertex function.
Via the knowledge of the @xmath -matrix, the dispersive part of the
imaginary and real part of the SP self-energy can be evaluated. The HF
part of the SP self-energy is calculated directly from the potential.
Finally, the spectral function can be obtained and the procedure starts
again until a consistent result is achieved. Some numerical details on
the calculation the 2B GF, the @xmath -matrix and the self-energy are
given at the end of App. C .

Following the extension of the formalism presented in Chap. 3 and the
evaluation of the density-dependent force @xmath given in Chap. 4 , we
would like to focus here mostly on the inclusion of 3BFs in the existing
code. Numerical details for the calculation of the density-dependent
contributions are reported at the end of App. C .

In order to include correctly the 3B force, we add its contributions to
the bare 2B potential, @xmath , in two different forms:

-   we define a @xmath for the calculation of the @xmath -matrix,
    defined in Eq. ( 3.25 ). This potential corresponds to the effective
    2B potential depicted in Fig. 3.4 . In Fig. 5.2 this is represented
    by the external right arrow specifying “effective 2B potential
    @xmath ”.

-   we define a @xmath for the calculation of the HF part of the
    self-energy, defined in Eq. ( 3.28 ). The HF self-energy corresponds
    to the first-order term of the effective 1B potential depicted in
    Fig. 3.3 , dropping the bare 1B part which, in the case under study,
    falls out of the calculation. We show this first-order term in Fig.
    5.3 . In Fig. 5.2 this is represented by the external right arrow
    specifying “effective 1B potential @xmath ”.

According to what was explained in Chap. 3 , the inclusion of the 3B
contributions by means of this strategy ensures that all diagrams
included in the self-energy are counted properly.

For the evaluation of the total energy via the modified GMK sum rule
given in Eq. ( 2.24 ), we need to evaluate the expectation value of the
3B operator. As already explained previously, in our calculations this
term is obtained only a the HF level. We depict it in Fig. 5.4 . To
obtain the 3B expectation value, we then perform an integration of the
kind:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the previous expression, the HF self-energy for the 3B part, i.e.
@xmath , which is also shown in the second term on the right-hand side
of Fig. 5.3 , has been computed from the 3B part of @xmath , i.e. @xmath
. Numerical details for the determination of the momentum distribution
in Eq. ( 5.1 ) are given at the end of App. C .

### 5.1 The self-energy

As defined by Dyson’s equation, Eq. ( 2.26 ), the self-energy
incorporates all interacting terms, for a specific approximation, which
dress up the SP propagator. For the ladder self-energy, we calculate
separately the imaginary and the real part. We derived these
contributions at zero temperature in Eq. ( 3.30 - 3.31 ). The real part
is derived from the imaginary part by means of a dispersion relation. As
a matter of fact, as shown in Eq. ( 2.30 - 2.31 ), a combination of the
real and imaginary part of the self-energy is needed to obtain the
spectral function.

In Fig. 5.5 , we present the imaginary part of the ladder self-energy
obtained at @xmath MeV. For a deeper comprehension of the qualitative
and quantitative behavior of the imaginary part of the self-energy, its
mathematical expression at finite temperature must be analyzed in detail
( Fri2004PhD ; Rio2007PhD ) . However, a general qualitative explanation
can be given. While the imaginary part is mostly connected to absorption
and to the available phase space, the real part of the self-energy is
also related to mean-field effects. We analyze in Fig. 5.5 its behavior
for three different SP momenta, @xmath , and for increasing density,
@xmath fm @xmath . In the figure we compare the self-energy when only
the 2B N3LO force is considered, to the case when the density-dependent
N2LO interaction is included. The inclusion of the density-dependent
force is presented in the three different cases: correlated and
uncorrelated average with the use of the full regulator as well as the
correlated average with the external regulator, as explained in the
previous chapter.

We note that the inclusion of the contracted 3B force doesn’t strongly
affect the overall behavior of the imaginary part of the self-energy. If
we look at momentum @xmath , we recognize, around energies close to the
chemical potential @xmath , the parabolic shape predicted by Luttinger
for the zero temperature case, i.e. @xmath ( Luttinger1960 ) . Actually,
the imaginary part of the self-energy approaches zero for @xmath as the
density increases. The fact that the system resembles the zero
temperature behavior is because the higher the density the stronger the
degeneracy of the system, and temperature effects are washed out. For a
fixed density, if we go to higher momenta, @xmath or even more at @xmath
, the cusp induced by the parabolic behavior decreases. Here we see that
the imaginary part of the self-energy flattens for energies close and
below @xmath . As Luttinger’s argument is independent of the force, the
inclusion of the density-dependent force generates no variation in the
position of the cusp. On the contrary, mainly at zero momentum, 3NFs
generate a smaller absolute value in the minima observed in the
imaginary self-energy, for energies close and below the chemical
potential, with respect to the 2B results. As we go to higher densities,
the difference between the values at the minima obtained with the two
cases increases. This is caused by the fact that the energy values at
the minima in the 2B case become more negative as the density increases,
while the ones including 3NFs remain approximately unaltered for all
densities. For @xmath , this spread goes from @xmath MeV at @xmath to
approximately @xmath MeV at double saturation density. For higher
momenta the behavior is somewhat different, with both minima, obtained
with and without 3NF, increasing to more negative values as the density
grows. At @xmath the density-dependent force generates a few MeV more
negative results for the imaginary part of the self-energy. In general,
the minima flattens for all densities as the momenta increases.
Nevertheless, the fact that the value of the minima changes is a
consequence of the combination of both phase space availability and the
force itself. The overall behavior of the imaginary part of the
self-energy at energies @xmath , below the minima, is left unaltered by
the inclusion of 3BFs, for all densities and momenta, showing a
negligible value at energies already around @xmath MeV below the
chemical potential.

Looking at energies close but higher than the chemical potential, the
imaginary self-energy presents a bump around @xmath MeV, for all
momenta, which disappears with increasing density. The three-body
contracted force induces smaller absolute values around the bump, but
conversely results fall below the 2B-only calculation when the
self-energy reaches the minimum observed in the region @xmath . As the
density increases, for a fixed momenta, this falling to more negative
results, for calculations performed with the 2NF density-dependent,
becomes steeper. In the region of energies @xmath MeV, especially for
density @xmath , is where we observe the strongest dependence on the
averaging/regulator procedure for the construction of the
density-dependent force. As it can be seen in Fig. 5.6 , where we focus
on this high density region, we obtained higher absolute values for the
minimum when the correlated average procedure with full regulator is
performed, with respect to the other procedures. This calculation shows
at the minimum a somewhat stable separation of @xmath MeV, observed for
all momenta, with respect to the two-body only calculation. Conversely,
results including the density-dependent force obtained with a correlated
average but with the external regulator or with a free average with the
use of the full regulator, present a variation in the position of the
energy minimum with increasing momenta. In these two latter cases, the
self-energy value at the minimum is at first close to the 2B calculation
one, and departs from it with increasing momentum. Simultaneously, these
minima approach the more negative result obtained with the complete
calculation of the density-dependent 2NF. We will see in the next
section that it is exactly in this high-density region where the main
variation for the spectral function appears. All in all, except for this
high-density high-energy region, we can conclude that the modifications
induced by the different averaging procedures are negligible. From a
qualitative point of view, the fact that modifications due to the
different averaging procedures appear mostly at high densities, is a
direct consequence of what we concluded from the partial wave analysis.
In fact, we stated that the difference in between the averages is mainly
due to how momenta below the Fermi momenta are treated. As the density
increases, the region of momenta below @xmath is bigger, consequently
the effect is enhanced.

Furthermore, the low and high energy tails of the imaginary part of the
self-energy are related to off-shell effects, which are determined by
the short-range part of the potential. The inclusion of three-body
forces seems to alter the behavior of this part of the potential
especially at high densities, where we observe a somehow enhanced, in
absolute values, high-energy tail. In some sense, we will observe this
effect when analyzing the depletion of the momentum distribution in the
next section, which will result more depleted at high densities when
considering 3BFs. This is in agreement with a stronger off-shell
behavior when including 3BFs.

A much more visible consequence of the density-dependent 2NF can be
detected at the quasi-particle energy. This is obtained from the real
part of the self-energy. The quasi-particle energy is obtained at each
momentum as the solution of the following self-consistent equation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The second term on the right-hand side of Eq. ( 5.2 ) is shown in Fig.
5.7 . This corresponds to the potential part of the quasi-particle
energy. We show it for three different densities, @xmath fm @xmath . For
all momenta, the contracted 3NF shifts the quasi-particle energy to more
repulsive values. At zero momentum, the shift amounts to @xmath MeV for
@xmath , increases to @xmath MeV at saturation density @xmath , and
grows as high as @xmath MeV at double saturation density @xmath . For
all densities, this shift gradually diminishes as momentum increases. At
low-momenta this modification leaves mostly unaltered the qualitative
behavior of the SP potential at @xmath and @xmath , except for a
repulsive effect in the entire momenta range. Conversely, at @xmath fm
@xmath , the strong repulsion at low-momenta, induced by the
density-dependent 2NF, also affects the qualitative momentum dependence
of the SP potential. At high densities, the quasi-particle potential
shows an even stronger repulsion becoming positive at intermediate
momenta. This strong density-dependent repulsive effect drives the
saturation of the total energy of symmetric nuclear matter, as we will
see in the following sections. Furthermore, the modification of the
momentum dependence of the quasi-particle potential affects the value of
the nucleon effective mass ( Som2009PhD ) .

Variations caused by the different averaging procedures in the
construction of the density-dependent force are negligible at densities
@xmath and @xmath . As expected from the analysis of the high density
behavior of the imaginary part of the self-energy, modifications are
mainly visible at @xmath . Here the use of the external regulator in the
correlated average drives results for the quasi-particle spectrum which
are @xmath MeV more repulsive at zero momentum with respect to the other
averaging procedures. This repulsion is mainly maintained for all
momentum with respect to the correlated average performed with the full
regulator. The main qualitative variation is observed for the curve
performed in the free average with the use of full regulator. The effect
of weighing internal contracted momenta from 0 to @xmath and having no
presence of momenta higher than the Fermi momentum, causes a more rapid
decreasing of the quasi-particle potential at high momenta. This could
be justified in a HF picture, where a sharp disappearance of momenta
higher than @xmath increases the damping of the SP potential.

### 5.2 Spectral function and momentum distribution

The SP momentum distribution, defined in Eq. ( 2.13 ) at zero
temperature, provides a measure of the correlations embedded in the
nuclear wave function. The spectral function, as shown in Chap. 2 (see
Eqs. ( 2.10 - 2.11 )), describes the spread in energy of the probability
to find single-particle states at energies other than the quasi-particle
energy, and hence tests the presence of correlations in the system. This
behavior can be experimentally seen in ( @xmath ) knockout reactions on
finite nuclei ( Mou1980 ; Ben1989 ; Dic2004 ) .

While we presented in Eq. ( 2.10 ) and Eq. ( 2.11 ) the formal
expressions for the spectral functions at zero temperature of
respectively the hole and particle part, at finite temperature the
spectral function can be described by a unique quantity, the @xmath (
Bla1986 ) . The spectral function @xmath is related to the discontinuity
of the SP propagator along the real axis (see Eq. ( 2.8 )), and takes
into account both effects coming from Eq. ( 2.10 ) for the hole
contribution and from Eq. ( 2.11 ) for the particle contribution. For a
non-interacting system, this quantity would result in a delta peaked at
an energy equal to the SP energy ( Bla1986 ) .

We plot @xmath in Fig. 5.8 for SNM at temperature @xmath MeV for
different densities and SP momentum. Spectral functions at three
characteristic momenta, @xmath , are presented. The left to right panels
correspond, for a specific momentum, to a density of @xmath fm @xmath .
For low and high momenta, the quasi-particle peak positioned in either
the hole, @xmath , or particle, @xmath , part can be clearly
distinguished in the energy dependency of the spectral function.
Actually at zero temperature, for @xmath and @xmath , the spectral
function @xmath must go to zero at @xmath , separating into two distinct
sections which correspond exactly to the hole and particle part given in
Eq. ( 2.10 - 2.11 ). At finite but low temperature, as presented in
Fig. ( 5.8 ), this behavior is strongly visible especially at low
momentum and high density, given the increased degeneracy of the system
under these conditions.

The energy of the spectral function peak is well described by the
quasi-particle potential analyzed in the previous section. For @xmath ,
panel LABEL:sub@sf_k0 of Fig. 5.8 , the quasi-particle peak is located
in the hole region of energies. This peak moves to more attractive
energies as the density increases. As a matter of fact, the higher the
density, the more bound the zero momentum state becomes, as observed in
the quasi-particle potential (see Fig. 5.7 ). As the density increases,
the spectral function approaches zero at @xmath , due to the more
degenerate behavior of the system. At @xmath , the low and high energy
tails are associated to a stronger presence of correlations which
populate states in energy regions far from the quasi-particle peak.
These tails cause the peak to narrow, especially in the 2NF+3NF
calculation, due to the fact that the spectral function must fulfill a
sum rule at all densities ( Rio2007PhD ) . In the 2NF case, the peak is
broader but overall lower in value, which is why a region of low and
high energy tails is still observed. This quasi-particle behavior for
the spectral function could have been expected observing the minimum at
zero momentum present in the imaginary part of the self-energy for
@xmath , Fig. 5.5 . The imaginary part of the self-energy enters both
the numerator and the denominator of the expression for the @xmath (
Rio2007PhD ) . The deeper the value for Im @xmath , the smaller the
value of the peak for the spectral function. It is interesting to note
that, as the density increases, in the 2NF calculation the
quasi-particle peak broadens and lowers in value. Conversely, if the
contracted 3B force is included, the peak narrows even more as the
density increases, in accordance to what is observed for the minimum of
the imaginary part of the self-energy in Fig. 5.5 . We must point out
that the negative values which appear at 2 @xmath when including 3NFs
should be attributed to numerical errors when performing the
calculation.

For momentum @xmath , panel LABEL:sub@sf_2kF of Fig. 5.8 , the behavior
of the spectral function is similar to the zero momentum one but
reflected in the particle region, @xmath . In this case the peak shifts
to more repulsive energies the higher the density of the system,
conversely to what happens in the zero momentum behavior. We note that
at higher SP momentum, the minimum of the spectral function at @xmath is
much better resolved with respect to the zero momentum case, especially
at density 2 @xmath . This is a consequence of the flattening of the
cusp observed in the imaginary part of the self-energy (see Fig.
LABEL:sub@imself2kF ). It is at this density that the largest effect due
to the 2B density-dependent force appears, causing the quasi-particle
peak to shift of @xmath MeV to lower energies. Naively, one might expect
an attractive effect on the saturation curve when including the 3NF.
Note, however, that the energy dependence is always plotted with respect
to the chemical potential, @xmath . The variation in the latter is
larger than the quasi-particle shift and results in an overall repulsive
effect of the 3NF as the density increases, as observed in the
quasi-particle potential at high densities and momenta (see Fig. 5.7 ).

At the Fermi momentum, panel LABEL:sub@sf_kF of Fig. 5.8 , the spectral
function presents a strongly peaked behavior located at energies @xmath
, proving indeed that at low temperatures the quasi-particle energy must
equal the chemical potential. In contrast to the behavior observed for
the other momenta, at the Fermi momentum the peak narrows and has larger
values as the density increases. This is due to the stronger degeneracy
of the system for higher densities, which leads the spectral function to
approach the zero temperature delta-peaked function at the chemical
potential. As previously stated, for a non-interacting system, the
spectral function results in a delta peaked at @xmath , which is the
behavior we observe in this more degenerate case. The narrowing of the
peak drives high energy tails which grow with density. These tails,
present for all momenta, are actually expected given the high energy
behavior observed in Fig. ( 5.6 ) for the imaginary part of the
self-energy.

From a global perspective, we can affirm that the inclusion of the 2NFdd
force doesn’t induce strong modifications in the spectral function
except for shifts in the QP peak. Nevertheless, a narrowing of the peaks
is observed for all momenta as the density increases. This causes
modifications in the off-shell behavior of the spectral function. This
leads us to conclude that the inclusion of 3BFs must be considered not
only at the QP level but in the entire off-shell dependency of the
spectral function. As expected from the analysis of the imaginary and
real part of the self-energy, modifications due to the different
averaging procedures are negligible at saturation and sub-saturation
densities, and are more visible for high densities. The effect of the
different procedures will be more evident in the following analysis of
the momentum distribution function.

Given the knowledge of the spectral function, via Eq. ( 2.13 ) we have
direct access to the SP momentum distribution function. In Fig.
LABEL:sub@mom_Nogga , we show @xmath in SNM at @xmath MeV for three
densities, @xmath = 0.08, 0.16, 0.32 fm @xmath . We compare results
obtained with and without the density-dependent 2NF, the former one
calculated in the correlated average with the use of the full regulator
function. The effect of the 3NF in the momentum distribution is
relatively small for all densities. The logarithmic scale, in Fig.
LABEL:sub@mom_Nogga_log , gives us the possibility to appreciate, mainly
at @xmath , a noticeable difference in @xmath for momenta higher than
the Fermi momentum. This enhancement of the distribution function at
high momenta is a consequence of the added correlation by 3BFs which
induces a larger high-momentum population.

In fact, we observe that 3NFs induce a noticeable density dependence in
the depletion of the momentum distribution. This is shown in the insets
of Fig. LABEL:sub@mom_Nogga , which focus on the low-momentum region.
The somewhat soft chiral 2NF induces a relatively small depletion, of
order @xmath , as compared to traditional 2NF, which typically have
@xmath . For these traditional two-body potentials, the density
dependence of the depletion is generally very soft and dominated by
tensor correlations ( Rio2009Apr ) . 3NF modify this behavior, possibly
due to the additional tensor structures associated to the
density-dependent 2NF explained in Sec. 4.1 . At sub-saturation
densities, the 3NF decreases the depletion. At density @xmath fm @xmath
, the zero momentum value for @xmath goes from @xmath to @xmath ,
driving a decrease in the kinetic energy value from @xmath to @xmath .
The difference is still small at @xmath =0.16 fm @xmath , within a few
percent. Also in this case, we observe a higher depletion when
considering only 2NF, i.e. @xmath versus @xmath . This causes once more
a somewhat higher kinetic energy for the system without 3NF, that is,
@xmath MeV to be compared with @xmath MeV. At higher densities, @xmath
=0.32 fm @xmath , the 3NF induces a slightly larger depletion, @xmath ,
compared with @xmath . Correspondingly the kinetic energy in the system
with 3NF, @xmath MeV, is a little bit higher than that with 2NF only,
@xmath MeV. This behavior leads us to conclude that the higher the
density, the stronger the promotion of SP states to high momentum due to
3B forces. This could have been expected given the enhanced high energy
tails at @xmath observed in the imaginary part of the self-energy as
also in the spectral function (see Fig. 5.6 and right column of Fig. 5.8
). Nevertheless, this behavior is reversed at saturation and
sub-saturation densities, where the inclusion of 3NFs lowers the effect
of correlations in @xmath , inducing a smaller depletion.

We plot in Fig. LABEL:sub@mom_comp the variations of the momentum
distribution function due to the different averaging procedures in the
construction of the density-dependent force. Concentrating on the low
momentum region, we observe negligible changes due to the use of the
different density-dependent forces. The depletion varies with a
percentage of less than 1%. The small shifts in the depletion are seen
better in the logarithmic scale presented in Fig. LABEL:sub@mom_comp_log
. In this scale, we see that the highest modifications are observed for
high densities. If we look at density @xmath , a spread in the different
curves is observed at high momentum. As already underlined, this is a
consequence of the fact that the higher the density the stronger the
effect induced from the different averaging procedures. We observe that
the largest high-momentum population is induced by the correlated
average with full regulator, leading to a more correlated behavior and a
higher kinetic energy. Nonetheless, as we will see in the next section,
the effect of the correlated average with full regulator provides less
repulsive energy results at high densities with respect to the other
constructions of the averaged force. This once more validates the fact
that the more regulated the momenta below @xmath , the less repulsive
the potential. Concluding, the effect of the different averaging
procedures is mostly visible on quasi-particle properties, as observed
in Fig. 5.7 , and will reflect mainly in bulk properties.

At this point, let us stress that in spite of the cutoff in both the 2NF
and 3NF considered here, one finds a substantial population of
high-momentum components. Similarly, the spectral functions display
qualitatively important tails at high energies. Traditional microscopic
2NF would yield even larger high-momentum components and fragmentation.
Our calculations indicate the importance of considering such effects in
many-body calculations even with relatively soft interactions. In fact,
our approach is not affected by a cutoff in the many-body approximation,
as applied on the contrary in the construction of the chiral
interaction. Due to this construction, the high-momentum region should
be free of population and we shouldn’t observe states beyond the cutoff
applied. In particular, let us stress that also when using soft
interactions, the low-momentum SP properties are affected by
correlations.

### 5.3 Nuclear matter

We present in this section results for the total energy of symmetric
nuclear matter obtained using the extended SCGF formalism described in
Chap. 3 which includes consistently 3B forces. As explained in Chap. 4 ,
we include 3NF at N2LO in the chiral expansion in a density-dependent
form obtained performing an average over the third particle. Averaging
procedures vary according to correlated or free propagator used in the
internal momentum integral, and on the two different regulator functions
included, as explained after Eq. ( 4.12 ). In the correlated average we
use the self-consistent SP propagator obtained through solution of the
Dyson equation explained in Sec. 2.3 . In the calculation, we include
partial waves up to @xmath ( @xmath ) in the dispersive (Hartree-Fock)
contributions. The total energy is computed via the modified GMK sum
rule defined in Eq ( 2.24 ), where the 3B expectation value is evaluated
as explained in the introduction to this chapter. When no 3B forces are
included, the standard GMK sum rule of Eq ( 2.14 ) is applied.

In Fig. 5.11 we show the curves of the energy per nucleon obtained for
symmetric nuclear matter at @xmath MeV. The effect of 3NF is striking.
As expected from the partial wave analysis and from the study of the
microscopic properties, the effect of 3B forces is to induce repulsion
in the energy values. This repulsion increases with density and is the
main cause of nuclear matter saturation. The 2B only calculation,
obtained with NN N3LO of ( Ent2003 ) , saturates at high densities not
visible in the range of the figure. To be more precise, saturation is
observed at @xmath fm @xmath at an attractive energy value of @xmath
MeV. This high saturation density is cured by the inclusion of the
density-dependent 2NF, which shifts the minima of the energy to
densities close to the empirical value. In Fig. 5.11 we use for the low
energy constants @xmath and @xmath the same values used in Sec. 4.2 ,
@xmath and @xmath ( Nog2006 ) . Note that in this calculation and in the
following ones, where the N3LO force is used in the 2B sector, the LECs
@xmath applied in the N2LO density-dependent force are taken in
accordance to Ref. ( Ent2003 ) , i.e. @xmath all measured in GeV @xmath
. The cutoff applied on the 3NF is set at @xmath MeV according to (
Nog2006 ) . We obtain a qualitatively good saturation density of @xmath
fm @xmath and a less attractive saturation energy of @xmath MeV with
respect to the empirical value. This value increases of @xmath MeV in
attraction if thermal effects are taken into account (see Fig.
LABEL:sub@snmtdep ). At saturation density, the curves obtained
performing the different averaging procedures follow what was expected
from the partial wave analysis of Chap. 4 . A shift of maximum @xmath
MeV is observed for the saturation energies of the different curves.
Specifically, at the saturation density @xmath fm @xmath , matter is
less bound when using the correlated average with the full regulator.
The free average with full regulator presents a slightly more bound
value with respect to the previous one, and the correlated average with
the external regulator provides the highest binding energy value. As
already stressed, this shift is less than 5% going from the most
attractive to the most repulsive result. A greater spreading in the
energy curves is observed at high densities. This could have been
expected looking at the high density behavior of the quasi-particle
potential in Fig. 5.7 . Conversely to what is observed at saturation
density, at double this value, the behavior for the curves appears
reversed. The correlated average with full regulator leads now the
lowest energy value. Nevertheless, we can say that in absolute energy
values the effect of the different averages is the same, both at @xmath
and at 2 @xmath . In fact, the correlated average with external
regulator presents the highest value, both in attraction at @xmath as in
repulsion at @xmath . The free average with full regulator follows the
former, and the smallest absolute values appear when using the full
correlated average. This is a consequence of what we had argued in Sec.
4.2 , where we stated that the higher the availability of momentum
states below @xmath , the stronger the effect of the 3NF, wether in
attraction or in repulsion. Nevertheless we must comment on the fact
that, except for a maximum energy shift of less than 4 MeV at high
densities, the matching of results obtained with the different averaging
procedure is remarkable.

Different approaches to obtain the two additional low-energy constants
appearing in the 3N chiral force have been presented in the literature.
These are usually based on fits in the few-body sector ( Nog2006 ;
Nav2007Nov ; Mar2013 ) . Consequently, we might expect quantitative
changes to the saturation properties coming from different
determinations of the LECs. We explore these differences in Fig. 5.12 ,
where we show the saturation curve at @xmath MeV obtained with four
different combinations of @xmath and @xmath . In the first three cases,
the Entem-Machleidt N3LO potential ( Ent2003 ) has been complemented
with the density-dependent force obtained for different couples of LECs,
derived in the correlated version with the full regulator, and with
@xmath MeV. The choice of combinations is representative of the spread
in LEC values associated to different fitting protocols. The first
choice, @xmath and @xmath , already used in Fig. 5.11 , has been
determined from the binding energies of @xmath H and @xmath He in exact
few-body calculations ( Nog2006 ) . The second set, @xmath and @xmath ,
has been obtained with a local version of the 3NF, but fit to the @xmath
system only ( Nav2007Nov ) . The third set of LECs, with @xmath and
@xmath , has been used in Ref. ( Kre2012 ) for SNM calculations on the
basis of natural sizes.

Curves corresponding to different values of @xmath and @xmath fall
within a narrow band below saturation, which reaches a maximum spread of
@xmath MeV at @xmath . In general, the modifications are mild even if
the constants are changed considerably, indicating that 3NF
contributions are small at low densities. Above @xmath fm @xmath ,
however, differences develop as density increases. These can be largely
explained by the contact term and its contribution to the total energy,
proportional to @xmath . In the Hartree-Fock approximation, this reads:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

One therefore expects positive values of @xmath to lead to more
attractive contributions. Looking at Fig. 5.12 , we see that the curve
obtained with the positive value of @xmath is, as a matter of fact, the
most attractive. The ones obtained with negative values of @xmath
increase in repulsion as the absolute value of this constant rises. This
is a direct consequence of the effect observed on @xmath partial waves
(see Fig. 4.3 ). There, we had observed that the contact 3NF derived
term could provide attraction or repulsion to the 2NF-only partial wave
according to the sign in the LEC @xmath .

In the last case presented in Fig. 5.12 , the green double-dash-dotted
line, a similarity renormalization group (SRG) transformation has been
applied to the NN N3LO potential. This transformation renormalizes the
2NF, suppressing off-diagonal matrix elements and giving rise to a
universal low-momentum interaction. This is usually performed to make
the 2NF more tractable in the many-body framework ( Bog2007 ; Bog2010 )
. The SRG evolution, however, introduces induced many-body forces and
these need to be consistently taken into account. A full SRG evolution
of 2NF and 3NF has been achieved only recently in momentum space, which
is the relevant basis for nuclear matter calculations ( Heb2012 ;
Heb2013Mar ; Wen2013 ) . Here we follow a previous simpler strategy,
whereby the SRG evolution is performed on the 2NF alone ( Heb2011 ) and
the LECs of the 3NF are refitted for each scale at which the
transformation is performed. In the specific case of Fig. 5.12 we choose
the case where the renormalization scale on the 2NF is equal to the one
applied on the 3NF, i.e. @xmath fm @xmath . LECs @xmath and @xmath are
then chosen according to ( Heb2011 ) . The low-momentum potential
calculation presents the most attractive result for the binding energy
of symmetric nuclear matter, approaching the empirical saturation energy
value around @xmath MeV, at a higher density of @xmath fm @xmath with
respect to the empirical one. Overall, the different energy curves in
Fig. 5.12 obtained with the four different couples of LECs reach a
spread of @xmath MeV at empirical saturation density @xmath ; this
spread doubles its value at @xmath . Conversely to what was previously
discussed in relation to the energy contribution given by the contact
term, even though the @xmath is negative in the SRG-evolved case, the
energy is more attractive with respect to all other curves. This is due
to the decimated high momenta in the renormalized-2NF, which is
consequently less repulsive. As tested in Ref. ( Car2013Oct ) , the
perturbative regime of nuclear matter is reproduced when using evolved
interactions, at least up to saturation density.

We must stress, at this point of the discussion, that in all
calculations presented up to now, the order at which @xmath EFT is
implemented in the interaction is not equivalent in the 2B and 3B
sector. A consistent measure of the convergence of the chiral expansion
would only be provided if the energy results for the system where
compared order by order with a consistent Hamiltonian. In other words,
NLO, N2LO and N3LO results should yield smaller and smaller error bands.
At N3LO, one would in principle also have to include four nucleon
forces, as recently done for neutron matter in Ref. ( Tew2013 ; Kru2013
) , where a full N3LO calculation has been performed.

For the purpose of consistency in the @xmath EFT expansion, we present
in Fig. 5.13 results obtained for SNM with the use of an optimized 2NF
at N2LO which was recently presented in Ref. ( Eks2013 ) . We compare
the energy per particle at @xmath MeV using the N3LO 2B Entem-Machleidt
potential ( Ent2003 ) and the 2B N2LO of Ref. ( Eks2013 ) . Results with
and without the correlated averaged 3NF with full regulator are showed.
For the N2LO 3NF which complements the optimized NN N2LO, we use the
values of @xmath and @xmath quoted in Ref. ( Hag2013 ) , i.e. @xmath and
@xmath . In both calculations, the cutoff on the 3NF contracted force is
set to @xmath MeV. In the full-N2LO calculation, LECs coming from the 2B
sector, namely @xmath , to be used in the N2LO 3NF are set to values
reported in ( Eks2013 ) . Looking at the 2NF-only results, the curves
obtained are very similar, with N2LO consistently more attractive than
N3LO in the whole density range. As already observed in Fig. 5.11 , the
inclusion of 3NF is crucial to obtain saturation at realistic densities
and energies. The full-N2LO calculation yields slightly more attractive
results at low densities, moving the saturation energy to a smaller
density value of @xmath fm @xmath , with respect to the N3LO one. But
conversely, it is more repulsive above saturation. This indicates a
larger incompressibility at high densities for results obtained with the
optimized version of the N2LO 2NF ( Eks2013 ) . For the full-N2LO
calculation, our results are in fair agreement with respect to those
performed in the Coupled Cluster many-body method, recently presented by
authors in Ref. ( Hag2013 ) .

Overall, the differences in between the two calculations, full-N2LO or
2B-N3LO+3B-N2LO, can be ascribed mostly to the distinct structure of the
2NF itself, and furthermore on the different values of the LECs. Even
though the calculations can be both valid on their own, a direct
comparison is hard to carry out. An analysis of the kind would be fair
if, in going from the N2LO to the N3LO order in the chiral expansion,
the Hamiltonian would have been obtained consistently, which is not the
present case. Conclusions on the compared quality of the results respect
to the consistency in the chiral expansion are then difficult to drive.

### 5.4 Neutron matter and the symmetry energy

Using the extended SCGF to include 3B forces, we compute in this section
the bulk properties of PNM. The effect that we observe, due to the
inclusion of the density-dependent 2NF, is repulsion at all densities.
Similarly to the symmetric matter case, repulsion added by the 3B force
rises with increasing density. In the case of pure neutron matter, where
the total energy of the system is always a positive value, the rising of
the energy for all densities contributes to stiffen the EOS of PNM. This
effect is convenient in order to yield higher values for the mass of
neutron stars. As a matter of fact, recent astrophysical observations,
where masses as high as twice the solar mass have been observed for
neutron stars ( Dem2010 ; Ant2013 ) , have ruled out a variety of
microscopic descriptions which lead to softer EOSs.

The case of pure neutron matter is particularly interesting for the
implementation of nuclear chiral interactions. In fact, up to fourth
order in the @xmath expansion, i.e. N3LO, all many-body forces among
neutrons are predicted. In other words, no further coupling constants,
except for those present in the 2B sector, i.e. @xmath and @xmath , need
to be adjusted. In App. C we demonstrate the vanishing for 3NF terms at
N2LO proportional to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . A similar
demonstration can be done for 3NF terms at N3LO ( Epe2009Oct ) .
Recently, studies for the pure neutron matter system have been computed
at full N3LO ( Tew2013 ; Kru2013 ) .

In PNM, as for the symmetric nuclear matter case, we perform
calculations complementing the N3LO by ( Ent2003 ) with the
density-dependent force computed in neutron matter as detailed in Sec.
4.1 . We will also show results obtained using the newly optimized N2LO
by ( Eks2013 ) , complemented with the same density-dependent force of
Sec. 4.1 , therefore being consistent in the order of the chiral
expansion. Unless if otherwise stated, cutoff on the 3NF contracted
force is set to @xmath MeV.

We present in Fig. 5.14 the density dependence for the total energy per
nucleon in pure neutron matter computed at finite temperature @xmath
MeV. LECs values are taken in accordance to ( Ent2003 ) , @xmath GeV
@xmath and @xmath GeV @xmath . In the 2B only case, calculated with the
NN at N3LO by ( Ent2003 ) , values for the total energy of the system
are around @xmath MeV at empirical saturation density @xmath fm @xmath .
The energy gains a @xmath MeV in repulsion at double saturation density
@xmath . The inclusion of 3NFs contribute to enhance even more the
energy values in the entire density range. This is a direct consequence
of the modifications observed on the partial wave matrix elements in
Fig. 4.8 . Repulsion due to the density-dependent 2NF goes from less
than @xmath MeV at density @xmath fm @xmath , rising to @xmath MeV at
saturation density, and boosting up to @xmath MeV at double saturation
density. We must outline that, thanks to the non-perturbative nature of
our calculation, which performs an all-order ladder summation for the
in-medium @xmath -matrix interaction, we are not bound to low-density
regions. Therefore, we can span with one same many-body technique a
higher density range, whereas perturbative many-body calculations must
perform some kind of extrapolation.

Furthermore we present in Fig. 5.14 the variation in the total energy
curve due to the different averaging procedures in the construction of
the density-dependent force. The difference is negligible for low
densities, and becomes appreciable only around double saturation
density. At @xmath , we observe an energy value of @xmath MeV. Here, the
three different averages reach a maximum spread of @xmath MeV. We note
that the behavior at high densities is similar to the one observed in
Fig. 5.11 for SNM. Results obtained with the self-consistent correlated
average with the use of the full regulator provide the less repulsive
energies at these high densities. On the contrary, the most repulsive
results are observed for the self-consistent correlated average but with
the use of the external regulator function. Nevertheless, the overlap in
between the different curves is striking, leading to an almost complete
independence on the average procedure implemented. For an estimate of
the @xmath energy results we can rely on the Sommerfeld expansion.
Thermal effects slightly increase the zero temperature energies, in
accordance to what was presented in Fig. LABEL:sub@pnmtdep .

Contrary to what was presented in the symmetric matter case, where
theoretical uncertainties are dominated by the different couples of the
additional LECs @xmath and @xmath , in the case of PNM, variations in
the calculations are dominated by uncertainties in the determination of
the LECs @xmath and @xmath ( Heb2013Jul ) . These LEC relate NN, @xmath
N and 3N interactions in the chiral expansion and their determination
from @xmath N scattering is within uncertainties in agreement with the
NN scattering extracted values. These lead to an error band for each
constant equal to @xmath GeV @xmath and @xmath GeV @xmath ( Ent2003 ;
Epe2005 ; Ren2003 ) . We show this error band in Fig. 5.15 . Results are
presented at zero temperature, following the extrapolation explained in
the introduction to this chapter, and computing each curve in two
different cases for the 2B force: the complete N3LO Entem-Machleidt
force ( Ent2003 ) and the SRG-evolved NN N3LO force with a cutoff of
@xmath fm @xmath . In both cases the 2B force is complemented with the
density-dependent 2NF derived in neutron matter with the correlated
average with full regulator function, with cutoff set to @xmath fm
@xmath in the former case, and @xmath fm @xmath in the latter one.
Results are depicted in a similar fashion to the ones presented in Ref.
( Heb2013Jul ) for an easier comparison. Upper curves correspond to the
upper bound value for the LECs, i.e. @xmath GeV @xmath and @xmath GeV
@xmath ; while lower curves correspond to the lower bound value, i.e.
@xmath GeV @xmath and @xmath GeV @xmath . We observe that in both cases,
of complete and evolved NN force, the spread in results due to
theoretical uncertainties in the LECs ranges from less than 1 MeV at sub
saturation densities, to @xmath MeV at @xmath , and doubles this value
at @xmath , presenting a higher spread for the evolved case. Looking at
Fig. 5.15 , we observe that bands overlap perfectly up to almost @xmath
fm @xmath . In this sense, neutron matter can be fairly well described,
up to these densities, with both the full and evolved 2B force, proving
the perturbative behavior in this low-energy regime.

To be consistent in the order of the chiral expansion for the nuclear
force, we perform, also for PNM, calculations at full N2LO using the
newly optimized NN force from Ref. ( Eks2013 ) . In the full N2LO
calculation the LECs, @xmath , used in the density-dependent force, are
taken in accordance to ( Eks2013 ) . In the N3LO case, values are taken
from ( Ent2003 ) . In Fig. 5.16 , we see that in both cases, of
including or not the density-dependent 2NF, results obtained with the
newly optimized N2LO force are more repulsive for all densities with
respect to the N3LO ones. In the 2B case, this repulsion is around
@xmath MeV at @xmath fm @xmath and grows with the density up to @xmath
MeV at @xmath . In the 2B+3B calculation the repulsion between the N2LO
and N3LO case is a bit stronger at all densities, with respect to values
obtained with the 2B forces only. The repulsive effect approaches values
of @xmath MeV at double saturation density. As discussed for SNM, we
ascribe this overall repulsion between the N2LO optimized and the N3LO
calculations to the different construction of the 2NF force. It is
interesting to note that the 2B N2LO potential provides higher energy
values with respect to the 2B N3LO one. The curve obtained with the
former potential approaches the one obtained with the 2B N3LO plus the
density-dependent potential. If thermal effects are taken into account,
curves obtained with the N2LO optimized force are in fair agreement with
the Coupled Cluster calculations presented in Ref. ( Hag2013 ) . Once
again, it is difficult to evaluate the quality of our results in
relation to the chiral expansion consistency, given the different
structures of the N2LO and the N3LO forces.

We want to conclude this chapter with a study of the symmetry energy. As
already outlined in the introduction to this chapter, a reliable
estimation for the density dependence of the symmetry energy is crucial
to understand and predict properties of isospin-rich nuclei and neutron
stars. To compute the symmetry energy, one generally resorts to the
parabolic formula, i.e. one assumes that the energy per particle (or any
of its components, kinetic and potential), has a quadratic dependence on
asymmetry ( Vid2009 ) :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath defines the isospin asymmetry of the system, with @xmath and
@xmath neutrons and protons respectively. This immediately yields that
the symmetry energy, @xmath , is given by the difference of PNM and SNM
energies:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The SCGF approach can be generalized to isospin asymmetric systems (
Fri2005 ) . The quadratic dependency of the energy with respect to the
asymmetry parameter @xmath , Eq. ( 5.4 ), has been validated using only
2NFs, however we don’t expect 3NFs to alter this behavior ( Car2012 ) .

We plot in Fig. 5.17 the density dependence for the symmetry energy
obtained using both the N3LO potential by ( Ent2003 ) and the optimized
N2LO by ( Eks2013 ) . In both cases, we perform the calculation in the
2B-only case, and in the 2B+3B procedure. Curves are obtained from those
presented in Fig. 5.13 and Fig. 5.16 applying Eq. ( 5.5 ). It is
interesting to note that when including the density-dependent force,
either on top of the 2NF N2LO or N3LO potential, the values of the
symmetry energy lower. This can be interpreted analyzing the different
modifications which 3B forces induce on, respectively, the PNM and SNM
system. In the latter case, the repulsion provided on energy values when
including 3NFs is stronger with respect to the former case. This affects
the subtraction in Eq. ( 5.5 ) providing smaller quantities for the
symmetry energy when considering the density-dependent force in the
calculation. To better understand this behavior, we present in Table 5.1
the results for the total energy per nucleon in PNM, SNM and the
symmetry energy, at @xmath MeV and empirical saturation density @xmath .
We must point out that the effect of temperature, following the
procedure presented in the introduction to this chapter, yields a
decrease in the symmetry energy values at @xmath MeV of approximately
@xmath MeV, with respect to the zero temperature ones. Furthermore, we
present in Table 5.1 the value of the the slope of the symmetry energy
at empirical saturation density. This quantity is measured as @xmath ,
and its value is constrained to be in a range of @xmath MeV ( Tsa2009 )
.

As expected from Fig. 5.17 , the result which best approaches the
currently accepted @xmath MeV symmetry energy value at @xmath ( Tsa2009
) is obtained from the 2B N2LO calculation. Taking thermal effects into
account, this lies slightly above of the accepted quantity.
Subsequently, the symmetry energy obtained with the 2B N3LO potential is
also a good estimate of @xmath at saturation density, settling a bit
below @xmath MeV. The slope @xmath obtained with the N2LO force is
higher with respect to the result given by the 2B N3LO. This is a
consequence of the more repulsive PNM energy together with a more
attractive SNM one for the N2LO case, which enhances the value of the
slope of the symmetry energy. Results for @xmath obtained including the
density-dependent forces lie farther below the accepted value, which is
a consequence of what we argued before. The less attractive energy
obtained for SNM together with a much more repulsive energy in PNM when
including 3NFs, provides a smaller value for the symmetry energy. This
effect can be traced back to the choice in the selected couple of LECs,
@xmath and @xmath . An alternative choice in this selection could yield
a more bound SNM system, with energies approaching the desired empirical
saturation energy. Consequently, this would improve results for the
symmetry energy. As a consequence, for lower results of the symmetry
energy, lower values of the slope @xmath are observed when including
3NFs. We once more point out that, these smaller values for @xmath at
saturation density, could be improved with a different choice of
low-energy constants for the description of the SNM energy curve.

## Chapter 6 Summary and Conclusions

The idea, on which the development of this thesis is based, has been the
consistent introduction of three-body forces in the formalism of the
SCGF theory. This work can be considered as the first attempt to expand
the theoretical formulation of the Green’s functions approach for
nuclear systems to include on a same footing 2B and 3B forces. A
systematic approach to the inclusion of 3B interactions in the SCGF
theory was a necessary step. We have extended a formalism that appeared
long ago, at the end of the 60’s ( Mart1959 ) . The effort put in
performing this task has been pushed by a double ambition. On the one
hand, it is a well-recognized fact that nuclear many-body calculations
require the inclusion of 3NFs to provide reliable nuclear structure
results. On the other, the inclusion of many-body forces, beyond the
2NF, is mandatory when dealing with calculations implemented with chiral
forces. In conclusion, the wish to provide consistent calculations with
the use of chiral interactions has been our main motivation along the
development of this thesis.

The introductory chapter of this thesis has been devoted to a general
overview of the many-body problem for infinite nuclear systems.
Different many-body formalisms to deal with this problem have been
briefly revised. All the methods presented are ab initio , in the sense
that the problem is treated from first principles, i.e. the Hamiltonian
has to be defined and the Schrödinger equation has to be solved. The
Hamiltonian is built up of microscopic 2B potentials which are
constructed to fit experimental scattering data. In this sense, these
potentials contain a repulsive short-range and tensor intermediate and
long range part of the strong interaction. Most of the methods discussed
here are nonperturbative, meaning that the correlations arising from the
repulsive behavior of the potential are taken into account and
incorporated either into the interaction or into the wave function. We
also considered perturbative approaches. Conversely to the previous, the
perturbative methods claim that calculations can be performed with
evolved nuclear potentials as well. In the former approach, the
short-range core strongly characterizes the NN potential. In the latter,
by means of regularization techniques, universal low-momentum softer
potentials can be defined. While on one side, the correlated behavior
has always been considered as the necessary condition for nuclear matter
saturation, on the other, many-body forces are unavoidable elements
which cannot be neglected. Furthermore, a revision of the most important
formulations for the microscopic potentials has been presented,
including Argonne @xmath ( Wir1995 ) and the CdBonn ( Mac2001 )
potentials. At the end of the introductory chapter, we have especially
focused our attention on the chiral inspired approach to nuclear forces.
Reviewing the basic ideas on which @xmath EFT is based, we then outlined
the state-of-the-art of chiral forces.

The second chapter has been devoted to the description of the Green’s
functions many-body approach, starting from the definition of the
Hamiltonian with the inclusion of a 1B, 2B and 3B contributions. For a
specific SP energy and momentum, the GF can describe the propagation of
a hole or a particle which interacts with the many-body system. The
information enclosed in the SP propagator can be accessed by the
spectral function. The spectral function defines the probability of
encountering a specific hole-state or particle-state in the many-body
system, and its width in energy defines the lifetime of this state. This
method goes beyond a mean-field approach, in that the spread in energy
of the spectral function dictates that a certain range of energies is
available for a given SP momentum. The hole spectral function is
directly related to experimental data, as it is connected to the value
of the removed strength in ( @xmath ) experiments of knock-out
reactions. We have then focused on the reformulation of the
Galitskii-Migdal-Koltun sum rule ( Gal1958 ; Kol1974 ) . If the system
interacts only via up to 2BFs, the sum rule provides the energy of the
many-body ground state by means of the sole knowledge of the SP spectral
function. When the 3B force is included in the Hamiltonian, the sum rule
needs further information to be evaluated. There are two different ways
to reformulate the sum rule:

-   in one case, the sum rule implies the computation of the 2BF
    expectation value in the many-body ground state. This approach is
    preferable if the fully correlated 2B propagator is computed in the
    many-body approximation, by means, for example, of the @xmath
    -matrix.

-   in the other case, the sum rule requires the knowledge of the 3BF
    expectation value in the many-body ground state. In nuclear physics,
    this latter quantity is expected to provide a smaller contribution
    to the total energy with respect to the 2BF expectation value. We
    would then rather use this version of the sum rule, especially if
    approximations are performed in the evaluation of the expectation
    value.

The second version of the sum rule is the one which has been implemented
in the calculations presented in the thesis. Here, the expectation value
of the 3BF needed to evaluate the GMK sum rule has been only computed at
the HF level. Computing the 2BF expectation value at the HF level would
have induced higher errors in the total energy value due to the bigger
contribution given by the 2BF operator. In the last section of Chapt. 2
, we have revised the self-consistent solution of the SP propagator by
means of Dyson’s equation. We have highlighted the fact that the
solution of this equation, by means of the irreducible self-energy,
requires only the inclusion of 1PI connected diagrams. Furthermore, we
have dedicated particular emphasis on the concept of skeleton diagrams
which, if used in the definition of the irreducible self-energy, sum up
big groups of nested diagrams. Finally, we stressed that the use of an
irreducible self-energy formed of connected skeleton 1PI diagrams
requires a truly self-consistent iterative solution of Dyson’s equation.

In Chap. 3 , the full expansion of the self-energy including 1B, 2B and
3B contributions has been presented. A further characteristic in the
diagrams to be included in the irreducible self-energy has been
considered:

-   the concept of interaction-irreducible diagram has been introduced,
    following the definition of articulation vertices ( Bla1986 ) . An
    articulation vertex is such if it contains a portion which links a
    group of propagating lines that can be isolated and disconnected
    from the vertex itself. We have defined a diagram as an
    interaction-irreducible one if no articulation vertices can be
    encountered.

The concept of interaction-irreducible diagrams has then led us to
define the effective interactions to be used in the construction of the
irreducible self-energy:

-   an effective 1B interaction which is the sum of three contributions:
    the original 1B interaction; a 1B average over the 2B interaction;
    and a 2B average over the 3B force. The 1B and 2B averages are
    performed using fully dressed propagators.

-   an effective 2B interaction which is the sum of the original 2B
    interaction plus a correlated 1B average over the 3B force.

This approach has been compared to the usual normal ordering procedure
to define effective interactions when beyond 2B forces are included in
the Hamiltonian. We considered our approach as a generalization of the
usual normal ordering, in that the ordering of the Hamiltonian is done
with respect to the correlated many-body wave function, instead of the
Slater determinant used in the latter approach. Subsequently, we
emphasized the fact that, in order to correctly evaluate the
perturbative expansion of the self-energy by means of the effective
interaction Hamiltonian, all interaction reducible diagrams must be
disregarded. In fact, these are already taken into account by means of
the effective interactions.
The complete perturbative expansion of the self-energy has been
performed all the way up to third order, proving that the definition of
the effective 1B and 2B interactions substantially reduces the number of
diagrams to be considered. This procedure substantially facilitates the
enumeration of all the contributions which build the self-energy
expansion. In addition, we solved the equation of motion for the
propagator. This solution induces the so called hierarchy of EOMs for
the GFs. In other words the solution for the EOM of the @xmath -body
propagator, requires the knowledge of a different @xmath -body
propagator. In the case of including 3BFs, the EOM technique defines a
hierarchy of equations that link each @xmath -body GF to the ( @xmath
-1)-, ( @xmath +1)- and ( @xmath +2)-body GFs. A truncation for this
hierarchy is necessary in order to solve the system of equations. The
solution for the EOM of both the 1B and 2B propagator was formally
presented without truncations, i.e. with exact expressions. Evaluating
the solution of the EOM for the 1B and 2B propagators we encountered:

-   from the EOM of the 1B propagator we have obtained an all-order
    definition of the irreducible self-energy in terms of 1PI
    interacting vertex functions. The 1B effective interaction defines
    directly the energy-independent part of the self-energy, which
    includes the HF approximation for the SP self-energy. Next, the
    vertex interacting functions, the @xmath and @xmath , define the
    energy-dependent part of the self-energy which is connected,
    respectively, to the 2B effective and 3B interaction.

-   from the EOM of the 2B propagator, we have obtained a complete
    definition of the @xmath vertex function. This includes terms
    containing both the 2B effective and the 3B interaction. Special
    attention was paid in considering all the exchange contributions
    when solving the EOM for the 2B propagator.

We then demonstrated the correspondence in between the EOM method and
the up-to-third-order self-energy expansion performed in the first part
of the chapter. This has proved, at least up to third order, the
validity of both approaches to the self-energy. Subsequently,
truncations on the @xmath interacting vertex function were finally
discussed, leading to specific many-body approximations:

-   we have analyzed the ladder, ring and parquet approximations to the
    solution of the many-body problem, paying special attention to the
    ladder approximation used in this thesis. We saw how the inclusion
    of the 3B force enters these approximations only by means of the
    effective 2B interaction. Consequently, this leaves the aspect of
    the approximation formally unaltered, with respect to the one in the
    sole 2B case.

The pedagogical approach followed in this chapter aimed at clarifing the
use of effective interactions in nonperturbative approaches. The
inclusion of 3BFs performed not from first principles, i.e. from the
definition of the Hamiltonian, has led in the past to an incorrect
treatment of the three-body contributions in the many-body
approximations.

The fourth chapter has been dedicated to the calculation of the
density-dependent 2BFs from chiral 3NFs at N2LO. Chap. 4 has been
divided into two parts: the first part presenting the formal evaluation
of the density-dependent force, and the second part dedicated to the
partial-wave analysis of the potential matrix elements. In the
evaluation of the 2B density-dependent force:

-   we have performed the average over the third particle of the three
    3B terms appearing at N2LO in the chiral expansion. This average has
    been computed with the use of the self-consistent correlated
    momentum distribution function obtained at each step in the
    iterative procedure of the SCGF method. In the average, a regulator
    function in terms of Jacobi coordinates has been considered.
    Expressions for the six potential terms deriving from the
    contraction of the 3NFs have been presented in the specific case of
    diagonal momenta. The average has been performed in both cases of
    SNM and PNM.

In the second part of the chapter, dedicated to the analysis of the
partial waves of the potential matrix elements:

-   we have studied the effect in SNM of each of the six
    density-dependent terms obtained at saturation density on top of the
    bare 2B N3LO force. The effects on @xmath , @xmath , @xmath mixing
    and @xmath waves have been studied in detail. This analysis has led
    us to the conclusion that the effect provided by the @xmath exchange
    contracted term which includes in-medium effects, i.e. @xmath , and
    the contact contracted term, i.e. @xmath , which includes vertex
    corrections to the contact 2B term, introduce the strong repulsion
    observed in @xmath partial waves. This repulsive effect, which
    increases with the density of the system, is what provides a
    mechanism for nuclear matter saturation.

-   the overall effect of the density-dependent force has been studied
    for the same partial waves, considering both a free and a correlated
    average for the contraction of the 3B force. The comparison between
    the two cases has led to small differences. Higher absolute values
    have been observed when using the free propagator, mainly in the
    @xmath and @xmath mixing partial waves, of around @xmath fm in
    enhancement. This effect has been ascribed to the different
    depletion of the momentum distributions used in the averaging
    procedure, considering that the less the depletion, the higher the
    absolute values of the partial waves.

-   furthermore, the effect on partial waves given by the use of
    different regulator functions in the averaging procedure has been
    analyzed. In one case, the complete function in Jacobi coordinates
    has been used. In the other, an external regulator which doesn’t
    affect the internal integrated momentum has been chosen. The effect
    on partial waves using an external regulator function has been
    mostly observed on @xmath and @xmath mixing partial waves, obtaining
    an effect similar to the one provided by the use of a free
    propagator in the averaging procedure, i.e. higher absolute values
    when considering a less depleted momentum distribution function.
    Some of the integrated functions which build the density-dependent
    force have also been analyzed considering the different averaging
    procedures.

From the analysis performed on the partial waves in SNM, we have
concluded that the repulsion which one observes on the total energy is
mostly provided by the @xmath waves. Furthermore, from the analysis of
the different averaging procedures, we have concluded that the small
variations are not mainly related to the presence of high-momentum
states, but mostly on how momenta below @xmath are regulated. If these
momenta are less depleted, the absolute value of the contracted 3NF
rises. In fact, at saturation density, the strongest effect in absolute
values is provided by the correlated average non regulated; followed by
the free average with internal regulation, and the smallest absolute
values are provided by the fully regulated correlated average.
The effects on partial waves in the case of PNM have also been studied,
evaluating the density-dependent contribution at saturation density:

-   we have observed an overall repulsive effect provided by the
    density-dependent force on the @xmath and @xmath partial waves
    accessible in neutron matter. Also in this case we have analyzed the
    effects provided by the different averaging procedures. Similar
    conclusions as for the SNM case have been driven.

In addition, at the end of Chap. 4 we have presented the extrapolation
followed for the diagonal potential matrix elements to non-diagonal
elements in relative momentum. A qualitative validation for this
extrapolation has been discussed, comparing the off-diagonal @xmath
partial wave of the density-dependent @xmath exchange 2B term, i.e
@xmath , to the one of the bare @xmath exchange 2B term.

In the final chapter, we have presented results for both microscopic and
macroscopic properties of symmetric nuclear and pure neutron matter. In
the introduction to Chap. 5 , we have described the effects caused by
the finite temperature calculations. By means of a simple extrapolation
formula, the effects of temperature have been evaluated at all densities
considered, providing us with an estimation of the zero temperature
results. Some details on the numerical inclusion of 3BFs in the SCGF
formalism have also been introduced.
We started with the analysis of the microscopic properties of the SNM
system:

-   the imaginary part of the SP self-energy has been analyzed for three
    typical momenta at various densities, i.e. @xmath , @xmath , and
    @xmath for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We have observed an overall
    small effect when considering the 3B force in the calculation. Main
    differences were noticed at zero momenta in the position of the
    minima which appears at energies close and below @xmath . Besides,
    at high densities, the density-dependent 2B force lowered the values
    in the minima which is observed beyond the chemical potential. At
    these high densities, especially at low momenta, the imaginary part
    of the self-energy approached zero at the chemical potential value,
    proving the stronger degeneracy of the system in these conditions.

-   we performed a study on the quasiparticle spectrum, focusing on the
    SP potential which is derived in this approach from the real part of
    the self-energy. We observed a visible repulsive effect provided by
    the density-dependent 2NF for all momenta. This modification
    increases with the density. Effects provided on the self-energy by
    the different averaging procedures were mainly visible only at
    @xmath .

-   we then focused our analysis on the spectral function. Also on this
    microscopic quantity, the effect of 3B forces has proved to be
    small. The spectral function has been analyzed for three typical
    momenta at various densities, i.e. @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath for
    @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . At zero momenta, the overall change due
    to the effective 2BF has been that of narrowing the peak of the
    spectral function, and consequently inducing higher energy tails to
    preserve the energy weighed sum rule for the spectral functions. For
    increasing momenta, we found a narrowing of the quasi-particle peak
    of the spectral function caused by the 3B forces. The strongest
    effect was observed at high density and high momenta, causing also a
    shift in the quasi-particle peak position. The effect caused by the
    use of different averaging procedures was damped even more in the
    spectral function, with respect to the imaginary part of the
    self-energy, and very little discrepancies in the curves were
    observed.

-   finally we analyzed the SP momentum distribution. The main effect
    has been tested on the depletion of the @xmath at low momenta. At
    low densities, 3NF induce a smaller depletion, being in some sense a
    source of weaker correlations, while at high densities, the
    modification is reversed, providing a larger population of
    high-momentum states. Modifications due to the different averaging
    procedures were once again barely visible, providing small
    variations in the high-momentum tails of the @xmath especially at
    @xmath . As before, we can ascribe this modification to the
    different regulation applied on momenta below @xmath which, at high
    densities has a more visible repercussion.

All in all, the small consequences, observed on the microscopic
properties, has lead us to think that the 3NFs effect can be well
accounted for in the quasi-particle behavior of the system. However,
modification on the high energy tails in the spectral function and
changes in the population of high-momentum components in the momentum
distribution, is a sign that changes provided by the 3B forces on the
full off-shell dependency must be considered. Furthermore, the
modifications provided by the different averages are mostly visible at
high densities.
After analyzing the microscopic properties in the case of symmetric
nuclear matter, we have focused our attention on the total energy of the
many-body ground state in both cases of SNM and PNM. In the case of SNM:

-   we have studied the effect of the inclusion of 3NFs in the
    calculation of the total energy. Repulsion with respect to the 2B
    calculation has been observed for all densities. An increasing
    repulsion with density was tested, providing the saturation of the
    energy around the empirical saturation density of nuclear matter. A
    @xmath MeV binding energy has been obtained, a bit smaller with
    respect to the empirical one.

-   computing the energy with the use of the different averages, in the
    construction of the density-dependent force, provided a striking
    agreement in between the different procedures. A stronger effect
    mostly at high densities has been observed, which follows directly
    the conclusions driven from the analysis of the microscopic
    properties.

-   additionally, we have studied the effect of using different LECs in
    the intermediate and short-range 3NF derived terms. The use of
    different couples of @xmath and @xmath constants has led to a band
    governed by the value of the @xmath . The less negative or more
    positive the value of the @xmath , the more attractive the curve for
    all densities. We have also compared our results with those obtained
    applying SRG regularization on the 2B potential. Results for the
    energy of SNM appear more attractive for all densities with respect
    to the non regularized calculations.

-   for the sake of consistency in the chiral expansion, we have
    implemented the full N2LO chiral force in both the 2B and 3B sector.
    We have relied on a newly optimized version of the N2LO together
    with the density-dependent force derived in this thesis. While in
    the 2B only calculation, the N2LO force yields slightly more
    attractive results with respect to the N3LO ones for all densities,
    in the 2B+3B case, the full N2LO calculation provides results which
    are a bit more attractive at low densities, but visibly more
    repulsive at higher ones. A comparison in terms of consistency in
    the chiral expansion is hampered by the different Hamiltonians which
    characterize the two cases.

Similarly to what has been studied in the SNM case, we have also
investigated the properties in PNM:

-   we have analyzed the effect of the 3BF on the total energy of the
    system. The effect of the inclusion of the density dependence force
    has been to provide repulsion at all densities. As in the SNM case,
    the changes due to the different averaging procedures have been
    mostly observed in the high density region.

-   moreover, we have studied the error band in the energy curve of PNM
    given by the theoretical uncertainties in the LECs, the @xmath and
    @xmath constants. Comparing with the 2B-SRG evolved calculations, we
    have proved the perturbative behavior of pure neutron matter in the
    @xmath EFT expansion.

-   to be once again consistent in the chiral expansion, we have
    performed calculations at full N2LO. In this case, the sole 2B-N2LO
    calculation provides higher energy values with respect to the
    2B-N3LO results, on the contrary to what was obtained in SNM. The
    2B-N2LO calculated values approach those obtained with the 2B N3LO
    plus the density-dependent N2LO force. When considering the full
    2N+3N force at N2LO in the calculation, results appeared to be more
    repulsive, especially at high densities. As in the SNM case, we
    ascribe these changes to the different construction of the 2B force,
    and to the different LECs used.

As a conclusion to the chapter, we have presented calculations for the
symmetry energy and its slope in density dependece, focusing especially
on its values at saturation density. We have provided calculations with
both the N2LO and N3LO in the 2B sector complemented with the
density-dependent N2LO force. We observed how, in both cases, the
inclusion of the density-dependent force lowers the values of the
symmetry energies for all densities. This causes a slightly larger
discrepancy with respect to the accepted value of @xmath MeV at
saturation density. The 2B only calculations gave higher values for the
symmetry energy in the entire density range studied, where the 2B-N2LO
provided the best value at saturation density in comparison to the
accepted one. Different choices in the LECs @xmath and @xmath in the SNM
curve could help to improve on the 2B+3B results for the symmetry
energy.

We conclude that the inclusion of the 3BFs in the many-body calculation
has proved to be fundamental to obtain the saturation mechanism in SNM
at acceptable energy/density values and to provide a stiffer equation of
state for PNM. This once again proves the necessity to consider
many-body forces to render the theoretical calculations consistent with
empirical and experimental results.

This study can be considered as a first step to the analysis, from a
nonperturbative point of view, of the low-temperature properties of SNM
and PNM with the inclusion of 3BFs in the SCGF approach. Several next
steps for improvement can be devised.
Higher-order terms in the 3B force expectation value, beyond the HF
level, could be included in the correction to the GMK sum rule ( Cip2013
) . If the dressed @xmath were computed, the alternative formulation of
the sum rule could be used, computing the complete expectation value of
the 2B force ( Car2013Nov ) . In addition, the full calculation of the
1B effective term (see Eq. ( 3.2 )), considering the contraction of the
3BF with a dressed @xmath , could also be implemented.
As far as the averaging procedure, calculations with matrix elements
considering off-diagonal relative momenta can be seen as a step to be
taken. This could be a way to test the validity of the extrapolation
made on diagonal matrix elements to obtain the off-diagonal ones (
JWHol2010 ) .
From the point of view of the chiral expansion, a full N3LO calculation
could be implemented ( Kru2013 ) . This would imply the definition of
new density-dependent terms from the 3NFs appearing at N3LO in the
chiral expansion. Nonetheless, a treatment for the 4NFs appearing at
N3LO must then be sorted out. Accessibility to other formulations of the
chiral potentials for different orders in @xmath EFT (NLO, N2LO, N3LO,
etc.) with consistent Hamiltonians at each order, could provide the
possibility to truly test the convergence of results in the chiral
expansion ( Epe2002Dec1 ; Epe2005 ; Epe2009Oct ) .
The high temperature behavior, @xmath MeV, could also be explored,
analyzing how thermodynamical properties of both SMN and PNM are changed
due to the inclusion of 3NFs ( Rio2009Feb ; Som2009 ) . Above all,
studies on @xmath -stable nuclear matter could really help constrain the
finite temperature EOS including both 2B and 3B forces ( Heb2013Jul ) .

Furthermore, we would like to underline once again that, while the main
motivation of our study has been nuclear systems, the extended SCGF
formalism can be applied to other many-body systems, of either atomic or
molecular nature. In this sense, the effort in deriving the full
extension to include 3BFs from first principles, has been also to
advance the formalism of the SCGF method to solve the quantum many-body
problem.

## Appendix A Feynman rules

We present in this appendix the Feynman rules associated with the
diagrams arising in the perturbative expansion of Eq. ( 2.25 ). The
rules are given both in time and energy formulation, and some specific
examples will be considered at the end. We pay particular attention to
non-trivial symmetry factors arising in diagrams that include many-body
interactions. We work with antisymmetrized matrix elements, but for
practical purposes represent them by extended lines.

We provide the Feynman diagram rules for a given @xmath -body
propagator, such as Eqs. ( 2.5 ) and ( 2.6 ). These arise from a trivial
generalization of the perturbative expansion of the 1B propagator in
Eq. ( 2.25 ). At @xmath -th order in perturbation theory, any
contribution from the time-ordered product in Eq. ( 2.25 ), or its
generalization, is represented by a diagram with @xmath external lines
and @xmath interaction lines (from here on called vertices), all
connected by means of oriented fermion lines. These fermion lines arise
from contractions between annihilation and creation operators,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Applying the Wick theorem to any such arbitrary diagram, results in the
following Feynman rules.

  Rule 1  

    Draw all, topologically distinct and connected diagrams with @xmath
    vertices, and @xmath incoming and @xmath outgoing external lines,
    using directed arrows. For interaction vertices the external lines
    are not present.

  Rule 2  

    Each oriented fermion line represents a Wick contraction, leading to
    the unperturbed propagator @xmath [or @xmath ]. In time formulation,
    the @xmath and @xmath label the times of the vertices at the end and
    at the beginning of the line. In energy formulation, @xmath denotes
    the energy carried by the propagator.

  Rule 3  

    Each fermion line starting from and ending at the same vertex is an
    equal-time propagator, @xmath .

  Rule 4  

    For each 1B, 2B or 3B vertex, write down a factor @xmath , @xmath or
    @xmath , respectively. For effective interactions, the factors are
    @xmath , @xmath .

When propagator renormalization is considered, only skeleton diagrams
are used in the expansion. In that case, the previous rules apply with
the substitution @xmath . Furthermore, note that Rule 3 applies to
diagrams embedded in the one-body effective interaction (see Fig. 3.3 )
and therefore they should not be considered explicitly in an
interaction-irreducible expansion. In calculating @xmath , however, one
should use the correlated @xmath instead of the unperturbed one.

  Rule 5  

    Include a factor @xmath where @xmath is the number of closed fermion
    loops. This sign comes from the odd permutation of operators needed
    to create a loop and does not include loops of a single propagator,
    already accounted for by Rule 3.

  Rule 6  

    For a diagram representing a @xmath -point GF, add a factor @xmath ,
    whereas for a @xmath -point interaction vertex without external
    lines (such as @xmath and @xmath ) add a factor @xmath .

The next two rules require a distinction between the time and the energy
representation. In the time representation:

  Rule 7  

    Assign a time to each interaction vertex. All the fermion lines
    connected to the same vertex @xmath share the same time, @xmath .

  Rule 8  

    Sum over all the internal quantum numbers and integrate over all
    internal times from @xmath to @xmath .

Alternatively, in energy representation:

  Rule 7’  

    Label each fermion line with an energy @xmath , under the constraint
    that the total incoming energy equals the total outgoing energy at
    each interaction vertex, @xmath .

  Rule 8’  

    Sum over all the internal quantum numbers and integrate over each
    independent internal energy, with an extra factor @xmath , i.e.
    @xmath .

Each diagram is then multiplied by a combinatorial factor S that
originates from the number of equivalent Wick contractions that lead to
it. This symmetry factor represents the order of the symmetry group for
one specific diagram or, in other words, the order of the permutation
group of both open and closed lines, once the vertices are fixed. Its
structure, assuming only 2BFs and 3BFs, is the following :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath represents the order of expansion. @xmath ( @xmath )
denotes the number of 2B (3B) vertices in the diagram. The binomial
factor counts the number of terms in the expansion @xmath that have
@xmath factors of @xmath and @xmath factors of @xmath . Finally, @xmath
is the overall number of distinct contractions and reflects the
symmetries of the diagram. Stating general rules to find @xmath is not
simple. For example, explicit simple rules valid for the well-known
@xmath scalar theory are still an object of debate ( Hue2012 ) . An
explicit calculation for @xmath has to be carried out diagram by
diagram. Eq. ( A.1 ) can normally be factorized in a product of factors
@xmath , each due to a particular symmetry of the diagram. In the
following, we list a series of specific examples which is, by all means,
not exhaustive.

  Rule 9  

    For each group of @xmath symmetric lines, or symmetric
    groups-of-lines as defined below, multiply by a symmetry factor
    @xmath = @xmath . The overall symmetry factor of the diagram will be
    @xmath . Possible cases include:

1.   Equivalent lines . @xmath equally-oriented fermion lines are said
    to be equivalent if they start from the same initial vertex and end
    on the same final vertex.

2.   Symmetric and interacting lines . @xmath equally-oriented fermion
    lines that start from the same initial vertex and end on the same
    final vertex, but are linked via an interaction vertex to one or
    more closed fermion line blocks. The factor arises as long as the
    diagram is invariant under the permutation of the two blocks.

3.   Equivalent groups of lines . These are blocks of interacting lines
    (e.g. series of bubbles) that are equal to each other: they all
    start from the same initial vertex and end on the same final vertex.

Rule 9-i is the most well-known case and applies, for instance, to the
two second-order diagrams of Fig. 3.5 . Diagram LABEL:sub@2ord_2B has 2
upward-going equivalent lines and requires a symmetry factor @xmath =
@xmath . In contrast, diagram LABEL:sub@2ord_3B has 3 upward-going
equivalent lines and 2 downward-going equivalent lines, that give a
factor @xmath = @xmath = @xmath .

Figs. A.1 and A.2 give specific examples of the application of rule
9-ii. Diagram LABEL:sub@diagr_29 has 3 upward-going equivalent,
non-interacting lines, which yield a symmetry factor @xmath = @xmath due
to rule 9-i. However, there are also two downward-going symmetric and
equivalent lines, that interact through the exchange of a bubble and
thus give rise to a factor @xmath = @xmath . The total factor is
therefore @xmath = @xmath = @xmath . Let us now expand the two 2B
effective interactions that are connected to the intermediate bubble
according to Eq. ( 3.3 ). Diagram LABEL:sub@diagr_29 is now seen to
contain three contributions, diagrams LABEL:sub@diagr_27 to
LABEL:sub@diagr_28 , with the symmetry factors shown in the figure. Note
that drawing the contracted 3B vertex above or below the bubble in
LABEL:sub@diagr_26 leads to two topologically equivalent diagrams that
must only be drawn once, i.e. diagram LABEL:sub@diagr_26 . However,
since the diagram is no longer symmetric under the exchange of the two
downward-going equivalent lines, rule 9-ii does not apply anymore and
the @xmath factor is no longer needed.

A similar situation occurs when the two interacting fermion lines start
and end on the same vertex, as in Fig. A.2 . Consider the left-most and
right-most external fermion bubbles. In all three diagrams, they are
connected to each other by a 3B interaction vertex above and by a series
of interactions and medium polarizations below. The intermediate bubble
interactions in diagrams LABEL:sub@diagr_33 and LABEL:sub@diagr_31 are
symmetric under exchange. There are therefore two sets of symmetric
interacting lines (the two up-going and two down-going fermion lines)
and hence both diagrams take a factor @xmath . In contrast, the two
external loops in LABEL:sub@diagr_12 are not symmetric under exchange
due to the lower 3B vertex. Rule 9-ii does not apply anymore and @xmath
. If all the vertices between the external loops where equal (e.g.
effective 2B terms @xmath ), a factor @xmath = @xmath would still apply.

The case of Fig. A.2 is of particular importance because these diagrams
directly contribute to the energy-independent 1B effective interaction.
In the EOM approach, these contributions arise from the first three
terms on the right-hand side of Fig. 3.15 . Note that the ladder diagram
has a symmetry factor @xmath = @xmath and that the exchange contribution
in the bubble term has to be considered. Using these diagrams to the
define the 2B propagator in Eq. ( LABEL:g4ptgamma ) and inserting these
in the last term of Eq. ( 3.2 ), one finds the contributions to @xmath
shown in Fig. A.3 . The two bubble terms have summed up to form diagram
LABEL:sub@diagr_33 , each of them contributing a factor @xmath from
Eq. ( 3.2 ). Consequently, the approach leads to the correct overall
@xmath = @xmath symmetry factor. In our approach, there is no need to
explicitly compute these diagrams, since they are automatically included
by Eq. ( 3.2 ).

Finally, rule 9-iii applies to the diagram in Fig. LABEL:sub@diagr_32 .
In this case, the two chains of bubble diagrams are equal and start and
end at the same 3BF vertices. Hence, they are equivalent groups of lines
and the diagram takes a factor @xmath . Diagram LABEL:sub@diagr_30 is
different because the exchange of all the bubbles generates a diagram in
which the direction of the internal fermion loop is reversed. Therefore
no symmetry rule applies and the symmetry factor is just @xmath . This
is, however, topologically equivalent to the initial diagram and hence
must be counted only once.

As an example of the application of the above Feynman rules, we give
here the formulae for some of the diagrams in Fig. 3.7 . Let us start
with the contribution depicted in diagram Fig. LABEL:sub@3ord_232B .
There are two sets of upward-going equivalent lines, which contribute to
a symmetry factor @xmath . Considering the overall factor of Eq. ( A.1 )
and the presence of one closed fermion loop, one finds:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Diagrams LABEL:sub@3ord_233B_1 and LABEL:sub@3ord_233B_2 differ only for
the orientation of a loop. Hence, there are two pairs of equivalent
lines in the first case and one pair and one triplet of equivalent lines
in the second, which is reflected in their different symmetry factors:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

## Appendix B Interaction-irreducible diagrams

Interaction-irreducible diagrams can be used to distinguish between two
different many-body effects in the SCGF approach. On the one hand,
effective interactions sum all the instantaneous contributions
associated with “averaging out” subgroups of particles that lead to
interaction-reducible diagrams. This has the advantage of reducing
drastically the number of diagrams at each order in the perturbative
expansion. It also gives rise to well-defined in-medium interactions. On
the other hand, the remaining diagrams will now include higher-order
terms summed via the effective interaction itself.

In this appendix, we prove that the perturbative expansion can be recast
into a set containing only interaction-irreducible diagrams at any given
order, as long as properly defined effective interactions are used. The
argument we propose has been often used to demonstrate how disconnected
diagrams cancel out in the perturbative expansion. We now apply it to a
slightly different case that requires extra care. We focus on the case
of a diagram that includes only 2B and 3BFs. The extension to the
general case of many-body forces should be straightforward.

Eq. ( 2.25 ) gives the perturbative expansion of the 1B GF in terms of
the Hamiltonian, @xmath , in the interaction picture. The @xmath -th
order term of the perturbative expansion reads:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Only connected contributions are allowed and we take the interaction
picture external creation and destruction operators to the left for
convenience. Let us assume, without loss of generality, that the diagram
is composed of @xmath 2B and @xmath 3B interaction operators. This gives
rise to @xmath identical contributions when expanding @xmath in the
time-ordered product, as discussed right after Eq. ( A.1 ) in App. A .

Let us denote with @xmath a generic operator, representing either a 2B,
@xmath , or a 3B, @xmath , potential. Suppose now that there is a
sub-set of @xmath operators that are arbitrary connected to each other,
but that share the external links with a unique operator, @xmath ,
outside the subset. In other words, @xmath is the only way to enter and
exit the subset of @xmath - operators @xmath as drawn below:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is also necessarily connected to the other interactions and,
hence, this is an articulation vertex . In general, there can be an
arbitrary number of articulation vertices, such as @xmath , at any given
order. Each one of these vertices would isolate a particular subset of
operators. The following arguments can be applied to each subset
separately.

For simplicity, let us restrict the argument to the simplest case of one
articulation vertex only. Suppose that, among @xmath terms, there are
@xmath 2B and @xmath 3B interactions, with @xmath . The number of
time-ordered products @xmath and @xmath in Eq. ( B ) that is consistent
with the above decomposition is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath .

Let us consider the case in which @xmath is a 3B operator, with matrix
elements @xmath connected with four legs to the internal subset of
@xmath vertices and with two legs to the rest of the diagram. We can
factorize the amplitude in Eq. ( B ) by adding an intermediate identity
operator as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that the factorization of the time ordered product, by inserting a
@xmath , is possible because the Wick theorem normal-orders these
products with respect to the reference state, @xmath . In other words,
both Eqs. ( B ) and ( LABEL:redu ) lead to exactly the same results
after all Wick contractions have been carried out.

All possible orders in which a general @xmath enters Eq. ( LABEL:redu )
are equivalent and are accounted for by the binomial factors. The factor
@xmath accounts for all the possible ways, eventually decided by
contractions, in which the six creation/annihilation operators in @xmath
can be separated in the two factors [see also Eq. ( B.7 ) below]. We
also include an additional factor @xmath coming from all the possible
ways to choose one creation/annihilation operator among the three
possible pairs. The correct time ordering for creation and annihilation
operators associated with @xmath is preserved using @xmath .

With this decomposition, we can identify the second line of Eq. (
LABEL:redu ) as an @xmath -th order contribution (with @xmath 2B and
@xmath 3B operators) to the perturbative expansion of @xmath .
Collecting all possible contributions of form ( B.2 ) and ( LABEL:redu )
in which the first @xmath operators are unchanged, the @xmath -th order
interaction-reducible contribution to @xmath becomes:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath sums all the diagrams at @xmath -th order with @xmath
two-body operators. Note that the last term no longer depends on time
and can be seen as an energy-independent correction to the 1B potential.
We can automatically take into account these interaction-reducible terms
by reformulating the initial hamiltonian to include the effective 1B
vertex:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where now we use an exact @xmath . The perturbative expansion obtained
with this effective interaction should only contain
interaction-irreducible diagrams to avoid double counting.

Note that in Eq. ( LABEL:redu2 ) we automatically obtain the correct
symmetry factor @xmath associated with the contraction of @xmath with
the two pairs of incoming and outgoing lines of @xmath . In the general
case, a @xmath -body vertex can be reduced to a @xmath -body one (with
@xmath ) by using a @xmath -body GF. The overall combinatorial factor in
that case will be:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

This yields both the correct combinatorial factors entering the new
effective @xmath -body vertex and the symmetry factor associated with
the contraction with the ( @xmath )-body GF. The above arguments can be
generalized to any starting @xmath -body Hamiltonian. Applying these
derivation to all possible cases for a 3B Hamiltonian leads to the
effective interactions discussed in Eqs. ( 3.2 ) and ( 3.3 ).

## Appendix C Complete expressions for the density-dependent force

In this appendix we would like to derive the complete expressions for
the density-dependent terms obtained from contraction of the 3NFs at
N2LO in the chiral expansion. In Sec. 4.1 we presented the expressions
for the six in-medium contributions @xmath only in the specific case of
diagonal momentum, i.e. equal relative incoming and outgoing momentum
@xmath . When considering off-diagonal momenta, the most general
expression for a two-nucleon potential reads ( Erk1971 ) :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.1)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

In the previous expression we have introduced the total relative
momentum @xmath . Comparing with the on-shell expression written in
Eq. ( 4.13 ), we see that a further tensor structure has appeared, i.e.
@xmath . Given the presence of this additional operatorial form, the
partial wave analysis which we have followed from Ref. ( JWHol2010 ) is
not valid anymore, because in this approach this structure is
disregarded. It can be shown that, in the diagonal momentum limit, this
structure vanishes ( Erk1971 ) .

For each of the three 3NF contributions, Eqs. ( 4.1 )-( 4.2 )-( 4.3 ),
we need to evaluate Eq. ( 4.10 ). In doing so, we need to define the
three different transferred momenta for each specific case of particles
interchange defined in Eq. ( 4.10 ). We define the center of mass
momentum @xmath as ( Heb2010Jul ) :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the relative incoming and outgoing momenta:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

We can then express the incoming and outgoing SP momenta of particle 1
and 2 as functions of @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Depending on which of the three exchange terms we are considering in
Eq. ( 4.10 ),the transferred momenta @xmath , with @xmath will change.
For the direct term we can rewrite

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

For the exchange term @xmath we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

In the last case, the one with the exchange term @xmath , we have;

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

In the approximation of zero center of mass momenta, i.e. @xmath , the
previous expressions simplify.

In the following expressions we define @xmath . For convenience we also
define the following multiplying factors, which include the LECs:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

##### Contraction of the 3NF two-pion-exchange term

Starting with the 3NF TPE contribution, Eq. ( 4.1 ), we need to
calculate the integral (see Eq. ( 4.10 )):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with the tensor @xmath given in Eq.( 4.4 ). If we develop the sum over
the three particle indices inside Eq. ( LABEL:dd3bf_tpe ), we obtain
(note that an implicit sum in indices @xmath is considered) :

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (C.10)
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

We then need to perform the trace over the spin/isospin of the third
particle in expression Eq. ( C.10 ), for each of the three exchanging
terms, e.g. 1, @xmath and @xmath .

In the case of SNM, we have for the direct term, i.e. 1:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (C.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, in the previous and in the following two equations, the dots on
the left-hand side correspond to the term written in the last equality
of Eq. ( C.10 ), disregarding the multiplying factor 2.
In the case of PNM, Eq. ( C.11 ) acquires a multiplying factor 1/2, as
detailed in ( 4.32 ).
In the case of SNM, we have for the exchange term @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the case of PNM, terms proportional to @xmath are zero because the
structure @xmath , appearing in Eq. ( C.10 ), leads to a vanishing term
when calculated in a system of solely neutrons. Contributions
proportional to @xmath and @xmath change according to: the first and
third line in Eq. ( LABEL:tpe_st_2 ) acquire a multiplying factor 1/4,
and furthermore appear in an isoscalar form, i.e. no @xmath multiplying,
with an added -1/2 factor (see ( 4.33 ) for explanation); the second
line in Eq. ( LABEL:tpe_st_2 ) acquires a multiplying factor 1/3 (see (
4.34 ) for explanation).
In the case of SNM, we have for the exchange term @xmath :

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

In the case of PNM, the results follow the ones obtained for the
contributions in Eq. ( LABEL:tpe_st_2 ). Terms proportional to @xmath in
Eq. ( LABEL:tpe_st_3 ) are zero for the same reason as in Eq. (
LABEL:tpe_st_2 ). Contributions proportional to @xmath and @xmath change
according to: the first and second line in Eq. ( LABEL:tpe_st_2 )
acquire a multiplying factor 1/4, and furthermore appear in an isoscalar
form, i.e. no @xmath multiplying, with an added -1/2 factor (see ( 4.33
) for explanation); the third line in Eq. ( LABEL:tpe_st_2 ) acquires a
multiplying factor 1/3 (see ( 4.34 ) for explanation).

If we then perform the momentum integral over the third particle,
substituting in Eq. ( C.11 )-( LABEL:tpe_st_2 )-( LABEL:tpe_st_3 ) the
expressions for the transferred momenta given in Eqs. ( C.5 )-( C.6 )-(
C.7 ), we can rearrange the complete result in three different
contributions. For SNM we have, writing explicitly the prefactors given
in ( C.8 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.16)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (C.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the case of PNM, contributions given in Eqs. ( C.14 )-( C.16 )-( C.17
) change according to explanation given in ( 4.32 ), ( 4.33 ) and ( 4.34
) respectively. It can be demonstrated that the terms given in Eqs. (
C.14 )-( C.16 )-( C.17 ) are equivalent to those presented in Eq. ( 4.14
)-( 4.16 )-( 4.22 ) when considering diagonal elements, i.e @xmath .

In the previous expression we have introduced the function:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The functions @xmath , which are integrals over a single pion
propagator, have already been introduced in Sec. 4.1 . The function
@xmath , which is an integral over the product of two different pion
propagators, now reads:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The rest of the functions, @xmath , and the auxiliary one @xmath ,
change according to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (C.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (C.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.23)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath .

##### Contraction of the 3NF one-pion-exchange term

Let us now perform the integration in Eq. ( 4.10 ) for the 3NF OPE
contribution Eq. ( 4.2 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (C.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we develop the sum inside Eq. ( C.24 ) we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (C.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

We then need to perform the trace over spin/isospin of the third
particle in Eq. ( C.25 ) for each of the three interchanging cases, e.g.
1, @xmath and @xmath .
In the case of SNM we obtain for the direct term, i.e. 1:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (C.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, in the previous and in the two following equations, the dots
written on the left-hand side correspond to term written in Eq. ( C.25
). In the case of SNM we obtain for the exchange term @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (C.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the case of SNM we obtain for the exchange term @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (C.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the case of PNM, performing the trace over spin for expression given
in Eq. ( C.25 ), considering all exchanges, e.g. 1, @xmath and @xmath ,
leads to a vanishing quantity, as was already explained at the end of
Sec. 4.1 .
If we then perform the momentum integration, substituting in Eq. ( C.26
)-( C.27 )-( C.28 ) the expressions for the transferred momenta given in
Eqs. ( C.5 )-( C.6 )-( C.7 ), we can rearrange the complete result into
two contributions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
                 (C.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the previous expressions we have used the explicit prefactor given in
( C.8 ) for the quantity @xmath . Contributions given in Eqs. ( C.29 )-(
C.30 ) are equivalent to those presented in Eq. ( 4.28 )-( 4.29 ) when
considering the case of diagonal momentum elements, i.e. @xmath .

##### Contraction of the 3NF contact term

For the contact term Eq. ( 4.3 ), we need to evaluate the integral:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (C.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Expanding the sum inside Eq. ( C.31 ) we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the case of SNM, the trace over spin/isospin over the third particle
of Eq. ( C.32 ) leads to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

The dots in the previous expressions correspond to the term given in Eq.
( C.32 ) disregarding the multiplying factor 2.
In the case of PNM, evaluating the trace over spin of Eq. ( C.32 ),
considering all exchanges, leads to a vanishing term.

The integral over momentum in Eq. ( C.31 ) is trivial. Writing
explicitly the prefactor @xmath given in Eq. ( C.8 ), we have for the
contact 3NF contracted term:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

### c.1 Numerical implementation

Let us give some details on the numerical implementation for the
calculation of the density-dependent force. We start with the definition
of the mesh necessary to calculate the integral over the internal
momenta @xmath (see Eq. ( 4.10 )). We have two different cases:

-   calculation with dressed distribution function @xmath . In this case
    we need to cover momenta up to a certain high value in which it is
    sure that the @xmath has reached zero. We define three
    Gauss-Legendre meshes respectively from @xmath to @xmath , from
    @xmath to @xmath , from @xmath to @xmath . Meshes are chosen to
    cover accurately the behavior of the distribution function from
    momenta lower to those higher than @xmath . Finally, high momenta
    after @xmath are represented through a tangential mesh. We have 50
    points in the Gauss-Legendre meshes, and 500 in the tangential one.

-   calculation with the undressed distribution function, i.e. a step
    function up to @xmath . In this case we use a simple gauss mesh from
    0 to @xmath of 50 points

For the external relative momenta, i.e. @xmath and @xmath , and the
relative angle between them, i.e. @xmath =cos @xmath , we define
gaussian meshes. For relative momenta we have @xmath , for values from 0
to 1100 MeV. At @xmath MeV it is certain that the potential is zero.
After the complete evaluation of the density-dependent force @xmath , we
perform a tangential map of these values up to relative momenta @xmath
MeV. A high-momentum mapping of the potential is necessary for the
correct integration of the Lippmann-Schwinger equation to obtain the
@xmath -matrix ( Rio2007PhD ) .

In the case of the average using the self-consistent momentum
distribution function coming form the previous iterative step, we need
to obtain this via Eq. ( 2.13 ). At each iterative step, the values of
the imaginary and real part of the self-energy are stored, for different
points in the energy and momentum space. The number of points in the
energy mesh is @xmath for energies ranging from @xmath MeV. For the
momentum mesh we have @xmath , for SP momenta going from 0 to 3000 MeV.
We then interpolate through a spline the values of the imaginary and
real part of the self-energy to a fine energy mesh of @xmath . These
values are used to define the spectral function (see Eqs. ( 2.30 )-(
2.31 )) necessary to evaluate Eq. ( 2.13 ). This last step is performed
via a trapezoidal integral in the energy range. We then perform a linear
interpolation of the obtained values of @xmath to the mesh of @xmath
defined for the integration of the quantities in the density-dependent
force. Extrapolated values are set to zero.

Let us give some hints on the general numerical implementation of the
SCGF method. A schematic representation of each iterative step has been
shown at the beginning of Chap. 5 in Fig. 5.2 . Approximately @xmath
minutes are necessary to perform a complete iteration, as the one
depicted in Fig. 5.2 . Depending on the starting point of the iteration
procedure, @xmath iterations are needed to obtain converged results.
These could be less for low densities and high temperatures, and if the
starting point is a converged iteration for another density, temperature
state of the system. The number of iterations for convergence increase
for lower temperatures and high densities. The fundamental quantities
that one has to calculate are the imaginary part of the 2B GF, the
@xmath -matrix and the self-energy.

The first order approximation of the 2B propagator corresponds to the
independent propagation of two fully dressed particles. This includes
two terms, a direct and an exchange one, as depicted diagrammatically in
Fig. 3.9 . This is built from an imaginary and a real part ( Rio2007PhD
) . Once these two parts are obtained separately, an angle average is
necessary to calculate the full @xmath . This average is necessary to
circumvent the coupling of partial waves with different total angular
momentum @xmath which appear in @xmath . The average is performed over
the angle formed by the center of mass momentum and the relative
momentum of the two nucleons. This strategy facilitates the solution of
the Lippmann-Schwinger equation to evaluate the @xmath -matrix.

The Lippmann-Schwinger equation to be solved is then a one dimensional
integral equation for each allowed combination of @xmath , and at most
two coupled values of @xmath , due to the tensor component of the NN
interaction. By means of a discretization procedure, the equation for
the @xmath -matrix is converted into a complex matrix equation which can
be solved via standard numerical techniques ( Rio2007PhD ) . A matrix
inversion has to be performed to solve this equation. This can be quite
demanding if the dimension of the matrix is large. It is then important
to sample in a correct manner the number of integration mesh points
without loosing physical information. This is achieved by sampling
conveniently the region where @xmath is maximum in the relative
momentum, and the high relative momentum region where, due to
correlations, @xmath might not be negligible. This task is the most
time-consuming in the SCGF program ( Rio2007PhD ) .

A nice property of the SCGF method concerns the fact that there is no
need to worry about poles in the inversion of this matrix. In fact in
this approach, the integrand remains finite for all energies and
momenta. There is however a pole in the bosonic function which is
present in the @xmath -matrix, that is canceled by a node of the same
@xmath -matrix (see ( Rio2007PhD ) for details). We have already
mentioned that at low temperatures, the appearance of bound states
signals the onset of the pairing instability. This would directly appear
as a pole in the matrix which has to be inverted to solve the
Lippmann-Schwinger equation. However, this should be seen only below a
critical temperature which is around @xmath MeV. Our calculations are at
this border line. Especially in the case of symmetric nuclear matter,
convergence at this temperature and for increasing density starts to be
slow and difficult to achieve. This is due to the neutron-proton pairing
in the coupled @xmath channel. In pure neutron matter, where this
channel is not available, convergence is good all the way up to high
densities, even for low temperatures.

The remaining step in the SCGF method is the calculation of the
self-energy from the @xmath -matrix. The first quantity to be obtained
is the imaginary part of the self-energy, Im @xmath . A momenta and
energy integrals have to be performed, taking special care for the pole
in energy of the Bose function in the @xmath -matrix. Even though this
pole is canceled by a node, specific numerical arrangements have to be
taken in the definition of meshes. The real part of the self-energy is
then obtained by means of a dispersion relation from the imaginary part,
while the HF self-energy is calculated directly from the potential. To
evaluate this quantity, the calculation of the momentum distribution is
needed, which is obtained as described above. According to the mesh
points in which the spectral function is needed, the interpolation is
done on the imaginary and real part of the self-energy, and not directly
on the spectral function. This is done in order to avoid incorrect
samplings of the structure of the spectral functions which could induce
numerical inaccuracies. We must point out that the energy mesh for the
evaluation of the spectral function must be accurate enough to reproduce
not only the quasi-particle peak region, but furthermore the low and
high-energy tails which characterize the spectral function.