In this thesis we develop a full characterization of abelian quantum
statistics on graphs. We explain how the number of anyon phases is
related to connectivity. For 2-connected graphs the independence of
quantum statistics with respect to the number of particles is proven.
For non-planar 3-connected graphs we identify bosons and fermions as the
only possible statistics, whereas for planar 3-connected graphs we show
that one anyon phase exists. Our approach also yields an alternative
proof of the structure theorem for the first homology group of
n-particle graph configuration spaces. Finally, we determine the
topological gauge potentials for 2-connected graphs. Moreover we present
an alternative application of discrete Morse theory for two-particle
graph configuration spaces. In contrast to previous constructions, which
are based on discrete Morse vector fields, our approach is through Morse
functions, which have a nice physical interpretation as two-body
potentials constructed from one-body potentials. We also give a brief
introduction to discrete Morse theory.

\prefacesection Dedication

I dedicate this thesis to my family and friends.

\prefacesection Acknowlegdements

Foremost, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my advisors
Prof. Jon P. Keating and Dr Jonathan M. Robbins for discussions we had,
their patience and constant encouragement.

Besides my advisors, I would like to thank my fellow officemates in
Mathematics Department: Jo Dwyer, Orestis Georgiou, Jo Hutchinson, Andy
Poulton and James Walton (in fact a chemist) for all the fun we have had
in the last three years. I hope our friendship will continue! I also
wish to thank my friend Rami Band for many stimulating discussions we
had on the subject of this thesis and the experience of the 2011 Royal
Society Summer Science Exhibition.

Finally, I would like to thank my family, in particular my sister Ania
for being so positively crazy!

\declarationpage

\comment \prefacesection Author’s Declaration I declare that the work in
this dissertation was carried out in accordance with the requirements of
the University’s Regulations and Code of Practice for Research Degree
Programmes and that it has not been submitted for any other academic
award. Except where indicated by specific reference in the text, the
work is the candidate’s own work. Work done in collaboration with, or
with the assistance of, others, is indicated as such. Any views
expressed in the dissertation are those of the author.

A.N. Other

Date:
