# Résumé

La corde topologique établit un contexte dans lequel beaucoup de
caractéristiques de la théorie des cordes complète, comme les aspects
complémentaires de la description par la surface d’univers et l’espace
cible, ou la dualité entre corde ouverte et corde fermée, mènent à des
techniques de calcul qui vont au-delà de la théorie perturbative. Ce
mémoire résume mes activités de recherche dans ce domaine. La
présentation est organisée autour des calculs de la fonction de
partition de la corde topologique @xmath basés sur des perspectives
diverses sur la corde topologique.

###### Contents

-    1 Introduction: What is @xmath ?
-    2 @xmath via geometric transitions
    -    2.1 Chern-Simons theory as the target space description of the
        open topological string
    -    2.2 Determining all holomorphic curves in @xmath fibrations
    -    2.3 From open to closed via geometric transitions
        -    2.3.1 The conifold transition
        -    2.3.2 Toric geometry and web diagrams
        -    2.3.3 Generalized conifold transitions
    -    2.4 Computing: local @xmath
        -    2.4.1 Performing sums over representations
        -    2.4.2 Computing Gopakumar-Vafa invariants
    -    2.5 Reproducing Nekrasov’s partition function via geometric
        engineering
        -    2.5.1 Nekrasov’s partition function
        -    2.5.2 @xmath from topological string theory
        -    2.5.3 Beyond @xmath
    -    2.6 The topological vertex on the strip
        -    2.6.1 The general formalism
        -    2.6.2 Computing the partition function on the strip
        -    2.6.3 Application: @xmath via matrix models
-    3 @xmath via holomorphic anomaly
    -    3.1 The BCOV holomorphic anomaly equations
    -    3.2 The generalized holomorphic anomaly equations
    -    3.3 The holomorphic anomaly equations in the rigid limit
        -    3.3.1 The special geometry of Seiberg-Witten theory
        -    3.3.2 Computing periods of @xmath
        -    3.3.3 Modularity
        -    3.3.4 BPS states and fixing the holomorphic ambiguity
    -    3.4 The @xmath @xmath theory and its deformation to @xmath
        -    3.4.1 The Seiberg-Witten curve and the UV gauge coupling
        -    3.4.2 Calculating the amplitudes from the curve
        -    3.4.3 S-duality
        -    3.4.4 Expressing the @xmath theory in terms of infrared
            variables
    -    3.5 The @xmath @xmath theory
-    4 AGT and @xmath
    -    4.1 Relevant notions in conformal field theory
        -    4.1.1 Conformal blocks
        -    4.1.2 Null vector decoupling
    -    4.2 The genus expansion and modularity
        -    4.2.1 The AGT dictionary
        -    4.2.2 The factorization limit
        -    4.2.3 The torus one-point block
        -    4.2.4 The spherical four-point block
        -    4.2.5 Seiberg-Witten and quantum geometry from null vector
            decoupling
-    5 Perspectives

## 1 Introduction: What is @xmath?

In the course of the last century, all fundamental forces underlying the
dynamics of nature were quantized, and the resulting theories
convincingly tested experimentally, save one: the force of gravity. That
quantizing gravity requires new ideas comes as no surprise, given the
necessity, as demonstrated by Einstein’s theory of general relativity,
of elevating space-time, in the process, from the spectator role it
plays for the other fundamental forces to a dynamical participant.
String theory is work in progress towards such a quantum theory of
gravity. It indeed introduces a plethora of new ideas to the task.
Unifying these into a concise theoretical framework is an important goal
of research in the field.

The original formulation of string theory, perturbative string theory,
nudges space-time out of its spectator role by elevating space-time
coordinates to dynamical fields. In contradistinction to conventional
field theories, in which the dynamical quantities are functions of
space-time coordinates, perturbative string theory takes its fundamental
dynamical object, the eponymous string, as a starting point. Its
worldsheet, the two dimensional surface the one dimensional string
traces out while propagating in time, is the domain of the field theory
underlying perturbative string theory. The fields encode how this
worldsheet is mapped into space-time. Quantization of these maps gives
rise to the excitations which we observe as matter particles and force
carriers, including the graviton, the carrier of the gravitational
force. Space-time is the target of these maps, and the conventional
field theory approach is therefore referred to as a target space
description from this perspective.

A fundamental challenge of the perturbative string is indicated by the
qualifier perturbative . Scattering amplitudes of the excitations of the
theory are obtained in a perturbation series in the gravitational
coupling, which is encoded in the string coupling constant @xmath . The
power of @xmath is a measure of how many times a string splits and joins
as it propagates through space-time while realizing a certain scattering
process. As the worldsheet theory is in fact conformal, the worldsheet
can be mapped to Riemann surfaces with punctures, such that the
splitting and joining frequency is measured by the genus of the Riemann
surface. Successive terms in the perturbation series in @xmath are thus
obtained by repeating the scattering calculation for worldsheets of
higher and higher genera. The scattering amplitude thus obtained should
be the perturbative, probably only asymptotic, approximation to an
underlying exact result. Finding a formulation of string theory in which
this exact result can be formulated as an observable, and which reduces
to the perturbative string in a perturbative approximation, is a
fundamental problem of the field, dubbed the search for a
non-perturbative completion of string theory .

Topological string theory describes a sub-sector of the full physical
string theory, in essence by only retaining the zero-modes in the
physical spectrum. The resulting simplification enhances our
mathematical and computational control of the theory. The interest in
the topological string is fed from various sources. Most immediately,
the topological string is directly related to the physical string on
space-times of the form @xmath , with the first factor the four
dimensional space-time of our quotidian experience, and @xmath a six
dimensional Calabi-Yau manifold. It computes contributions to the
effective space-time action of this theory and is used as a tool to
explore the low energy manifestations of string theory. Mathematicians
are interested in the topological string as a technique for studying
families of Calabi-Yau manifolds, and associated structures, extending
to integrability, number theory, and beyond. Finally, the study of
topological string theory is fuelled by the ambition to extract
structural lessons applicable to the full physical string, in particular
concerning the question of its non-perturbative completion.

Just as perturbative string theory, the topological string in its
original formulation is defined genus by genus, and gives rise to
functions @xmath of geometric parameters @xmath characterizing its
target space @xmath , a Calabi-Yau manifold. From the A-model point of
view, these take the schematic form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The @xmath are rational numbers called Gromov-Witten invariants.
Integers can be extracted from these that count, in an appropriate
sense, the number of holomorphic maps from a genus @xmath Riemann
surface to the target space @xmath , such that the image has homology
class @xmath . These maps are the zero modes of the worldsheet fields
alluded to above that embed the physical string into space-time.
Assembling the topological string amplitudes @xmath into a formal
generating function gives rise to the topological string partition
function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The name partition function indicates that, just as in the physical
string, we expect an underlying theory within which @xmath is elevated
beyond its perturbative definition. Unlike the situation in the physical
string, the quantity @xmath is understood sufficiently well in a variety
of circumstances to permit its study beyond perturbation theory. This is
the topic of this thesis.

We will be focussing throughout on non-compact manifolds @xmath (though
the methods of section 3 apply equally well to compact Calabi-Yau
manifolds). In this decompactification limit, gravity becomes
arbitrarily weak, which is why gauge theories will feature prominently
in our discussion. It is perhaps disappointing to begin the journey at
such a distance from the proclaimed goal, a quantum theory of gravity.
As re-assurance, we can offer that the fundamental problem of finding a
non-perturbative completion to a perturbative worldsheet theory persists
to this level of simplification – as consolation, that we will encounter
much beautiful and intricate structure along the way.

## 2 @xmath via geometric transitions

In this section, we will discuss how a target space description of the
open topological string gives rise to an algorithm for computing @xmath
non-perturbatively in @xmath on any toric Calabi-Yau manifold @xmath .
The expressions obtained in this formalism are closely related to the
partition function in Gopakumar-Vafa form,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is derived in [ 1 , 2 ] by identifying @xmath with a space-time
index on the spectrum of the physical theory. At a given @xmath , only
finitely many of the Gopakumar-Vafa invariants @xmath are non-vanishing.
Hence, presented in this form, the coefficients of @xmath in an
expansion in Kähler parameters @xmath are analytic functions in @xmath .
In contrast, much of the structure of @xmath as a function of the Kähler
parameters is hidden in the series expansion over @xmath . A central
focus in this section will be the partial resummation of this series. In
particular, this will allow the proof of the equality of @xmath on
certain geometries with the Nekrasov partition function of @xmath gauge
theories, which will play a pivotal role in furthering our understanding
of @xmath in section 4 .

### 2.1 Chern-Simons theory as the target space description of the open
topological string

In [ 3 ] , Witten identified @xmath Chern-Simons theory on a compact
3-manifold @xmath as the target space description of the open
topological string A-model on @xmath , the cotangent space of @xmath ,
with @xmath A-branes wrapping the Lagrangian submanifold @xmath of
@xmath . A simple argument [ 3 ] proves that no holomorphic maps @xmath
exist mapping the boundary of the worldsheet Riemann surface @xmath to
@xmath . Nevertheless, the A-model on this geometry is not trivial, as
the partition function receives contributions from the boundary of the
moduli space of Riemann surfaces, where these degenerate to graphs.
Witten argues, using open string field theory, that this contribution is
captured by the partition function of Chern-Simons theory on @xmath .
The Chern-Simons theory depends on the level @xmath and the rank @xmath
of the gauge group. In the open string description, @xmath maps to the
number of branes wrapping @xmath , and the string coupling constant is
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The combination on the right-hand side of the above equation of level
and rank is the familiar quantum correction to the naive coupling
constant @xmath of Chern-Simons theory.

A general Calabi-Yau manifold with Lagrangian submanifold @xmath will
generically exhibit holomorphic curves ending on @xmath . Witten
instructs us to add a Wilson loop contribution

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

to the Chern-Simons action for each such holomorphic curve, with @xmath
the knot, i.e. a one real dimensional closed curve in the 3-manifold
@xmath , formed by the intersection of the curve with @xmath . Unless
noted otherwise, all traces are to be understood in the fundamental
representation. Determining the set of such holomorphic curves is a
difficult problem. They will generically occur in families, requiring us
to make sense of a contribution to the Chern-Simons action involving an
integral over a family of knots @xmath with integrand ( 2.3 ). This
prescription is hence calculationally not feasible for an arbitrary
geometry. With an assiduous choice of geometry, however, it represents
the starting point for computing @xmath on arbitrary toric Calabi-Yau
manifolds.

### 2.2 Determining all holomorphic curves in @xmath fibrations

The class of geometries we will consider [ 4 ] permit a @xmath torus
action. The locus at which this action degenerates encodes the essential
features of the geometry. The basic local building block of these
geometries is the cotangent space of the 3-sphere, @xmath . This space
carries a complex structure, inherited from @xmath via the embedding

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath , and @xmath the complex structure modulus of the geometry.
For @xmath real, the base @xmath of the cotangent space is situated at
@xmath , @xmath . The @xmath action on the geometry is given by @xmath
and @xmath . This action can be intuitively thought of as translation
around the circle directions of the two cylinders defined by each of the
two equations ( 2.4 ) individually at fixed @xmath . One or the other
@xmath action degenerates at @xmath , @xmath respectively.
Diagrammatically, the geometry can be depicted as in the left diagram in
figure 1 , in which the degeneration loci are represented in a real
three dimensional slice of the geometry spanned by the axes direction of
the two cylinders and @xmath . The @xmath can be located along the
dashed line (one quickly convinces oneself that a @xmath fibered over an
interval such that one cycle degenerates at one end, a different cycle
at the other end, is topologically an @xmath ).

To obtain a geometry containing a holomorphic curve, we can modify these
equations such that one of the torus cycles degenerates at two point of
the @xmath -plane:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The corresponding diagram is given on the right in figure 1 for @xmath .
The geometry now contains an isolated holomorphic cylinder, given by
@xmath , which intersects each of the two 3-spheres indicated by dashed
lines in an unknot.

Following Witten’s prescription, the target space description of open
topological string theory on this geometry is given by a Chern-Simons
theory living on each @xmath , with the holomorphic cylinder and its
multicovers extending between the two 3-spheres giving rise to a Wilson
loop insertion

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the Chern-Simons path integral. The integration contours @xmath are
the unknots along which the cylinder intersects the two 3-spheres, and
the coordinate @xmath is an open string modulus indicating the length of
the cylinder, complexified by the classical vacuum expectation value of
the Wilson loops. The two Chern-Simons theories can be essentially
decoupled by an application of the Frobenius formula [ 5 , 4 ] , which
yields the identity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The sum here is taken over all irreducible representations @xmath of
@xmath , or equivalently over all possible Young diagrams with at most
@xmath rows. We will drop the constraint on the number of rows by
considering the large @xmath limit. @xmath indicates the first Casimir
of the representation @xmath , or equivalently the number of boxes of
the corresponding Young diagram. Witten’s prescription thus gives rise
to the following partition function for the open string on the geometry
on the right in figure 1 :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Computations on more intricate @xmath fibrations follow the same
pattern. They will generically involve multiple cylinders ending on the
same Lagrangian @xmath manifold. Each cylinder will intersect the @xmath
in an unknot. Computing the corresponding Wilson loop factor requires
determining the linking number of all unknots on a given @xmath . In the
following, we will only need the result for a Hopf link, the link of two
unknots with linking number one. This was computed in [ 6 ] , as a
function of the Chern-Simons coupling @xmath and the ’t Hooft coupling
@xmath . For reasons we will explain below, we will here be interested
only in the leading @xmath limit of this result, which we denote as
@xmath for the case in which the two linked unknots carry
representations @xmath , @xmath respectively. Explicit expressions can
be found in [ 6 , 4 ] . Organizing the calculation in terms of the size
of representations @xmath , one can thus compute @xmath to arbitrary
order in the open string modulus @xmath .

### 2.3 From open to closed via geometric transitions

#### 2.3.1 The conifold transition

In [ 7 ] , Gopakumar and Vafa proposed an open-closed duality for the
topological string, similar in spirit to the AdS/CFT correspondence of
the full physical string theory: the theory in the presence of branes is
dual to a theory without branes on a modified geometry. The simplest
example of this duality relates the open topological A-model on @xmath
with @xmath branes wrapping the Lagrangian @xmath at the base of the
fibration, which we encountered above, to the closed topological A-model
on the sum of two line bundles over the projective line, @xmath . The
complexified Kähler parameter @xmath of the @xmath base of this geometry
is related to the number of branes wrapping the submanifold @xmath of
@xmath via

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The geometries on the two sides of the duality are related to each other
as follows. Deforming the complex structure of @xmath all the way to
@xmath gives rise to a singular manifold, called the conifold, defined
by the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

in @xmath . This space is a local model for a common singularity in
Calabi-Yau manifolds. To smoothen the singularity, one can deform the
space by introducing the complex parameter @xmath as in ( 2.4 ), to
re-obtain @xmath . The cotangent space of @xmath is therefore also
referred to as the deformed conifold. A second possibility is to resolve
the singularity via a general procedure in algebraic geometry referred
to as a blow-up, in which a point is replaced by a projective space.
This yields the space @xmath , which is therefore also called the
resolved conifold. The size of the @xmath is measured by the Kähler
parameter @xmath , and the singular limit is reached at @xmath . The
passage from the deformed to the resolved conifold is termed the
conifold transition. Diagrammatically, it can be represented as in
figure 2 .

#### 2.3.2 Toric geometry and web diagrams

Note that at the point @xmath of ( 2.4 ), a third @xmath action can be
defined on the geometry: multiplication of @xmath and @xmath by a common
phase. A @xmath action in three complex dimensions is the hallmark of a
three complex dimensional toric manifold. The toric property is
preserved by the blow-up which resolves the singularity. The diagram in
figure 2 representing the resolved conifold is called a web diagram. Its
distinguishing features are the trivalent vertex, rational edges, and
the fact that the sum of the primitive vectors emanating from each
vertex vanishes. Any such diagram encodes a toric Calabi-Yau geometry.
These diagrams will play a central role in the formulation of the
topological vertex, to which we shall turn in subsection 2.6 .

A more general formalism for describing toric geometry, valid beyond the
context of local Calabi-Yau manifolds, proceeds by encoding the geometry
in terms of toric fans (see e.g. the classic exposition in [ 8 ] ). In
the case of local Calabi-Yau manifolds, these diagrams are dual to web
diagrams, in the sense depicted in figure 3 .

#### 2.3.3 Generalized conifold transitions

The authors of [ 9 , 4 ] proposed extending the conifold transition to
the @xmath fibrations encountered in subsection 2.2 , by performing such
transitions locally on each @xmath . Conversely, given a toric
Calabi-Yau manifold, one can introduce additional @xmath cycles, called
exceptional cycles, via the blow-up procedure alluded to above. Provided
that the resulting manifold retains the Calabi-Yau property, the local
geometry of the blow-up cycle will be that of a resolved conifold.
Performing the conifold transition on a sufficient number of such cycles
should give rise to the class of geometries discussed above. Naturally,
care must be exercised that these local manipulations be consistent with
the global constraints of the geometry. Under these manipulations,
holomorphic curves intersecting two exceptional cycles map to
holomorphic cylinders intersecting the 3-spheres the cycles transition
into. The corresponding Kähler parameters map to open string moduli.

We have sketched these manipulations for the case of local @xmath , ¹ ¹
1 Given a complex surface @xmath , the total space of its canonical line
bundle is a non-compact Calabi-Yau manifold, referred to as ‘local
@xmath ’. Non-compact Calabi-Yau manifolds are also referred to as local
Calabi-Yau, the nomenclature indicating that they should be thought of
as the local description of a larger, compact geometry. which will serve
as a principal example in the next subsection, in figure 4 .

The diagram (1) is the web digram representing local @xmath . Blowing up
the four toric fixed points, we obtain diagram (2). Performing local
conifold transitions on the four exceptional cycles then yields diagram
(3). The partition function of the open @xmath -model on this latter
geometry can be computed via Chern-Simons theory as described above.
This coincides with the closed topological string partition function of
geometry (2) upon the correct mapping of open to closed variables. To
recover the original geometry, we can take the @xmath limit of all
Kähler parameters associated to exceptional curves. As is evident from
the general form of the partition function ( 2.1 ), all contributions
involving exceptional curves are thus set to 0. By the map ( 2.9 )
between closed and open variables, the limit in terms of open variables
is given by @xmath . ² ² 2 In fact, as first observed in [ 9 ] , an
additive correction term is required to the naive identification between
open and closed moduli when geometric transitions beyond the simple case
of the conifold are considered. A first principles derivation of this
shift in the context of a proof of the open/closed duality of geometric
transitions, e.g. along the lines of [ 10 ] , is still outstanding. This
is the rationale behind the introduction above of @xmath as the @xmath
limit of the Hopf link expectation value.

### 2.4 Computing: local @xmath

#### 2.4.1 Performing sums over representations

We have reduced the computation of the partition function of the closed
topological string on local @xmath to the evaluation of the following
expression:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Hopf link expectation values @xmath were defined at the end of
subsection 2.2 , and @xmath denote the exponentiated Kähler parameters
associated to the two @xmath -cycles. By the results of [ 6 ] for the
computation of Wilson loop expectation values involving the Hopf link,
we can evaluate this expression to arbitrary order in @xmath and @xmath
. These calculations rapidly become cumbersome. In [ 11 ] , Iqbal and I
demonstrated how to sum the series over @xmath exactly, with
implications involving an important conjecture by Nekrasov, as we
discuss in subsection 2.5 . We will indicate the scope of these
summation techniques in subsection 2.6 , based on [ 12 ] . For now,
continuing with the example at hand, let us introduce

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

as a building block of the partition function. The crucial step in the
summation is writing

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the partition function for a (-2,0)-curve [ 4 ] , and making the
ansatz

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

This ansatz, mirroring ( 2.14 ), reflects the fact that the
contributions to @xmath stem from a single isolated curve and its
multicovers. It was proved rigorously in [ 13 ] . We can determine
@xmath by computing ( 2.12 ) to first order in @xmath . We obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We have here denoted the Young diagram corresponding to representation
@xmath as @xmath , with @xmath indicating the number of rows and @xmath
the number of boxes in its @xmath -th row. This expression can be
further simplified to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.17)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The partition function ( 2.11 ) thus takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 2.4.2 Computing Gopakumar-Vafa invariants

Extracting Gopakumar-Vafa invariants from ( 2.19 ) is an easy exercise.
Since we have summed the series over @xmath , we introduce the following
parametrization of the general Gopakumar-Vafa form ( 2.1 ) of the
partition function:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

To extract the factor @xmath , we have invoked the fact that @xmath [ 14
] . We further parametrize the partition function ( 2.19 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equating @xmath , we deduce @xmath (a result obtained in [ 14 ] ) and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath               
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Evaluating ( 2.19 ) explicitly, we find for @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the functions @xmath are finite at @xmath . To give an impression
of the expressions involved, we cite the first few results from [ 11 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 2.5 Reproducing Nekrasov’s partition function via geometric
engineering

#### 2.5.1 Nekrasov’s partition function

In [ 15 ] , Nekrasov computed the prepotential of @xmath gauge theories,
previously obtained by Seiberg and Witten by what is now known as
Seiberg-Witten theory (we will have much to say about this in section 3
), directly by computing integrals on instanton moduli space via
localization methods. The idea of applying localization to compute
integrals over instanton moduli space was already presented in [ 16 , 17
, 18 , 19 , 20 ] . Nekrasov demonstrated that enlarging the equivariant
action on moduli space by the two commuting (Euclidean) spacetime
rotations of orthogonal planes leads to isolated fixed points, and
computed their contribution to the relevant integrals as a function of
the two additional equivariant parameters, @xmath and @xmath .
Assembling these results in a generating function weighted by instanton
number gives rise to the Nekrasov partition function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have denoted the relevant @xmath -instanton moduli space as
@xmath and @xmath stands for an appropriate equivariant form depending
on the details of the gauge theory under consideration. The instanton
counting parameter @xmath is related to the ultraviolet gauge coupling.
@xmath contains much information beyond the prepotential of the four
dimensional gauge theory, the computation of which was the primary
motivation underlying [ 15 ] . Nekrasov conjectured that it coincides
with a counting function capturing BPS states in the spectrum of the
gauge theory embedded within string theory. At @xmath , the counting
function specializes to the index underlying ( 2.1 ), @xmath hence,
according to this conjecture, to @xmath . Proving this conjecture was
part of the motivation behind the works [ 12 , 21 , 11 ] .

For the case of pure @xmath gauge theory, the Nekrasov partition
function at @xmath takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The sum is over all fixed points of the equivariant action, which are in
one-to-one correspondence with Young diagrams @xmath , @xmath . The
number of boxes of a Young diagram @xmath is indicated by @xmath .
@xmath is the vacuum expectation value of the adjoint scalar (see
section 3.3.1 ), @xmath . Factors with @xmath are understood to be equal
to 1. The parameter @xmath is best thought of as the radius of an
additional circle which lifts the four dimensional gauge theory to a
five dimensional one [ 22 ] . The four dimensional result is obtained in
the @xmath limit.

#### 2.5.2 @xmath from topological string theory

Local @xmath , the geometry studied in subsection 2.4 , is the simplest
example of a Calabi-Yau geometry whose effective field theory
description exhibits enhanced gauge symmetry. Using e.g. toric methods,
it is not difficult to see that this geometry coincides with the
resolution of an @xmath singularity fibered over @xmath . The singular
geometry yields enhanced gauge symmetry, as D2 branes, which give rise
to W-bosons in the gauge theory, become massless here. Embedding a gauge
theory into string theory by an appropriate choice of geometry is
referred to as geometric engineering . The mapping of parameters between
geometry and gauge theory in the case of local @xmath and pure @xmath
gauge theory is the following:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath here encodes the size of the cycle resolving the @xmath
singularity. It consequently maps to the vacuum expectation value @xmath
of the adjoint scalar of the gauge theory, which induces the breaking of
the gauge symmetry. The ultraviolet gauge coupling is inversely
proportional to the size of the compactification manifold.

To relate ( 2.19 ) to ( 2.29 ), we note the equality [ 11 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, the @xmath terms in ( 2.19 ) account for the factors in the
product ( 2.29 ) with @xmath . The remaining terms follow from the
identity

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This identity was proposed and checked experimentally in [ 11 ] , and
proved in [ 13 ] .

It is possible to use a generalization of the methods described above to
perform computations on local Calabi-Yau manifolds resolving higher
@xmath singularities, related to gauge theories of higher rank [ 21 ] .
These computations however become cumbersome, and are best performed
within the framework of the topological vertex [ 23 ] .

#### 2.5.3 Beyond @xmath

The physical meaning of @xmath beyond the @xmath locus has been
elucidated from several perspectives in the decade since the publication
of [ 15 ] . In [ 24 ] , generalizing the computation that led to ( 2.1
), @xmath at general @xmath , @xmath was reformulated as a counting
function of BPS states, thus extending its definition beyond the gauge
theory context. The same reference also introduces a refinement of the
topological vertex (we will introduce the unrefined vertex below) to
compute this counting function, christened the refined topological
string partition function, for arbitrary toric geometries. Refined
topological string amplitudes @xmath are formally defined as the
expansion coefficients of this partition function in @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

In [ 25 ] , a Lagrangian was formulated for a gauge theory with
partition function @xmath , referred to as the @xmath -deformation of
the initial gauge theory, and a relation to two dimensional integrable
systems established. The worldsheet definition of this refinement is
still not completely settled. Steps in this direction have been taken
e.g. in [ 26 ] , where the role of the refined amplitudes in @xmath
supergravity is investigated. Mathematically, refinement has been
interpreted in terms of motivic invariants [ 27 , 28 ] . A remarkable
correspondence between @xmath -deformed gauge theory and two dimensional
conformal field theory was proposed in [ 29 ] . This will play a central
role in section 4 .

### 2.6 The topological vertex on the strip

#### 2.6.1 The general formalism

The above calculation already suggests the emergence of diagrammatic
rules for the computation of @xmath for local toric Calabi-Yau
geometries. The principal complication in the direct computation of the
partition function with the methods described is that the web diagrams
underlying toric Calabi-Yau manifolds, introduced in subsection 2.3.2 ,
exhibit a trivalent vertex, while the manipulations exemplified in
figure 4 give rise to a tetravalent vertex as building block, and
require taking limits to access general toric geometries. In [ 23 ] , an
expression for a trivalent vertex was extrapolated from the circle of
ideas presented here. In the form presented in [ 30 ] , it is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

The indices @xmath symbolize Young diagrams. A sum over such an index
indicates a sum over all possible Young diagrams. @xmath denotes the
Schur function associated to the diagram @xmath . Schur functions form a
particular basis for symmetric polynomials, with the number of variables
here taken to infinity. The notation is @xmath , with @xmath indicating
the number of boxes in the @xmath -th row of the diagram @xmath . The
@xmath are skew Schur functions, defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath are tensor product coefficients, and @xmath . Though
not manifest, the expression ( 2.34 ) enjoys cyclic symmetry with regard
to the Young diagrams @xmath . Two vertices are glued, up to a subtlety
to which we shall return momentarily, by performing a sum over Young
diagrams as follows,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the transposed Young diagram, obtained by exchanging
rows and columns, and @xmath , as above, indicates the total number of
boxes of the Young diagram @xmath . @xmath is the exponentiated Kähler
parameter corresponding to the cycle obtained by gluing the vertices.
The subtlety in gluing vertices is related to the necessity of
specifying a framing when computing Wilson loop vacuum expectation
values in Chern-Simons theory (we glossed over the framing question in
the discussion above, it is of course addressed in [ 11 , 21 ] ). In the
vertex formalism, the framing information translates into an integral
vector associated to each leg of the vertex. Changes of framing with
regard to the canonical framing @xmath chosen in ( 2.34 ) are encoded in
a triplet of integers @xmath [ 23 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The gluing rules require gluing vertices with opposite framing vectors.
One can easily check that the particular choice of framing vectors, as
long as the choices on the two glued legs are correlated and opposite,
is irrelevant upon performing the sum over Young diagrams.

#### 2.6.2 Computing the partition function on the strip

In [ 12 ] , Iqbal and I set out to study methods for performing the sums
over Young diagrams explicitly in the context of the topological vertex.
Based on the two identities [ 31 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.38)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

we demonstrated that the sums occurring in the evaluation of the
partition function on any triangulation of the strip, in the sense
exemplified in figure 5 , can be performed.

These strips in turn can be used as building blocks for more intricate
geometries, as we will discuss below. The geometry encoded by a strip
diagram consists of two types of curves strung together: @xmath ,
referred to as a (-1,-1) curve, and @xmath , referred to as a (-2,0)
curve. The corresponding fans and web diagrams are depicted in figure 3
. The contribution from such curves to @xmath can be easily computed,
using the vertex and the summation identities ( 2.38 ). For a @xmath
curve, it is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

and for a @xmath curve,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

The exponential factor yields @xmath of these curves by themselves, i.e.
not as building blocks of a larger geometry, as its @xmath -dependent
coefficient is set to one by choosing these diagrams trivial, @xmath .
The Gopakumar-Vafa invariants of these simple geometries can be read off
from these expressions as @xmath .

Using this notation, the link invariant @xmath , which is the
tetravalent vertex on which our calculation in the previous subsections
was based (with @xmath as its @xmath limit), is related to the
topological vertex as follows [ 12 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

The partition function on a triangulated strip consists of a product of
contributions ( 2.39 ) and ( 2.40 ), one for each pairing of vertices,
with the corresponding Kähler parameter @xmath being the sum of all
intermediate Kähler parameters [ 12 ] . E.g., the diagram depicted in
figure 6 yields the partition function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Fixing the occurrence of transpositions requires a slightly more
detailed analysis which is outlined in [ 12 ] .

The results for @xmath on the strip were used in [ 12 ] to study the
behavior of the topological string partition function under flop
transitions, and to prove the equality of Nekrasov’s partition function
and the corresponding topological string partition function for
arbitrary rank @xmath gauge group and matter content. In the next
subsection, we wish to touch upon a more elaborate application, which
was the subject of two papers [ 32 , 33 ] .

#### 2.6.3 Application: @xmath via matrix models

The point of departure is the so-called BKMP conjecture, named after its
authors [ 34 ] , which proposes an alternative method for computing the
topological string amplitudes @xmath on a toric local Calabi-Yau
geometry @xmath , based on the topological recursion [ 35 ] . The latter
is an algorithm, inspired by matrix model computations, which assigns to
any affine curve @xmath functions @xmath of the curve data. If @xmath
coincides with the spectral curve of a matrix model, then the @xmath
yield the coefficients of the logarithm of the partition function of the
matrix model in a large @xmath expansion. These functions share many
properties with topological string amplitudes @xmath [ 36 , 37 ] . This
prompted the authors of [ 34 ] to conjecture that an adaptation of the
topological recursion algorithm applied to the mirror curve of a local
Calabi-Yau geometry @xmath should yield functions @xmath which equal the
topological string amplitudes @xmath . To study this conjecture, Eynard
and I set out to construct a matrix model whose partition function
reproduces that of the topological string on an auspiciously chosen
fiducial geometry @xmath [ 32 , 33 ] . The proof of the BKMP conjecture
for this geometry then reduces to demonstrating that the spectral curve
of this matrix model coincides with the mirror curve of @xmath . It is
easy to show [ 33 ] that any toric Calabi-Yau manifold can be related to
a sufficiently large triangulated rectangle as depicted in figure 7 upon
blowing up vertices and flopping a number of curves. As the effect of
these two operations on the topological string amplitudes @xmath is well
understood, proving the conjecture for such a fiducial geometry @xmath
will thus quickly imply the general result.

In this subsection, we will sketch how to construct a matrix model that
computes the topological string partition function on @xmath . This is
the content of [ 32 ] . Computing the spectral curve of this matrix
model, the subject of the follow-up work [ 33 ] , requires elaborate
matrix model technology which would lead us too far afield. To summarize
the conclusion of [ 33 ] , the potential of the matrix model we will
propose lies outside of the validity of several theorems we require to
compute the spectral curve. Upon proposing certain natural
generalizations of these theorems, the mirror curve indeed emerges in a
highly non-trivial fashion as the spectral curve of our matrix model.
Elevating our arguments to a proof of the BKMP conjecture will require
extending the necessary theorems, a task of independent interest. Since
the publication of [ 33 ] , a proof of the conjecture using different
means has been proposed in [ 38 ] .

We turn now to the derivation of the matrix model. We wish to convey a
flavor of why a chain of matrices matrix model arises, and how matrix
integrals can give rise to sums over partitions.

##### The chain of matrices matrix model:

The topological string partition function @xmath on @xmath can be
computed by gluing together the building blocks @xmath depicted in
figure 8 by summing over the Young diagrams @xmath and @xmath .

The basic challenge is to rewrite these sums as matrix integrals.
Following the rules developed in [ 12 ] and reviewed above, @xmath on a
strip of @xmath boxes is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath signifies the appropriate exponentiated Kähler parameter
for the curve spanning between the vertices labeled by @xmath and by
@xmath . As a first step towards the matrix model, we re-express @xmath
in terms of the diagonal matrices

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the parameters @xmath encoding the Kähler parameters of the
geometry [ 32 ] . We have introduced an upper bound @xmath on the number
of rows of the Young diagrams we consider. It can be taken to be
arbitrarily large. ³ ³ 3 The spectral curve will depend only
non-perturbatively on @xmath [ 33 ] . In terms of the Vandermonde
determinant

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

and its generalization

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath                        (2.48)
                                   
                                   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------

Here, @xmath is a complicated potential, the details of which can be
found in [ 32 ] . By introducing larger matrices still [ 39 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can rewrite

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

We next want to re-express ( 2.50 ) in terms of a certain set of normal
matrices which we shall define below, rather than diagonal matrices. To
this end, we introduce @xmath additional integrals and write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath indicating the @xmath -th diagonal entry of the matrix
@xmath . We have here used Cauchy’s determinant formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

Each determinant factor in ( 2.51 ) can be written as an Itzykson-Zuber
integral [ 40 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are now arbitrary normal matrices with
eigenvalues @xmath , @xmath respectively. Substituting @xmath and @xmath
respectively for the two determinants on the right-hand side of ( 2.51
), and introducing

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

we arrive at a contribution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

per strip.

We thus see the general structure for the matrix model computing @xmath
emerging: the Young diagrams above and below a strip, denoted by @xmath
, @xmath in figure 5 , are encoded in matrices @xmath , @xmath . Strips
are glued by integrating over the corresponding @xmath . Each strip also
involves a matrix @xmath , which only appears linearly in a contribution
to the potential of the form @xmath . No other contributions to the
potential involve products of different matrices. This is the general
structure of a class of matrix models called chain of matrices.

##### From matrix integrals to sums over Young diagram:

Next, we need to constrain the eigenvalues of the matrices @xmath to be
of the form ( 2.44 ). This is accomplished by choosing their integration
domain as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath the product of contours

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

passing through the desired eigenvalues of the form ( 2.44 ). We then
multiply the integrand of the matrix model with functions @xmath , the
explicit form of which can be found in [ 32 ] , that exhibit simple
poles at these eigenvalues, and constant residue. The integral over
eigenvalues is thus replaced by a sum over terms of the form ( 2.44 )
for arbitrary positive integers @xmath . Due to the symmetry of the
integrand in the eigenvalues, we can, upon multiplying by the number of
permutations, order them, such that the @xmath once again reflect the
number of boxes in the @xmath -th row of a Young diagram @xmath .

## 3 @xmath via holomorphic anomaly

The previous section unfolded mainly within the A-model version of the
topological string, and built on target space considerations. We now
turn to a computation method using B-model techniques which is firmly
rooted in worldsheet considerations. We will hence be computing order by
order in the string coupling. This appears to be taking a step backwards
compared to the results of the topological vertex, which are
non-perturbative in the string coupling. What we gain, however, is the
ability to compute all order results in the Kähler parameters. As a
consequence, modularity properties will become manifest that are not
visible at finite order.

### 3.1 The BCOV holomorphic anomaly equations

The topological string amplitudes @xmath are naively, by BRST symmetry,
holomorphic functions on the appropriate moduli space of a Calabi-Yau
manifold @xmath : they are defined as correlators of a two-dimensional
twisted worldsheet theory integrated over the compactified moduli space
of genus @xmath Riemann surfaces @xmath . Derivatives with regard to
anti-holomorphic variables lead to additional insertions in the
correlator. As these are BRST exact, they give rise to contributions
only from the boundary of the integration domain. In the case at hand,
the boundary of @xmath describes degenerating Riemann surfaces.
Pictorially, degenerations arise upon the pinching of cycles of the
Riemann surface, giving rise to lower genus Riemann surfaces. A careful
study of this phenomenon [ 41 ] gives rise to the holomorphic anomaly
equations,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath , where the Kähler potential @xmath and the metric @xmath
on moduli space as well as the three-point function @xmath are special
geometry data encoded in the genus 0 amplitude @xmath of the theory. The
derivatives @xmath are covariant with regard to the appropriate bundles.
The contributions on the right-hand side of this equation can easily be
traced to the two possible ways in which a Riemann surface can
degenerate in @xmath : if the pinched cycle does not sever the Riemann
surface in two, the resulting surface has genus reduced by one, giving
rise to the first term on the right-hand side of ( 3.1 ). If on the
other hand the surface becomes disconnected upon pinching, the resulting
two components of genus @xmath and @xmath give rise to the second
contribution to the anti-holomorphic derivative.

As the genera appearing on the right-hand side of the holomorphic
anomaly equation are strictly smaller than the genus on the left-hand
side, the equation gives rise to a recursion relating topological string
amplitudes at different genera. The starting point of the recursion is
the topological string amplitude @xmath at genus one, which satisfies
its own holomorphic anomaly equation expressed purely in terms of
special geometry data. Clearly, the recursion is not sufficient to fix
the topological string amplitudes, as it contains no information about
the purely holomorphic dependence of the genus @xmath amplitude. We will
see below how this so-called holomorphic ambiguity can be addressed by
providing appropriate boundary conditions.

### 3.2 The generalized holomorphic anomaly equations

We will here be interested in the refined topological string briefly
introduced in subsection 2.5.3 , in particular with an eye towards the
applications in section 4 . As a worldsheet definition of the @xmath
-deformation is still lacking, a derivation of recursion relations for
the refined amplitudes following the reasoning of [ 41 ] presented above
is currently not available. In its place, a simple generalization of the
equations ( 3.1 ) was conjectured in [ 42 ] . These equations have by
now passed numerous checks [ 42 , 43 , 44 ] . They are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The prime on the sum indicates omission of the summands @xmath and
@xmath . The first term on the right-hand side is absent at @xmath .

Note that these equations are reminiscent of the holomorphic anomaly
equations for the topological string with insertions [ 41 ] , suggesting
that the @xmath -deformation may correspond to an appropriate operator
insertion in the correlator defining the generalized amplitudes. In [ 44
] , we briefly discuss the dilaton as a possible candidate for such an
insertion. This proposal deserves further study.

### 3.3 The holomorphic anomaly equations in the rigid limit

We will here be interested in applying the holomorphic anomaly equations
to rigid @xmath theories which arise upon @xmath -deformation of string
theory on non-compact Calabi-Yau manifolds [ 44 ] . We will furthermore
specialize to gauge theories, though the formalism applies equally well
to arbitrary local geometries and without taking a field theory limit.
We will see that with minimal assumptions regarding the modularity of
the result, we can integrate the holomorphic anomaly equations exactly
to any desired order in @xmath and @xmath .

Before we specialize to the special geometry of a genus one curve (this
is the target space in question, not to be confused with genus one
worldsheets), most of the discussion in this subsection can easily be
presented in greater generality, simply by increasing the number of
variables and indices. The main technical simplification that occurs
when restricting to genus one is that the solutions of the Picard-Fuchs
equations yielding the relevant periods required to specify the special
geometry can be written down explicitly.

#### 3.3.1 The special geometry of Seiberg-Witten theory

Seiberg-Witten theories [ 45 , 46 ] are four-dimensional gauge theories
exhibiting @xmath supersymmetry. Here, we will focus on the gauge group
@xmath . The fields are organized in vector and hypermultiplets. The
@xmath vector multiplet consists of an @xmath chiral and an @xmath
vector multiplet. Much of the physics is determined by the complex
scalar @xmath in the chiral multiplet. The potential for @xmath exhibits
a flat direction. The corresponding vacuum expectation value @xmath
hence parametrizes a moduli space, which coincides with the moduli space
of the topological string (in the field theory limit). This vacuum
expectation value breaks the gauge symmetry from @xmath to @xmath . The
low-energy two derivative effective action of the theory (before
coupling to a gravitational background) is entirely encoded in terms of
a holomorphic quantity in @xmath called the prepotential @xmath . Much
of the power of the Seiberg-Witten approach to solving these theories
stems from identifying contributions to the action with geometric
quantities on moduli space. Due to the presence of @xmath supersymmetry,
the moduli space is governed by special geometry . We will describe the
implications of this structure in the following.

Let us first determine the geometric data that enter into the
holomorphic anomaly equations ( 3.1 ). In terms of distinguished flat
coordinates @xmath which can always be defined locally, the metric on
moduli space is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

This metric is visibly Kähler, with the corresponding Kähler potential
@xmath . The three-point functions @xmath occurring in ( 3.1 ) are
determined by triple derivatives of the prepotential. In the
one-dimensional case that we are considering here,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The geometry on moduli space is hence entirely determined by the
prepotential @xmath and the appropriate choice of flat coordinates. This
data can be encoded [ 45 , 46 ] in terms of a family of Riemann surfaces
@xmath of genus one (higher rank groups require curves of higher genera)
parametrized by the modulus @xmath of the theory, as well as a
meromorphic (1,0)-form @xmath , the so-called Seiberg-Witten
differential. This one-form is constrained to satisfy @xmath , with
@xmath the unique (up to scaling) holomorphic one-form on @xmath . The
periods of @xmath along one-cycles @xmath furnishing a symplectic basis
of @xmath determine the flat coordinate @xmath and its dual @xmath , ⁴ ⁴
4 In massive theories, the Seiberg-Witten differential exhibits residues
proportional to the masses, and the integration contour must be
specified.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

This definition fixes @xmath uniquely as a flat coordinate in the
vicinity of @xmath , the weak coupling point of the gauge theory, upon
fixing boundary conditions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The constant @xmath is equal to one or two, depending on whether the
gauge theory contains fundamental matter or not. Away from this point,
the periods are multi-valued functions of @xmath . We will refer to
their values on any given branch as @xmath . Locally, the function
@xmath can be inverted, and @xmath thereupon expressed as a function of
@xmath .

The physical interpretation of flat coordinates is most evident by
considering the expression for the central charge and the complex gauge
coupling of the theory. The central charge associated to a BPS particle
of electric, magnetic, and @xmath flavor charge @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

By @xmath supersymmetry, the mass of a BPS particle carrying these
charges is determined by the central charge via @xmath .

A hallmark of @xmath theories is that the gauge coupling and theta angle
can be combined into a complex gauge parameter @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The effective infrared gauge coupling of the effective low energy theory
is determined in terms of @xmath via

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that via the relation of @xmath to the holomorphic one-form on
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

As the ratio of two symplectically dual periods of @xmath takes values
in the upper half-plane, the positivity of the effective gauge coupling
is thus manifest in this formalism.

The structure ( 3.5 ) permits the computation of the prepotential due to
the special geometry relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Computing the prepotential hence requires determining the periods of the
meromorphic differential @xmath , expressing @xmath as a function of
@xmath , and integrating once, or determining @xmath as a function of
@xmath , and integrating twice.

#### 3.3.2 Computing periods of @xmath

The general path towards computing the periods of the Seiberg-Witten
differential @xmath (as well as the corresponding problem of finding the
periods of the holomorphic (3,0) form @xmath ) proceeds via solving the
Picard-Fuchs differential equations that these periods satisfy. In the
case at hand, for which the relevant curve is elliptic, a general
formula is available to express the relevant period of the holomorphic
one-form @xmath . The corresponding period of @xmath can then be
obtained via integration. Before introducing this formula, we will
rapidly review some basic facts about elliptic curves.

Upon suitable variable definition, the elliptic curve @xmath can
generically be put in Weierstrass form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The complex structure of this curve is specified by the ratio of the
periods of the holomorphic one-form. Not coincidently, this ratio is
denoted as @xmath . The symplectic basis @xmath with regard to which the
periods are computed is only defined up to an action of the group @xmath
, and two @xmath parameters related by the induced @xmath transformation
determine the same complex structure. Due to this degeneracy, a more
convenient parametrization of the complex structure is given by the
@xmath -invariant of the curve,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath here denotes the discriminant of the curve,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The relation between @xmath and @xmath is established by the formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are Eisenstein series, modular forms of @xmath
of weight 4 and 6 respectively. The modular invariance of @xmath is
manifest in this formula.

The curve is singular over points on moduli space at which the @xmath
-invariant is infinite. Aside from the weak coupling point at @xmath ,
this occurs at zeros of the discriminant. Physically, singularities in
the interior of moduli space correspond to points at which particles are
becoming massless [ 45 , 46 ] . Generically, periods undergo monodromy
upon circling singularities. According to the theory of Picard-Fuchs
equations applied to elliptic curves, a unique period (corresponding to
a choice of cycle in @xmath ) exists at each such singularity that does
not undergo monodromy, the so-called constant period. This is the period
we call @xmath in general, and @xmath in the particular case of the
singular point at @xmath . Up to normalization, this period is uniquely
determined to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

To obtain the period @xmath , the physical boundary condition ( 3.6 )
must be imposed.

Given these formulae, we can hence compute the prepotential @xmath
following the second method outlined at the end of subsection 3.3.1 : we
first use ( 3.13 ) and ( 3.15 ) to express @xmath (i.e. an appropriate
representative of the @xmath orbit of the complex structure parameter)
in terms of the variables parametrizing the Seiberg-Witten curve of the
theory. Generically, this will yield @xmath in a power series expansion
in these variables. Substituting @xmath into ( 3.16 ) allows us to
determine @xmath . Inverting this relation and substituting yields
@xmath , from which we can finally compute the prepotential by
integrating twice,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 3.3.3 Modularity

The direct integration of the holomorphic anomaly equations [ 47 ]
relies on the following two observations. Firstly, the equations are
formulated with regard to local variables on moduli space. The effective
coupling parameter @xmath is such a variable. We have seen that as a
function of the global coordinate @xmath , @xmath is multivalued; it
transforms under the monodromy group @xmath upon circling singularities
in the moduli space. As physical quantities such as the refined
topological amplitudes @xmath for @xmath (for the three remaining cases,
only the derivatives have physical significance) should be unique
functions of @xmath (otherwise the true moduli space of the theory would
be a cover of the @xmath -plane), we can conclude that such quantities
expressed as functions of @xmath must be invariant under the monodromy
group @xmath . Secondly, the point of departure for formulating the
holomorphic anomaly equations is the non-holomorphicity of the @xmath .
Using the propagator method introduced in [ 41 ] , one can argue that
the non-holomorphicity of these quantities can be captured by expressing
them as polynomials in @xmath , @xmath , with holomorphic functions as
coefficients. Combining these two observations, it is natural to attempt
to express the @xmath in terms of almost holomorphic modular forms [ 48
] for the monodromy group @xmath . These are modular forms under @xmath
that are polynomials in @xmath with coefficients that are holomorphic
functions of @xmath . They form the ring @xmath . The simplest
representative of this class of functions is the modular completion
@xmath of the second Eisenstein series @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

In fact, this function can be used to provide a second definition of
almost holomorphic modular forms: they are polynomials in @xmath with
coefficients that are holomorphic modular forms (the equivalence of
these two definitions is the content of Prop. 20 in [ 48 ] ). A closely
related class of functions is obtained by mapping @xmath to @xmath ,
giving rise to the ring @xmath of quasi-modular forms. They exhibit
holomorphic dependence on the modular parameter, yet transform in a
complicated fashion due to the modular anomaly of @xmath . As the rings
@xmath and @xmath are isomorphic, we will use the two notions
interchangeably in the following without further comment.

Taking the anti-holomorphic derivative in ( 3.2 ) with regard to the
coordinate @xmath and invoking ( 3.18 ), and taking the derivatives on
the right-hand side of the equation with regard to the flat coordinate
@xmath , yields the equation [ 49 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

To obtain expressions valid globally on moduli space, we replace the
@xmath with @xmath derivatives and arrive at

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.20)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We have here introduced the variable

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

This proves computationally convenient, as the derivatives occurring in
( 3.20 ), with recourse to ( 3.16 ) and upon invoking the Ramanujan
identities, have handy expressions in terms of low order polynomials in
@xmath . Taking the @xmath amplitudes,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

as point of departure, it is easy to derive the general form of the
amplitudes @xmath via induction to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath are polynomials in derivatives of @xmath and @xmath . The
holomorphic anomaly equations fix all of these, with the exception of
@xmath , the holomorphic ambiguity alluded to above. Requiring the
finiteness of @xmath as @xmath constrains the degree of @xmath as
polynomials in @xmath , resulting in a finite number of coefficients
that need to be fixed at each @xmath .

#### 3.3.4 BPS states and fixing the holomorphic ambiguity

The holomorphic anomaly equations manifestly do not contain sufficient
information to fix the purely holomorphic part of the amplitudes @xmath
. We fix these with recourse to the interpretation of @xmath as a
counting function of BPS particles, on which the parametrization ( 2.1 )
and its refinement relies [ 50 , 51 , 44 ] . Note that unlike the
holomorphic anomaly equations, this input follows from target space, not
worldsheet considerations.

The argument relies on the fact that, for generic masses of the matter
fields in the theory, a single BPS particle is becoming massless at a
singularity of the curve @xmath at which its discriminant vanishes. The
constant period ( 3.16 ) vanishes at such points. Expanding the
contribution to the BPS counting function stemming from a single
particle around @xmath yields the result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath ’s are fixed fractions. We emphasize that this result
does not require further knowledge of the BPS spectrum (this would be
akin to knowing @xmath ), as each singularity, for a generic choice of
mass parameters, is due to a single particle. The absence of subleading
poles in @xmath is referred to as the gap condition [ 52 , 53 ] . A
counting argument demonstrates that the constraints imposed by this
condition at all singularities are sufficient to fix the holomorphic
ambiguity [ 50 , 44 ] .

### 3.4 The @xmath @xmath theory and its deformation to @xmath

Coupling @xmath @xmath gauge theory to a massless adjoint matter
multiplet enhances the supersymmetry of the theory to @xmath . The
resulting gauge theory is superconformal. This modifies the nature of
the parametrization of the Seiberg-Witten curve, compared to
asymptotically free cases. For the latter, the ultraviolet gauge
coupling can be replaced, via dimensional transmutation, by a scale
@xmath . Demanding that the Seiberg-Witten curve remain finite both in
the massless and the @xmath limit constrains its dependence on @xmath to
be polynomial, for dimensional reasons. By contrast, an arbitrary
holomorphic dependence of the curve on the ultraviolet gauge coupling
@xmath is a priori allowed in the case of superconformal theories. The
theory even upon mass deformation (now referred to as @xmath ) exhibits
S-duality with regard to this parameter, as we will demonstrate. A
further particularity of the superconformal case is that the maximal
none-vanishing power of @xmath in @xmath is @xmath rather than @xmath as
in ( 3.24 ). In this sense, the holomorphic anomaly is weaker for such
theories.

#### 3.4.1 The Seiberg-Witten curve and the UV gauge coupling

The Seiberg-Witten curve of @xmath was obtained in [ 45 ] . It is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath are the so-called half-periods of the Weierstrass @xmath
-function. Their occurrence in the Seiberg-Witten curve is natural when
one considers the massless limit of the theory. The enhanced @xmath
supersymmetry in this limit excludes quantum corrections to the
prepotential. The ultraviolet and infrared gauge coupling hence
coincide. Consequently, the complex structure of the curve (which, as we
reviewed above, is identified with the @xmath class of the infrared
coupling) cannot depend on @xmath . The Seiberg-Witten curve for this
theory can therefore be identified with the generic elliptic curve of
complex structure @xmath obtained from the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

by setting @xmath , @xmath . The roots in @xmath of the right-hand side
coincide with @xmath evaluated at the zeros @xmath of @xmath , the
two-torsion points of the torus. This is the definition of the
half-periods, @xmath .

At finite mass, the prepotential does receive instanton corrections. The
argument of the half-periods in ( 3.26 ) is now identified as the
ultraviolet gauge coupling @xmath of the theory, and no longer coincides
with the complex structure of the curve, which exhibits @xmath and
@xmath dependence.

#### 3.4.2 Calculating the amplitudes from the curve

As we mentioned above, the @xmath supersymmetry that the @xmath theory
exhibits in the massless limit rules out instanton corrections, such
that that the prepotential is uncorrected and given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Following the steps outlined in section 3.3.2 , the infrared coupling in
the massive theory can be computed to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . The prepotential ( 3.17 ) is again obtained by integrating
twice with regard to @xmath .

The amplitudes at @xmath are obtained by following the strategy outlined
above, with a slight modification required [ 44 ] as the discriminant of
the curve ( 3.26 ) is a perfect square: as a consequence, the
discriminant vanishes to order two at all singularities of the curve,
even though a single particle is becoming massless at these points. It
is natural to identify this property as the physical manifestation of
the presence of adjoint, rather than fundamental, matter in this theory.
We obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is essentially the square root of the discriminant,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

To convey an impression of the form of these results, we here quote the
amplitudes for @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that the half-periods @xmath assemble to the Eisenstein series
@xmath and @xmath in these polynomials. They are functions of the
ultraviolet coupling @xmath . In contrast, the Eisenstein series
entering in the definition of the variable @xmath are functions of the
tau parameter of the Seiberg-Witten curve, the infrared coupling of the
gauge theory.

#### 3.4.3 S-duality

The results we have obtained are invariant under the monodromy group
@xmath , which acts on the infrared coupling @xmath . In addition, the
@xmath theory has an S-duality symmetry under the action of @xmath on
@xmath , which induces the same action on @xmath . Expressing @xmath as
a function of @xmath and @xmath [ 44 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

we read of the modular weight of @xmath under S-duality to be 2. The
half-periods @xmath transform as weight 2 modular forms under the
subgroup @xmath of @xmath consisting of elements of @xmath which are
equal to the identity element modulo 2. ⁵ ⁵ 5 More on this subgroup in
section 4.2.4 . Under the action of the full modular group, they are in
addition permuted amongst themselves.

Assembling all of these transformation properties, we can check the
explicit S-duality invariance of our results.

#### 3.4.4 Expressing the @xmath theory in terms of infrared variables

The exact results we obtain for the refined amplitudes @xmath for @xmath
are expressed as functions of a redundant set of variables @xmath . We
can invert ( 3.29 ) to obtain @xmath and then invoke ( 3.34 ) to express
@xmath purely in terms of the infrared variables @xmath and @xmath .
This is the form in which we will reproduce the amplitudes in section
4.2.3 , as a power series in @xmath . In the massless limit, this
procedure can be performed exactly (as @xmath ) and yields e.g.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 3.5 The @xmath @xmath theory

The discussion of @xmath gauge theory with the @xmath fundamental
flavors is in many regards similar to that of @xmath . The full details
can be found in [ 44 ] . Here, we only wish to highlight some
differences. While both theories are superconformal and exhibit the same
Seiberg-Witten curve in the massless limit, they are nevertheless not
identical even at this level. This has two causes. The first is
physical: the degenerate roots of the discriminant in the @xmath theory
are indeed due to multiple particles becoming massless at these
singularities. Upon generic mass deformation, all zeros become first
order. The second is related to the choice of the ultraviolet coupling.
As emphasized in [ 54 ] , this reflects a choice of coordinates on the
moduli space of marginal couplings of the theory, and is not canonical.
To match the instanton results of Nekrasov, a different choice of
ultraviolet coupling must be made in the @xmath and the @xmath theory:
in the case of @xmath , the argument of the half-periods @xmath
appearing in the Seiberg-Witten curve is identified with @xmath ; the
appropriate choice in the @xmath theory is [ 47 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

While there is a systematics underlying this choice which we shall touch
upon in section 4.2.4 , a first principles justification is still
lacking.

## 4 AGT and @xmath

In [ 29 ] , a remarkable conjecture was put forward relating four
dimensional superconformal @xmath @xmath quiver gauge theories to two
dimensional Liouville conformal field theory. This conjecture goes by
the name of the AGT correspondence, the initials of the authors of [ 29
] . The underlying intuition stems from considering an M5 brane on a six
dimensional manifold which is the cross product of the four dimensional
spacetime of the gauge theory and the two dimensional Riemann surface on
which the conformal field theory is defined. Four dimensional gauge
theories that can be obtained in this fashion are referred to as
theories of class @xmath [ 55 ] . By taking the volume of one or the
other factor to be small, distinguished quantities in the effective M5
brane theory can be calculated in either a four dimensional or a two
dimensional effective theory, and the corresponding observables of the
four dimensional and two dimensional theory must hence coincide. As the
M5 brane theory is only poorly understood, this reasoning furnishes
useful intuition (also for analogous conjectures based on other
partitions of six), but does not provide a detailed dictionary, or
qualify as a proof of the correspondence. In [ 56 ] , a proof has been
proposed based on the argument that the respective objects in two and in
four dimensions are solutions to the same Riemann-Hilbert problem.

The bridge between the AGT correspondence and the topological string in
the field theory limit is established via geometric engineering, which
we already encountered in section 2.5.2 , as the instanton partition
functions of the superconformal field theories in question can be
computed via the field theory limit of the topological string on
appropriate geometries. Studying the topological string from the vantage
point of this correspondence promises to be fruitful for at least two
reasons. For one, @xmath on different geometries maps to different
observables in the same conformal field theory, a unifying perspective.
And secondly, whether via the original definition ( 1.2 ) or the index
definition leading to ( 2.1 ), @xmath is defined as a formal power
series, either in the string coupling or Kähler parameters. In contrast,
conformal blocks, the AGT dual to @xmath , are analytic functions, away
from poles and branchcuts, in all of their parameters. In studying how
to recover the topological string expansions from conformal field
theory, we can thus hope to learn how to move beyond these formal
expansions.

To drop the caveat in the field theory limit , the correspondence needs
to be extended to a q-deformed version of conformal field theory, based
on a deformed Virasoro algebra [ 57 ] , as initiated in [ 58 , 59 , 60 ]
.

In the papers [ 61 , 62 ] , Troost and I studied two instances of the
AGT correspondence in detail, corresponding to @xmath and @xmath
Seiberg-Witten theory. The dual conformal field theory quantities are
the one-point block on the torus and the four-point block on the sphere.
Our principal goals were to recover the genus expansion of the
topological string partition function from the conformal field theory
perspective, and to uncover how quasi-modularity arises in the conformal
field theory approach.

### 4.1 Relevant notions in conformal field theory

#### 4.1.1 Conformal blocks

Conformal blocks are universal chiral building blocks of conformal field
theory @xmath -point functions. They are completely determined by the
Virasoro algebra. Thus, on the torus, the one-point function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

can be expressed as a sum over holomorphically factorized contributions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The conformal blocks @xmath are meromorphic functions of the Teichmüller
parameter @xmath of the one-punctured torus (by translation invariance,
the position of the insertion is irrelevant), as well as of the weight
@xmath of the insertion, and the summation parameter @xmath , the
so-called intermediate weight. This sum extends over all primary weights
occurring in the trace ( 4.1 ). The sum over all descendants is
incorporated in the respective conformal blocks. ⁶ ⁶ 6 We will recall
the notion of primary and descendant states in the next subsection. Note
that the dynamical information of the conformal field theory is encoded
purely in the three-point function @xmath , which in particular
determines the range of the sum over intermediate weights.

To obtain the corresponding expression for the four-point function on
the sphere,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

we first use conformal invariance to map three of the four insertion
points to @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath respectively. The final point is
then mapped to the so-called cross-ratio

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

which can serve as a coordinate on the Teichmüller space of the
four-punctured sphere. By performing this transformation, we can express
@xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.5)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The quantity @xmath , defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

is then decomposed analogously to ( 4.2 ) as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The conformal blocks @xmath again depend meromorphically on the
Teichmüller parameter, the weights of all insertions @xmath , and the
intermediate weight @xmath . The sum over @xmath here arises upon
considering the operator product expansion of @xmath and @xmath . It
hence extends over all primary states occurring in this OPE.

From the derivation of the holomorphic factorization of @xmath -point
functions [ 63 ] , the computation of conformal blocks order by order in
power of the Teichmüller parameter is a straightforward but tedious
algorithmic exercise. This computation can be simplified by relying on
recursion relations [ 64 , 65 ] satisfied by the blocks. In the current
context of relating to the genus expansion of the instanton partition
function, such recursions were studied in [ 61 ] . Here, we wish to
discuss a method which permits the computation of all order results in
the Teichmüller parameter, and thus permits reproducing the
quasi-modular results of section 3.4.4 . This method relies on imposing
null vector decoupling on the conformal field theory correlators.

#### 4.1.2 Null vector decoupling

The sums that appear in the equations ( 4.2 ) and ( 4.7 ) are over the
weights of primary states in the spectrum of the conformal field theory
in question. A primary state @xmath is an eigenstate of the Virasoro
generator @xmath , @xmath , that is annihilated by all positive mode
Virasoro generators, @xmath for @xmath . Descendant states are obtained
by acting with an arbitrary number of negative mode Virasoro generators
@xmath , @xmath , on the primary state, @xmath . The sum @xmath is the
level of the descendant, its weight is easily seen to be @xmath . The
vector space spanned by a primary state together with all of its
descendants is referred to as a Verma module. It furnishes a
representation space of the Virasoro algebra. If a descendant of the
primary is itself primary, i.e. is annihilated by all positive mode
Virasoro generators, then this representation is reducible. Such
descendant states are referred to as null vectors. Primary states that
exhibit null vectors in their Verma modules are called degenerate. They
have been classified. They occur in a family parametrized by two
positive integers @xmath and @xmath , and their weights are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The parameter @xmath is related to the central charge @xmath of the
Virasoro algebra via @xmath . Correlators involving null vectors can
consistently be set to zero. This is referred to as null vector
decoupling. Setting these correlators to zero will not modify
correlators with states of smaller level, as any attempt to lower the
level of the null vector by acting on it with a positive mode Virasoro
generator will annihilate it.

As the Virasoro generators act within correlators as differential
operators, correlators with degenerate insertions satisfy differential
equations, called null vector decoupling equations. The order of the
differential equation coincides with the level of the null vector. The
null vector decoupling equation of the four-point function with an
additional degenerate insertion @xmath at level 2 is immediate to write
down,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The analogous equation for the one-point function requires invoking the
conformal Ward identity on the torus [ 66 ] . It is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the partition function on the torus, @xmath is the
Weierstrass @xmath -function, @xmath is its primitive, @xmath , and
@xmath .

These differential equations are satisfied by the full correlator. To
isolate the contribution from a conformal block of a given intermediate
weight, we need to impose the appropriate boundary conditions on the
solution: the monodromy of the solution as the insertion point of the
degenerate operator circles the origin, or the origin and @xmath , in
the case of the torus and the spherical block respectively. This is
determined by considering the operator product expansion of the
degenerate operator with the operator @xmath , which, as described
above, occurs either directly in the trace ( 4.1 ), or in the OPE of
@xmath and @xmath when evaluating ( 4.3 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Note that the OPE of the degenerate operator @xmath with any other
operator involves only two primaries. Using the standard parametrization
of weights in terms of Liouville momenta @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

the Liouville momenta of these primaries are given by @xmath . The
@xmath in the parentheses above indicate a power series in @xmath . The
monodromy in @xmath is hence determined entirely by the exponent @xmath
.

The presentation up to this point is exact. What we have arrived at is a
differential equation and boundary conditions to determine the two-point
block on the torus and the five-point block on the sphere respectively.
To extract from these results the conformal blocks of interest, the
contribution of the degenerate operator needs to be identified. This is
only possible in a limit of parameter space where the ratio of the
weights of the original insertions to that of the degenerate operator
goes to infinity, as we discuss below in subsection 4.2.2 .

### 4.2 The genus expansion and modularity

#### 4.2.1 The AGT dictionary

Having reviewed the necessary notions of conformal field theory, we are
now ready to present the AGT dictionary: the weights of the insertions
of the conformal blocks correspond to the masses of the flavors of the
gauge theory, and the intermediate weights to the vacuum expectation
values of the vector multiplet scalars. The Teichmüller parameters on
which the conformal blocks depend map to coordinates on the space of
marginal couplings of the gauge theory (i.e. ultraviolet couplings).
Finally, the central charge of the conformal field theory can be
expressed in terms of the @xmath -parameters of the gauge theory, which
we package into the two couplings @xmath and @xmath . In formulae,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

As the @xmath -parameters also enter in the dictionary relating weights
on the one side of the correspondence to masses and vacuum expectation
values on the other, the small @xmath limit, which we will refer to as
the genus expansion limit, implies taking all weights to be large. Note
that this does not yet imply a particular limit for @xmath , hence for
the central charge @xmath .

#### 4.2.2 The factorization limit

For the null vector decoupling equations to be useful for our purposes,
we need to be able to extract the blocks of interest from the solutions
of these equations, which yield these blocks with the additional
insertion of a degenerate field. This can be achieved, but at the price
of taking the semi-classical limit @xmath , equivalent via ( 4.13 ) to
@xmath . In this limit, one can argue using the tools of Liouville
theory (though the result must be general, as conformal blocks are
universal objects) that conformal blocks factorize when one considers
heavy ( @xmath ) and light ( @xmath ) insertions simultaneously (see
e.g. [ 67 ] for a lucid exposition). The intuition behind this
factorization is that in the semi-classical limit, heavy insertions
backreact on the classical Liouville metric, while the contribution of
light insertions can be approximated by multiplicative factors.

The parametrization ( 4.13 ) of the weights of the insertions implies
that at finite @xmath , these scale towards infinity in the
semi-classical limit. By contrast, the Liouville momentum @xmath of the
degenerate operator @xmath identifies it as a light insertion. We will
thus be able to factor out its contribution to the block
semi-classically.

#### 4.2.3 The torus one-point block

Let us now apply the computational strategy outlined above to the torus
one-point block. With the ansatz

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

the null vector decoupling equation ( 4.10 ) takes the form of a
holomorphic Schrödinger equation:

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.15)
  -- -- -- --------

In accord with the factorization property in the semi-classical limit,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

we make the following ansatz for @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The boundary condition which follows from the discussion around ( 4.1.2
) now translates into

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the solution of the differential equation with the boundary
condition imposed will yield the sought after conformal block @xmath .

To solve the equation, we make the formal ansatz

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The AGT correspondence predicts @xmath . Note that introducing a second
expansion in @xmath would not longer permit the distinction between
@xmath and @xmath based on the leading @xmath behavior exhibited in (
4.17 ). Until we find an alternative criterium for separating the two,
we must hence work in the @xmath limit.

We arrive at the following system of equations to determine @xmath and
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

together with the boundary condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the subscript @xmath indicates the integral over the @xmath -cycle
of the torus defined by the lattice spanned by the lattice vectors
@xmath and @xmath .

The recursive solution of these equations in a @xmath expansion is
straightforward. It requires evaluating integrals of the form @xmath .
These can be evaluated recursively [ 68 , 69 ] . They take values in the
ring @xmath of quasi-modular forms encountered in subsection 3.3.3 . The
computation thus naturally leads to modular expressions for @xmath .
@xmath is not closed under integration however. For its elements to
integrate to quasi-modular forms, the coefficients must satisfy
algebraic constraints which follow from the Ramanujan identities. In [
61 ] , we verified experimentally that these constraints are met up to a
given order of computation. The proof of this property [ 70 ] follows
upon uncovering the special geometry underlying the equation ( 4.15 ),
as we outline in section 4.2.5 below. To give a flavor of the results
one encounters, let us reproduce the following few amplitudes here:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Up to a rescaling of @xmath , these coincide with the results ( 3.35 )
obtained via the holomorphic anomaly equations.

#### 4.2.4 The spherical four-point block

The occurrence of modularity in the computation of the one-point toric
block is perhaps ultimately not surprising (though it had not been
observed prior to [ 61 ] ), given the torus underlying the problem.
Indeed, as we witnessed above, quasi-modular forms arise upon
integration of the Weierstrass @xmath -function, in terms of which the
Ward identities on a torus are naturally formulated. The occurrence of
modularity in the spherical four-point block might naively appear less
obvious. However, when formulated in the correct variables, the
computation of the four-point block is in fact very similar to the toric
case.

We can motivate the appropriate choice of variables as follows. Above,
we introduced the cross ratio @xmath as a representative of the class of
four insertion points @xmath acted upon by global conformal
transformations, and expressed the spherical block as a function of
@xmath . This variable takes values on the three punctured sphere. To
move the punctures to a more convenient location, we can instead
consider the parametrization

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the @xmath the half-periods of the Weierstrass @xmath -function
already encountered above. The right-hand side is invariant under the
action of @xmath introduced in subsection 3.4.3 . We have hence mapped
the moduli space to @xmath , and the punctures to the cusps of this
domain. The permutations of the insertion points @xmath , which act as
rational transformations on @xmath , are realized by the action of
@xmath on @xmath . From these considerations, it is natural to expect
modular behavior of the spherical conformal block under @xmath when it
is expressed as a function of @xmath .

Motivated by ( 4.23 ), we introduce a 2:1 map from the torus to the
sphere via [ 71 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

In terms of this coordinate, the null vector decoupling equation ( 4.9 )
takes the form [ 72 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath the two-torsion points of the torus introduced in subsection
3.4.1 , and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is related to the five-point correlator via a somewhat
complicated prefactor [ 62 ] , which however modifies the semi-classical
expansion of the conformal block only at leading and subleading order in
@xmath . Comparing to ( 4.15 ), the similarity of this problem to the
computation of the one-point block is manifest. Computationally, a
slight generalization of the period integrals of powers of the
Weierstrass @xmath -function is required [ 62 ] . This again leads to
expressions for @xmath in terms of quasi-modular forms that coincide
with the computations presented in the previous section based on the
holomorphic anomaly.

#### 4.2.5 Seiberg-Witten and quantum geometry from null vector
decoupling

The results we obtained above are modular in the Teichmüller parameter
of the punctured Riemann surface associated to the conformal block in
question. By the AGT dictionary, this parameter corresponds to the
ultraviolet coupling of the dual gauge theory. This modularity is thus a
reflection of the S-duality of the gauge theory as described in
subsection 3.4.3 above. The modularity underlying the exact results of
section 3.4 in contrast is based on the monodromy group of the gauge
theory, and the corresponding modular parameter is the infrared coupling
of the gauge theory. In this section, we want to identify this parameter
in conformal field theory [ 70 ] . We will argue within the context of
@xmath theory.

The entry point once again is the system of equations ( 4.20 ) derived
from null vector decoupling. Reassembling the expansion coefficients,
the boundary condition ( 4.21 ) can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

This and all following equalities involving @xmath and @xmath are to be
interpreted in the sense of equalities of formal power series. We show
that the integrand

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

can be interpreted as a deformed Seiberg-Witten differential, in that it
satisfies the @xmath -deformed special geometry relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The proof of this relation follows along the lines of the proof of the
Riemann bilinear identity, upon the correct choice of formal
differential form. @xmath -deformed special geometry is sometimes
referred to as quantum geometry.

The Riemann surface on which the integrals are to be performed follows
by considering the leading @xmath contribution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

to @xmath . The square root is single-valued on the genus 2 surface
defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

the double cover of the definition domain of @xmath . Two holomorphic
one-forms exist on this surface. One yields the ultraviolet coupling of
the gauge theory as the ratio of its @xmath to its @xmath period
(relative to one sheet, the periods on the second sheet merely differ in
sign), the other the infrared coupling. The relation of the curve ( 4.31
) to @xmath theory was already pointed out in [ 73 ] . We thus reproduce
all of the Seiberg-Witten data from within conformal field theory.

Finally, notice that the relation ( 4.29 ) provides the missing argument
proving the quasi-modularity of @xmath , as the period integrals of
@xmath are manifestly quasi-modular.

## 5 Perspectives

As promised in the introduction, we have seen that the passage from the
physical to the topological string enhances our command of the theory
dramatically, giving rise to a variety of computational techniques
leading to all order results in @xmath or the Kähler parameters for
@xmath . The AGT correspondence presents a promising avenue towards
studying the nature of the remaining series expansions, and the analytic
properties of @xmath . Much work remains to be done: to elevate the
results of the previous section past @xmath , to move away from the
field theory limit, to generalize away from geometric engineering
geometries. At the end of this path, a @xmath -deformed version of
conformal field theory beckons that has @xmath on arbitrary toric
geometries as its observables. Whether this will shed light on the
ultimate goal of finding a non-perturbative completion of perturbative
string theory remains to be seen, but we are guaranteed to encounter
much intricate and beautiful structure along the way.

## Acknowledgments

I would like to thank all of my colleagues with whom I have had the good
fortune to collaborate and discuss physics over the last fifteen years,
the members of my thesis committee for agreeing to the task, and, as
always, my family for their love and support.