In this thesis, major new developments in the program SecDec are
presented. SecDec is a publicly available program for the numerical
evaluation of multi-loop multi-scale integrals and in this thesis it has
been extended from Euclidean to physical kinematics.

The program SecDec is based on sector decomposition to extract
dimensionally regulated singularities. To deal with integrable
singularities due to mass thresholds, the integrand is analytically
continued to the complex plane. Further improvements are shown, proving
invaluable in the two applications within this thesis.

In the first application, numerical results for several massive two-loop
four-point functions are presented. In particular, results for two of
the most complicated massive non-planar two-loop box integrals entering
the heavy-quark pair production at next-to-next-to leading order in QCD
are shown. A mixed analytical and numerical approach proves beneficial
in the evaluation of the most complicated diagram. It is shown that the
program can deal not only with scalar integrals, but also with tensor
integrals of in principle arbitrary rank.

In its second application within this thesis, the neutral MSSM
Higgs-boson spectrum is discussed. In particular, the calculation of the
leading momentum-dependent order @xmath corrections using a mixed
on-shell/ @xmath renormalization scheme is presented. Integrals which
are available in analytic form have been implemented in a way allowing
for a stable numerical evaluation. Analytically inaccessible integrals
are evaluated numerically using the program SecDec . The combination of
the new momentum-dependent two-loop contribution with the existing one-
and two-loop corrections in the on-shell/ @xmath scheme leads to an
improved prediction of the light MSSM Higgs-boson mass and a
correspondingly reduced theoretical uncertainty. The effect of the newly
included momentum-dependent terms on the neutral @xmath -even
Higgs-boson masses is discussed. The corresponding shifts in the
lightest Higgs-boson mass @xmath are below @xmath in all scenarios
considered, but can extend up to the level of the current experimental
accuracy. The results are included in the code FeynHiggs , a publicly
available program to calculate parameters related to the Higgs-boson
sector in the framework of the MSSM.
