In order to better understand the plasma supply and leakage at active
regions, we investigated physical properties of the upflows from edges
of active region NOAA AR10978 observed with the EUV Imaging Spectrometer
(EIS) onboard Hinode . Our observational aim is to measure two
quantities of the outflows: Doppler velocity and electron density.

These upflows in the corona, referred to as active region outflows
(hereafter the outflows ), were discovered for the first time by EIS due
to its unprecedented high sensitivity and spectral resolution. Those
outflows are emanated at the outer edge of a bright active region core,
where the intensity is low ( i.e. , dark region). It is well known by a
number of EIS observations that the coronal emission lines at the
outflow regions are composed of an enhanced component at the blue wing
(EBW) corresponding to a speed of @xmath , added to by the stronger
major component almost at rest. This EBW can be seen in line profiles of
Fe xii – xv whose formation temperatures are around @xmath . It has been
suggested that the outflows are (1) an indication of upflows from the
footpoints of coronal loops induced by impulsive heating in the corona,
(2) induced by the sudden pressure change after the reconnection between
closed active region loops and open extended loops located at the edge
of an active region, (3) driven by the contraction occurring at the edge
of an active region which is caused by horizontal expansion of the
active region, and (4) the tips of chromospheric spicules heated up to
coronal temperature. While a number of observations have been revealed
such aspects of the outflows, however, their electron density has not
been known until present, which is one of the important physical
quantities to consider the nature of the outflows. In addition, the
Doppler velocity at the transition region temperature ( @xmath ) has not
been measured accurately in the outflow regions because of the
difficulties in EIS spectroscopic analysis ( e.g. , the lack of onboard
calibration lamp for absolute wavelength, and the temperature drift of
line centroids according to the orbital motion of the satellite). In
this thesis, we analyzed the outflow regions in NOAA AR10978 in order to
measure Doppler velocity within wide temperature range ( @xmath ) and
electron density by using an emission line pair Fe xiv @xmath Å/ @xmath
Å.

Since EIS does not have an absolute wavelength reference onboard, we
need another reference for the precise measurement of the Doppler
velocity. In this thesis, we exploited Doppler velocity of the quiet
region as the reference, which was studied in Chapter 3 . EUV emission
lines observed in the quiet region are known to indicate redshift
corresponding to @xmath at @xmath , while those above that temperature
have not been established where a number of emission lines observed with
EIS exist. Since the corona is optically thin, spectra outside the limb
are superposed symmetrically along the line of sight, which leads to the
reasonable idea that the limb spectra take a Doppler velocity of @xmath
. We derived the Doppler velocity of the quiet region at the disk center
by studying the center-to-limb variation of line centroid shifts for
eleven emission lines from the transition region and the corona. By
analyzing the spectroscopic data which cover the meridional line of the
Sun from the south pole to the north pole, we determined the Doppler
velocity of the quiet region with @xmath in the accuracy of @xmath for
the first time. It is shown that emission lines below @xmath have
Doppler velocity of almost zero with an error of @xmath , while those
above that temperature are blueshifted with gradually increasing
magnitude: @xmath at @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 Positive (Negative) velocity indicates
a motion away from (toward) us. .

The Doppler velocity of the outflows was measured for twenty six
emission lines which cover the temperature range of @xmath in Chapter 4
. Though it is well known that the outflows are prominent around @xmath
and exhibit clear blueshift corresponding to several tens of @xmath due
to the existence of EBW extending up to @xmath , the behavior below that
temperature has not been revealed. Using the Doppler velocity of the
quiet region (obtained in Chapter 3 ) for the temperature range of
@xmath as a reference, we measured the Doppler velocity of several types
of coronal structures in NOAA AR10978: active region core, fan loops,
and the outflow regions. Active region core, characterized by high
temperature loops ( @xmath ), indicated almost the same centroid shifts
as the quiet region selected in the field of view of the EIS scan. Fan
loops are extending structures from the periphery of active regions,
which indicated @xmath at the transition region temperature, and the
Doppler velocity decreased with increasing formation temperature:
reaching @xmath at @xmath . Different from fan loops, the outflow
regions exhibited a blueshift corresponding to @xmath at all temperature
range below @xmath , which implies that the plasma does not return to
the solar surface. The fact that the outflow region and fan loops are
often located near each other has been made it complicated to understand
the physical view of those structures. By extracting the target regions
with much carefulness, we revealed the definitive difference of the
outflow regions and fan loops in the Doppler velocity at the transition
region temperature.

In Chapter 5 , the electron density of the outflows (EBW component in
coronal emission line profiles) was derived for the first time by using
a density-sensitive line pair Fe xiv @xmath Å/ @xmath Å. This line pair
has a wide sensitivity for the electron density range of @xmath , which
includes the typical values in the solar corona. We extracted EBW
component from the line profiles of Fe xiv through double-Gaussian
fitting. Since those two emission lines are emitted from the same
ionization degree of the same ion species, they should be shifted by the
same amount of Doppler velocity and thermal width. We challenged the
simultaneous fitting applied to those two Fe xiv lines with such
physical restrictions on the fitting parameters. After the
double-Gaussian fitting, we obtained the intensity ratio of Fe xiv
@xmath Å/ @xmath Å both for the major component and EBW component.
Electron density for both component ( @xmath and @xmath ) was calculated
by referring to the theoretical intensity ratio as a function of
electron density which is given by CHIANTI database. We studied six
locations in the outflow regions. The average electron density in those
six locations was @xmath and @xmath . The magnitude relationship between
@xmath and @xmath was different in the eastern and western outflow
regions, which was discussed in Section 7 associated with the magnetic
topology. The column depth was also calculated by using the electron
densities for each component in the line profiles, and it leads to the
result that (1) the outflows possess only a small fraction ( @xmath )
compared to the major rest component in the eastern outflow region,
while (2) the outflows dominate over the rest plasma by a factor of
around five in the western outflow region.

We developed a new method in line profile analysis to investigate the
electron density of a minor component in Chapter 6 . Instead of
obtaining the electron density from the intensity ratio calculated by
the double-Gaussian fitting, we derive the electron density for each
spectral bin in Fe xiv line profiles, which we refer to as @xmath -
@xmath diagram . This method has an advantage that it does not depend on
any fitting models. By using the @xmath - @xmath diagram, we confirmed
that EBW component indeed has smaller electron density than that of the
major component in the western outflow region while that was not the
case in the eastern outflow region.

Our implications are as follows.

(1) The outflow regions and fan loops, which has been often discussed in
the same context, exhibited different temperature dependence of Doppler
velocity. We concluded these structures are not identical.

(2) We tried to interpret the outflows in terms of the siphon flow (
i.e. , steady and unidirectional) along coronal loops, but it turned out
to be unreasonable because both the mass flux and the gas pressure
gradient were in the opposite sense to what should be expected
theoretically.

(3) The temperature dependence of the Doppler velocity in the outflow
regions are different from that was predicted by a previous numerical
simulation on impulsive heating with longer timescale than the cooling.
We observed upflow at the transition temperature, while the numerical
simulation resulted in downflow at that temperature.

(4) As for the case if intermittent heating is responsible for the
outflows, we analytically considered a balance between heating and the
enthalpy flux. The duration of heating was crudely estimated to be
longer than @xmath so that the density of upflows from the footpoints
becomes compatible with that of the observed outflows.

(5) Though EBW component contributes to the emission as a small fraction
in a line profile, the volume amount is around five times as large as
the major component in the western outflow region as calculated by using
the electron density for each component in Fe xiv line profiles.

(6) Coronal loops rooted at the eastern outflow regions are connected to
the opposite polarity region within the active region when taking into
account the magnetic topology constructed from an MDI magnetogram, from
which we suggest a possibility that the outflows actually contribute to
the mass supply to active region coronal loops at the eastern outflow
region.
