# Preface

Superfluidity is a very general phenomenon. Critical temperatures of
known superfluids extend over 17 orders of magnitude (from about 200 nK
for cold atomic gases to up to @xmath K for nuclear and quark matter).
In the frame of this thesis, I will be most interested in the upper end
of this scale and discuss relativistic superfluids which presumably
exist in dense nuclear or quark matter in the interior of compact stars.
Due to its interdisciplinarity, the study of this field is as
fascinating as it is challenging. Concepts of many different branches
such as particle physics, solid state physics or astrophysics have to be
taken into account and I will devote a rather large part of this thesis
to describe the rich spectrum of physics to which the research presented
in this thesis is relevant.

The basic idea is to relate the effective hydrodynamic description of a
superfluid to the underlying microscopic theory. The relevant
microscopic physics are determined by a relativistic quantum field
theory to which a Bose-Einstein condensate is introduced. Even though it
is to some extent obvious that the hydrodynamics of a superfluid evolve
from such a microscopic background, this relation has never been made
explicit before. The existence of such a “gap” in our perception of
superfluidity has led the existence of two separate communities (a
“phenomenological” and a “microscopic” one), each equipped with a
terminology of its own. This difference in terminology is a frequent
source of confusion and I hope the results of this work can help to
eliminate at least some of this confusion. In the second part of this
thesis, I shall demonstrate explicitly that it is indeed possible to the
derive the hydrodynamic description and calculate all non-dissipative
hydrodynamic parameters purely in terms of field theoretic variables. It
shall also be indicated how the obtained results are related to recent
research outside of high energy physics, in particular to liquid helium
and cold atoms. In the third part I will use this microscopic framework
to study the sound excitations of a superfluid. In part IV, the more
complicated but phenomenologically important scenario of two coupled
superfluids will be discussed.

Most of the results were obtained in a collaboration with my thesis
advisor Andreas Schmitt ¹ ¹ 1 Univ.Ass. Dr. Andreas Schmitt, Institute
for Theoretical Physic, Technical University Vienna
  andreas.schmitt@tuwien.ac.at as well as Mark Alford ² ² 2 Prof. Mark
G. Alford, Physics Department, Washington University of St. Louis,
alford@wuphys.wustl.edu and Kumar Mallavarapu ³ ³ 3 S. Kumar
Mallavarapu, Physics Department, Washington University of St. Louis,
kumar.s@go.wustl.edu from the Washington University in St. Louis. In
particular the results presented in sections 8 and 10,11 and 12-15 of
this thesis were published in the following two articles

-   M. G. Alford, S. K. Mallavarapu, A. Schmitt, S. Stetina, Phys. Rev.
    D 87, 065001 (2013)

-   M. G. Alford, S. K. Mallavarapu, A. Schmitt, S. Stetina, Phys.Rev.
    D89, 085005 (2014)

## Acknowledgments

I would like to use this opportunity to express my deepest gratitude
towards my thesis advisor Andreas Schmitt. Over the past years, I have
come to value him not only as an excellent and dedicated teacher, but
also as a great mentor. In addition to uncountable discussions in frame
of the research projects we carried out together, his counseling in
academic affairs in general and in preparation of conference talks or
writing scientific articles in particular have been invaluable to me. I
find it hard to believe that the quality of my PhD training could have
been any better.

I would also like to thank Anton Rebhan for many valuable comments and
suggestions and in particular for granting me additional financial
support.

I thank Mark Alford, Karl Landsteiner and Eduardo Fraga for inspiring
and valuable discussions.

Finally I would like to thank the Austrian Science Fund FWF for the
financial support I have received over the past three years.

###### Contents

-    I Introduction
    -    1 Early experiments with liquid helium
    -    2 The two-fluid model
    -    3 The discovery of compact stars
    -    4 Compact stars from a microscopic point of view
        -    4.1 Cold and dense nuclear and quark matter
            -    4.1.1 Highest densities, Color flavor locking
            -    4.1.2 High, but not asymptotically high densities
        -    4.2 Phenomenology of compact stars
-    II Superfluidity from field theory
    -    5 Relativistic thermodynamics and hydrodynamics
        -    5.1 Relativistic thermodynamics and entrainment
        -    5.2 A relativistic version of Landau‘s two-fluid formalism
        -    5.3 Temperature and chemical potential in field theory
        -    5.4 From generalized to frame dependent thermo- and
            hydrodynamics.
    -    6 The microscopic point of view - what makes a superfluid?
        -    6.1 The critical velocity of a superfluid
        -    6.2 Spontaneous symmetry breaking in field theory
    -    7 Lagrangian and formalism
    -    8 Zero temperature: Single fluid formalism
        -    8.1 Equations of motion and conservation equations
        -    8.2 Zero-temperature hydrodynamics: Landau‘s formalism
            -    8.2.1 Generalized single fluid formalism
            -    8.2.2 The non-relativistic limit
    -    9 The 1PI and 2PI effective action
        -    9.1 Full, connected and one-particle irreducible Green‘s
            functions.
        -    9.2 1PI effective action in the one loop approximation
        -    9.3 Two-particle irreducible formalism
    -    10 Two-fluid formalism in the low-temperature approximation
        -    10.1 Effective action and dispersion relations.
        -    10.2 Stress-energy tensor and current
        -    10.3 The two-fluid formalism from field theory
            -    10.3.1 Generalized thermodynamics from field theory
        -    10.4 Explicit results in the low-temperature approximation
            -    10.4.1 Entrainment and superfluid density from field
                theory
        -    10.5 Conclusion
    -    11 The two fluid model at arbitrary temperatures
        -    11.1 The effective action in CJT
        -    11.2 Renormalized stationarity equations and pressure
        -    11.3 Goldstone mode
        -    11.4 Critical temperature, condensate and critical velocity
            for all temperatures
        -    11.5 Two-fluid properties for all temperatures
            -    11.5.1 Algorithm
            -    11.5.2 Limit of vanishing superflow
            -    11.5.3 Superfluid density and entrainment for all
                temperatures
        -    11.6 Conclusion
-    III Sound modes in relativistic superfluids
    -    12 Derivation of the wave equations
        -    12.1 General structure of the solutions
    -    13 The low-temperature approximation
    -    14 Sound modes for all temperatures
    -    15 Conclusion
-    IV A mixture of two superfluids
    -    16 Effective description
    -    17 Hydrodynamics
        -    17.1 Frame dependent hydrodynamics
    -    18 Phase diagram at zero temperature
        -    18.1 Stability condition and global minima
        -    18.2 Phase diagrams
        -    18.3 Conclusion
-    V Outlook
-    VI Appendix
    -    A Matsubara sum with anisotropic excitation energies and the
        low-temperature limit
    -    B Path integrals over complex fields
        -    B.1 The partition function in momentum space
        -    B.2 The stress-energy tensor and current
    -    C Renormalization and useful identities for the stress-energy
        tensor
    -    D Small-temperature expansion
    -    E Renormalization in 2PI
        -    E.1 Uncondensed phase with (spurious) background field
        -    E.2 Condensed phase without superflow
        -    E.3 Renormalization with Goldstone mode
        -    E.4 Condensed phase with superflow
    -    F Calculation of sound velocities
        -    F.1 Derivation of the wave equations
        -    F.2 Solution of sound wave equations and low-temperature
            approximation
        -    F.3 Sound velocities at low temperatures for arbitrary m
    -    G Chemical potential in a system of two coupled superfluids

## Part I Introduction

The discovery of superfluidity originated from the study of the
low-temperature dynamics of helium. Helium exhibits the rather peculiar
feature of remaining liquid - even when the limit of absolute zero
temperature is approached. While we are not aiming to describe the
properties of helium as accurately as possible, no introduction to
superfluidity can be complete without mentioning some of the spectacular
experimental results of these studies. Most of the discussed properties
are not exclusive for helium but are properties of superfluids in
general. In particular, we shall explain how the theoretical attempts to
describe the observed phenomena ultimately led to the powerful two-fluid
formalism which will be introduced in section 2 . A relativistic version
of this two-fluid formalism is widely and successfully used today to
describe the phenomenology of superfluids in compact stars (see also
section 5 ). After a short historical outline of the discovery of
compact stars we will discuss the properties of matter which presumably
exists in compact stars from a microscopic point of view. In particular,
we shall explain in which phases of dense matter we expect to encounter
superfluidity and how the occurrence of superfluidity influences
observable phenomena of compact stars. The microscopic terminology used
in section 4 will inevitably be very different from the phenomenological
one used in sections 1 and 2 . It shall be the goal of second part of
this thesis to make the relationship between both approaches as explicit
as possible. A review of the discovery of superfluidity containing many
interesting historical details can be found in [ 1 ] . In addition,
reference [ 2 ] provides a good introduction to the phenomenology of
superfluidity.

### 1 Early experiments with liquid helium

The experimental discovery of superfluidity dates back to the year 1927
when Keesom, Wolfke and Clusius discovered an anomaly in the properties
of liquid ⁴ ⁴ 4 This is by far the most abundant isotope of helium and
used in most laboratory experiments. Each pair of neutrons, protons and
electrons occupies a 1s orbital, none of them possesses orbital angular
momentum and the spin of each pair adds up to zero. In this
configuration, helium is extremely stable. : the specific heat as a
function of temperature shows a sharp maximum at 2.17 K [ 3 , 4 ] .
According to the shape of this diagram this point was called “lambda
point” and marks the boundary of two different liquid states referred to
as helium I (above ) and helium II (below ). Shortly after the discovery
of this novel He II phase, experimental efforts focused on the study of
heat-flow and viscosity of helium II which seemed to show a rather
unusual behavior:

Rollin in Oxford realized [ 7 ] that the heat transport in Helium II is
up to 5 times as effective as in Helium I and shows a sharp peak at a
temperature around 2 K (a typical plot is shown in 1.1 ).

It was conjectured that convection (due to the bulk motion of the fluid
as opposed to heat conduction due to excitations of molecules) could be
responsible for the anomalously large value of heat transport provided
that the viscosity is small enough. However, the usual convection law
@xmath (i.e. a linear relation between heat-flow and temperature
gradient where @xmath denotes the thermal conductivity) was only
recovered for sufficiently small temperature gradients. In addition,
Brewer and Edwards measured the thermal resistance as function of the
heat flow [ 6 ] . This relation remains constant up to a critical value
of the heat flux at which the thermal resistance suddenly increases
rapidly (see right panel of figure 1.1 ). This critical value of the
heat flow corresponds precisely to the critical value of the temperature
gradient at which nonlinear deviations from the convection law become
measurable which suggests a deeper connection between both phenomena. In
fact, both can be explained by the concept of a critical velocity : as
we will discuss in the paragraph below, a heat flux induces a
counter-flow of mass flux (and vice versa). The mass flow however is
limited by a certain critical velocity at which turbulence arises (see
discussion in section 6.1 ). This in turn is the origin of the sudden
increase in thermal resistivity and for the onset of a nonlinear regime
of the heat flow.

The counter-flow mechanism was discovered by two spectacular experiments
which showed the so called “thermomechanical effect” and its inverse,
the “fountain effect” [ 8 ] : in case of the thermomechanical effect,
two containers were filled with helium II and connected by a very thin
capillary - a so called “superleak” which should be thin enough to block
any viscous fluid. Increasing the pressure

in container A leads to a flow of helium towards container B.
Surprisingly, this induces a temperature difference in both containers:
while the temperature increases in A, it decreases in B. This shows that
mass flow and heat flow are not just interconnected, but even pointed in
opposite directions. The fountain effect was discovered, when a flask
(open at the bottom) with a thin neck was lowered into a bath of helium
II. Additionally, the lower part of the flask is filled with a fine
compact powder - again with the purpose of preventing any viscous liquid
from escaping through the bottom. As soon as the helium in the flask is
heated up, a fountain of liquid helium sprays out at the top. Such a
process can in principle go on as long as the heat supply as well as the
cooling of the bath are provided.

The absence of viscosity in helium II was shown in 1938 independently by
two groups, Kapitza [ 10 ] in Moscow and Allen and Misener [ 11 ] in
Cambridge by measuring the flow velocity of helium through thin
capillaries. The published articles of both groups include remarkable
statements about the nature of superfluidity: Kapitza proposed [ 10 ]
that “by analogy with superconductors […] helium below the @xmath point
enters a special state which might be called superfluid” . This is the
first time the term superfluidity appears in literature. Furthermore,
superfluidity is related to superconductivity long before the
microscopic theory of the latter phenomenon was established. Kapitza
received the Nobel price for his discovery in 1978. Allen and Misener on
the other hand claimed [ 11 ] that “the observed type of flow[…] cannot
be treated as laminar or even as ordinary turbulent flow”. This
statement implied that helium II requires an entirely new
fluid-dynamical description and was in contradiction to the common view
of that time that liquid helium is an “ordinary” fluid with very small
viscosity (i.e. an ideal fluid describable by Euler‘s equations of
motion).

The pioneers in setting up this entirely new theory of fluidity were
Fritz London and Laszlo Tisza. London argued [ 12 ] that since atoms
were Bose particles, they should undergo Bose-Einstein condensation, a
rather new concept at that time. He then calculated the transition
temperature of an ideal Bose gas with the density of liquid and arrived
at a value of 3.1 K, quite close to . London also explained, why Helium
II remains liquid when the temperature approaches absolute zero: even at
very low pressure, the quantum kinetic energy of helium atoms is large
compared to their binding energies due to Van der Waals forces. In
addition, helium atoms are particularly light. As a net result, helium
atoms do not remain “frozen” at fixed lattice positions even at very low
temperatures. Shortly after Tisza learned about London’s ideas, he
proposed a two-fluid model [ 13 ] consisting of a superfluid that would
have zero entropy and viscosity and a viscous normal fluid which carries
entropy. With the aid of such a model he was able to provide an
intriguingly simple explanation of the thermomechanical effect: heating
in terms of the two fluids means converting superfluid into normal fluid
at a rate sufficient to absorb the applied energy. Near the heater, this
results in an excess of the normal fluid and a deficiency of the
superfluid. Convection then leads to a counterflow of both components:
while the superfluid is drawn towards the heater (where it will be
transformed), the normal fluid flows away from the heater. Any
temperature inhomogeneity in a superfluid is efficiently smoothened out
by this counterflow mechanism. This effect is directly visible in
experiments:

when pressure is reduced below vapor pressure, we expect that boiling of
helium II sets in. Usually boiling becomes visible by the onset of
bubbles, which represent local hot spots in a liquid. However, in
boiling helium II one cannot observe any bubbles ⁵ ⁵ 5 Once again, this
effect is limited by the critical velocity. If the induced counterflow
becomes too large an onset of bubbles is indeed visible. .

In case of the two containers which are connected by a small capillary,
only the superfluid can pass (the viscosity of the normal fluid prevents
it from creating a counterflow through the narrow capillary such that no
equilibrium between the two containers can be achieved). This situation
is illustrated in figure 1.3 . Since there is now more mass (but the
same entropy!) in container B, the temperature decreases . By the same
argument, the temperature increases in container A. From the same
experiment, it was deduced that the charge is carried by the superflow:
a steady state (when there is no more flow through the superleak) is
only achieved when the chemical potentials are equal in both containers
@xmath . According to the thermodynamic relation, a pressure gradient
corresponds to gradients in temperature and chemical potential @xmath ,
but only a gradient in the chemical potential will induce a superflow.
Tisza was also able to explain the fountain experiment: heating creates
a temperature difference between the helium within the flask and the
helium bath below causing the superfluid to enter the flask. The viscous
normal fluid on the other hand is prevented from leaving the flask due
to the powder at the bottom. The volume of the liquid in the flask thus
increases rapidly resulting in a fountain shooting out at the top.

Finally it was Landau, who perfect the two-fluid model. At this point,
it is interesting to mention that Landau, despite his certainly
outstanding intuition refused to believe in the relevance of
Bose-Einstein condensation. Nevertheless, Landau‘s theory is a
remarkable success. The main advance compared to Tisza‘s model lies in
the definition of the normal component. While Tisza believed that the
normal fluid consists of uncondensed atoms, Landau proposed that it is
made of quasiparticles of the quantum fluid. In a manner of speaking,
both Landau and Tisza were correct about a different half of the
two-fluid model. Landau divided all quasiparticle excitations into two
groups which he termed “phonons” and “rotons”. While the “phonon” has a
dispersion relation linear in momentum and determines the
low-temperature properties of the fluid, the “roton” dispersion is
quadratic in momentum and can only be excited after a certain energy gap
@xmath has been reached ⁶ ⁶ 6 The microscopic nature of the roton
excitations is still heavily debated today. Different microscopic models
aim to reproduce the roton spectrum with different levels of success. .
After fitting model parameters such as @xmath to reproduce the
experimental value of the specific heat, he calculates a transition
temperature of about 2.3 K in very good agreement with the experimental
value.

Perhaps the most striking prediction of the two-fluid model is the
existence of an additional sound mode: Landau proposed that heat should
propagate as what he calls “second sound” rather than diffuse as in an
ordinary fluid. Even though the idea of temperature waves also
originated from Tisza, the results differed in both models: Landau
predicted that second sound approaches a value of @xmath with @xmath
being the velocity of ordinary sound waves in the zero temperature limit
while in Tisza‘s model the velocity of second sound approaches zero. The
experimental confirmation of Landau‘s result ultimately marked the
success of his model which we shall briefly review in the next section.

### 2 The two-fluid model

Landau essentially constructed his famous two-fluid model based on the
experimental results reviewed in the last section. We will now discuss
the non-dissipative version of this model, i.e. we will consider a
mixture of a superfluid and an ideal fluid (the normal component). A
generalization which takes into account the viscosity of the normal
fluid is discussed for example in [ 14 ] . The basic equations of motion
of an ideal fluid are built on the fact that the motion of a fluid
within a given volume element can be described by the mass density
@xmath , the entropy density @xmath and the fluid velocity @xmath . The
corresponding equations read:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Equivalently to the Euler equation the conservation of momentum can be
used

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the momentum density is given by @xmath and the stress tensor of
an ideal fluid by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

These equations can be solved for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath provided
that the equation of state @xmath is supplemented.

To explain the experimental fact that entropy does not flow with the
center mass velocity @xmath , it is obviously necessary to go beyond the
Euler set of equations and introduce an independent velocity field
associated with the entropy flow. This velocity is denoted by @xmath ,
reflecting that only the normal fluid carries entropy. The velocity of
the superfluid on the other hand is constrained by the condition that no
turbulence occurs (at least not for flow velocities below the critical
velocity). In mathematical terms, the superfluid velocity is assumed to
be irrotational, @xmath . The mass density is divided into superfluid
and normal-fluid density ⁷ ⁷ 7 It should be noted that this is merely an
interpretation, the two densities cannot be physically separated. It is
not possible to determine which helium atoms belong to the normal fluid
and which to the superfluid. @xmath where the normal-fluid density
vanishes at zero temperature and the superfluid density at the critical
temperature. By definition, the two fluid components interpenetrate each
other without mutual friction. The total mass flow adds up to:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The conservation of mass remains unchanged

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

whereas the conservation of entropy is now given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Momentum conservation can be written in the form of ( 2.4 ) using
equation ( 2.6 ) and the stress tensor of the two-fluid system

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

It remains to find the corresponding Euler equation for the superfluid.
As demonstrated by Khalatnikov [ 14 ] , this equation can in principle
be derived from conservation equations postulated above, the
irrotationality of the superflow and the principle of Galilean
invariance (see also reference [ 15 ] ). However, such a derivation is
tedious and we shall follow Landau‘s original approach: in order to
explain why the chemical potentials on both sides of a superleak are
equal in the steady state Landau postulated that the chemical potential
acts as the potential energy of the superfluid component and @xmath as
the corresponding force. The superfluid Euler equation then reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equations ( 2.7 , 2.5 ) and momentum conservation form a complete set of
eight independent hydrodynamic equations describing the motion of a
superfluid in terms of the eight variables @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath provided that the equations of state @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
are supplemented. Galilean invariance requires the equations of state to
depend only on the difference of @xmath and @xmath and to be invariant
under rotations. A few concluding remarks about the two fluid equations
are in order:

-   In the strict mathematical derivation of the two-fluid equations,
    frame dependence plays an important role. While in the single fluid
    case, one can always define a local rest frame of the fluid, this is
    no longer possible in the two-fluid case. In the way listed above,
    the two-fluid equations are obviously given in a lab frame where
    @xmath and @xmath are both nonzero. When we consider relativistic
    superfluids, the Galilean transformation connecting two frames of
    reference will have to be replaced by a Lorentz transformation.
    Especially when deriving the corresponding hydrodynamic equations
    from microscopic physics, frame dependence will be a non-trivial
    issue.

-   The irrotationality condition of the superfluid implies that the
    superflow can be expressed as the gradient of a scalar potential
    @xmath . When terms quadratic in the velocities are neglected,
    equation ( 2.10 ) turns into @xmath . This is an important relation
    indicating that velocity and chemical potential of a superfluid can
    be obtained as time and spatial derivatives of the same scalar field
    @xmath . The relation @xmath follows after taking the time
    derivative

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.11)
      -- -------- -- --------

    In a relativistic context, it seems natural to unite chemical
    potential and superflow using the four gradient @xmath . In a
    microscopic context, we will later identify the field @xmath as the
    phase of a Bose-Einstein condensate.

-   The two-fluid framework can be extended to include dissipation. The
    equation of motion for the normal component is then to be replaced
    by a Navier-Stokes equation. In the simplest case, linear deviations
    from equilibrium in the hydrodynamic parameters are considered.
    While the conservation equations of mass and momentum can be
    extended to include dissipative terms, entropy is no longer
    conserved. One rather has:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.12)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Here, @xmath denotes the dissipative entropy flux and @xmath is a
    positive definite quantity (the positive entropy production due to
    dissipation will drive the system back into equilibrium after some
    time). These assumption result in a modified Navier-Stokes equation
    which is rather complicated (an explicit expression can be found in
    [ 14 ] ). The two-fluid Navier-Stokes equation differs from the
    regular one in the number of viscosity coefficients: in addition to
    the shear viscosity, three bulk viscosity coefficients rather than
    one are present. It should be noted that the concept of two fluid
    components which interpenetrate each other without mutual friction
    becomes problematic in the presence of dissipation. A detailed
    discussion of the validity of the two-fluid picture including
    viscosity can be found in [ 15 ] .

### 3 The discovery of compact stars

The discovery of Sirius B by Walter Adams in 1915 is regarded as the
first discovery of a compact star. Using stellar spectroscopy, he was
able to deduce [ 16 ] that despite of its size which is roughly about
the size of the earth, Sirius B had a mass that is comparable to that of
the sun. In reference to their hot temperature and small size, such
objects were called “white dwarfs”. Due to the high densities present in
a white dwarf, atoms are fully ionized, all electrons are free and form
a degenerate gas. It was soon realized that relativistic effects are
important for a realistic description of such an electron gas [ 17 ] .

In February 1932, James Chadwick discovered the neutron [ 18 ] after
only two weeks of experimentation. It is often mentioned in literature
that this discovery served as a motivation for Landau to speculate about
the existence of neutron stars. This however seems not to be the case
(see reference [ 19 ] for a historical review). The submission of
Landau‘s first publication on compact stars [ 20 ] dates back to January
1932 - one month before Chadwick‘s discovery. While it is true that
Landau predicted the existence of stars with the structure of “gigantic
atomic nuclei”, he was obviously unaware of the existence of neutrons at
that time as he describes the atomic nucleus as being made of protons
only (Landau would not consider neutrons for another six years). The
first model of a nucleus made of protons and neutrons was suggested by
Ivanenko in April 1932 [ 21 ] .

The term neutron star was first introduced in 1933 by Walter Baade an
Fritz Zwicky [ 22 ] at Caltech in an attempt to explain the enormous
amount of energy released in supernova explosions (the gravitational
collapse of the core of a massive star). As they correctly explained,
such a supernova explosion represents the transition of an ordinary star
into a neutron star - an object made up of closely packed neutrons with
a very small radius and extremely high density. In 1939, George Gamov
realized [ 23 ] that white dwarfs are analogous to neutron stars: both
represent the final evolutionary state of a star, but a white dwarf is
the supernova remnant of a star whose mass was not large enough to
become a neutron star (which is the case for over 97% of the stars in
our galaxy). However, the existence of neutron stars remained
controversial. In 1939, Robert Oppenheimer and George Volkov found
analytic solutions to the Einstein equations of general relativity for
the special case of static and spherical stars made of isotropic matter.
Based on the resulting equation (also called Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkov
equation), they calculated an upper limit for the mass of neutron star
to roughly 0.7 solar masses [ 24 ] - smaller than the mass of stellar
cores that could collapse into neutron stars. The crucial ingredient is
the equation of state: while Oppenheimer and Volkov used an equation of
state for a degenerate non-interacting neutron gas, a similar
calculation based on Skyrme-model effective nucleon interactions
resulted in a maximum mass as high as two times the solar mass [ 25 ]
and general interest in neutron stars raised again.

In the meantime a consistent microscopic theory of Cooper pairing was
established and possible applications in nuclear matter where studied by
Nicolay Bogolyubov in 1958 [ 26 ] . Only one year later, Arkady Midgal
suggested that superfluidity might be present in neutron stars - a first
study was carried out by Vitaly Ginzburg and David Kirzhnits in 1964 [
27 ] . Since then, a great number of possible phases of matter
(including superfluid ones) in compact stars that go beyond ordinary
nuclear matter have been suggested and we will review some of them in
the next chapter. It was not until 1967 that the first direct
observation of a neutron star finally took place. Jocelyn Bell Burnell
and Antony Hewish measured radio emissions originating from a fast
rotating neutron star, a so called pulsar [ 28 ] , located in the
“crab-nebular” - a remnant of a gigantic supernova bright enough to be
directly observed by Chinese astronomers in 1054. Hewish was awarded the
Nobel price for this discovery in 1974.

### 4 Compact stars from a microscopic point of view

In the frame of this thesis, we will reserve the word compact star for
objects which are dense enough to support nuclear and/or deconfined
quark matter in their inner layers. The physics of white dwarfs
mentioned in the last chapter will not be considered here. Nucleons and
quarks are strongly interacting particles and therefore, the dynamics of
matter inside a compact star are mainly determined by quantum
chromodynamics (QCD). However, electroweak interactions induce further
constraints on the composition of matter. To describe dense matter in
compact stars, we first need to discuss the phase diagram of QCD and
clarify where in this diagram compact stars exist. Since we are
ultimately interested in superfluidity (i.e. a low-temperature
phenomenon), we shall discuss in which sense matter inside a compact
star can be considered as cold. In order to review superfluidity in
dense and strongly interacting matter, we will make use of a modern
microscopic picture, in which superfluidity is the result of spontaneous
symmetry breaking. We will not elaborate further why a system subject to
spontaneous symmetry breaking exhibits superfluidity at this point as
this will be discussed in great detail in part II. The impact of
superfluidity on the phenomenology of a compact star will be explained
in section 4.2 .

#### 4.1 Cold and dense nuclear and quark matter

In what follows, only three quark flavors (up, down and strange) will be
considered. Quark chemical potentials in a compact star can reach values
up to about 500 MeV - by far not enough to excite heavier quarks. (If
not explicitly stated otherwise, the symbol @xmath will refer to the
quark chemical potential.) The presence of electrons might be required
in compact star matter to achieve electric neutrality and the
corresponding chemical potential will be denoted as @xmath . If we were
to consider purely strong interactions, we could assign a chemical
potential to each separately conserved quark flavor. However, weak
interactions violate flavor symmetries and we shall see that as a result
the number of independent chemical potentials is reduced from four (
@xmath ) to two ( @xmath and @xmath ). Despite the high densities of
matter inside a compact star, the mean free path of neutrinos is still
large enough to allow them to escape. Lepton number is thus not
conserved and no chemical potential can be assigned to it. Finally, any
cluster of matter is formally required to be a color singlet and thus
there is no net chemical potential for color charges in a compact star
(with the exception of non-uniform phases in which sub domains with
positive and negative charge can in principle exist [ 29 ] ). In the
high energy limit, quark masses can be neglected and the overall
symmetry group of QCD including color gauge group as well as left and
right-handed flavor groups reads:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

While the current quark masses of up and down quark of about 5 MeV are
negligible, the strange quark mass of about 90 MeV will certainly have a
strong impact on the composition of matter inside a compact star. The
following features of QCD are particularly important for our
understanding of the phase structure of strong interactions:

-   QCD is an asymptotically free theory which means that the coupling
    strength between quarks decreases with increasing momentum transfer
    . At sufficiently high energies and/or densities, QCD thus behaves
    like a free field theory. This behavior can effectively be described
    by a running coupling @xmath where the characteristic energy scale
    is experimentally determined to a value of @xmath 200 MeV. Only when
    the momentum transfer is larger than this value, say above @xmath ,
    perturbative calculations are valid.

-   At sufficiently low temperatures and/or densities, quarks are
    confined into color-neutral composite particles (hadrons). Critical
    temperature and density of the deconfinement transition can vaguely
    be related to the characteristic energy scale: corresponds to a
    temperature of the order of @xmath K at which hadrons are melted
    into their constituent quarks. Furthermore, the size of a light
    hadron measures about 1 fm which roughly corresponds to @xmath . If
    the average separation distance of quarks is below 1 fm (at a
    chemical potential @xmath of around 400 MeV) deconfinement sets in.
    It should be noted that even though asymptotic freedom and
    confinement can at least vaguely be related to one energy scale
    @xmath , they should be treated as independent: while confinement is
    the dominant characteristic of the theory at low energies,
    asymptotic freedom becomes dominant at high energies.

-   At low temperatures and densities , chiral symmetry (the symmetry of
    independent left and right handed flavor rotations) is spontaneously
    broken by a color-neutral quark/anti-quark condensate @xmath The
    resulting ground state is only invariant under simultaneous
    rotations of left and right handed quark flavors (i.e. vector
    rotations) ⁸ ⁸ 8 The full symmetry group @xmath can be decomposed in
    vector and axial-vector symmetries which correspond to simultaneous
    ( @xmath ) and opposite ( @xmath ) rotations of left and right
    handed flavors. However, the @xmath symmetry is violated in any
    region of the phase diagram by quantum effects (axial anomaly) and
    reduced to the descrete group @xmath . We will surpress this
    residual group in the breaking patterns. The vector symmetry @xmath
    corresponds to baryon number conservation and will from now on be
    denoted as @xmath .

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (4.2)
      -- -------- -- -------

    The above pattern indicates that the axial symmetry @xmath is
    maximally broken @xmath resulting in @xmath Goldstone bosons - the
    pseudoscalar meson ⁹ ⁹ 9 Pseudoscalar particles are characterized by
    zero total spin and odd parity, usually denoted as @xmath . octet.
    It should be noted that chirality is an approximate symmetry valid
    only at asymptotically high energies and its breaking is a
    complicated dynamical matter: instead of exactly massless Goldstone
    bosons one obtains pseudo-Goldstone modes with small masses.

For the sake of completeness, it should be mentioned that chiral
symmetry breaking and confinement not necessarily share a common phase
transition line and in principle a confined but chirally symmetric phase
might exist. We will ignore this possibility here and project a crude
first version of the phase diagram with a single phase boundary
separating confined and deconfined quark matter in figure 4.1 .

From these generic features of QCD, we can deduce that compact stars are
located in an area of cold and dense matter in the QCD phase diagram:
shortly after their creation in a supernova explosion, the temperature
of compact stars is of the order of 10 MeV ( roughly @xmath ). During
the evolution of a compact star, it further cools down to temperatures
in the keV range which is small compared to scale set by @xmath .
Chemical potentials of compact stars on the other hand can become as
large as @xmath MeV. We are thus particularly interested in a region of
@xmath and @xmath . At very high temperatures @xmath a plasma of
asymptotically free quarks and gluons is realized. Entropy prohibits a
well ordered ground state and there is no spontaneous symmetry breaking
in this region of the phase diagram - in other words all symmetries of
the group @xmath are effectively restored. Experimental data of the
transition to this state matter can be obtained from relativistic heavy
ion colliders. A powerful theoretical tool to probe this transition is
lattice QCD which, at least in the vicinity of the temperature axis,
predicts a smooth crossover from hadronic matter to quark-gluon plasma.
In the limit of @xmath , a rich phase structure due to a large variety
of symmetry breaking patterns is anticipated. Because of asymptotic
freedom, it seems reasonable to begin a discussion of cold and dense
quark matter at very high densities where properties of the ground state
can be deduced from first principles (i.e. QCD) and then investigate
what happens once we progress downwards in density.

##### 4.1.1 Highest densities, Color flavor locking

A comprehensive introduction to the physics of high density quark matter
can be found for example in references [ 29 ] and [ 30 ] . At
asymptotically high densities, quark masses can be neglected and the
quark Fermi momenta @xmath become large. Due to Pauli blocking, only
states in the vicinity of the Fermi sphere are modified by interactions.
Such interactions then involve large momentum transfer and are governed
by weak coupling. As a result, we expect to find a Fermi liquid of
weakly interacting quarks and quark-holes. However, in contrast to
Coulomb forces acting between electrons, interactions between quarks are
certainly attractive in some channel which can be deduced from the
existence of baryons which are bound states of quarks. Such attractive
interactions between quark quasi-particles will render the ground state
unstable with respect to Cooper pairing ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 As discussed for
example in [ 29 ] , the energy scale at weak coupling @xmath below which
the quasiparticle picture of quarks breaks down is parametrically of
order @xmath while the BCS order parameter (the energy gap in the
excitation spectrum of the quasiparticles) is parametrically larger of
order @xmath . In other words, pairing occurs in a region of the phase
diagram where the quasiparticle picture of the quarks and thus also the
BCS argument remains rigorously valid. and these pairs, possessing
bosonic quantum numbers, will undergo Bose Einstein condensation. This
argument, as originally presented by Bardeen, Cooper and Schrieffer
(BCS) [ 31 ] holds true for quarks in quark matter in the same way as it
does for electrons in a solid ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 In some sense, the pairing
mechanism is even simpler in quark matter as an attractive interaction
in QCD is directly provided by single gluon exchange (which is the
dominant process at weak coupling) whereas in a solid, a complicated
framework of electron - phonon interactions is required. . So far, we
can make two important observations on high density quark matter:

-   The ground state of high density quark matter spontaneously breaks
    baryon conservation, and therefore is a baryon superfluid. Since
    baryon conservation is an exact symmetry of QCD for any given
    density, the spontaneous breaking of @xmath is also the origin of
    superfluidity in nuclear matter.

-   Since the order parameter @xmath of Cooper pairing is a di-fermion
    condensate @xmath , it cannot be a color singlet but rather breaks
    the @xmath symmetry. Thus, quark matter at highest densities is not
    only a superfluid but also a color superconductor.

It remains to determine the structure of the BCS order parameter in
color, flavor and spin space. Interactions between quarks can be
decomposed into a symmetric sextet as well as an antisymmetric
anti-triplet channel:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

This holds true for color as well as flavor degrees of freedom. In color
space, quarks must be in the anti-triplet representation as this channel
provides attractive interactions while interactions in the sextet
channel are repulsive. Since pairing is preferred in the antisymmetric
spin zero channel and the overall wave function of a Cooper pair has to
be antisymmetric, we can conclude that quarks pair in an anti-triplet
flavor channel. The color and flavor structure of the Cooper pair is
thus given by:

  -- -- -- -------
           (4.4)
  -- -- -- -------

Expanding in an antisymmetric color and flavor basis, we can write:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The @xmath matrix @xmath now determines the specific color and flavor
structure of the Cooper pair within the antisymmetric basis. To maximize
the condensation energy, quarks of all colors and flavors are required
to contribute to the Cooper pairing. This allows for an unique
determination of the order parameter and one obtains @xmath [ 32 ] .
This diquark order parameter breaks the symmetry group @xmath down to
simultaneous rotations of color and flavor degrees of freedom:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and related to this breaking pattern, the corresponding ground state has
been termed color-flavor locking (CFL) [ 32 ] . The breaking of baryon
conservation to the discrete subgroup @xmath reflects the cooper pair
nature of the ground state. To complete the discussion of CFL, we list
all elementary excitations of this phase:

-   The spontaneous breaking of baryon conservation @xmath gives rise to
    a discrete massless Goldstone mode as well as a gapped mode with a
    finite spectral weight [ 33 ] . We shall see that the Goldstone mode
    is crucial in the discussion of superfluidity, the massive mode
    becomes relevant only at higher energies.

-   CFL breaks chiral symmetry as can be seen in the breaking pattern (
    4.6 ). The low energy spectrum of CFL hence contains 8 light
    (pseudo)-Goldstone modes with quantum numbers identical to those of
    the meson octet resulting from chiral symmetry breaking in
    low-density QCD ( 4.1 ). The corresponding excitations can therefore
    be considered to be the high density analogues of pions, kaons and
    the @xmath particle ¹² ¹² 12 At this point, it is interesting to
    mention that the symmetry properties of CFL and hadronic matter in
    principle allow for the intriguing possibility of a quark-hadron
    continuity, see references [ 34 ] , [ 35 ] and [ 36 ] . . The meson
    octet is complemented by a singlet state @xmath resulting from the
    breaking of @xmath . Due to the axial anomaly, the @xmath particle
    mass becomes large at lower densities whereas at large densities,
    the effect of the anomaly becomes arbitrarily small (see also
    discussion in section 4.1.2 ). The (pseudo) Goldstone modes together
    with the (exact) Goldstone mode resulting from the breaking of
    @xmath determine the dynamics of CFL at low energies @xmath .

-   The @xmath (pseudo) Goldstone modes in CFL are accompanied by nine
    gapped excitations (i.e. the quark-quasiparticles) where one of them
    has a gap of magnitude @xmath and the remaining eight of magnitude
    @xmath [ 30 ] .

-   The color gauge group @xmath is completely broken resulting in
    Meissner masses for all glouns. The generator of the electromagnetic
    charge on the other hand is contained in the flavor group @xmath ¹³
    ¹³ 13 This is visible for example in the covariant derivative. To
    couple electric charges to the three quark flavors, the charge
    generator @xmath -1/3) is coupled to the electron chemical potential
    @xmath . and due to symmetry breaking in CFL, only the residual
    generator @xmath remains unbroken. In other words, all diquark
    condensates carry zero net @xmath -charge. This phenomenon is called
    rotated electromagnetism. @xmath is a linear combination of the
    generator of the original electromagnetic charge and the gluon
    generator @xmath and the new gauge field reads @xmath . However,
    since the mixing angle @xmath is very small, one may say that the
    (original) photon does not acquire a Meissner mass and CFL is not an
    electromagnetic superconductor.

A phase diagram including the CFL phase is shown in figure 4.2 . In
summary, the properties of the CFL phase at highest densities allow for
a rigorous theoretical treatment from first principles: QCD is weakly
coupled at high densities and infrared divergences are are cut off by
the Meissner masses of the gluons. Furthermore, magnetic interactions in
QCD are screened by Landau damping [ 29 ] .

It remains to provide a quantitative estimate in which density regime
one can expect CFL to represent the ground state. Calculations of the
order parameter @xmath of CFL in the frame of BCS theory are reliable at
a chemical potential of the order of about @xmath MeV ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 It should
be emphasized that this magnitude of the chemical potential specifically
describes the limit at which the BCS gap equation is valid. It should
not be confused with a threshold at which perturbative calculations
become applicable - the gap equation is derived under the assumption of
weak coupling, but it is still non perturbative. [ 37 ] (roughly 15
orders of magnitude larger than the maximum value for chemical
potentials inside compact stars). Parametrically, one obtains the
following result [ 38 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

This shows that the gap in CFL is parametrically larger than the
standard BCS result for the gap which is proportional to @xmath . This
deviation results from the fact that the point like four-fermion
interaction has been replaced with the long-range gluon interaction. As
@xmath increases faster than @xmath decreases [ 29 ] , one can conclude
that the gap increases for asymptotically large @xmath . The critical
temperature of CFL deviates by a factor of @xmath from the standard BCS
result

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

As in standard BCS theory, the critical temperature is of the same order
of magnitude as the zero temperature gap. With these results at hand, it
is tempting to try a bold extrapolation to densities existing inside
compact stars. According to the QCD beta function, a chemical potential
of about 400 MeV corresponds to a coupling of @xmath (of course we can
only rely on the two loop approximation of the beta function which
strictly speaking is not valid at all at lower densities). This results
in a gap (and thus also in a critical temperature) of the order of 10
MeV - above temperatures of a compact star except for the first minutes
after their creation. Even though such an extrapolation seems of course
unreliable, a comparison with models specifically designed to describe
an intermediate density region such as the NJL (Nambo Jona Lasinio)
model shows surprisingly good qualitative agreement [ 39 ] . This
suggests that color superconductors are at least strong candidates for
the ground state of matter inside a compact star. What really happens to
the ground state of QCD once we leave the save grounds of asymptotically
high densities is very hard to determine as our current theoretical
control over the region of intermediate densities is very limited. Some
insights can be obtained by extrapolations from nuclear theory (upwards
in density) or, as we will discuss in the next section, from CFL
(downwards in density). Another possibility is to use effective models
for this region of the phase diagram. More powerful and reliable methods
such as lattice QCD or experimental insights from heavy ion collisions
are limited to lower densities (one should not however, that future
accelerator facilities such as NICA might provide some insight [ 40 ]
and also in lattice QCD some progress in the effort to extend
calculations to higher densities has been made [ 41 ] ). From this point
of view, the study of compact stars as the only “laboratory” where such
intermediate densities are realized in nature could prove to be
invaluable.

##### 4.1.2 High, but not asymptotically high densities

Two effects become important once we leave the realm of asymptotically
high densities:

-   The coupling strength increases. This effect renders calculations
    from first principles outside the asymptotic density region very
    complicated and it is very challenging to include higher order
    effects in the coupling constant. Approaches to resolve this issue
    include the construction of an effective field theory for
    quasi-quarks and gluons near the Fermi surface [ 42 ] or
    renormalization group theory [ 43 ] . In the effective field theory
    approach, strong coupling makes it necessary to include non Fermi
    liquid effects at energy scales above the gap [ 44 ] , [ 45 ] .

-   The mass of the strange quark increases and the Fermi momentum
    @xmath decreases. The separation of the Fermi momenta of different
    quark flavors eventually leads to the breakdown of Cooper pairing ¹⁵
    ¹⁵ 15 For two fermion species with chemical potentials @xmath and
    @xmath , a first order transition to the unpaired phase sets in at
    @xmath , the so called Chandrasekhar-Clogston point. . To obtain a
    quantitative estimate, when this happens for 3-flavor CFL, one has
    to take into account that matter inside a compact star is
    constrained by charge neutrality and beta equilibrium ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 In
    quark matter, @xmath decay and electron capture are represented by
    @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath respectively and an additional
    non-leptonic process is given by @xmath . These constrain the
    chemical potentials to @xmath and @xmath (as stated before, there is
    no chemical potential for neutrinos). , which couples the chemical
    potentials. In unpaired quark matter , the lack of negative electric
    charge due to the reduced number of strange quarks (charge @xmath )
    is compensated by lowering the up-quark (charge @xmath ) Fermi
    momentum and increasing the down-quark (charge @xmath ) Fermi
    momentum (the electron contribution to the charge density is
    parametrically negligibly compared to the quark contributions, for a
    more detailed discussion see [ 30 ] ) resulting in the ordering
    @xmath . To leading order in @xmath one finds an equidistant
    separation of @xmath between all quark flavors. In CFL quark matter
    , the pairing locks the Fermi momenta together as long as the energy
    cost of enforcing the pairing is compensated by the energy released
    from the condensation of Cooper pairs. As the cost of maintaining a
    common Fermi surface is parametrically @xmath and the gain of
    condensation energy is @xmath , we can expect paired quark matter to
    remain stable as long as @xmath . It should be noted that such a
    limit is not exclusive to the pairing pattern of CFL: less symmetric
    pairing patterns which might appear as @xmath increases (for example
    patterns in which only two flavors contribute to the pairing) suffer
    the same fate of stressed pairing [ 46 ] . From these simple
    estimates, it is of course not possible to decide, whether CFL is
    robust enough to extend all the way down to the phase boundary of
    nuclear matter or not.

Systematic studies show that as long as densities are still high enough
and the stress on the pairing pattern is not too large, CFL will most
likely react with the development of a kaon condensate [ 47 ] . To
understand why kaon condensation is particularly important in this
context, we will take a closer look at the effective theory for mesons
in CFL first derived in reference [ 44 ] . The construction of this
effective theory works analogously to chiral perturbation theory in
nuclear matter: the chiral group @xmath is assumed to be intact which is
an appropriate approximation as long as quark masses are small compared
to the specific scale of chiral symmetry breaking. This scale is set by
the high density analogue of the pion decay constant @xmath which was
calculated [ 48 ] to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

It should be noted that in contrast to the chiral effective theory in
vacuum, the finite chemical potential in the high density effective
theory explicitly breaks Lorentz invariance (see also discussion in
section 5.3 ). The meson fields @xmath appear to all orders in the
chiral field @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the Gellmann matrices. @xmath contains an octet of
mesons @xmath under the unbroken @xmath symmetry. The subscripts @xmath
and @xmath now correspond to the @xmath charges which are attributed in
the same way as (regular) electric charges are attributed to vacuum
mesons. There is however an important difference to vacuum mesons: the
Cooper pair nature of the ground state in CFL leads to mesons which are
given by a @xmath condensate rather than by quark/anti-quark bound
states. This can be deduced from the fact that quark flavors in CFL are
paired in the anti-triplet representation, see ( 4.4 ). Replacing quarks
with anti-quarks (and vice versa) while preserving their flavor quantum
numbers results in the identification @xmath or @xmath . In order to
reproduce the flavor quantum number of, say, a neutral kaon, one then
has to replace @xmath with @xmath . Obviously, as the quark content of
the “CFL-mesons” differs from the vacuum mesons, so will their mass
ordering.

Since the effect of the axial anomaly becomes arbitrarily small at high
densities, the overall symmetry group under of the effective theory is
given by @xmath . The chiral field and mass matrix transform under
chiral rotations @xmath as @xmath and @xmath . The somewhat peculiar
transformation property of @xmath is related to the explicit breaking of
chiral symmetry induced by finite quark masses: in order to recover a
chirally symmetric theory, it is necessary to require that the mass
matrix is not passive under chiral transformations but transforms as
@xmath . Under @xmath transformations, the chiral field @xmath
transforms as @xmath . Once again, to enforce invariance under axial
transformations, @xmath is required to transform as @xmath . Collecting
all possible mass contributions up to the second order, the effective
Lagrangian for mesons in CFL reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and the constant @xmath can be obtained from weak-coupling
calculations. Remember that the mesons fields are contained in the
exponent of @xmath and are thus present to any order. It can be shown [
47 ] that @xmath and @xmath act as effective chemical potentials for
right-handed and left-handed fields. The corresponding symmetry group
@xmath can formally be treated as a gauge symmetry, which allows us to
introduce a covariant derivative @xmath . The corresponding mass terms
then enter the theory in the usual way of a chemical potential as the
zeroth component of the covariant derivative:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we where only to consider the @xmath symmetry, these terms would
cover all possible mass contributions. Due to the additional requirement
of @xmath invariance, also the second term in @xmath proportional to
@xmath is allowed up to second order in @xmath (for more details on the
construction of mass terms see also [ 49 ] ). Terms linear in @xmath are
in principle forbidden by the symmetry group of @xmath as they break the
axial symmetry @xmath . In vacuum chiral perturbation theory where the
effect of the axial anomaly is strong, a linear term of the form @xmath
is included instead of the @xmath invariant term proportional to @xmath
in ( 4.11 ). Weak-coupling results in the high density regime for @xmath
and @xmath indeed show that @xmath is suppressed for large @xmath and
the term proportional to @xmath is dominant while at lower densities the
situation is reversed.

Diagonalization of the mass terms of ( 4.11 ) leads to the result that
the mass ordering of mesons in CFL is reversed ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 In particular,
the @xmath meson which is the Goldstone boson corresponding to @xmath
breaking is now the lightest meson since the effect of the anomaly is
suppressed. as compared to vacuum mesons [ 49 ] . This is one of the
reasons why in CFL kaon condensation is favored over pion condensation.
It is worth emphasizing that this effective theory is constructed on
symmetry properties only. If the scaling of the CFL gap and the quark
masses with the chemical potential were known, the effective theory
would be applicable far outside the weak-coupling regime and represent a
powerful tool to calculate properties of matter inside a compact star.

To study kaon condensation, we can set all meson fields except the
neutral kaons in the exponent of @xmath to zero and denote the fields in
@xmath which correspond to the neutral kaons by the complex field @xmath
. Then we separate the vacuum expectation value @xmath from fluctuations

@xmath and expand up to fourth order in the fields [ 50 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

As a result, one obtains a complex scalar @xmath theory. We shall use
such a theory as a starting point for the derivation of superfluid
hydrodynamics in part II. For the current discussion we can neglect
fluctuations and consider only the potential:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the effective mass, chemical potential and coupling are obtained
in terms of the parameters of the high density effective theory as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The mass depends on the coefficient @xmath which in turn is proportional
to @xmath . A similar derivation of the effective neutral pion mass
results in @xmath which is indeed larger than the kaon mass. From these
results it becomes obvious why CFL with (neutral) kaon condensation ( )
is a reasonable candidate to succeed (pure) CFL once we progress
downwards in density. We have seen that the stress induced by a finite
strange quark mass on unpaired quark matter in @xmath equilibrium is
compensated by converting strange quarks into mostly down quarks. In CFL
matter where all quasi-quarks are gapped, the system rather counteracts
the lack of strangeness with the population of mesons that contain down
quarks and strange holes (i.e. kaons). Bose-Einstein condensation of
these particles will occur if the effective chemical potential becomes
larger than the effective mass. Since @xmath and @xmath , the
condensation of neutral kaons is likely to occur in a region of
decreasing @xmath and increasing @xmath and @xmath . Similar arguments
also apply to positively charged kaons @xmath . However, the positive
charge requires the presence of electrons to achieve electric neutrality
which disfavors a @xmath condensed phase. A calculation of the critical
temperature of kaon condensation [ 50 ] extrapolated to densities of
about @xmath MeV yields @xmath MeV. This is of the order of or even
larger than the critical temperature of CFL. In other words, in a region
of the phase diagram, where parameters are such that @xmath is
guaranteed, CFL quark matter should develop a kaon condensate. Since the
kaon condensate spontaneously breaks conservation of strangeness

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we expect this phase to be a kaon superfluid. It should be noted that
weak interactions violate the conservation of strangeness and @xmath is
not an exact symmetry to begin with. However, this violation is
relatively mild as the finite mass of the (pseudo) Goldstone boson of 50
keV [ 30 ] is small compared to the critical temperature of kaon
condensation.

Given the rather exotic value of @xmath MeV at which CFL can be taken
for granted, it is unknown whether this phase (with or without meson
condensation) really extends all the way down to phase boundaries of
nuclear matter. Other candidate ground states such as superconductors
with two-flavor or single flavor pairings, Spin-1 superconductors or
crystalline phases have been discussed in great detail in literature
(see reference [ 29 ] for a review). As discussed in the end of section
4.1.1 , the absence of reliable theoretical or experimental tools in
this region of the phase diagram leaves us behind with a formidable
challenge.

Finally, after crossing this unknown region we reach the hadronic phase
which is relatively well describable by means of effective models which
are - at least at sufficiently low densities - well constrained by
nuclear scattering data. The hadronic phase is subdivided in a gaseous
and a liquid phase at a chemical potential of @xmath MeV. The phase
structure is summarized in figure 4.3 . At higher densities and low
temperatures, nuclear matter might be superfluid. In fact it is the
spontaneous breaking of the same symmetry group @xmath that leads to
superfluidity in dense nuclear matter as baryon number is always an
exact symmetry in any density regime of the QCD phase diagram. Since we
are now in the confined phase of QCD, we cannot deduce the properties of
the ground state from first principles but have to rely on an effective
microscopic description. The attractive interaction between protons and
neutrons necessary for the formation of Cooper pairs can be described by
the exchange of mesons instead of gluons ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 An appropriate model
to describe such interactions is for example the Walecka model. In its
simplest version, protons and neutrons interact via the exchange of the
scalar @xmath and the vector @xmath meson (superfluidity in such a model
is discussed for example in reference [ 51 ] ). . In hadronic matter at
low densities, protons and neutrons pair in the @xmath channel, where we
have used the spectroscopic notation @xmath to specify total spin @xmath
, angular momentum @xmath and total angular momentum @xmath . At higher
densities, medium effects as well as three-body interactions of the
nuclear forces become important and pairing most likely happens in the
@xmath channel (see reference [ 52 ] for a recent review on pairing in
nuclear matter).

Also meson condensation is considered in nuclear matter where again the
focus lies on the condensation of (in this case negatively charged)
kaons. @xmath condensation is motivated by the fact that medium effects
in nuclear matter lead to an increase of the pion mass whereas the
effective kaon mass is reduced (for a review of strangeness in neutron
stars see reference [ 53 ] ). Furthermore, as soon as densities are
large enough for kaons to condense, it becomes favorable to create a new
Fermi sphere for negatively charged kaons instead of adding additional
electrons at large momenta in order to achieve electric neutrality. The
conversion of electrons into kaons is subdivided into electron capture (
@xmath ) followed by neutron decay ( @xmath ) with the neutrinos
escaping the star. As a net result, a large number of neutrons is
converted into protons and matter becomes more and more isospin
symmetric.

Hyperons are estimated to appear at densities of about two times nuclear
saturation density ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 Nuclear saturation density is defined is the
density of nucleons in an infinite volume at zero pressure. It should be
emphasized that the term nuclear matter does not address matter inside a
nucleus but rather an idealized state of matter of a huge number of
neutrons and protons interacting via strong forces only. In the absence
of external forces, the nucleons will then arrange themselves in a
preferred density of @xmath (If for instance, nucleons are added to a
very large nucleus, the density of the nucleons will remain
approximately constant at the value of @xmath ). The corresponding
binding energy per nucleon is @xmath . In a compact star, densities are
typically as large as several times nuclear saturation density. [ 53 ]
and depending on critical temperatures and densities, they might
constitute additional superfluid components. In particular, the @xmath
and @xmath particle are often considered in literature as they are
conjectured to appear first with increasing density. It should be
mentioned that the recent discovery of a two-solar-mass neutron star [
54 ] challenges the hypothesis of hyperonic matter and/or meson
condensation in neutron stars since the equation of state including
hyperons seems to limit the maximum mass of a neutron star to lower
values. This is all the more surprising since at a certain density
threshold, the onset of hyperons seems unavoidable. This so called
“hyperon puzzle” is currently among the most heavily debated issues in
compact star physics.

In summary, one can see that superfluidity appears in many different
spots and at various densities in cold strongly interacting matter :

-   CFL is a fermionic superfluid since it spontaneously breaks baryon
    conservation @xmath . The scalar field theory analyzed in part II
    can be seen as a low-temperature approximation to such a system for
    energies smaller than the magnitude of the superconductive gap.
    Expected temperatures in the interior of compact stars suggest that
    this is a reasonable approximation.

-   At high but not asymptotically high densities, systematic studies
    show that CFL will most likely develop a kaon condensate. The
    corresponding ground state @xmath is a bosonic superfluid since it
    spontaneously breaks conservation of strangeness @xmath . The
    effective theory for kaons in CFL ( 4.11 ) can even be more directly
    related to a complex scalar field theory as we have discussed above.
    However, it is still an approximation since explicit symmetry
    breaking effects due to weak interactions are neglected. It is
    important to realize that the spontaneous breaking of @xmath happens
    “on top” of the symmetry breaking pattern of CFL. A hydrodynamic
    description of CFL and kaon condensation is therefore highly
    non-trivial: in addition to two superfluid components (a quark and a
    kaon superfluid), a normal fluid is present. In part IV , we will
    discuss how such a coupled system of superfluids can effectively be
    described in terms of coupled scalar fields.

-   Finally we encounter superfluidity in compact stars at much lower
    densities, where proton superconductivity and neutron superfluidity
    might coexist. Again, one might use an effective bosonic description
    to model the low-temperature dynamics. However, in order the
    describe proton superconductivity, the global @xmath symmetry would
    have to be replaced by a local gauge symmetry. If coexisting hyperon
    superfluidity is taken into account, one has to handle an even more
    complicated mixture of different fluid components (a mixture of
    nucleon-hyperon superfluids has for example been considered in [ 55
    ] ).

#### 4.2 Phenomenology of compact stars

We have seen that nuclear or quark matter at intermediate densities is
notoriously hard to tackle and the study of compact stars perhaps the
only available way to gain further insights. Naturally, the question
arises whether the microscopic composition of matter inside a compact
star can be related to macroscopic effects observable to
astrophysicists. This could lead to a fruitful symbiosis: a profound
understanding of dense matter from first principles allows for a more
precise modeling of compact stars whereas on the other hand observations
of compact stars can help to constrain microscopic models.
Superfluidity, being a macroscopic quantum phenomenon, is certainly of
great interest in this respect.

To the best of current knowledge, a compact star can be subdivided into
3 different regions [ 56 ] , see figure 4.4 ; Atmosphere, crust, and
core. Nuclear and quark matter are most likely limited to the core with
a radius of several kilometers which in turn is subdivided into inner
and outer core: in the outer core, densities can reach up to two times
@xmath and matter is most likely composed of a large fraction of
neutrons accompanied by a small admixture of protons as well as
electrons and possibly muons constrained by the condition of electric
neutrality. While electrons and muons presumably form an ideal Fermi
liquid, neutrons and protons constitute a strongly interacting Fermi
liquid and are most likely in a superfluid (superconducting) state. In
the inner core of a compact star, densities can reach up to 15 times
@xmath . Among the candidates for the ground state of matter are CFL and
CFL- as well as nuclear matter including pion or kaon condensation or
hyperons. The crust is again subdivided into outer and inner crust. The
outer crust is a very thin surface layer with a radius of a few hundred
meters and densities below @xmath consisting of ionized atoms and an
electron gas. In deeper layers, this electron gas becomes strongly
degenerate and ultrarelativistic while the ions constitute a strongly
coupled Coulomb system (a liquid or a solid). At the boundary to the
inner crust, neutrons start to drip out from the nuclei. Matter inside
the inner crust thus consists of electrons, free neutrons and and
neutron rich atomic nuclei. In analogy to semiconductors, it has been
suggested that neutrons in the crust can be divided into “conduction”
neutrons and neutrons which are effectively bound to nuclei. A
speculative band structure of these conduction neutrons has been
investigated for example in [ 57 ] , [ 58 ] . The fraction of free
neutrons increases with the density until nuclei completely disappear at
the interface to the core. Finally, the outermost layer (atmosphere) is
hypothesized to be a thin plasma layer (at most several micrometers
thick) and its dynamics are assumed to be fully controlled by the star’s
magnetic field.

We shall now discuss observables where superfluidity acts as an
important link between microscopic and macroscopic physics. Some of
these observables such as pulsar glitches explained below are best
described in a hydrodynamic framework. For two reasons, such an
effective hydrodynamic description should be consistent with the
principles of special ²⁰ ²⁰ 20 We shall ignore effects of general
relativity in the frame of this work. While they are certainly important
to model the structure compact star on a large scale, they can be
neglected when we discuss microscopic properties of matter inside a
compact star. relativity: first of all, due to the high densities in a
compact star, Fermi momenta are much larger than the masses of particles
²¹ ²¹ 21 This is certainly true for deconfined quark matter. Nucleons in
the crust are assumed to be at the “borderline” at which relativistic
effects become important while nucleons in the core definitely have to
be treated relativistically. . Secondly, compact stars can reach
rotation frequencies up to . This corresponds to a point on the equator
moving with a velocities up to 20 percent of the speed of light. A
relativistic version of the two-fluid formalism will be introduced in
section 5 .

-   Pulsar glitches are sudden increases in the rotational frequency
    @xmath of a pulsar. The rotation of a compact star is expect to
    decrease slowly with time due to the loss of rotational energy to
    electromagnetic radiation (dipole radiation or radiation due to
    electron-positron winds). They are observed in various pulsars at
    intervals from days to years and magnitudes of @xmath . The most
    popular explanation of this phenomenon is related to the superfluid
    nature of matter in the crust of a compact star: the angular
    momentum of a superfluid is quantized by the formation of vortex
    lines (singular regions in which the superfluid density vanishes).
    The loss of angular momentum of spinning pulsar thus corresponds to
    a decrease in the density of vortex lines (the vortices “move
    apart”) just as the increase of angular momentum corresponds to the
    creation of new lines. In the inner regions of the crust close to
    the neutron drip density, free neutrons might be superfluid and
    coexist with the crust (see reference [ 58 ] for a theoretical
    modeling of the superfluid/crust interaction). If however the
    vortices are immobilized because they are “pinned” to the rigid
    structure of the crust, then after some time the superfluid
    component will move faster than the rest of the star. This
    differential motion will result in a rising tension and at some
    critical value, a sudden transfer of angular momentum from the
    superfluid to the crust as a result of the collective “unpinning” of
    several vortex lines might take place. The vortex lines then move
    outwards as the angular momentum of superfluid is decreased and
    “re-pin”. There is however doubt that neutron vortices really posses
    the ability to “re-pin” (see [ 29 ] and references therein).

-   A compact star has a very rich and complex structure of pulsation
    modes which can be classified in terms of their respective main
    restoring force (see [ 60 ] for a review). Of special interest are
    so called r-modes (or Rossby modes) whose restoring force is due to
    the Coriolis effect. R-modes are known to become generically
    unstable at a certain critical frequency above which this mode grows
    exponentially. In other words, if a neutron star is spun up by
    accretion of surrounding matter, its spin will be limited by a value
    slightly above this critical frequency at which the torque due to
    accretion is balanced by gravitational radiation emission which is
    coupled to the r-mode. Fast spinning stars are nevertheless observed
    in nature, which indicates that the r-mode instability is
    effectively damped by some mechanism. One such mechanism is viscous
    damping, in particular viscosity effects at the boundary of crust
    and core are suspected to provide an efficient enough suppression of
    the instability. The description of r-modes requires a hydrodynamic
    framework which properly takes into account the microscopic
    composition of a star. To take into account possible superfluid
    phases in a compact star, a two-fluid model must be used which
    results in a distinction of “ordinary” and superfluid r-modes [ 61 ]
    .

Another observable which sensitive to the energy gap @xmath but does not
require a hydrodynamic description is the cooling of a star. One minute
after the creation of compact star in a supernova, it becomes
transparent to neutrino emission. Neutrinos will then dominate the
cooling for millions of years. Three ingredients are necessary to gain
an understanding of the cooling behavior of a star: the emission rate of
the neutrinos, the specific heat and the heat transport properties of
matter inside a compact star. We will restrict this discussion to the
low-temperature properties where superfluidity is important (that is we
consider only temperatures small compared to the critical temperature of
superfluidity or superconductivity). When compact stars are formed,
their interior temperatures are of the order of @xmath K. Within days,
the star cools down to less than @xmath K and during most of its
existence, it will sustain a temperature in between @xmath K and @xmath
K. In case of CFL, we have discussed that critical temperatures in a
compact star can roughly be extrapolated to a value of 10 MeV @xmath K,
which would mean that for (almost) any evolutionary state, the
low-temperature approximation is justified. In nuclear matter on the
other hand, recent measurements [ 62 ] indicate that the critical
temperature of neutron superfluidity is of the order of @xmath K which
means that one needs to go beyond the low-temperature description - at
least in the early evolutionary stages of the star.

Most matter inside a compact star transports heat very efficiently and
can thus be assumed to be isothermal to a good approximation. As a
result, the cooling of a compact star should be dominated by the layer
that provides the highest emission rate. As heat transport in
superfluids is particularly large, it is probably the most important
channel to distribute thermal energy in a compact star. However, it
should be emphasized that the convective heat transporting mechanism
that we have discussed in the context of pure liquid helium might be
suppressed in nuclear matter in the presence of electrons or muons due
to entrainment (see discussion in section 5.1 ). In CFL on the other
hand, no additional leptons are required to achieve electric neutrality
and therefore the convective counterflow might indeed be the dominant
process.

The most efficient neutrino emissivity process is the so called “direct
Urca” process where in the case of nuclear matter the emission of
neutrinos originates directly from neutron decay and electron capture
reactions. From the principle of momentum conservation, it can be shown
[ 30 ] that both processes will only take place if the proton fraction
is larger than 10 percent of the overall baryon density. At least in the
case of non-interacting nuclear matter, this condition would rule out
the Urca process. This situation can change significantly in interacting
nuclear matter as we have discussed before and therefore, the cooling
curve might provide a rough estimate of the proton fraction in a compact
star. If the proton fraction is not large enough, a modified and much
less efficient version of the direct Urca process will most likely take
over in which case a spectator proton or neutron is added to ensure the
conservation of angular momentum (the neutron decay process is then for
example modified to where N denotes either a neutron or a proton). In
case of quark matter, the corresponding weak processes for the direct
Urca process involve single quarks (see section 4.1.1 ). In both cases,
this means that one has to come up with the necessary energy to break
Cooper pairs. As a result, specific heat and Urca process are
exponentially suppressed by a factor of @xmath which might provide a way
to determine whether or not superconducting or superfluid matter exists
in a compact star: any shell of a compact star in which matter is not
superfluid, will dominate the cooling. If all fermionic modes in a
compact star are gapped, less efficient cooling mechanisms originating
from the Goldstone mode should become dominant. Comparing with
experimental data, it seems unlikely that this is the case.

## Part II Superfluidity from field theory

### 5 Relativistic thermodynamics and hydrodynamics

To introduce superfluid hydrodynamics for relativistic systems, it is
necessary to replace Galilean invariance, which was the guiding
principle in the construction of Landau‘s non-relativistic two-fluid
model, with Lorentz invariance. This concerns thermodynamics as well as
hydrodynamics. A relativistic generalization of thermodynamics requires
to answer questions such as: ‘‘How does temperature or chemical
potential transform under Lorentz transformations?’’. We shall not
attempt to find the most general answer to these questions ²² ²² 22
There has been a rather long debate how to set up a consistent
relativistic description of thermodynamics, see for instance reference [
63 ] . , but rather search for the correct transformation properties
within the frame of the two-fluid model. The relativistic invariance in
this model is implemented by requiring that the central quantity - the
so called “master function” - is built from Lorentz scalars similar to
the Lagrangian of a relativistic field theory in vacuum. However, the
introduction of finite temperature and chemical potential in a field
theory goes hand in hand with the introduction of boundary conditions
which explicitly break Lorentz invariance. Furthermore, performing
calculations within a theory - even if a perfectly invariant one - can
obviously lead to results which are manifestly not invariant: in the
calculation of dispersion relations for example, the zeroth component of
the four-vector @xmath is expressed in terms of its spatial components
@xmath . We therefore cannot expect to be able to write down results
covariantly at any intermediate stage of a calculation but we will at
least be able to reformulate the final results in terms of invariants -
within certain limits as we shall see in section 10.3.1 . We will now
review, how to construct relativistic hydrodynamics on the basis of
Lorentz invariance and then in section 5.3 discuss in which sense
temperature and chemical potential violate Lorentz invariance in a
microscopic approach.

#### 5.1 Relativistic thermodynamics and entrainment

A generalization of hydrodynamics and thermodynamics for relativistic
superfluids was introduced by Lebedev and Khalatnikov [ 64 , 65 ] and
Carter [ 66 ] . Their models - termed “potential” and “convective”
variational approaches, respectively - differ in formulation but are
equivalent and can be translated into each other [ 67 , 68 ] . As a
starting point to set up a relativistic generalization of
thermodynamics, we consider the thermodynamic relation between pressure
and energy density,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The right hand side couples extensive variables (variables that are
proportional to the size of a system such as charge and entropy
densities) to their conjugate intensive variables (variables that
describe bulk properties of matter and do not scale with the size of the
system such as chemical potential or temperature). The relativistic
generalization of the first group of variables is given in terms of the
two four-vectors @xmath and @xmath which contain @xmath and @xmath
respectively in their zeroth component. In the same manner we can define
a relativistic generalization for the second group of variables by
introducing two independent four-vectors for the conjugate momenta which
include @xmath and @xmath in their zeroth component. Motivated by the
non-relativistic two-fluid formalism (in particular equation ( 2.11 )),
we introduce a four-gradient @xmath as the conjugate momentum to @xmath
. We shall see later that the chemical potential in the superfluid case
is indeed proportional to the time derivative of the phase of the
superfluid condensate. For the current purpose, the symbol @xmath
denotes some gradient field which reflects the potential flow of a
superfluid. The conjugate momentum to @xmath is usually denoted by
@xmath . The convective approach uses the two four-currents as basic
hydrodynamic variables, whereas the potential approach uses the two
conjugate momenta. The straightforward relativistic generalization of
equation ( 5.1 ) then reads:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where by @xmath we denote the invariant contraction @xmath of the two
four-vectors. @xmath and @xmath denote generalized versions of energy
(Hamilton) and pressure (Lagrange) density (in hydrodynamic literature
@xmath is often referred to as “master function”). Both @xmath and
@xmath are connected by the covariant version of a Legendre transform (
5.2 ). To obtain some intuition about the microscopic origin of the
conjugate momenta, we consider the case of zero temperature where there
is no entropy current and where the Legendre transform reduces to @xmath
. In this case, the conjugate momentum is a direct covariant
generalization of the canonically conjugate momentum in the sense of
Hamiltonian mechanics. For a Lagrangian depending on the gradients of
the field @xmath , we can at tree level identify @xmath (this
identification will be made explicit in section 8.2.1 ) and the
transition from canonical to generalized mechanics is simply given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This analogy is less obvious at finite temperature as there is no field
theoretic prescription how to construct the conjugate momentum @xmath to
the entropy current.

To ensure Lorentz invariance, the only allowed building blocks to
construct @xmath or @xmath are contractions of the currents or the
conjugate momenta respectively:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Variations of @xmath correspond to variations of the conjugate momenta
while variations of @xmath correspond to variations of the currents:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Starting from @xmath and applying the chain rule, the conjugate momenta
are then obtained from

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the same way, starting from @xmath we obtain the currents as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with:

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.10)
  -- -- -- --------

Obviously, the coefficients are related by a simple matrix inversion,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we can see, only two out of the four different four-vectors are
independent and it is up to us which two we are going to use to set up
our hydrodynamics. Even a “mixed form” based on one momentum and one
current is possible. (As we will demonstrate in the next section,
Landau‘s two-fluid formalism is precisely such a mixed form!)
Furthermore, these relations reveal a very important intrinsic feature
of multi-component fluids: currents are not necessarily aligned with
their respective conjugate momenta. One rather finds that a conjugate
momentum is given as a linear combination of all available currents (and
vice versa). This effect is termed entrainment and as we can see, it
manifests itself in the appearance of the coefficient @xmath (or @xmath
) which is therefore often called entrainment coefficient ²³ ²³ 23 The
letter @xmath originally referred to “anomalous”. It has since been
realized that entrainment is a key feature of most multi-fluid systems.
@xmath and @xmath are called bulk and caloric coefficients respectively.
. Currents and momenta can be viewed as the skeleton of hydrodynamics,
the microscopic physics enter through the coefficients. Entrainment is
by no means a finite temperature effect, it rather concerns any system
in which more than one (particle or heat) current is present. It was
first discovered by Andreev and Bashkin (especially in non-relativistic
literature it is still often referred to as the Andreev-Bashkin effect)
who developed a hydrodynamic description of a mixtures of liquid and [
69 ] . atoms which obey Fermi statistics need to undergo Cooper pairing
first before they can condense and dissolve in the surrounding
condensate. Such a system therefore consists of two very different kinds
of condensates and correspondingly of two different kinds of superfluid
flow. Entrainment becomes evident since the effective mass of a atom due
to strong interactions with the surrounding becomes more than twice as
large as the mass itself. The flow of quasiparticles therefore
transports a significant fraction of atoms. It should be noted that
entrainment is a non-dissipative effect owing to the microscopic
interactions between particles. The reason why it is usually not
observed in a mixture of ordinary fluids is viscosity, which tends to
equalize velocities. A similar situation exists in a mixture of neutron
and proton superfluids (see reference [ 70 ] or [ 71 , 72 , 73 ] ) where
the strong interactions due to nuclear forces lead to a coupling between
both fluids (again this is a non-dissipative effect, distinct from the
scattering of neutron and proton quasiparticles which leads to
dissipation): the neutron and proton quasiparticles are dressed

by a common polarization cloud, leading to effective masses of the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath being the entrainment contribution. The corresponding
relations between the conserved momenta and velocity-fields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

are a non-relativistic equivalent of equations ( 5.5 ) and ( 5.6 ). An
entrainment matrix for a mixture of nucleons and hyperons has been
calculated in reference [ 55 ] . We shall construct a relativistic
effective theory for entrainment at zero temperature in part IV .

Entrainment effects are suspected to play a key role in many observables
of neutron stars [ 58 ] : they are important in the determination of
frequency and damping of oscillation modes of neutron star cores
composed of neutron and proton superfluids. Furthermore, they might have
a strong influence on the heat transport mechanism in neutron stars. As
we have argued in the context of helium, the dominant heat transport
mechanism in a superfluid is convection - at least in the absence of
other charged particles. In the interior of a rotating neutron star,
entrainment effects induce a flow of protons around vortices of the
neutron superfluity resulting in huge magnetic fields of about @xmath G
for each vortex line. Electrons then scatter on these large magnetic
fields and thereby induce a mutual friction between the neutron
superfluid and the electrons. This might effectively damp the
counterflow mechanism and favor heat conduction over convection.
Finally, entrainment effects between a lattice of ionized nucleons and
superfluid neutrons at the inner crust of a neutron star most likely
have a strong influence on pulsar glitches [ 74 ] .

For relativistic systems, the generalized Legendre transform which takes
into account superfluids originating from several particles species
denoted by the chemical index @xmath is then given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this general discussion of entrainment now back to the two-fluid
formalism. If one of the two

central quantities @xmath and @xmath , say the generalized energy
density is known, the equations of motion can be obtained by applying
the variational principle ²⁴ ²⁴ 24 To extend this treatment according to
the principles of general relativity, the Einstein-Hilbert action can be
added to the fluid action. One then not only performes variations of
@xmath with respect to the currents but also with respect to the metric
@xmath . [ 68 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the perfect heat conducting case, one obtains the conservation
equations for charge and entropy:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

as well as two additional Euler equations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

To demonstrate the general structure of these equations, the conjugate
momentum to @xmath has been denoted as @xmath . In the superfluid case,
@xmath and the equation to the left is trivially fulfilled. The second
equation is called the vorticity equation. We will encounter this
equation later and use it to derive the wave equations which determine
the speeds of sound. While this mathematically very elegant and rigorous
formalism is often applied in relativistic astrophysics, its
applicability in field theory is very limited since here we do not
possess the master function from the beginning and therefore cannot use
it to obtain the correct equations of motion. Nevertheless, we can use
the knowledge of the structure of these equations to correctly construct
the corresponding fluid variables from field theory and then also
construct the masterfunction a posteriori .

It remains to construct a generalized version of the stress-energy
tensor:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again, one can see that in the zero-temperature case, (tree level) field
theoretic and effective description coincide (simply replace @xmath with
@xmath ) whereas the finite temperature generalization is more involved
in field theory. @xmath is manifestly symmetric in the Lorentz indices
even in the presence of entrainment as can easily be checked by
eliminating the conserved currents by their conjugate momenta from
equations ( 5.8 ),( 5.9 ) (or the other way around). With the aid of
@xmath , we can also formulate the relation between pressure and energy
density as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The conservation of the stress-energy tensor provides us with an
alternative way to obtain the equations of motion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

With @xmath from equation ( 5.4 ), we find:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using charge and entropy conservation as well as the fact that the
second term of equation ( 5.21 ) is zero by construction, we find that
the vorticity equations follows directly from the conservation of @xmath
.

Finally, we shall demonstrate how to derive useful expressions for the
coefficients @xmath , @xmath , @xmath in terms of various contractions
of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and the Lorentz scalar @xmath [ 51 ] . To do
so, we first contract equations ( 5.5 - 5.9 ) with @xmath and @xmath
resulting in:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The equations in the first line can be used to eliminate @xmath in favor
of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the numerator we still have mixed terms in momenta and currents.
However, it is easy to check that the expression in the numerator can be
rewritten as @xmath . In an analogous way we obtain expressions for the
remaining two coefficients:

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.23)
  -- -- -- --------

The inverse relations are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 5.2 A relativistic version of Landau‘s two-fluid formalism

From the choice of variables, it becomes evident that the original
two-fluid formalism of Landau introduced in section 2 differs from the
generalized hydrodynamic formalism discussed above. Instead of setting
up hydrodynamics in terms of the conserved currents @xmath and @xmath ,
the current @xmath is decomposed in a normal fluid and a superfluid
contribution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where neither @xmath nor @xmath is conserved on its own. The velocity of
the normal fluid is usually denoted by @xmath . By definition, only the
normal fluid carries entropy. Therefore, we define the normal-fluid
velocity as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

In other words, the normal-fluid rest frame is defined by @xmath or
@xmath . The superfluid velocity on the other hand is as we know
constructed from the gradient field @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

In both cases, the normalization factors guarantee that the condition
@xmath is fulfilled. The basic fluid variables now include one current
and one conjugate momentum. In the strict sense of generalized
hydrodynamics, Landau‘s formalism is to be regarded as a mixed form.
This means that in contrast to the rest frame of the normal fluid
defined by @xmath , the rest frame of the superfluid is not defined by a
vanishing three-current @xmath but rather by a vanishing three-momentum
@xmath . Only at zero temperature, where @xmath both rest frames
coincide. In this limit, we will introduce the chemical potential in our
field-theoretic calculation (see section 8.2 ). Landau‘s mixed form is a
frequent source of confusion and we shall devote the rest of the section
to analyze, how pure and mixed form are related to each other.

In an analogous way to @xmath from equation ( 5.25 ), we can construct
the stress-energy tensor by adding contributions from two ideal-fluid
tensors:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

One should note that while in the single fluid case @xmath is
constructed such that @xmath and @xmath are measured in the rest frame
of the fluid, this is in general no longer possible in the presence of
two fluids. In particular @xmath is always anisotropic. In section 5.4
we will relate the generalized pressure @xmath which appears in the
thermodynamic relation to the components of @xmath in the superfluid and
the normal-fluid rest frames. The decomposition in terms of superfluid
and normal components in the form ( 5.25 ) and ( 5.28 ) can be found for
instance in [ 75 , 76 , 77 , 78 , 79 ] . To translate between the mixed
and the pure form (see also appendix of [ 78 ] ), we rewrite the current
and stress-energy tensor with the help of equations ( 5.5 ), ( 5.6 ), (
5.8 ) and ( 5.9 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which shows the stress-energy tensor in its manifestly symmetric from.
Comparing this with equations ( 5.25 ), ( 5.28 ), we can identify:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, we show how the invariant quantities @xmath and @xmath relate
to @xmath . From ( 5.18 ) one can derive the following expression for
the generalized pressure [ 51 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Plugging in the stress-energy tensor in its mixed form from ( 5.28 ) on
the right-hand side of this equation, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Consequently, the generalized pressure is the sum of the pressures of
the superfluid and normal components, each measured in their respective
rest frames. Analogously, we find for @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 5.3 Temperature and chemical potential in field theory

As elegant as the way how temperature and chemical potential in the
covariant formalism were introduced may be - as soon as we try to derive
the corresponding hydrodynamics from field theory, we are confronted
with conceptual difficulties. In field theory, Lorentz invariance can
explicitly be violated as soon as we impose boundary conditions on a
partition function which is otherwise perfectly Lorentz invariant. In
our microscopic calculations, we will work in the Matsubara formalism in
which temperature is associated with imaginary time @xmath . The
boundary conditions now require the quantum fields @xmath to vary
periodically with @xmath , i.e. @xmath where @xmath is the inverse
temperature. In momentum space, this condition translates into @xmath
which leads to the definition of the (bosonic) Matsubara frequencies
@xmath . It is important to keep in mind that we haven’t made any
identification yet how the variable @xmath which appears in the
field-theoretic calculations relates to the temperature variable which
appears in the hydrodynamic two-fluid model. A more physical way to say
why Lorentz invariance appears to be broken at finite temperature is to
point out that finite temperature introduces a preferred rest frame, the
rest frame of the heat bath. The heat bath is characterized as the frame
in which the averaged kinetic energy of an ensemble particles vanishes.
In such a frame, one can measure a net entropy @xmath but no entropy
flow @xmath . At this point one should remember that, in the terminology
of the two-fluid formalism, the rest frame of the heat bath
characterized by @xmath corresponds the the rest frame of the normal
fluid. Usually one can switch to a covariant formulation by introducing
the velocity four-vector of the heat bath (see for example the
discussion in references [ 80 ] or [ 81 ] ). However, as we will argue
in section 10.3.1 this is complicated in our case.

In the same way, finite density breaks Lorentz invariance (again the
concept of finite density is linked to the preferred rest frame of the
heat bath in which the medium is a rest). In field theory, the chemical
potential couples to the zeroth component of the charge (Noether)
current @xmath in the partition function. In the particular case of a
complex scalar @xmath theory, we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath denotes the canonically conjugate momentum @xmath . After
performing a shift in the conjugate momentum, the new variable @xmath
appears only quadratically and can be integrated out. This redefinition
leads to a new Lagrangian in which the chemical potential appears
similar to the temporal component of a gauge field (i.e. the time
derivative @xmath is replaced by @xmath ). The details of this
calculation can be found for example in [ 82 ] . Again we haven’t made
any statement how the variable @xmath is connected to the chemical
potential in the two-fluid model. In an effective theory for two coupled
superfluids with chemical potentials @xmath and @xmath , we can still
introduce a chemical potential to the Lagrangian by replacing @xmath
with @xmath where @xmath (the prove of this statement is somewhat more
involved and carried out later).

From what we just discussed, it might seem natural to identify @xmath
and @xmath and assume that @xmath and @xmath are both measured in the
normal-fluid rest frame. A formal prove of these relations will have to
wait until section 10.3.1 .

The effect of finite density on our microscopic calculation will be in
some sense less severe compared to the effects of finite temperature: It
will always be possible to calculate, how the spatial components @xmath
of the charge current (conjugate to @xmath ) enter our field theoretic
calculations. On the other hand we will not be able to obtain any
information how the spatial components of the entropy current @xmath
(conjugate to @xmath ) enter our field theoretic calculations as these
have been projected out. This limitation also implies that explicit
expressions of all hydrodynamic parameters in the superfluid rest frame
are impossible to obtain. We can still consider the case @xmath , but
this simply means that now both fluids share a common rest frame. The
only exception is the zero-temperature limit discussed in section 8 , at
which the flow of the normal fluid is zero by definition. In this case,
the only velocity dependence is due to @xmath and @xmath really
corresponds to the superfluid rest frame.

#### 5.4 From generalized to frame dependent thermo- and hydrodynamics.

Since we anticipate that our microscopic calculations will be tied to
the rest frame of the normal fluid, it is a useful preparation to
calculate frame dependent expressions for @xmath and @xmath which we
will later calculate from field theory. Before we do so, we have to
clarify how temperature and chemical potentials in these frames are
related to the generalized four-vectors @xmath and @xmath . To obtain,
say, the temperature in an arbitrary frame moving with velocity @xmath
we have to evaluate the contraction @xmath . This leads in the
particular cases of superfluid and normal-fluid rest frames to the
following definitions:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

To extract the explicit form of @xmath in either rest frame, we
eliminate @xmath from equations ( 5.2 ), ( 5.18 ) and find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which the normal-fluid and superfluid rest frame expressions can
easily be read off. For @xmath we find from equation ( 5.18 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Remember, that the stress energy tensor as given in equation ( 5.18 ) is
not manifestly symmetric. It is obtained in its symmetric form when
relations ( 5.5 ), ( 5.6 ) or ( 5.8 ), ( 5.9 ) are inserted. Finally,
the spatial components can be obtained from proper projections on
transverse and longitudinal directions

with respect to the fluid component in motion:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The rest frame expressions of the current can be obtained directly from
( 5.25 ). The various components are listed in table 1 and can be
interpreted as follows: the components of the current are written in
terms of @xmath and @xmath . (Alternatively, by means of the translation
given in equation ( 5.29 ), we could have written them in terms of the
coefficients @xmath and @xmath .) Since @xmath and @xmath are measured
in their respective rest frames, the charge density of the other fluid
component contains an explicit Lorentz factor, i.e., @xmath is
multiplied by @xmath (see also the discussion at the end of section 8.2
) in the normal-fluid rest frame, and @xmath is multiplied by @xmath in
the superfluid rest frame. The spatial components of the currents are
given by the respective number densities times the three-velocities of
the other fluid. The components of the stress-energy tensor are written
in terms of the Lorentz scalars @xmath and @xmath . The last two lines
of the table illustrate the meaning of these quantities. The transverse
pressure, i.e., the pressure measured in the spatially orthogonal
direction with respect to the fluid velocity of the other current, is
identical to the generalized pressure @xmath . The energy density @xmath
contains the kinetic energy from the other fluid component. This is
exactly the term that distinguishes the transverse from the longitudinal
pressure. Therefore, the combination of the frame-dependent quantities
@xmath is identical to the generalized energy density @xmath .

### 6 The microscopic point of view - what makes a superfluid?

Now that we reviewed the hydrodynamic framework which we ultimately want
to derive, we can finally turn to the discussion of the microscopic
foundations of superfluidity. Our understanding of the microscopic
nature of superfluidity is inevitably connected with the question what
happens to matter at very low temperature (“low temperature” is of
course a relative term, depending on the corresponding critical
temperature). This leads us directly to the third law of thermodynamics:
at absolute zero temperature, the entropy of any substance must go to
zero. In terms of Boltzmann‘s relation @xmath , where @xmath is the
number of available quantum states of a system, this implies @xmath
(i.e. the system must have reached its ground state and this ground
state is non-degenerate). An obvious condition for the existence of
superfluidity is that matter doesn’t solidify at very low temperatures.
As mentioned in the introduction, it was London who realized that
quantum mechanics are responsible for this phenomenon. As a consequence
of Heisenbergs Uncertainty Principle, the lowest energy state of a
system is not zero and as a result, the molecules of a solid are not
entirely fixed to their lattice sites - even at the absolute zero
temperature. If in addition these molecules are loosely bound by weak
van der Walls forces, than even the zero point motion is enough to
render the solid unstable. In other words, the solid melts under its own
zero point energy! Naturally, the approach to zero temperature is very
different for bosons and fermions: in case of fermions, the Pauli
principle forbids that any two particles can occupy the same state. The
result is that even in the ground state, states up to a very high energy
(the Fermi energy) are occupied. For bosons, there is no such exclusion
principle which leads to the conclusion that all particles occupy the
same lowest energy state as we approach zero temperature. What is
special about Bose gases is the fact that the transition into this
ordered state suddenly sets in at a critical temperature @xmath . In
case of , this transition temperature is located at a value of about
@xmath K at vapor pressure. The fraction of particles which are in the
ground state is called the Bose-Einstein condensate. All particles
within the condensate can be described by one coherent wave function
(i.e. the complex phase of the wave function is fixed to one specific
value for all particles in the ground state) which renders this state
particularly robust. The fundamental mechanism behind this transition is
spontaneous symmetry breaking. In the ground state, the phase of the
condensate randomly assumes one specific value. The theory itself is
invariant under global changes of the phase and all values of the phase
lead to the exact same ground state energy. In field theoretical terms
this means that the Lagrangian which describes our system is invariant
under global transformations of the phase, but the ground state is not.
For completeness, it should be mentioned that interactions slightly
modify this simple picture as quantum scattering will drive a small
number of particles out of the ground state even at zero temperature.
Provided that interactions are sufficiently small, this effect can be
neglected.

As we shall see, the condensate alone is not enough the explain
superfluidity. Of crucial importance is the nature of the available
excitations. Above absolute zero, all sorts of excitations including
vibrations or spin and orbital degrees of freedom may contribute to the
entropy of a given substance. Such excitations can be described as a gas
of quasiparticles and we will call them elementary in the sense that
they correspond to the natural spectrum of excited states of the
substance under consideration ²⁵ ²⁵ 25 In some sense, a quasiparticle
can of course also be considered a collective excitation since, without
the presence of a surrounding medium the whole quasiparticle picture
doesn’t make any sense. We shall however reserve the term collective
excitation for sound waves which involve oscillations in the density of
the quasi-particles (i.e. in the density of the elementary excitations
). . In substances which exhibit superfluidity at low temperatures, the
quasiparticle picture typically remains valid up to very high wave
numbers. Usually these excitations simply “freeze out” as we approach
zero temperature because their dispersion relations are gapped. In a
superfluid however, there is a second kind of excitation which is
massless and therefore present for any given temperature. Quite
confusingly, this excitation has been named superfluid phonon even
though the term phonon usually describes an elementary excitation of a
lattice of atoms in condensed matter theory. In field theoretic
terminology, such an excitation is called Goldstone mode. According to
Goldstone‘s theorem, it is a direct consequence of the spontaneous
breaking of a continuous global symmetry. Corresponding to this
symmetry, there is a conserved charge which is carried by the superflow.
We will not consider complications such as spin, our system simply
consists of self-interacting spin-0 particles. The quasiparticle
spectrum will include the superfluid phonon as well as a gapped massive
mode which is not present at low temperatures. We shall explicitly
calculate the dispersion relations of both excitations. The presence of
a Goldstone mode which can be excited for arbitrarily small energies
raises the question why the superfluid ground state does not immediately
dissipate. The answer to this question is Landau‘s critical velocity
which we will introduce now.

#### 6.1 The critical velocity of a superfluid

To explain under which conditions a fluid can propagate without
friction, Landau considered a superfluid flowing with velocity @xmath
through a capillary which defines the rest frame of the laboratory.
Dissipation involves the creation of quasiparticles which, in the rest
frame of the fluid are characterized by an energy @xmath and a momentum
@xmath . In the frame of the laboratory, we therefore have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Landau‘s original argument is non-relativistic and therefore both frames
are connected by a Galilean transformation. Dissipation now means that
the fluid loses energy which translates into the condition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The minimum value of the expression on the left hand side is obtained
when @xmath and @xmath are anti-parallel. One then finds:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

This minimum condition is identical to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

This leads to a very simple geometric interpretation of the critical
velocity: first, one needs to plot the dispersions of all elementary
excitations in an @xmath plane. In the next step, one considers a
horizontal line through the origin in this plane and rotates it upwards.

If one can do so without intersecting the curve of the dispersion
relation, superfluidity is supported. In an ideal Bose gas, the particle
dispersions are given by @xmath and therefore superfluidity is not
supported. This lead Landau to his famous conclusion that the elementary
excitations in must be of an entirely different nature consisting of
phonons and rotons. The two scenarios are compared in figure 6.1 . A
similar argument applies for fermionic systems such as . Excitations are
generated as particle-hole pairs and usually measured relative to the
Fermi surface. As properly described by BCS theory, Cooper pairing leads
to an energy gap @xmath in the excitation spectrum of the fermion
quasi-particles. There is however also a Goldstone mode in from which
the critical velocity has to be determined.

The above argument holds for zero temperature. At finite temperature,
the situation is more complicated as the elementary excitations will be
thermally populated and therefore thermal excitations of the Goldstone
mode are present for any superfluid velocity. It is clear that a proper
derivation of the hydrodynamics of a superfluid requires both
ingredients, condensate and excitations and they will also appear
coupled to each other. This derivation will be carried out in three
steps: we shall begin at zero temperature, where the relation between
hydrodynamics and field theory is well established, review it and make
it as explicit as possible. In the second step, we derive hydrodynamics
in a low-temperature regime. In this approximation, we will still be
able to obtain analytic results for all hydrodynamic parameters. Finally
we study the full temperature range up the the critical temperature
numerically in a self-consistent formalism. We express the basic
currents and momenta of the two-fluid formalism in terms of
field-theoretic quantities, and calculate the generalized pressure
@xmath at nonzero temperature in the presence of a superflow. The
microscopic model will be a relativistic @xmath field theory (see
section 7 ) with a U(1) symmetry that is spontaneously broken by a
Bose-Einstein condensate of the fundamental scalars. We have discussed
how such a model can in principle be related to physics relevant to
compact stars in section 4.1.2 . Nevertheless, the study which we will
carry out is very general since we do not have to specify the system for
which our microscopic theory is an effective description.

Several existing studies in the literature are related to this approach.
For instance, in [ 83 ] the two-fluid formalism is connected with a
simple statistical approach to the phonon contribution, [ 51 ] connects
it with a Walecka model describing nuclear matter in a neutron star, and
[ 84 ] makes the connection to a very general effective field theory. In
[ 85 ] , a hydrodynamic interpretation of a field-theoretic effective
action was discussed for zero temperature. For the simplified case of a
dissipationless, homogeneous fluid, our study is a generalization of
this work to nonzero temperatures. In that reference, an effective
Lagrangian for the superfluid phonons is formulated which has been
employed to study transport properties of quark matter, see for instance
[ 86 ] .

#### 6.2 Spontaneous symmetry breaking in field theory

Before we begin the translation from field theory to hydrodynamics, we
shall discuss how spontaneous symmetry breaking manifests itself in
field theory which is a useful preparation for the chapters to come. We
use the same model which will also serve as a basis for the derivation
of the two-fluid equations: a complex scalar @xmath model describing
(repulsively) interacting spin-0 bosons with mass @xmath and coupling
@xmath in the presence of a finite chemical potential @xmath (see also
section 5.3 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

This model is invariant under global transformations @xmath (note that a
complex scalar field theory is necessary to introduce a U(1) symmetry).
The complex field can be written as @xmath . To allow for Bose-Einstein
condensation, we separate the zero momentum mode @xmath where for
symmetry reasons, we can set @xmath and define @xmath .

To discuss spontaneous symmetry breaking, it is sufficient to consider
the tree level potential @xmath . From ( 6.5 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

As we can see, a positive coupling @xmath is necessary to ensure the
stability of the potential. Minimization with respect to @xmath yields
the ground state (i.e. the state with the largest pressure). For @xmath
, the only minimum is given by the trivial solution @xmath . If on the
other hand @xmath , we

find a minimum located at nonzero @xmath (see figure 6.2 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Such a ground state can no longer be @xmath invariant. In field
theoretic terminology the ground state spontaneously breaks the @xmath
symmetry of the Lagrangian. One should keep in mind that the ground
state itself is degenerate and by choosing @xmath we have chosen a
specific direction in the @xmath - @xmath plane.

To obtain the dispersion relations of the elementary excitations, we
need to calculate the propagator (i.e. the term quadratic in the
fluctuations @xmath , we will demonstrate this in a more complicated
case in the next section)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The excitations are given by the poles of @xmath (or the roots of det
@xmath )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

As expected, the spectrum includes a gapless Goldstone mode which is
linear to lowest order in an expansion in @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

as well as a massive mode @xmath . To obtain this result, we have
inserted the condensate from equation ( 6.7 ). As pointed out, the
nature of these excitations is a key ingredient to understand
superfluidity and we shall discuss their properties in detail in the
chapters to come. By now, we have discussed all microscopic concepts
necessary to describe superfluidity. To derive superfluid properties
from field theory, it will be very important to consider modulus and
phase of the condensate @xmath separately. The general setup for the
upcoming calculations is described in the next chapter.

### 7 Lagrangian and formalism

Our starting point is the Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the same properties as discussed in the last section. Note however
that the chemical potential @xmath is set to zero. We shall see later
that it can be obtained from the (time dependency of the) phase of the
Bose-Einstein condensate. For simplicity, we might also set the mass
@xmath to zero in some of the results. We can now allow for
Bose-Einstein condensation in the usual way by separating the
condensate,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is the modulus and @xmath the phase of the condensate

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For convenience, we have introduced the transformed fluctuation field
@xmath , which we have written in terms of its real and imaginary parts.
Inserting this into the Lagrangian yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the tree-level potential

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the fluctuation terms, listed by their order in the fluctuation from
linear to quartic,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

In the following sections, we will perform calculations in three steps:

-   At strictly zero temperature, we can restrict ourselves to the tree
    level potential @xmath given by equation ( 7.4 ). In terms of the
    two-fluid model, this scenario corresponds to a single fluid case
    where only the superfluid is present. The (static) zero temperature
    value of the condensate is obtained from @xmath . This scenario is
    discussed in section 8 .

-   For low-temperature approximations, we shall need the tree-level
    potential and the terms quadratic in the fluctuations. The linear
    terms @xmath can be rewritten such that they are - up to a total
    derivative term - proportional to the equations of motion ( 8.1 )
    and ( 8.2 ), and thus do not contribute to the on-shell action. From
    the contributions of @xmath , we can construct the one-particle
    irreducible (1PI) effective action @xmath and we will use the
    one-loop approximation for this quantity. While it is of course
    possible to construct 1PI diagrams from @xmath and @xmath , they
    would include external legs. The 1PI effective action includes only
    “legless” 1PI diagrams, the so-called “proper vertices”, as we will
    explain in the next section. The temperature dependent condensate
    @xmath can in principle be obtained from the stationary equation
    @xmath . However, we will approximate @xmath by its tree-level
    value. The low-temperature approximation to the two-fluid model is
    discussed in section 10 .

-   To go beyond the low-temperature limit, we will use a two-particle
    irreducible (2PI) formalism. In the 2PI framework, contributions
    from @xmath and @xmath obviously cannot be neglected. All diagrams
    which are two-particle irreducible and can be constructed from the
    interaction terms above are collected in the potential @xmath (see
    figure 7.1 ). The “double-bubble” diagram can be directly
    constructed from @xmath . From @xmath alone it is not possible to
    construct a 2PI diagram. We can see however that every vertex in
    @xmath contains a condensate, and as we know, each condensate comes
    with a factor of @xmath (see equation ( 6.7 )). Therefore, to order
    @xmath we have to include second order contributions from @xmath
    which are given by the second diagram in figure 7.1 . The
    one-particle and two-particle irreducible effective action will be
    derived in section 9 . The 2PI effective action is a functional of
    the condensate @xmath as well as the full propagator @xmath . The
    stationarity equations @xmath and @xmath not only allow for a self
    consistent determination for the condensate @xmath but also of the
    mass parameter. This is important for the following reason (see also
    discussion in reference [ 50 ] ): consider the simplest case with no
    condensation (and no superflow). The dispersion relations ( 6.9 )
    then reduce to the simple form

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Condensation occurs for @xmath in which case @xmath acquires an
    unphysical negative value. A non-vanishing condensate @xmath leads
    to corrections proportional to @xmath in the propagator, see ( 6.8
    ). The resulting dispersions ( 6.9 ) are then positive for all
    three-momenta @xmath and can be used to calculate thermal integrals
    in the low-temperature approximation. However, as the condensate is
    expected to melt away at the critical temperature, this problem will
    indefinitely occur for sufficiently large temperatures if the mass
    remains fixed. Therefore, self-consistency equations for mass and
    condensate are required. Calculations for arbitrary temperatures are
    discussed in section 11 .

### 8 Zero temperature: Single fluid formalism

In a first step, the translation of field theory into hydrodynamics will
be carried out at tree-level, ignoring all quantum fluctuations. This
allows us to present the translation into hydrodynamic equations in the
simplest case, based on reference [ 85 ] . We begin with a discussion of
the conservation equations as well as the equations of motion and
solutions thereof.

#### 8.1 Equations of motion and conservation equations

The classical equations of motion for @xmath and @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The field-theoretic expressions for the conserved charge current and the
stress-energy tensor are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

For the stress-energy tensor, we have used the gravitational definition
by formally introducing a general metric @xmath which, after taking the
derivatives, we set to be the metric of flat Minkowski space. This
definition guarantees that @xmath is symmetric and conserved. Since
@xmath is also conserved, we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

which are the hydrodynamic equations. As we expect from Noether’s
theorem, current conservation is identical to the equation of motion for
@xmath . The reason is that @xmath only appears through its derivatives
in the Lagrangian, as it should be for the radial mode in the presence
of an exact U(1) symmetry.

As an ansatz for the solution of the equations of motion we may choose

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

In this ansatz, we assume @xmath and @xmath are each composed of a
static part plus small oscillations around it. The static part of the
solution is the superfluid mode, corresponding to an infinite and
uniformly flowing superfluid. The density and flow are specified by the
values of the components of @xmath , which are pure numbers, not
functions of @xmath , and are not constrained by the equation of motion.
The value of @xmath is determined by the boundary conditions, which
specify the topology of the field configuration, namely the number of
times the phase winds around as we traverse the space-time region in
which the superfluid resides ²⁶ ²⁶ 26 Usually, Bose-Einstein
condensation is introduced by separating the zero momentum mode in the
expansion of

@xmath

This case however corresponds to the separation of the @xmath mode
resulting in

@xmath

@xmath is given by @xmath from equation ( 8.8 ). . The oscillations
around the static solution yield two modes whose dispersion relations
@xmath are determined by the equations of motion. As expected, one of
the modes is the massless Goldstone mode, the other is a massive
“radial” mode (see also figure 6.3 ). The oscillatory modes can be
thermally populated to yield the normal fluid. The boundary conditions
place no constraint on the amplitudes of the oscillatory modes because
they are topologically trivial. In this section we will assume uniform
density and flow of the superfluid, but in general one could obtain a
space-time-dependent superfluid flow by giving nonzero classical
background values to the @xmath and @xmath . The normal fluid would then
consist of a thermal population on top of that background. We can use
the poles of the tree-level propagator ( 10.2 ) to determine the
dispersion relation of the oscillatory modes. This yields the same
result as solving the equations of motion ( 8.1 ), ( 8.2 ) with the
ansatz ( 8.6 ), ( 8.7 ). Oscillations in @xmath will also be relevant to
the calculation of the sound velocities. In fact, for low temperatures
we will demonstrate that the coefficient of the linear term in the
massless mode @xmath is nothing but the velocity of first sound. For
now, we set @xmath . In this case, @xmath , and we can write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Inserting this solution back into the Lagrangian gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is clear from the usual definition of the pressure in terms of the
partition function that, in our current tree-level treatment, this
Lagrangian is identical to the pressure. Bose-Einstein condensation
obviously appears for @xmath which is a first hint that @xmath plays the
role of a chemical potential. It is important to keep in mind that we
will keep the approximation of uniform density and flow of the
superfluid throughout the remainder of this work, including the finite
temperature calculations of sections 10 and 11 .

#### 8.2 Zero-temperature hydrodynamics: Landau‘s formalism

We now explore the connection between field-theoretic quantities and
hydrodynamics. We recall that the hydrodynamic expressions for current
and stress-energy tensor at zero temperature are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the velocity of the superfluid which fulfills @xmath .
To identify @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath we go to the superfluid rest
frame @xmath = (1,0,0,0), where there is no flow of charge, energy, or
momentum: @xmath . Then we have @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , so @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath are the charge density, energy density, and pressure
in the superfluid rest frame; the pressure is isotropic. (We will
discuss the superfluid density @xmath below). They can be expressed
covariantly via appropriate contractions,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

To relate these hydrodynamical quantities to the microscopic physics we
can use equations ( 8.3 ), ( 8.4 ). For @xmath and @xmath we obtain
immediately

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the superfluid 3-velocity with Lorentz factor @xmath .
This is precisely the factor multiplying @xmath when measured in the
normal-fluid rest frame (see table 1 in section 5.4 ). The velocity is
given by @xmath ²⁷ ²⁷ 27 The minus sign appears because the 3-velocity
@xmath corresponds to the spatial components of the contravariant
4-vector @xmath , while the operator @xmath corresponds to the spatial
components of the covariant 4-vector @xmath , i.e., @xmath . We have
thus recovered the expected irrotational flow of the superfluid. The
difference between expressions ( 8.13 ) and ( 5.27 ) is that we have
identified the scalar potential @xmath as the phase of the condensate.
For @xmath and @xmath we first use ( 8.12 ) and ( 8.4 ) to obtain partly
microscopic expressions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

From contracting the relation for @xmath in ( 8.13 ) with @xmath we know
that @xmath ; as a consequence, we obtain the expected relation @xmath .
We can now identify the physical meaning of @xmath : using the
zero-temperature thermodynamic relation in the superfluid rest frame
@xmath , we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

so @xmath is identified with @xmath the chemical potential in the
superfluid rest frame . Going back to the solution for the modulus
@xmath ( 8.8 ) we see that, as expected, Bose condensation only occurs
for @xmath . Using ( 8.9 ) and ( 8.14 ) we finally obtain fully
microscopic expressions for the energy density and the pressure,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath is the only mass scale in our Lagrangian. The trace of
the stress-energy tensor @xmath vanishes for @xmath . Finally, the
superfluid density @xmath is defined via the expansion in small
three-velocities of the momentum and energy densities

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

From these expansions we obtain its microscopic form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### 8.2.1 Generalized single fluid formalism

We can now repeat the above translation in the frame of the generalized
hydrodynamic formalism. Although this might seem to be an unnecessary
complication for the isotropic zero-temperature case, it is a useful
preparation for the nonzero temperature case. The basic variables are
the conserved current density @xmath and its conjugate momentum. We will
now confirm that this conjugate momentum is given by the gradient of the
phase @xmath . Recall that in the single fluid case the stress-energy
tensor is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the generalized pressure @xmath and the generalized energy density
is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the Legendre transform in the single fluid case where @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . By comparison with the expressions from section 8.2
, it is easy to see that in the single-fluid case @xmath and @xmath are
simply pressure and energy density in the fluid rest frame (see also
discussion in section 5 ), @xmath , @xmath . In the single fluid case,
the current is indeed proportional to the conjugate momentum with a
coefficient given by the underlying microscopic physics

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we can simply read off

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

In summary, it is important to keep in mind that the connection from
macroscopic to microscopic physics is made by identifying the conjugate
momentum @xmath as the four-gradient of the phase of the condensate . In
addition, in equations ( 8.13 ) -( 8.16 ) we express all thermodynamic
and hydrodynamic parameters of the Landau model in terms of field
theoretic variables while the microscopic physics enter the generalized
hydrodynamic formalism via the coefficient @xmath from equation ( 8.23
). In addition, from equation ( 8.13 ) and ( 8.15 ) we draw the
following important conclusions:

-   The rotation of the phase (at the bottom of the “Mexican hat”
    potential) generates the chemical potential of the superfluid.

-   The number of rotations per unit length determines the superfluid
    velocity.

-   @xmath represents the invariant expression for the chemical
    potential @xmath . In case @xmath this relation simplifies to @xmath
    . In case @xmath we have @xmath . Here we have indicated that @xmath
    alone is not an invariant and therefore changes its value to @xmath
    when measured from outside the superfluid rest frame. The Lorentz
    factor in @xmath compensates this change such that @xmath is indeed
    invariant.

##### 8.2.2 The non-relativistic limit

The relativistic two-fluid equations incorporate the correct
non-relativistic limit of section 2 (for a general discussion, see for
example [ 67 ] ). In this section we investigate this limit in the
single fluid case at zero temperature. According to Landau and Lifschitz
[ 87 ] we need to write the relativistic energy density as the sum of
the rest energy of particles that constitute the fluid and the
non-relativistic energy density @xmath . Here @xmath is the particle
number per volume in the rest frame of the fluid. To transform into the
laboratory frame (i.e. to eliminate @xmath in favor of @xmath ), we
write the energy density as ²⁸ ²⁸ 28 For notational consistency, we
still omit factors of @xmath which are usually taken into account in the
non-relativistic literature. :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the single fluid case, the components of @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, we have inserted the @xmath factor contained in definition of
@xmath . Expanding for small velocities and inserting @xmath from
equation ( 8.24 ), @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, we have used that the non-relativistic pressure and energy density
are much smaller than the rest energy: @xmath . After subtraction of the
rest energy @xmath , we obtain the expected result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next, we expand @xmath up to the third order in @xmath resulting in

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where again @xmath has been used. The result reads:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the non-relativistic case momentum density @xmath and energy flux
@xmath are not the same. To obtain @xmath , we need to subtract the term
@xmath coming from the rest energy first and obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Analogously we obtain the spatial components:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Identical results can be obtained by starting right away from a
non-relativistic Lagrangian and repeating the analysis of section 8.2 .
The @xmath theory in the non-relativistic limit is discussed for example
in [ 88 ] .

### 9 The 1PI and 2PI effective action

In this section, we review the one-particle irreducible (1PI) and
two-particle irreducible (2PI) formalism which we shall apply in the
finite temperature calculations. Both formalisms are non-perturbative in
the sense that the coupling constant is present to all orders and a
certain class of diagrams is resummed. We have discussed in section 7
that such a non-perturbative and self-consistent formulation is
necessary to extend our calculations to finite temperatures. We can
restrict the discussion in this chapter to the zero temperature case. In
the imaginary time formalism, the introduction of finite temperature
amounts to a “straightforward” modification of the results which we will
obtain in the following. As a preparation, it is necessary to discuss
the difference between full, connected and 1PI diagrams.

#### 9.1 Full, connected and one-particle irreducible Green‘s functions.

In what follows, bare propagators are represented by @xmath ,
interaction vertices by @xmath and sources (sinks) by @xmath . The
abstract index @xmath represents continuous as well as discrete
parameters such as space-time @xmath or the internal @xmath internal
space spanned by the fields @xmath and @xmath . We consider only the
bosonic case where the ordering of @xmath is irrelevant. For the purpose
of introducing the 1PI and 2 PI formalism, we shall denote a bosonic
scalar quantum field by @xmath and a corresponding classical field by
@xmath . Later, when we perform actual calculations, we will denote the
classical field simply by @xmath (we have already done so in section 6.2
).

Physical processes, algebraically expressed in terms of Green‘s
functions, can be graphically illustrated by Feynman diagrams. The full
n-point Green‘s function defined as the time-ordered vacuum expectation
value of Heisenberg field operators @xmath corresponds to an infinite
sum of Feynman diagrams which take into account all possible
interactions as we discuss in figure 9.1 . The Dyson-Schwinger equation
(DSE) represents a systematic way to generate all these diagrams.

One can see right away that the DSE is self-consistent and it is exact
only if all diagrams can be resummed (which is practically never the
case). In principle, the DSE can be used to reproduce the perturbative
expansion of a given theory to arbitrary order by iteration (see for
example [ 89 ] ). We define the functional @xmath from which we can
generate all vacuum Green´s functions for a process with @xmath
different sources. (Since @xmath depends on continuous as well as
discrete parameters, it is a functional.) Obviously, we can obtain the
full N point Green‘s functions by acting on @xmath with @xmath
(functional) derivatives:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

This allows us to express the DSE as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Collecting bare (inverse) propagators and vertices in the definition of
the action of the field @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and using:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

we can elegantly write the DSE for any full N-point functions as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

This equation is the quantum version of the classical equation of motion
which is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

As an example, we perform one iteration of the DSE for a full
three-point function in figure 9.2 . As we can see, the result is a
factorization into mutually connected and disconnected diagrams which
represents a new way of decomposing all Feynman diagrams.

This factorization is graphically illustrated in figure 9.3 . Formally,
one can write this factorization for an arbitrary N-point function as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , the generating functional of all connected Green‘s
functions @xmath , is defined in exactly the same way as @xmath (with
the index @xmath starting from 1 as there is at least once source
attached to a connected Green‘s function):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The differential equation ( 9.7 ) relating @xmath and @xmath can easily
be solved resulting in

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using this relation, one can easily construct the DSE in terms of
connected diagrams from ( 9.5 ). Taking into account the chain rule

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we find the following elegant formulation of the DSE in terms of
connected Green´s functions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, we can further decompose connected Green‘s functions in terms
of one-particle irreducible (1PI) ones. By definition, 1PI Green‘s
function remains connected even if one internal line is cut. If one
follows an external leg into a connected Green‘s function one inevitably
ends up on a 1PI diagram which again has zero, one or more external legs
which lead to another connected part and whose cutting would disconnect
the diagram (at tree level, one does not end up at a 1PI diagram at
all). Iteration leads to yet another decomposition in terms of 1PI
diagrams. This is summarized in figure 9.4 .

The 1PI Green‘s functions can be viewed as the fundamental building
blocks of any Feynman diagram. The coefficients in this expansion are
called proper self energy @xmath (connecting two external legs) and
proper vertices @xmath (connecting three or more external legs). We
introduce the field @xmath , a connected Green‘s function with one
external leg attached. This object is precisely the classical field

defined as the vacuum expectation value of the quantum field @xmath in
the presence of an external source

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Algebraically, we can write the decomposition displayed in figure 9.4 as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, we have defined the proper self energy as @xmath . The reason for
this definition is that we want to reformulate equation ( 9.12 ) such
that the left side is zero:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again we introduce the corresponding generating functional:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the argument of @xmath denotes a vector of the classical fields
@xmath . Acting with @xmath on @xmath generates vertices of 1PI diagrams
- unlike full or connected Green‘s functions, 1PI Green‘s functions do
not have propagators attached on their external legs. With these
preparations, we can reformulate equation ( 9.13 ) in the following way

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equations ( 9.15 ) reveal the true nature of the relationship between
connected and 1PI green functions: @xmath and @xmath are connected by a
Legendre transform

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation summarizes that @xmath is independent of @xmath and @xmath
is independent of @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Once again, we can construct the DSE in terms of 1PI diagrams. To do so,
we eliminate @xmath derivatives

in favor derivatives of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

and further use @xmath and @xmath to exchange @xmath with @xmath in the
DSE ( 9.5 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The 1PI DSE equation ( 9.15 ) still plays the role of a quantum analog
to the classical equation of motion. Motivated by equation ( 9.19 ),
@xmath is called effective action . To obtain the classical equation of
motion from the 1PI quantum DSE ( 9.19 ), we can simply neglect the
contribution coming from @xmath . The role of @xmath is to create loops.
²⁹ ²⁹ 29 The classical DSE can be obtained from ( 9.19 ) by neglecting
the contribution coming from @xmath . It is a tree expansion of the form

@xmath

We can interpret the right hand side diagramatically: [] Comparing this
to the 1PI expansion displayed in figure 9.4 , we can see that the
vertices @xmath of the tree expansion have been replaced by 1PI
diagrams. In other words in the 1PI formalism, the quantum loop
corrections to the classical expansion are embodied in the proper
vertices @xmath , i.e. they sit in the spot of the classical vertices.

In summary, we can take the generating functional @xmath of full Green‘s
functions, replace @xmath with @xmath and and instead of evaluating the
full path integral substitute the classical approximation @xmath in the
integrand and obtain an exact result.

Spontaneous symmetry breaking manifests itself in the 1PI formalism by a
nonzero vacuum expectation value of @xmath , even though the source J is
set to zero

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 9.2 1PI effective action in the one loop approximation

In order to obtain the one loop approximation for the effective action
for a complex scalar field @xmath we introduce the path integral
representation for the generating functional of connected Green‘s
functions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next, we perform the Legendre transform to obtain the 1PI effective
action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

and expand the action @xmath around the classical solution which is the
main contribution to the path integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

This amounts to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting the result in the exponent of ( 9.22 ) and performing the
Gaussian integral ³⁰ ³⁰ 30 The linear shift in @xmath doesn’t affect the
integration measure. yields

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where has been used. This is the one loop effective action which we
shall use (within certain approximations) in section 10.1 . The term
proportional to the quadratic fluctuations @xmath is the propagator, see
for example ( 6.8 ). In summary, the Legendre transform has introduced
new vertices to our theory. To check that the diagrammatic expansion of
@xmath is indeed given by all one loop diagrams of these vertices, we
separate contributions from the condensate which are resummed to all
orders in @xmath in ( 9.25 ), from the free propagator in absence of a
condensate @xmath , @xmath where @xmath is matrix of the dimension of
the internal space ³¹ ³¹ 31 Comparing to our case of a complex scalar
filed, @xmath and @xmath are given by

@xmath

The situation will be slightly more complicated once we treat modulus
and phase of the condensate separately (see also ( 7 )) as @xmath
becomes anisotropic. .

Then the logarithmic term is decomposed as follows

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can now expand the second term in a Taylor series and obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Diagrammatically, this series corresponds to a one loop diagram with 2,
4, 6.. classical fields (condensates) attached:

[]

As expected, no external legs are connected to these 1PI diagrams. A
more physical way to say this, is that external legs would introduce a
momentum dependence of @xmath . We will later identify this functional
with the pressure, which, being a thermodynamic quantity, must not
depend on external momenta.

#### 9.3 Two-particle irreducible formalism

The construction of the 2PI effective action is a straightforward
generalization of the 1PI case. As a starting point we use the
generating functional of connected Green‘s function and introduce two
source terms, one for the quantum field @xmath and one for the quantum
propagator @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The classical field and two point function (propagator) are obtained in
the usual way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

and therefore variation with respect to the source @xmath results in

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Before we turn to the construction of the 2PI effective action, we
remark that we can easily construct the 1PI effective action of the
functional @xmath ( 9.26 ). The quadratic term including @xmath can
formally be treated as an additional “mass” term and the (single)
Legendre transform can be directly applied:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

In analogy to the 1PI effective action, we define now the 2PI effective
action by a double Legendre Transform with respect to @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, the equations of motion for the fields @xmath and @xmath
are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Using equation ( 9.27 ) and the 2PI effective action ( 9.29 ), it is
again easy to show that @xmath and @xmath . The physically interesting
case is again given by vanishing sources in which case the equations of
motions turn into

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

with non-vanishing expectation values @xmath and @xmath . What is
remarkable about the stationary equations ( 9.32 ), is that they already
include the DSE for the propagator on the classical level. We shall
exploit this fact extensively in section 11 . In particular cases such
as BCS theory, spontaneous symmetry breaking does not result in a vacuum
expectation value of the field, but in a vacuum expectation value of the
two point function. The 2PI formalism is therefore particularly well
suited to describe such systems. In the path-integral representation,
the 2PI generating functional is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can again study the loop expansion systematically. To leading order,
we can use the one loop approximation derived in the last section to
evaluate the 1PI effective action defined by ( 9.28 ) (i.e. we use the
generating functional @xmath from equation ( 9.26 ) but perform only a
single Legendre transform with respect to @xmath ). Remember that we can
absorb the term proportional to @xmath as an additional mass term into
the propagator of the action @xmath . Now all we have to do is to
replace @xmath by @xmath and the free propagator in the background of
the classical field @xmath by @xmath in the expansion ( 9.23 ). The
result reads:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From the dual Legendre transform ( 9.29 ) we can obtain the one loop
approximation of the 2PI functional:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To reformulate this equation in a more useful way, we need to eliminate
the remaining source @xmath in favor of the field @xmath . This can be
achieved with the aid of @xmath from which we obtain (at lowest loop
order) @xmath and therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To go beyond the one loop approximation, we introduce the potential
@xmath which includes 2PI diagrams with at least two loops built from
the propagator @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

We will use the two-loop Hartree approximation of this object as will be
explained in section 11 .

### 10 Two-fluid formalism in the low-temperature approximation

#### 10.1 Effective action and dispersion relations.

We the aid of the non-perturbative 1PI and 2PI formalisms which we have
reviewed in the last section, we can now continue our derivation of the
two-fluid model at finite temperature. The nonzero-temperature
calculation is complicated because we are interested in the situation of
a nonzero (homogeneous) superflow; this renders the system and in
particular the dispersions of the Goldstone mode anisotropic. In this
part, we are mostly interested in analytical results to discuss the
translation to hydrodynamics thoroughly. Since we have argued in section
7 that a calculation for arbitrary temperatures requires the more
complicated 2PI formalism in which results are obtained purely
numerically, we shall for the moment restrict ourselves to small
temperatures. In particular this means that we shall not determine the
condensate self-consistently by solving @xmath , and rather work with
its zero-temperature value obtained from @xmath . Starting from the full
self-consistent formalism, one can show that the temperature-dependence
of the condensate includes an additional power of the coupling constant
compared to the terms we are keeping. We are thus working in the
low-temperature, weak-coupling approximation. Note however that the
melting of the condensate, as well as other contributions from the full
action may induce terms proportional to @xmath in the pressure, while we
shall only keep terms proportional to @xmath and higher order in @xmath
. This approximation is only consistent if @xmath , i.e., strictly
speaking, our approximation leaves a “gap” between @xmath and the small
temperatures we are discussing, although this gap can be made
arbitrarily small by choosing the coupling constant @xmath sufficiently
small.

Within this approximation, we can work with the simple 1PI effective
action in the one-loop approximation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the tree-level potential @xmath from equation ( 8.9 ) and the
inverse tree-level propagator in momentum space @xmath which can be read
off from the terms quadratic in the fluctuations in equation ( 7 ). The
trace is taken over the @xmath space of the two real degrees of freedom
of the complex scalar field, and the sum is taken over four-momenta
@xmath , @xmath with the bosonic Matsubara frequencies @xmath . The sum
over three-momenta, here written for a finite volume @xmath and thus
over discrete momenta, becomes an integral in the thermodynamic limit.
At the stationary point, i.e., with equation ( 8.8 ), we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . In all our microscopic calculations
we evaluate thermal fluctuations in the background of a uniform
superflow, so we take @xmath (and hence @xmath ) to be space-time
independent ³² ³² 32 Observe that the relation between @xmath with and
without superflow is given by a simple boost. To see this, set @xmath in
( 10.2 ) and then boost every wave vector @xmath by an arbitrary
velocity @xmath :

@xmath

This results in

@xmath

Inserting the microscopic expressions @xmath and @xmath we arrive
precisely at ( 10.2 ). .

Since we neglect the melting of the condensate, we have inserted the
zero-temperature solution into the propagator. In order to compute the
effective action, one may employ partial integration with respect to the
@xmath integral. The effective action density then becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (10.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we have used the explicit form of the tree-level propagator and
have performed the @xmath trace. We have also inserted the zero
temperature solution for @xmath into the potential @xmath . The
evaluation of the Matsubara sum and the simplification of the result are
explained in detail in appendix A . Neglecting the thermal contribution
of the massive mode, we can write the result as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the numerator in the momentum sum of equation (
10.3 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.5)
  -- -------- -- --------

and where @xmath are complicated excitation energies whose
small-momentum approximations are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here we have abbreviated

  -- -- -- --------
           (10.8)
  -- -- -- --------

with @xmath being the angle between @xmath and @xmath . The physically
relevant low-energy excitation is @xmath . This is the Goldstone mode
which, as equation ( 10.6 ) confirms, is massless and linear in the
momentum for small momenta, as it should be. The coefficient in front of
the linear term is related to the speed of (first) sound as we explain
in part III. For the case without superflow we have @xmath , and thus,
in the limit @xmath , we recover the well-known value of @xmath . The
superflow introduces an angular dependence @xmath into the Goldstone
dispersion and thus also into the sound velocity. This angular-dependent
function also shows that, in contrast to the zero-temperature case, we
cannot write the result in a covariant way since the temporal and
spatial components of @xmath appear separately. Another observation is
the complicated factor in the integrand of equation ( 10.4 ). This
factor indicates a mixing between the original modes of the complex
field (between particles and antiparticles, essentially) due to
condensation. Such a factor appears also, although considerably simpler,
for the case without superflow. It is analogous to a Bogoliubov
coefficient in the case of Cooper pairing which, in that case, accounts
for the mixing between fermions and fermion-holes. We shall now
calculate the field theoretic representation of the stress-energy tensor
and the Noether current.

#### 10.2 Stress-energy tensor and current

As we have emphasized, stress-energy tensor and charge-current are
particularly important in our derivation of the two-fluid model as we
posses a precise recipe how to construct them from field theory:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.9)
  -- -------- -- --------

The angular brackets denote the expectation value of an operator in the
finite-temperature ensemble of the microscopic theory,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.10)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with the partition function @xmath defined so that @xmath . The
calculation of the functional integral is lengthy and carried out in
appendix B . The results reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In the case of the stress-energy tensor, one can check explicitly that
the sum over the Matsubara frequencies leads to an infinite result. A
renormalization is thus required. As a renormalization condition, we
require for the case without superflow the obvious interpretation of the
diagonal components @xmath in terms of the energy density @xmath and the
pressure @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.13)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then, switching on a nonzero superflow, does not yield any additional
divergences. These conditions can be implemented on a very general
level, without explicit evaluation of the stress-energy tensor. We do so
in detail in appendix C . The calculation in this appendix also leads to
a very useful formulation of the effective action, the stress-energy
tensor, and the current, which will later facilitate the interpretation
in terms of the hydrodynamic two-fluid picture. We define

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.14)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.15)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the zero-temperature discussion, we have related the tree-level
potential @xmath to the generalized pressure @xmath . The notation of
equation ( 10.14 ) anticipates that we can identify the effective action
@xmath with the generalized pressure at finite temperature. In section
10.3 , we will see that this assumption is justified. The notations
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath are chosen in analogy to @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , which we introduced in section 5.1 (we already know the zero
temperature contribution to the coefficient @xmath from the single-fluid
treatment of section 8.2.1 ). With the help of these quantities we can
rewrite the effective action as (see appendix C )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.16)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have abbreviated @xmath , while the renormalized stress-energy
tensor and the current become

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.17)
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

These expressions are useful because, firstly, they are written in a
covariant way and, secondly, they anticipate the two-fluid formulation
which as we know is constructed from two basic four-vectors. We have
already identified the conjugate momentum to @xmath with @xmath ; the
other conjugate momentum can of course not be identified with @xmath ,
which is a purely microscopic quantity, but we shall see that this
formulation is close enough to the two-fluid formulation that it can
easily be cast in a more “macroscopic” form. At the moment, the
introduction of the four-vector @xmath is for notational purposes only,
introduced to write the above equations in terms of four-vectors. We
will see however that it really corresponds to the four-velocity of the
normal fluid introduced in section 5.2 .

It is instructive to compute the trace of the stress-energy tensor. With
the help of equation ( C.3 ) we immediately find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.19)
  -- -------- -- ---------

i.e., the trace vanishes when we set @xmath , as expected.

#### 10.3 The two-fluid formalism from field theory

So far we have related the zero-temperature limit of the microscopic
theory to hydrodynamics where we identified @xmath as the conjugate
momentum to @xmath . Furthermore, we have carefully prepared field
theoretic results at finite temperature, in particular the conserved
current @xmath and the stress energy tensor @xmath . With these results
we can continue to apply the machinery of the two-fluid formalism to
successively identify all remaining hydrodynamic and thermodynamic
quantities in terms of field theoretic variables. Our covariant
formulation from section 10.2 before performing the Matsubara sum will
turn out to be very useful for this purpose.

Before we can proceed with this program, we have to clarify the issue of
frame dependence of the microscopic calculations at finite temperature
once and for all. Motivated by the discussion of section 5.3 , it seems
reasonable to assume that the microscopic calculation is performed in
the normal-fluid rest frame (or the rest frame of the heat bath) defined
by @xmath . We shall now explicitly demonstrate that this is indeed
consistent with the results we obtained in the last section and identify
the thermodynamic parameters @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in this frame.
As a first step, we may use Landau‘s definition of the charge current
from equation ( 5.25 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and evaluate it the normal-fluid rest frame defined by @xmath . From the
temporal components of @xmath we know that in the normal-fluid rest
frame the total number density is given by @xmath where @xmath plays the
role of a Lorentz factor (see also the discussion of table 1). While
@xmath is the invariant expression of the chemical potential, @xmath
clearly plays the role of the chemical potential in the normal-fluid
rest frame. The superfluid velocity measured in the normal-fluid rest
frame is given by @xmath . We could have introduced the normal-fluid
rest frame already in the discussion of the zero temperature results in
section 8.2 . To avoid confusion, we have simply distinguished between
results obtained in the superfluid rest frame ( @xmath ) and outside the
superfluid rest frame ( @xmath ). From the finite temperature point of
view, measurements from outside the superfluid rest frame correspond to
measurements in the normal-fluid rest frame. In case of @xmath , both
fluids share a common rest frame and we have @xmath . We shall from now
on denote the chemical potential in the normal-fluid rest frame by
@xmath rather than @xmath (we have used the latter notation in ( 5.36 )
for the purpose of introducing both rest frames).

As a side remark, observe that we can also evaluate the spatial
components of @xmath in the normal-fluid rest frame, contract the
equation with @xmath and solve for @xmath . This yields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.20)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The right-hand side is now purely defined in terms of the
field-theoretic quantities (the spatial components of the Noether
current and the gradients of the phase @xmath ). We will however use a
more systematic way to obtain the fluid densities from @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath in section 10.4.1 .

##### 10.3.1 Generalized thermodynamics from field theory

Now that we have obtained chemical potential @xmath and the velocity of
the superflow @xmath in the normal-fluid rest frame, we continue with
the discussion of the generalized pressure @xmath and the generalized
thermodynamic relation which in addition to @xmath involves the
conjugate momentum @xmath . With the stress-energy tensor ( 5.18 ) and
using @xmath we can write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.21)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Let us now compute the right-hand side with the microscopic expression
for @xmath . With @xmath and @xmath from equations ( 8.4 ), ( 8.3 ) we
compute

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.22)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here we have used @xmath , while equation ( 10.21 ) is a general
relation for arbitrary four-velocities @xmath . The tensor @xmath
appearing in equation ( 10.21 ) can be interpreted as a projector onto
the 4-dimensional hypersurface orthogonal to @xmath . It is important to
keep in mind that we cannot simply promote @xmath to an arbitrary
four-velocity in the microscopic calculation. It would occur
additionally in different places in the calculation, which we cannot
identify in our present treatment because the spatial components of
@xmath have been projected out in our finite temperature calculation. In
a manner of speaking, we are “stuck” in the normal-fluid rest frame.
But, of course, since @xmath is a Lorentz scalar, the normal-fluid rest
frame is as good as any other frame to compute @xmath . By comparing
with equation ( 10.16 ) we see that the right-hand side of equation (
10.22 ) is exactly ( @xmath times) the effective action. Therefore, we
have obtained the important result,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.23)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This relation is somewhat expected since we already know that, at zero
temperature (and at tree-level), @xmath corresponds to the Lagrangian,
which in this case gives the microscopic pressure. At nonzero
temperature (without superflow), the effective action gives the
(isotropic) pressure. Therefore, the relation ( 10.23 ) is a natural
generalization to the anisotropic case with a nonzero superflow. This
motivates our choice of notation in equation ( 10.14 ) because now we
have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.24)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Next, let us discuss the generalized thermodynamic relation @xmath . In
the normal-fluid rest frame, @xmath and thus @xmath , which is the
product of entropy and temperature, measured in this particular frame.
To confirm this microscopically, we use the thermodynamical definition
of the entropy density,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.25)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath and @xmath defined in equation ( 10.15 ). Note that the
first two terms ( @xmath and 2) come from the explicit @xmath
-dependence in the prefactor @xmath and in the @xmath within the
logarithm. On the other hand, we can compute @xmath via the generalized
thermodynamic relation. We find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (10.26)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where we have used @xmath , the trace of the stress-energy tensor (
10.19 ), the effective action (which is @xmath ) ( 10.16 ), and the
current ( 10.18 ). With the help of the identity ( C.3 ) we see that
this is indeed the same as @xmath times the entropy from equation (
10.25 ). In other words, the microscopic temperature @xmath can be
identified with generalized quantity @xmath in the normal-fluid rest
frame. In this frame, we have now identified all terms in the
generalized thermodynamic relation. By now, we have obtained the means
to correctly interpret microscopic results in the frame of the two-fluid
model. We shall analyze the parameters of this model now in a
low-temperature approximation.

#### 10.4 Explicit results in the low-temperature approximation

We want to compute the effective action, the components of the
stress-energy tensor, and the current for small temperatures explicitly.
To this end, we have to approximate momentum sums of the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.27)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where, for the case of the effective action, @xmath is given by equation
( 10.5 ), and for the stress-energy tensor and the current we need to
replace @xmath by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

which can be read off from equations ( 10.17 ), ( 10.18 ). For all three
cases, we can write the result of the Matsubara sum in the form ( 10.4
). Then, we write @xmath with the Bose distribution function @xmath .
The integral over the first term is, in the present approximation,
temperature independent. It is divergent and has to be renormalized by
subtracting the vacuum contribution. After doing so, a finite term
remains which however is suppressed by one power of @xmath compared to
the zero-temperature term @xmath we have already computed, for instance
in equation ( 10.4 ). We shall thus neglect this contribution and only
keep the thermal contribution, i.e., the integral over the second term
that contains the Bose function. This contribution is finite and
unaffected by the renormalization. ³³ ³³ 33 The subleading
zero-temperature contribution we are neglecting here gives rise to the
difference between the superfluid density and the condensate density .
At zero temperature, the charge density is always identical to the
superfluid density, @xmath , while the condensate density, defined as
@xmath with the modulus of the condensate @xmath , might be smaller. In
our leading-order approximation, condensate and superfluid densities are
identical. We explain the small-temperature expansion in detail in
appendix D . Before we come to the main results, let us discuss the
simpler example without superflow, @xmath and use @xmath . In the
absence of a superflow, the dispersions reduce to @xmath , @xmath with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.30)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is equivalent to ( 6.9 ) after the condensate from equation ( 6.7
) has been inserted. As usual, @xmath is the Goldstone mode and @xmath
the massive mode. This yields the small-temperature result for the
pressure to order @xmath (see also appendix F.3 for the calculation with
finite mass parameter @xmath )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.31)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The @xmath term has two interesting properties related to the resulting
charge density, which is obtained by taking the derivative with respect
to @xmath . Firstly, if we set @xmath , the @xmath -dependence drops
out, such that there is no @xmath contribution to the charge density in
this case. Secondly, in the presence of a finite @xmath , one finds that
the @xmath contribution to the charge density is negative, i.e., for
small temperatures the density decreases with temperature. (The second
derivative @xmath is positive, i.e., the system is thermodynamically
stable.) The @xmath term has neither of these properties, it contributes
to the charge density even for @xmath and gives rise to a positive
@xmath term in the density.

The case with superflow is of course more complicated. In particular,
the momentum integration now involves a nontrivial angular integral over
the angle between the momentum and @xmath . Nevertheless, it turns out
that this angular integral can be performed analytically for all cases
we consider. For brevity, we set @xmath in the following. Then, we
obtain for the effective action density to order @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.32)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Obviously, for @xmath we recover the @xmath limit of equation ( 10.31 ).
Note that the result is valid to all orders in the superfluid velocity.
We have not applied any expansion in @xmath . Analogously, we compute
the components of the stress-energy tensor and the current. For the
spatial components of the stress-energy tensor we use

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The results are collected in table 2. All expressions in this table are
written in terms of quantities measured in the normal-fluid rest frame.
At zero temperature it is very natural to write them in terms of the
Lorentz scalar @xmath , for instance @xmath . As expected, such a
formulation is less obvious for the nonzero temperature terms. Since the
microscopic calculation has a preferred rest frame where the
thermodynamic variables @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are measured, the
velocity-dependence shown here is a mixture of trivial Lorentz boosts
and complicated effects of the superflow on the collective excitations
(which in turn can be interpreted as boosts of the microscopic vector
@xmath , see footnote below equation ( 10.2 ) ).

We may compare the results presented in table 2 with the frame dependent
quantities listed in table 1. One can for instance check from the
explicit results that the difference between longitudinal and transverse
pressure is indeed @xmath , and that the momentum density @xmath is
indeed @xmath times the current @xmath . More importantly, we see that
@xmath , which, since @xmath , confirms that the generalized pressure
can be identified with the effective action @xmath .

With the results of @xmath in hand, we may also ask for the superfluid
density @xmath . This energy density is defined in the low-velocity
limit, in generalization of the mass densities in the non-relativistic
framework (and in contrast to @xmath , @xmath which we calculate in the
next section and which are number densities). With @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(Alternatively, we can write @xmath .) This expression for the
superfluid density is obviously in agreement with the zero-temperature
result ( 8.18 ). The superfluid density appears also in the energy
density as part of the kinetic energy, @xmath .

##### 10.4.1 Entrainment and superfluid density from field theory

The independent degrees of freedom of our microscopic calculation are
the chemical potential @xmath , the temperature @xmath , and the
superfluid three-velocity @xmath , all measured in the normal-fluid rest
frame, where the entropy current vanishes by definition, @xmath . We
have thus given 8 independent components out of the 16 components of the
4 four-vectors @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath of the two-fluid
formalism. The other 8 components are @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . For
the Noether current @xmath and the entropy @xmath we have
field-theoretic and thermodynamic definitions respectively. It remains
to compute the spatial components of the thermal four-vector @xmath .
Additionally, we have to compute the coefficients @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . They are defined as the derivatives of @xmath with respect to
the Lorentz scalars @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . However, this is not
the form in which our @xmath is given. Therefore, we need to find a
different way to compute these coefficients. This can be done with the
help of equations ( 5.8 ) and ( 5.9 ). First, we solve the spatial part
of equation ( 5.8 ) for @xmath and insert the result into the spatial
part of equation ( 5.9 ). Together with the temporal components, this
yields three equations for the three variables @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, whose solutions are listed in table 3, where, for completeness, we
also give the coefficients @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , which are obtained
from the inverse of equation ( 5.11 ). With these results we immediately
find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.35)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since all results are expressed in terms of quantities accessible from
our microscopic calculation, we can for instance compute (for @xmath and
in the low-temperature limit)

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We see that the coefficients @xmath and @xmath vanish at @xmath . This
is in accordance to our zero-temperature discussion, where only @xmath
was nonzero. The connection between the coefficients @xmath , @xmath and
the number densities @xmath , @xmath is given in equation ( 5.31 ). We
can insert @xmath and @xmath as functions of @xmath , @xmath into the
temporal component of equation ( 5.6 ) to get also @xmath as a function
of @xmath , @xmath . The result is the useful translation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.39)
  -- -------- -- ---------

(To avoid confusion: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are quantities
measured in the normal frame, while @xmath is the superfluid density
measured in the superfluid frame. Remember that the superfluid density
measured in the normal frame is @xmath .) As a check, we see that @xmath
given in table 3 is indeed the same as @xmath with @xmath calculated
from equation ( 10.20 ). It is now of course straightforward to also
express @xmath , @xmath , @xmath in terms of @xmath and @xmath . In the
small-temperature approximation, the superfluid and normal number
densities, measured in the normal-fluid rest frame, become

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.40)
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.41)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

One can check that the sum of both densities gives the total charge
density @xmath from table 2. As expected, the normal density vanishes
for @xmath and begins to increase with increasing temperature, while the
superfluid density decreases. In the more complete treatment of section
11 , we expect the superfluid density to vanish at the critical
temperature because the condensate melts. Remember that this melting is,
in our one-loop effective action, a higher-order effect in the coupling
constant, which we have neglected. The decrease of @xmath is therefore
only due to the interaction between the two fluids. As an aside, note
that for @xmath the @xmath contributions in superfluid and normal
densities cancel each other exactly. We have made this observation
already below equation ( 10.31 ) where we have seen that in the @xmath
limit there is no @xmath contribution to the density.

Finally, we may express the generalized pressure @xmath in terms of
Lorentz scalars. This reformulation is instructive because it gives
@xmath in the form that is usually assumed in the two-fluid formalism.

Our quantities in the normal-fluid rest frame @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
are translated into the relevant Lorentz scalars @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath via

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10.44)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We solve these equations for @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath and insert the
result into the effective action. Then, up to fourth order in the
temperature we can write the generalized pressure as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.45)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The term in the square brackets can be written as @xmath with the “sonic
metric” @xmath , see equation (8.9) of reference [ 83 ] . In other
words, the Lorentz invariant @xmath term of the pressure in the presence
of a superflow is obtained by replacing @xmath in the @xmath term of the
pressure in the absence of a superflow. In principle, we can use the
higher order terms in equation ( 10.4.1 - 10.44 ) to write the @xmath
contribution in terms of Lorentz scalars. However, we have not found a
compact way of writing this contribution. But, we have checked that it
is not simply given by the same replacement as for the @xmath term. This
is no surprise since the sonic metric is constructed solely for systems
for a Goldstone mode with linear dispersion. The @xmath term however,
knows about the cubic term in the dispersion.

#### 10.5 Conclusion

We have discussed the dissipationless hydrodynamics of a relativistic
superfluid, starting from a complex scalar field. Our main goal has been
to relate the field theory with the covariant two-fluid framework of
superfluidity. To achieve these goals analytically, we have so far
restricted our calculations to the limit of small temperatures. The
results from these studies and the approximations necessary to obtain
them shall now be summarized.

1.   Microscopic calculation. We have started from Bose-Einstein
    condensation in a @xmath theory. The condensate has been assumed to
    be static and homogeneous (which corresponds to the simple
    hydrodynamic scenario of a static, homogeneous superflow). A crucial
    role is played by the phase of the condensate. While small
    oscillations of the phase correspond to the excitations of the
    Goldstone mode, rotations of the phase around the full @xmath circle
    give rise to a chemical potential (speed of the rotation) and a
    superfluid three-velocity (number of rotations per unit length). In
    the presence of a non-zero superflow, the excitations of the
    Goldstone mode become anisotropic, and we have computed the
    resulting components of the conserved current and stress-energy
    tensor for nonzero temperatures. We have restricted ourselves to a
    weak-coupling, low-temperature approximation, including terms up to
    sixth order in the temperature. This has allowed us to present the
    microscopic results in an analytical form.

2.   The two-fluid formalism. In the relativistic two-fluid formalism,
    the basic variables are the charge current and the entropy current.
    In the dissipationless case, both are conserved. For both currents,
    we can define conjugate momenta. Now, if the two fluids are
    interacting with each other, neither of the currents is
    (four-)parallel to its own momentum, but also receives a
    contribution from the other momentum. This contribution is called
    entrainment, and it must be computed from an underlying microscopic
    theory. This formalism was explained in detail in sections 5 and 5.2
    where different formulations based on “mixed” and “pure” variable
    sets where described and related to each other. For instance, the
    entrainment coefficient (and related coefficients) can be expressed
    in terms of the superfluid and normal-fluid charge densities @xmath
    and @xmath (whose corresponding superfluid and normal-fluid
    four-currents are, even in the dissipationless case, not separately
    conserved).

3.   Relationship between them . There are several concepts and
    quantities in the two-fluid formalism that are usually not used in
    field theory, such as the generalized pressure that depends on
    Lorentz scalars. Therefore, one important aspect of this work has
    been a translation of these quantities into field-theoretic
    language. For instance, we have proven that, once we assume that the
    microscopic calculation is performed in the rest frame of the normal
    fluid, it follows that the generalized pressure is given by the
    effective action. We have also expressed the coefficients that
    relate the currents with the conjugate momenta in terms of
    quantities that are well defined in field theory, namely the
    space-time derivative of the phase of the condensate, the components
    of the Noether current, and the entropy. As a result, we have been
    able to compute these coefficients explicitly as a function of
    temperature, chemical potential, and superfluid velocity. Certain
    combinations of these coefficients yield @xmath and @xmath . Our
    calculation shows for instance that @xmath is not simply given by
    the condensate density: even though we have neglected the
    temperature dependence of the condensate, @xmath depends on
    temperature. It also confirms that @xmath is not identical to the
    phonon number, as one might naively expect; while the phonon number
    goes like @xmath for small temperatures (see for instance [ 90 ] ),
    @xmath .

### 11 The two fluid model at arbitrary temperatures

We will now go beyond the low-temperature approximation (i.e. extend
calculations up to the critical temperature), and go beyond the
weak-coupling limit by resumming certain contributions to all orders in
the coupling constant. We still neglect dissipation and keep the
superflow uniform in time and space. In the extension to high
temperatures we have to make use of the more elaborate 2-particle
irreducible (2PI) formalism [ 91 , 92 , 93 ] (also called
Cornwall-Jackiw-Tomboulis (CJT) formalism or @xmath -derivable
approximation scheme) which we have introduced in section 9.3 . We will
use this formalism in the Hartree approximation at two-loop level. We
have seen that this formalism is particularly well suited to systems
with spontaneously broken symmetries. It has been used previously, among
many other applications, to describe meson condensation in the CFL phase
[ 94 , 50 , 95 ] , but without including the effects of a superflow.
This is the first time that a superflow has been implemented in this
formalism. The extension to all temperatures below the critical
temperature for superfluidity is relevant in the context of compact
stars because temperatures in the star may well be of the order of the
critical temperature or higher, in particular in its early evolutionary
stages.

#### 11.1 The effective action in CJT

Based on the results of section 10.3.1 , we relate the 2PI effective
action @xmath which is a functional of the (modulus of the) condensate
and the full propagator @xmath , to the generalized pressure @xmath .
Remember that the index “c” for classical fields and propagators will be
suppressed. In the two loop approximation, the effective action density
( @xmath times the effective action) is then given by (see equation (
9.33 ))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the trace is taken over the internal @xmath space and @xmath is
the three-volume. The the potential @xmath includes all two-loop,
two-particle-irreducible, diagrams. These diagrams are shown in figure
7.1 . Here, we have used the definitions of the tree level potential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the free propagator in the presence of a condensate

  -- -- -- --------
           (11.3)
  -- -- -- --------

For convenience, we first discuss the unrenormalized effective action
and include a counterterm @xmath later, see section 11.2 and appendix E
. The Hartree approximation implies that we only consider self
interaction terms coming from the “double bubble diagram” (left diagram
in figure 7.1 ). The exchange contributions to @xmath coming from the
“sunset diagram” (right diagram in figure 7.1 ) are neglected. We are
thus left with a single two-loop diagram which is generated by the
quartic interactions and whose algebraic expression is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

Had we included the “sunset diagram” originating from the cubic
interactions, @xmath would also depend explicitly on @xmath . Moreover,
the self-energy would depend on momentum. Therefore, neglecting the
contribution from the cubic interaction is a tremendous simplification,
even though only an explicit calculation can show whether its
contribution is indeed small. Naively, the additional factor of the
condensate at the cubic vertex suggests that for chemical potentials
only slightly above the mass @xmath our simplification is a good
approximation. However, it was that shown the contribution we neglect is
important to obtain a second order phase transition, i.e., the Hartree
approximation shows, unphysically, a first order phase transition [ 96 ,
97 , 98 ] . We shall come back to this issue when we present our results
in section 11.4 .

In our approximation the self-energy does not depend on momentum and is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.5)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the first term is proportional to the unit matrix. One can now
easily confirm the useful relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.6)
  -- -------- -- --------

To determine the ground state of the system, we need to find the
stationary points of the effective action. To this end, we take the
(functional) derivatives of the effective action with respect to @xmath
and

@xmath and set these to zero,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (11.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (11.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

With an ansatz for the full propagator we can bring these equations into
a more explicit form. Within the present approximation, the most general
form of the propagator is [ 50 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.9)
  -- -------- -- --------

with two mass parameters @xmath , @xmath , that have to be determined
self-consistently. With this ansatz, the off-diagonal components of the
Dyson-Schwinger equation ( 11.8 ) are automatically fulfilled. We are
left with the scalar equation ( 11.7 ) and the two diagonal components
of equation ( 11.8 ). Inserting the first of the diagonal components
into equation ( 11.7 ), and adding and subtracting the two diagonal
components to/from each other, yields the following (yet unrenormalized)
three equations for the three variables @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (11.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (11.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (11.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are the diagonal elements of the full propagator
@xmath , and where we have already assumed that the condensate @xmath is
nonzero (there is also the trivial solution @xmath which we briefly
discuss in the context of renormalization, see appendix E ). With the
help of equation ( 11.6 ) and ( 11.8 ), the pressure at the stationary
point can be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.13)
  -- -------- -- ---------

#### 11.2 Renormalized stationarity equations and pressure

Renormalization in the 2PI formalism has been discussed in numerous
works in the literature, for instance in references [ 94 , 95 , 98 , 99
, 100 , 101 , 102 , 103 , 104 , 105 , 106 , 107 , 108 , 109 , 110 ] .
For our purposes, the methods developed and used in references [ 94 , 95
, 103 ] are most useful. While reference [ 103 ] introduces counterterms
“directly” in the effective action, [ 94 , 95 ] use an iterative method,
based on [ 101 , 102 ] , where the counterterms are introduced order by
order in the coupling. Both methods are equivalent. We shall follow the
“direct” approach of [ 103 ] . All details of the renormalization are
discussed in appendix E . Here we simply summarize the main steps and
give the results.

The renormalization requires to add appropriate counterterms to the
effective action ( 11.1 ), proportional to the (infinite) parameters
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath . In the condensed phase, two different
parameters @xmath , @xmath for the renormalization of the coupling are
necessary. Then one can show, after regularizing the ultraviolet
divergent integrals in the action and the stationarity equations that
the parameters @xmath , @xmath , @xmath can be expressed in terms of the
(finite) renormalized parameters @xmath , @xmath , an ultraviolet cutoff
@xmath , and a renormalization scale @xmath . And, importantly, these
parameters do not depend on the medium, i.e., on @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath . The relation between the cutoff dependent quantities and the
renormalized ones becomes a bit more compact if we introduce (infinite)
bare parameters via @xmath , @xmath . Then, we can write the
renormalized parameters as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.14)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For the regularization of the divergent momentum integrals we use
Schwinger’s proper time regularization [ 111 ] , where the cutoff @xmath
is introduced by setting the lower boundary of the proper time integral
to @xmath . More precisely, we separate a “vacuum” contribution from
each of the divergent integrals such that a finite integral remains and
the “vacuum” term can be regularized. This term is not exactly a vacuum
term because the ultraviolet divergences depend on the self-consistent
mass @xmath (and thus implicitly on @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ), and
therefore the subtraction term must be (implicitly) medium dependent. In
the presence of a superflow, we even find that the ultraviolet
divergences depend explicitly on @xmath , see discussion in section E.4
.

To write down the result of the renormalization procedure we first
introduce the following abbreviations for the momentum sums,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.15)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then, the renormalized stationarity equations ( 11.10 - 11.12 ) are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (11.16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (11.17)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (11.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the finite parts of the momentum sums are

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                                
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with the Euler-Mascheroni constant @xmath , the Bose distribution
function @xmath , and the quasiparticle excitations @xmath that are
given by the positive solutions of @xmath . The energies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

appear in the “vacuum” subtractions whose regularized versions give rise
to the (medium dependent) finite terms in the first lines of equation (
11.2 ) and ( 11.2 ) and to (medium independent) infinite terms which are
absorbed in the renormalized coupling constant and the renormalized
mass.

The renormalized version of the pressure at the stationary point is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.21)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath being solutions of the stationarity
conditions ( 11.16 - 11.18 ), and the finite part of

the momentum sum

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (11.22)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

#### 11.3 Goldstone mode

The quasiparticle dispersion relations @xmath are determined by the
zeros of @xmath . In analogy to the zeros of @xmath which lead to the
dispersions ( 10.6 ), ( 10.7 ) we expect one massive mode and one
Goldstone mode where the Goldstone mode fulfills @xmath at @xmath .
Setting @xmath in the inverse propagator ( 11.9 ), we see that @xmath is
only a zero of @xmath if @xmath (or if @xmath ). However, this condition
for the existence of a Goldstone mode is in contradiction to equations (
11.16 ) and ( 11.18 ) which imply @xmath , where @xmath might be small
but does not vanish. Consequently, the Goldstone theorem is violated in
our approach [ 50 , 94 , 95 , 99 , 100 , 103 , 104 , 106 , 108 , 109 ,
110 ] . For our discussion of the superfluid properties it is crucial to
work with an exact Goldstone mode. Therefore, we shall ignore the
contribution from the momentum sum in equation ( 11.18 ), thereby giving
up the exact self-consistency of our approach [ 50 , 104 ] . This is an
ad hoc modification of the stationarity equations, i.e., we do not
consider the true minimum of the full self-consistency equations, but a
point away from this minimum. The benefit of this modification is that
the Goldstone theorem is built into our calculation. Of course, our
choice of enforcing the Goldstone theorem is not unique, and there are
infinitely many “Goldstone points” once the exact self-consistency is
sacrificed. This situation is illustrated in figure 11.1 . A similar,
but not identical, procedure is followed in reference [ 108 ] , where
the stationary point in the constrained subspace given by the condition
of an exact Goldstone mode is determined.

Our modification results in a particularly simple set of equations,
because the three stationarity equations now reduce to two trivial ones
and only one that still contains a momentum integral,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (11.23)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (11.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The two dispersion relations @xmath are then determined from

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.25)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where equation ( 11.23 ) has been used to eliminate @xmath . Since we
are interested in arbitrary temperatures below @xmath , we shall need
the full dispersion of both modes. Their explicit form is too lengthy to
write down, but we can at least demonstrate the linear part of the
dispersion relation of the Goldstone mode as a function of the mass
parameter @xmath (this result is identical to ( 10.6 ) if the zero
temperature expression for @xmath is inserted)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.26)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For vanishing superflow we have @xmath and obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.27)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If we work at a point that is not exactly the stationary point, we
cannot use the pressure ( 11.21 ). We rather have to evaluate the
effective action density at the ”Goldstone point”. For the
renormalization it is crucial that we only modify the finite part of the
stationarity equations. Therefore, all infinities cancel in the same way
as above, see appendix E.3 for a more detailed discussion; for the
pressure at the ‘”Goldstone point” we then find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.28)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here we have already eliminated @xmath and @xmath with the help of
equation ( 11.24 ). The stationarity equation ( 11.24 ) and the pressure
( 11.28 ) are the starting point for our calculations. We shall solve
the stationarity equation numerically for the self-consistent mass
@xmath , which in turn gives the condensate via @xmath as well as the
dispersion relations of the Goldstone mode and the massive mode. We need
the pressure for various thermodynamic derivatives which are needed to
compute for example the sound velocities.

#### 11.4 Critical temperature, condensate and critical velocity for all
temperatures

To get started, we need to determine the critical temperature @xmath by
solving the stationarity equation ( 11.24 ) for @xmath at the point
@xmath - we shall explain that this is precisely the critical value of
@xmath , see discussion around equation ( 11.32 ). To do so, one has to
choose specific values for the parameters @xmath and @xmath as well as
@xmath , @xmath , and the renormalization scale @xmath . Then we can
obtain @xmath at any temperature between @xmath and @xmath by a
numerical evaluation of the stationary equation ( 11.24 ). Once we have
determined @xmath from the stationarity equation we obtain the
condensate @xmath through @xmath . In figure 11.2 we show the condensate
as a function of temperature for the simple case without superflow and
for two different coupling strengths. We have set @xmath , but the
conclusions we draw from this figure are valid for all values of @xmath
. As mentioned below equation ( 11.4 ), the phase transition to the
non-superfluid phase turns out to be of first order, although this is
barely visible if we plot the condensate for all temperatures. Moreover,
there is a dependence on the renormalization scale @xmath through the
logarithmic terms discussed in section 11.2 . This dependence and the
first order transition are very weak because of the smallness of the
coupling constants chosen here. As the figure shows, the stronger the
coupling, the stronger the dependence on the renormalization scale and
the stronger the first order transition.

Since we know that the first-order nature of the phase transition is an
artifact of the Hartree approximation, we shall restrict ourselves to
sufficiently weak coupling constants. We shall work with the two
couplings chosen in figure 11.2 . In this case we find that we can, to a
very good approximation, work with a simplified stationarity equation
and a simplified pressure, using ³⁴ ³⁴ 34 In the notation of appendix E
, this means that we approximate @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (11.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (11.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.31)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In this approximation, the contributions from loop diagrams that do not
depend on temperature explicitly are neglected. As a consequence, the
zero-temperature results are identical to the tree-level results. All
dependence on the renormalization scale @xmath is gone and thus we do
not have to specify @xmath . We have checked numerically that the
subleading terms that we have dropped do not visibly change any of the
curves we show, see also right panel of figure 11.2 , where the
approximation is compared to the full result.

The effects of a nonzero superflow on the solution are shown in figure
11.3 , for the parameters @xmath and @xmath . In the left panel of this
figure we show the Goldstone mode dispersion relation @xmath , evaluated
using the value of @xmath that solves the stationarity equation. We see
that for a given superfluid velocity, there is a temperature at which
the dispersion becomes flat in the direction opposite to the superflow.
For higher temperatures, there would be negative energies, indicating an
instability of the system. Therefore, this particular temperature is a
critical temperature, even though the condensate has not yet melted
completely. Only at vanishing superflow is the critical temperature the
same as the point where the condensate has become zero (if our approach
gave an exact second-order phase transition). The plot shows that the
low-energy part of the dispersion, where @xmath is linear in @xmath , is
sufficient to locate the instability. Therefore, in the right panel of
the figure, we show the slope of the linear part, see equation ( 11.26
), as a function of temperature for three different values of the
superflow. The superfluid state breaks down when the slope in the
anti-parallel direction vanishes. This defines a critical temperature
for any given velocity, or a critical velocity for any given
temperature. With the help of the low-energy dispersion ( 11.26 ) we can
derive a semi-analytical result for the critical velocity. We find that
the linear part of the dispersion is positive for all angles between the
momentum @xmath and the superflow @xmath only if @xmath . This shows
explicitly that the condensate @xmath cannot become arbitrarily small
for nonzero superflow. Using @xmath and @xmath , we can rewrite the
condition for the positivity of the excitation energy in the equivalent,
but more instructive, form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.32)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is an implicit condition for allowed values of the superfluid
velocity @xmath . (Remember that @xmath is a complicated function of
this velocity.) We plot the critical line, given implicitly by equation
( 11.32 ), in the plane of superfluid velocity and temperature in figure
11.4 .

The right-hand side of the inequality ( 11.32 ), evaluated at @xmath ,
is simply the slope of the Goldstone mode at @xmath , see equation (
11.27 ). This is related to Landau’s original argument for the critical
velocity (see also section 6.1 ): based on a Lorentz transformation of
the excitation energy (in the original non-relativistic context a
Galilei transformation), the critical velocity is determined by the
slope of the Goldstone mode at @xmath (unless there are non-trivial
features such as rotons in superfluid helium, which is not the case
here). One might thus think that we would just have to do the @xmath
calculation to determine the critical line in the phase diagram.
However, switching on a superflow is not equivalent to a Lorentz
transformation of the excitation energy; it is a Lorentz transformation
plus a change in the self-consistently determined condensate, which in
turn back-reacts on the excitation energies. This additional effect is
contained in the @xmath dependence of @xmath in equation ( 11.32 ). For
comparison, we have plotted the (incorrect) critical curve obtained from
the @xmath dispersion in the phase diagram as a dashed line. We see that
the full result is smaller for nonzero temperatures. In the
weak-coupling case considered here, the effect of the superflow (in
addition to being a Lorentz boost) on the Goldstone dispersion becomes
negligibly small for low temperatures. Therefore, at @xmath the critical
velocity is @xmath , in exact agreement with the slope of the low-energy
dispersion at @xmath . For a similar recent discussion in a holographic
approach see reference [ 112 ] and in particular the phase diagram in
figure 6 of this reference.

The critical line seems to suggest a (strong) first-order phase
transition to the non-superfluid phase at the critical velocity.
However, at temperatures below @xmath ( @xmath being the critical
temperature in the absence of a superflow), the system still “wants” to
condense, even for velocities beyond the critical value. In other words,
the uncondensed phase also turns out to be unstable. In our calculation,
this is seen as follows. First we note that the stationarity equation
for @xmath in the case @xmath , see equation ( E.14 ), does not depend
on @xmath . This is clear since @xmath is the phase of the condensate,
so the uncondensed phase must be independent of @xmath . For
supercritical temperatures the solution to the @xmath stationarity
equation gives a value of @xmath that is greater than @xmath , but at
subcritical temperatures @xmath is less than @xmath . The excitation
energies are simply given by @xmath , so @xmath becomes negative for
certain momenta if @xmath . Therefore, the non-superfluid phase is
unstable below @xmath . As a consequence, within our non-dissipative,
uniform ansatz, we cannot construct a stable phase for sufficiently
large superfluid velocities and low temperatures (shaded area in figure
11.4 ). Beyond the critical velocity there may be no stable phase, if
dissipative effects such as vortex creation arise in that regime. There
is some evidence for this in liquid helium [ 113 ] , [ 114 ] and
ultra-cold bosonic [ 115 ] and fermionic [ 116 ] gases. Possibly, a more
complicated, dissipative and/or inhomogeneous phase already replaces the
homogeneous superfluid for superfluid velocities below our critical
line. In this sense we have only determined an upper limit for the
critical velocity as a function of temperature below which the
homogeneous superfluid is stable. This limit can for instance be reduced
by the onset of unstable sound modes due to the two-stream instability [
117 ] .

#### 11.5 Two-fluid properties for all temperatures

##### 11.5.1 Algorithm

Besides solving the stationarity equation we need to compute derivatives
of the pressure with respect to @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath to obtain
the thermodynamic and hydrodynamic parameters of the two-fluid model. As
we will later also be interested in sound excitations, we need to
compute all first and second derivatives. In this section, we explain
the algorithm with which these results are obtained. The most direct way
to do so is via brute force numerical evaluation, for instance with the
method of finite differences. In order to obtain results less prone to
numerical uncertainties, we compute the derivatives in the following
semi-analytical way. First we note that the pressure @xmath at the point
that respects the Goldstone theorem (as well as at the point where the
stationarity equations are exactly fulfilled) depends explicitly as well
as implicitly via @xmath on the relevant variables,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.33)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and each thermodynamic derivative we are interested in also sees the
implicit dependence in @xmath . (Had we only been interested in first
derivatives and had we considered the exact solution of the stationarity
equations - sacrificing the Goldstone theorem - we could have restricted
ourselves to the explicit dependence, since then the derivative of the
pressure with respect to the self-consistently determined mass would
have vanished by construction at the stationary point.) Denoting the
variables by @xmath , we can thus write

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (11.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (11.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The derivatives of @xmath can be obtained from taking the first and
second derivatives of the stationarity equation ( 11.24 ). Writing this
equation as @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (11.36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (11.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We can thus use the following algorithm to compute the properties of the
superfluid:

-   Choose values for the thermodynamic parameters @xmath and @xmath as
    well as the parameters @xmath , @xmath , and the renormalization
    scale @xmath .

-   Determine the critical temperature @xmath by solving the
    stationarity equation ( 11.24 ) for @xmath at the point @xmath .

-   Find the solution for @xmath of the stationarity equation ( 11.24 )
    for various values of the temperature @xmath .

-   Compute the first and second derivatives of the integrands of @xmath
    and @xmath with respect to @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ;
    for the case without superflow one may use a simplification for this
    step as we explain below. This is done algebraically, i.e, before
    choosing numerical values. Nevertheless, it is useful to do all this
    with a computer because the results get very complicated.

-   Perform the three-momentum integrals numerically over all
    expressions obtained in the previous step. Since there are three
    integrands ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ) and four variables ( @xmath
    , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ), we have to perform @xmath integrals
    for the first derivatives and @xmath integrals for the second
    derivatives at each temperature. In the presence of a superflow,
    each of the integrals contains a non-trivial integration over the
    polar angle; without superflow, only the integrals needed for the
    superfluid density contain such an angular integral.

-   Use equations ( 11.34 - 11.37 ), the results of the previous step,
    and some trivial derivatives of terms outside the momentum integrals
    to put together the first and second derivatives of @xmath with
    respect to @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . There are many terms to
    handle but this is a trivial task for a computer since the
    non-trivial numerical calculation has already been done in the step
    before. We have checked that the derivatives thus obtained are much
    cleaner in terms of numerical errors compared to a brute force
    numerical calculation using finite differences.

-   Insert the obtained derivatives into the definitions of the physical
    quantities such as @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

##### 11.5.2 Limit of vanishing superflow

Even though we are also interested in the general case of a
non-vanishing superflow, let us briefly discuss how the calculation
simplifies in the limit @xmath . In that case, when we compute
derivatives with respect to @xmath and @xmath we can set @xmath
straightforwardly. But, when we compute @xmath and @xmath we have to be
more careful. Consider the microscopic definition of @xmath according to
( 10.20 ). These quantities describe the response of the system to a
superflow, i.e., even if we are eventually interested in the case @xmath
, we need to work initially with a nonzero superflow. We can write the
superfluid density for @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.38)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have expanded @xmath in a Taylor series for small @xmath . In
this series we have dropped the linear term because the first derivative
(i.e., the current @xmath ) vanishes for @xmath , which is obvious
physically and can also be checked explicitly. It seems that the
derivatives with respect to @xmath are very complicated to compute
because they involve the derivatives of the dispersion relations @xmath
which are contained in the momentum integrals in @xmath and @xmath , see
equations ( 11.2 ), ( 11.2 ) and ( 11.22 ). However, since we know that
@xmath are the solutions to the quartic equation ( 11.25 ), we can
simplify the calculation significantly by taking the first and second
derivatives of

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (11.39)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath with @xmath being the angle between @xmath and @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are the excitation energies at vanishing superflow which are equivalent
to ( 10.30 ) if @xmath is inserted. Equations ( 11.39 , 11.5.2 ) are
very useful for the explicit calculations, especially the tree-level
calculation of the sound velocities in appendix 12.1 .

##### 11.5.3 Superfluid density and entrainment for all temperatures

We shall now apply the algorithm introduced in the last section to
calculate the superfluid density as well as the coefficients @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath . The superfluid and normal-fluid densities for all
temperatures up to the critical temperature are shown in figure 11.5 .
Here we consider the case without superflow. As expected, the superfluid
density is identical to the total density at @xmath and decreases
monotonically with the temperature until it goes to zero continuously at
the critical temperature. The plot shows the densities for two different
values of the coupling constant. Different coupling strengths lead to
different critical temperatures. In the given plot, @xmath for the
weaker of the two chosen couplings, @xmath , while @xmath for the
stronger coupling, @xmath (the stronger the coupling, the stronger the
repulsive force between the bosons and hence the lower the critical
temperature). Therefore, the absolute value of the temperature is
different for the two curves at a given point on the horizontal axis.
This has to be kept in mind for all following plots. We see that the
stronger coupling tends to favor the superfluid component, i.e., for a
given relative temperature with respect to @xmath an increase of the
coupling leads to a (small) increase of the superfluid density fraction.

In the right panel of the figure we compare the full 2PI result with the
tree-level approximation for low temperatures from ( 10.40 ), ( 10.41 ).
We have plotted the curves where the expansion is truncated at order
@xmath and where it is truncated at order @xmath . It is already clear
from the comparison of these two truncations that the series in @xmath
converges very slowly. Both truncations are only good approximations to
the full result for very low temperatures compared to the critical
temperature, in this case for @xmath .

Next we compute the coefficients @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and plot them
in figure 11.6 . Again, we have chosen the same two coupling strengths
as in figure 11.5 . We have normalized the coefficients not only by
dividing by @xmath (such that they become dimensionless), but also by
multiplying with a factor @xmath such that the normalized @xmath is 1 at
zero temperature for all couplings, which makes it easier to compare
different couplings in a single plot. At zero temperature, @xmath ,
which implies that there is no entropy current, @xmath , as expected,
and we have a single-fluid system. At finite temperature, both currents
become nonzero and we have a two-fluid system.

The dependence on the coupling seems to be relatively weak for @xmath ,
@xmath , while the entrainment coefficient @xmath increases
significantly with the coupling. We have checked that, for the case of
the weaker coupling @xmath , @xmath behaves linearly in the temperature
for all temperatures @xmath . The low-temperature results are given in
equations ( 10.4.1 ), ( 10.4.1 ) and ( 10.38 ). In the right panel of
figure 11.6 we compare the analytical low-temperature approximation for
@xmath with the full result. As for the superfluid and normal-fluid
densities we see that we have to zoom in to very low temperatures
compared to @xmath in order to find agreement between the approximation
and the full result.

#### 11.6 Conclusion

In this part, we have extended our study of the properties of a bosonic
relativistic superfluid to all temperatures below the critical
temperature within the 2PI formalism. These studies build on the
connection between field theory and the two-fluid picture that we have
developed in sections 7 , 8 and 10 . We shall now summarize formal
aspects of the 2PI approach which we had to deal with such as
renormalization as well as the physical results obtained within that
approach.

-    Formalism. Even though the 2PI formalism is well suited to the
    treatment of systems with spontaneous symmetry breaking, in practice
    it has several difficulties, and we now describe how we have
    addressed them. Firstly, the renormalization of the theory is
    nontrivial because there are ultraviolet divergences in the action
    and stationarity equations which implicitly depend on the medium
    through the self-consistent masses. Presumably such unwanted
    dependences would be absent in a more complete treatment that takes
    into account the momentum dependence of the order parameter. We
    follow the approach adopted in the existing literature, introducing
    counterterms on the level of the effective action to achieve
    renormalizability. We have pointed out an additional ultraviolet
    divergence in this approach, arising from nonzero superflow.
    Secondly, the two-loop truncation of the 2PI effective action
    violates the Goldstone theorem by giving a small mass to the
    Goldstone mode. In the physics of a superfluid, however, the
    masslessness of the Goldstone mode is crucial since it determines
    the low-energy properties of the system. We have therefore built the
    Goldstone theorem into our calculation by hand, using a modification
    of the stationarity equations. This means that we do not work at the
    minimum of the potential, but at a point slightly away from that
    minimum. In particular, we have evaluated the effective action at
    that “Goldstone point”.
    Thirdly, we have employed the Hartree approximation, meaning that we
    have neglected the exchange contribution to the effective action
    from the cubic interactions that are induced by the condensate. This
    approximation is particularly simple since the self-energy is then
    momentum-independent. The price one has to pay, however, is that the
    phase transition to the non-superfluid phase becomes first order,
    while a complete treatment predicts a second order phase transition.
    We control this problem by restricting our calculation to weak
    coupling, in which case the unphysical discontinuity of the order
    parameter at the critical point is small, as is the sensitivity of
    our final results to the arbitrary renormalization scale.

-    Physical results. We have analyzed Landau‘s critical velocity for
    superfluidity within the 2PI formalism. The critical velocity
    manifests itself through the onset of an instability (negative
    energy) in the dispersion relation of the Goldstone mode. We have
    computed the critical velocity for all temperatures. At low
    temperatures, our critical velocity is in agreement with the
    original version of Landau’s argument, which is based on a Lorentz
    (or Galilei) transformation of the dispersions at vanishing
    superflow. In general, however, the Goldstone dispersion at finite
    superflow is not just obtained by a Lorentz transformation. A
    superflow also affects the condensate which in turn influences the
    dispersion relation. This effect is taken into account in our
    self-consistent formalism and turns out to decrease the critical
    velocity sizably at intermediate temperatures. As a result of this
    calculation, we have presented a phase diagram in the plane of
    temperature and superfluid velocity. This phase diagram is
    incomplete in the sense that we have restricted ourselves to
    homogeneous phases. In particular, we have not constructed a
    superfluid phase for velocities beyond the critical one.
    We have computed the parameters of Landau‘s two fluid formalism
    (i.e. superfluid and normal-fluid densities) as well as of the
    generalized hydrodynamical approach based on the conserved charge
    and entropy current. Most notably is the entrainment coefficient,
    which expresses the degree to which each current responds to the
    conjugate momentum originally associated with the other current. We
    have seen that the entrainment between the currents becomes larger
    with temperature and is also increased significantly by increasing
    the microscopic coupling @xmath .

## Part III Sound modes in relativistic superfluids

We shall now investigate one of the most striking consequences of
Landau‘s two-fluid model: the existence of additional sound excitations
in a superfluid. As discussed in the introduction, the two-fluid
equations not only predict an “ordinary” sound wave which is basically
an oscillation in density (or chemical potential), but also oscillations
in temperature (or entropy) which have been termed second sound.
Starting from the conservation equations of the two-fluid model, we
shall first explain how to derive the wave equations which determine the
speeds of first and second sound.

In a second step, we will use the low-temperature results of the
hydrodynamic parameters to describe the (very) low-temperature behavior
of the sound velocities and obtain explicit results which depend on the
temperature @xmath , chemical potential @xmath and the background
superflow with velocity @xmath . Related calculations can be found in
the recent literature in the non-relativistic context of superfluid
atomic gases [ 118 , 119 , 120 , 121 ] , where the experimental
observation of both sound modes is in principle possible, although
challenging [ 122 , 123 , 124 ] . Our results will give the sound
velocities in the presence of an arbitrary superflow, i.e., an arbitrary
relative velocity between the superfluid and the normal fluid (limited
by a critical velocity, as our results will show). In particular, they
will depend on the angle between the direction of the sound wave and the
direction of the superflow. A similar calculation in the
non-relativistic context of superfluid helium has been performed in [
125 ] where, in contrast to our calculation, the sound velocities are
computed in the superfluid rest frame and without temperature
corrections. We will find temperature corrections to the velocity of
second sound, which, as we shall see, arise from the cubic terms in
momentum of the dispersion relation of the Goldstone mode. We will also
be able to confirm Landau‘s prediction that the speed of second sound
@xmath approaches the limit of @xmath at zero temperature.

Finally we will make use of the numerical results obtained from the 2PI
formalism to calculate sound velocities for any temperature up to @xmath
. In particular we will use the algorithm described in section 11.5.1
and the limit of vanishing superflow. In the frame of these calculations
we will encounter a rather surprising result: with increasing
temperature, a pure density wave can transform into a pure temperature
wave and the other way around. We will term this phenomenon role
reversal and discuss it in detail in section 14 .

### 12 Derivation of the wave equations

The sound wave equations are derived from the hydrodynamic equations. We
start from equations ( 5.16 ) and ( 5.17 ), that is, from the current
and entropy conservation and the vorticity equation. [Of course,
equivalently, one can start from the current conservation plus
energy-momentum conservation.] In addition, we need the expression for
@xmath from ( 5.4 ), which will allow us to rewrite derivatives of
thermodynamic quantities in terms of derivatives of the independent
variables. These are the chemical potential @xmath , the superfluid
three-velocity @xmath (more precisely, @xmath ), the temperature @xmath
, and the normal-fluid three-velocity @xmath . All these variables are
now allowed to exhibit small oscillations in space and time about their
equilibrium values, @xmath , @xmath . We perform the calculation in the
normal-fluid rest frame from the previous sections, i.e., the superfluid
velocity has a (large) static and homogeneous equilibrium value on top
of which the sound wave oscillations occur, @xmath , while the static
and homogeneous part of the normal velocity can be set to zero, @xmath .
Of course, we need to keep the oscillations of the normal-fluid velocity
@xmath because there is no global rest frame in which they vanish.

We employ the linear approximation in the oscillations. In this case,
the temporal component of the vorticity equation is trivially fulfilled.
From the remaining equations one can eliminate the normal velocity, such
that one is left with two equations where the sound wave oscillations
are solely expressed in terms of oscillations in @xmath and @xmath
(oscillations of the superfluid velocity @xmath can be expressed in
terms of oscillations of @xmath by applying a time derivative to the
whole equation and using @xmath ). The derivation of the wave equations
is quite lengthy, and we explain the details in appendix F.1 . One
obtains the following system of two equations,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the enthalpy density of the normal fluid. Each term is a
product of a space-time derivative - in which we can replace @xmath by
@xmath and @xmath by @xmath - and a prefactor that only contains the
equilibrium values @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Before discussing
results, let us write down the wave equations in two limit cases.
Firstly, let us set @xmath . In this case, the normal number density
vanishes, @xmath , and thus @xmath . With this relation and the
zero-temperature expression @xmath from section 8.2 (we set @xmath for
simplicity in this subsection) one finds that all terms on the
right-hand side of ( 12 ) vanish, and ( 12 ) can be compactly written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again, we recover the sonic metric @xmath , see remark below the
generalized pressure ( 10.45 ). With @xmath we obtain @xmath , which is
equation (4.12) of [ 83 ] (see also equation (29) of reference [ 90 ] ).
This wave equation has one physical solution @xmath , with the velocity
of first sound @xmath . The explicit solutions on the low-temperature
limit are given in ( 13.1 ), ( 13 ) (as we shall see below, this
solution is unaltered by temperature effects up to the order we are
working).

Secondly, we discuss the limit case without superflow, @xmath . In this
case, only the first lines of equations ( 12 ) and ( 12 ) are
nonvanishing. Now, with @xmath and @xmath we obtain two equations for
the two amplitudes @xmath , @xmath . Since we are interested in
nontrivial solutions, we need to require the determinant of the
coefficient matrix to vanish. After a bit of algebra, using @xmath
(which is true for @xmath ) and @xmath , the resulting equation can be
written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.5)
  -- -------- -- --------

This result is in exact agreement with the one given in equations (19) -
(22) of reference [ 78 ] . Now there are two physical solutions, @xmath
, with the two sound velocities @xmath , @xmath . The reason for the
appearance of the second mode is that the presence of the second fluid
component allows for relative oscillations between the two fluids. As a
check, one can confirm that the solutions of equation ( 12.5 ) are the
@xmath limit of the full (low-temperature) results ( 13.1 ) and ( 13 ).

#### 12.1 General structure of the solutions

Before we explicitly calculate the speeds of sound for low temperatures
one can make interesting observations about the general structure of the
solutions which are obtained as follows: after replacing @xmath and
@xmath with their corresponding fluctuations @xmath , @xmath and
introducing the speed of sound @xmath , one can write equations ( 12 )
and ( 12 ) compactly in the following form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (12.6)
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The coefficients of this system of equations are complicated
combinations of first and second derivatives of the pressure (compare to
equations ( 12 ), ( 12 ) ) and are defined in appendix F.2 . Requiring
the equations ( 12.6 ) and ( LABEL:eq:sound12 ) to have nontrivial
solutions for @xmath , @xmath yields a quartic equation for @xmath with
four solutions, two of which are physical (i.e. real an positive), the
velocities of first and second sound @xmath and @xmath . Nevertheless,
there are more possible sound waves in a superfluid. They can be found
by starting from a certain subset of the conservation equations. For
instance the so-called fourth sound [ 126 ] can be excited by fixing the
normal fluid by an external force. It is thus calculated after dropping
momentum conservation [ 14 ] [ 79 ] . We shall not be concerned with
these solutions in the following.

We can now discuss on a general level whether first and second sound are
basically a propagation of a heat or a density wave. To do so, we
calculate the ratio of the amplitudes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.8)
  -- -------- -- --------

For each sound mode, the one-dimensional space of solutions of equations
( 12.6 ), ( LABEL:eq:sound12 ) is a straight line through the origin in
the @xmath - @xmath plane. It is convenient to define the angle of that
line with the @xmath axis,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.9)
  -- -------- -- --------

The sign of this angle tells us whether chemical potential and
temperature oscillate in phase ( @xmath ) or out of phase ( @xmath ).
The magnitude of @xmath characterizes the mixture of oscillations in
temperature and chemical potential with @xmath corresponding to a pure
oscillation in chemical potential and @xmath to a pure oscillation in
temperature. We shall investigate this ratio in section 14 for all
temperatures with rather surprising results. We can also translate this
into the amplitudes in density and entropy. With the help of the
thermodynamic relation for the pressure @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.10)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we can derive (see also appendix F.2 ) a similar expression for the
amplitude ratio of @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.11)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In general, the sound modes and the corresponding amplitudes are very
complicated. Let us therefore begin with a discussion the case of
vanishing superflow, @xmath . In this case, the coefficients @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath become irrelevant (for the
explicit form of the wave equation in the limit @xmath see ( 12.5 )),
and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (12.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We thus have the following simple quadratic equation for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.13)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is instructive to solve this equation in the limit where there are no
other energy scales than @xmath and @xmath . In our context, this will
be the case when we set the supercurrent and the mass parameter to zero,
@xmath . Then, we can write the pressure as @xmath with a dimensionless
function @xmath , and the sound velocities assume a simple form [ 78 ] .
The reason is that now there are simple relations between first and
second derivatives of the pressure, for instance we find @xmath , @xmath
. Then, one computes the following two solutions of equation ( 12.13 )
for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.14)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We see that one solution is constant while the other depends on the
thermodynamic details of the

system. The ratios of the amplitudes become particularly simple in this
limit. We find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (12.15)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This result shows that, for a given pair of amplitudes, @xmath and
@xmath or @xmath and @xmath , first sound is always an in-phase
oscillation while second sound is always an out-of-phase oscillation.
Moreover, we can make an interesting observation regarding the magnitude
of the amplitudes. At @xmath , where also @xmath , first sound is a pure
chemical potential (and pure density) wave, while second sound is a pure
temperature (and pure entropy) wave. This is no longer true for nonzero
temperatures. If at the critical temperature @xmath and @xmath , the
roles of first and second sound completely reverse upon heating the
superfluid from @xmath to @xmath . We shall discuss this role reversal
in more detail when we present our numerical results in section 14 .

### 13 The low-temperature approximation

In general, the full wave equations ( 12.6 ) and ( LABEL:eq:sound12 )
yield very complicated results for the sound velocities. However, in our
approximation for low temperatures up to order @xmath in the pressure,
one can show that the resulting quartic equation for @xmath factorizes
into two quadratic equations. This is explained in detail in appendix
F.2 . In this appendix we also explain that our truncation of the
low-temperature series does not allow us to compute temperature
corrections to the sound velocities of order @xmath and higher. The
@xmath corrections, however, can be reliably determined. As one can see
from equations ( F.2 ), ( F.26 ) this is possible because of the @xmath
terms in the pressure which originate from the @xmath term in the
dispersion of the Goldstone mode. It turns out that there is a @xmath
correction only to the second sound @xmath . The explicit results are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (13.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the angle between @xmath and the direction of the sound
wave given by the wave vector @xmath . As a consistency check, we
confirm that @xmath is the ( @xmath limit of the) linear part of the
dispersion of the Goldstone mode from ( 10.6 ), which was computed as
one of the poles of the propagator. In the low-temperature
approximation, this dispersion does not depend on temperature since the
melting of the condensate has been taken into account (see section 10.1
).

The velocity of second sound @xmath becomes complex for certain angles
@xmath as soon as @xmath . This value corresponds to Landau‘s critical
velocity at zero temperature, see also figure 11.4 . Moreover, the
@xmath term of @xmath is divergent as @xmath approaches @xmath . We have
seen in table 2 that all components of the stress-energy tensor and the
current exhibit this divergence too. The expressions in that table show
that due to this divergence the @xmath term (say, in the energy density
@xmath ) becomes comparable to or even larger than the @xmath term for
superfluid velocities close to (and below) the zero temperature value of
the critical velocity @xmath , even if @xmath is very small. This
suggests that a calculation to all orders in @xmath must be performed to
predict reliably the behavior in this close-to-critical regime. In
analogy, for the speed of second sound close to the critical velocity
and at nonzero temperatures we also need the resummed result, and we
cannot trust the truncated expression.

We plot the two sound velocities for all angles and for various
superfluid velocities in figure 13.1 . Because of the breakdown of the
temperature expansion we have just explained, the results for nonzero
temperature are only shown up to a superfluid velocity where the @xmath
correction is still smaller than the @xmath term. We see that both sound
velocities are increased when they propagate parallel to the superflow
and decreased when they propagate in the opposite direction. At @xmath ,
where the result can be taken seriously for all @xmath , the speed of
second sound decreases significantly when the critical velocity is
approached, and goes to zero for all “backward” angles @xmath (while the
velocity of first sound only goes to zero for propagation exactly
antiparallel to the superflow, @xmath ). Interestingly, for a given
superfluid velocity, the temperature effect always increases the speed
of second sound for all angles. We know that for larger temperatures it
must decrease again, because it has to vanish at the critical
temperature where there is only one fluid in the system. Within our
low-temperature approximation we cannot see this decrease.

Finally, let us discuss the low-temperature results at non vanishing
mass @xmath . A finite mass is of importance, since its effect as an
additional energy scale will turn out to be interesting, and we can use
large values of @xmath to approach the non-relativistic limit. Since the
expressions become very complicated if both @xmath and @xmath are
nonzero, we present the results for @xmath . We defer all details of the
calculation to appendix F.3 . The final result for the two sound
velocities up to quadratic corrections

in the temperature is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (13.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we can see, the speed of first sound is indeed identical to the slope
of the low-energy dispersion of the Goldstone mode ( 10.6 ) - at least
at very low temperatures. The speed of second sound at zero temperature
is simply @xmath times the speed of first sound - we recover Landau‘s
result in the presence of a mass @xmath . Also here we can see that the
temperature corrections are positive, even though we expect the speed of
second sound to decrease eventually and vanish at the critical
temperature. When we perform a self-consistent calculation for all
temperatures up to @xmath in the next section, we will see that this is
indeed the case.

### 14 Sound modes for all temperatures

We compute the velocities of first and second sound @xmath and @xmath
numerically for all temperatures by applying the algorithm explained in
section 11.5.1 . The results are shown in figure 14.1 (sound velocities
and amplitudes for zero superflow), figure 14.2 (sound velocities at
very low temperatures and comparison with the analytical results from
last section) and figure 14.3 (sound velocities and amplitudes for
nonzero superflow). We now discuss various aspects of the results
separately.

Speed of first sound and scale-invariant limit. In the simplest case,
with vanishing mass parameter and superflow, the speed of first sound is
@xmath for all temperatures, see analysis in section 12.1 . This is
shown in the upper left panel of figure 14.1 and is in agreement with
the analytical result ( 12.14 ). For low temperatures, this sound speed
is identical to the slope of the Goldstone dispersion. For higher
temperatures, however, the slope deviates from the speed of first sound
and approaches zero at the critical point, just like the speed of second
sound. In other words, the Goldstone mode is, in general, not a solution
to the wave equations derived from the hydrodynamic conservation
equations. Only in certain temperature limits do these waves coincide
with the Goldstone mode.

The upper right panel of figure shows that for a nonzero mass parameter
@xmath , the speed of first sound deviates from the scale-invariant
value at low temperatures, but approaches this value for high
temperatures @xmath . Notice that we have chosen the same mass parameter
in units of @xmath for both coupling strengths. As a consequence, the
sound velocities for the two coupling strengths coincide at zero
temperature, but the mass is different in units of @xmath : for the
smaller coupling (solid lines) we have @xmath , while for the larger
coupling (dashed lines) @xmath . This is the reason why @xmath appears
to approach the scale-invariant value more slowly for the case of the
larger coupling.

Speed of second sound. In all cases we consider, the speed of second
sound increases strongly at low temperatures. We can see this increase
in the low-temperature approximation, see discussion in section 13 .
Even though figure 14.2 shows that the analytic approximation is only
valid for very low temperatures, we see that the strong increase
continues beyond the validity of the analytical approximation (although
it becomes less strong than the approximation suggests). One can see
from equations ( 13.1 ), ( 13 ), ( 13.3 ) that the @xmath contribution
does not, to leading order, depend on the coupling constant. Therefore,
since smaller coupling strengths correspond to higher critical
temperatures, the increase of @xmath can be made arbitrarily sharp (on
the relative temperature scale @xmath ) by decreasing the coupling. This
tendency is borne out in figure 14.1 .

In the upper panels of figure 14.1 , the velocity of second sound does
not go to zero at the critical point. This is an artifact of our Hartree
approximation: as we have discussed in section 11.4 , in our approach
the phase transition is strictly speaking first order. Therefore, the
condensate is not exactly zero at our critical point. The speed of
second sound turns out to be sensitive to this effect, and therefore
@xmath does not approach zero at @xmath . The superfluid density appears
to be less sensitive to this effect since it approaches zero to a very
good accuracy, see figure 11.5 .

Role reversal of the sound modes. To discuss the physical nature of the
sound waves, we first notice that the speeds of sound show a feature
that is reminiscent of an “avoided level crossing” in quantum mechanics.
This feature is most pronounced for small coupling and nonzero mass
parameter @xmath , see upper right panel of figure 14.1 and the zoomed
inset in this panel. It suggests that there is a physical property that
neither first nor second sound possesses for all temperatures, but that
is rather “handed over” from first to second sound in the temperature
region where the curves almost touch. We find this property by computing
the amplitudes of the oscillations associated to the sound modes, as
discussed in section 12.1 . In particular, we are interested in the
mixing angle @xmath defined in equation ( 12.9 ) that indicates whether
a given sound mode is predominantly an oscillation in chemical potential
or in temperature or something in between. Our results show that @xmath
always corresponds to @xmath while @xmath always corresponds to @xmath .
Therefore, the first sound is always an in-phase oscillation, while the
second sound is always an out-of-phase oscillation. However, whether
first or second sound is a density wave or an entropy wave is a
temperature dependent statement, as already discussed in the
scale-invariant limit where there are simple expressions for the
amplitudes, see equation ( 12.15 ). In all cases we consider, @xmath
transforms from a pure density wave at @xmath to a pure entropy wave at
@xmath and vice versa for @xmath . This role reversal becomes sharper
for larger @xmath and/or smaller @xmath , i.e., it is smoothest in the
ultra-relativistic regime at strong coupling, see lower left panel of
figure 14.1 . (Remember that we compare two relatively weak coupling
strengths, the “strong coupling” is @xmath .)

Comparison to non-relativistic systems. We can view @xmath as a
parameter with which we can go continuously from the ultra-relativistic
limit @xmath to the non-relativistic limit of large @xmath (always
keeping @xmath smaller than @xmath in order to allow for condensation).
Therefore, the right panels of figure 14.1 are comparable to the results
in non-relativistic calculations. Of course, @xmath , as chosen in the
plots, is not actually a non-relativistic value; for instance, for this
value of @xmath the speed of first sound at low temperatures is still
about 50 % of the speed of light, while, for comparison, the speed of
first sound in superfluid helium is about @xmath , i.e., about @xmath
times the speed of light. Nevertheless, already for this moderate value
of @xmath we find qualitative agreement with the non-relativistic
results of reference [ 120 ] see in particular Fig. 6 in this reference
which also exhibits the avoided crossing and the sharp role reversal at
a low temperature. As in this reference, we also find that a stronger
coupling smooths out both of these features. The results shown in
figures 14.3 and 14.4 generalize the results of [ 120 ] to the
relativistic regime and to the case of nonzero superflow (For a
zero-temperature calculation of the sound velocities in the presence of
a superflow in @xmath He see reference [ 125 ] ).

Our results (and those of reference [ 120 ] ) for the sound modes differ
from the calculations and measurements for superfluid helium [ 2 ] , [
14 ] and a (unitary) Fermi gas. For instance, in neither of these
experimentally accessible cases does the speed of second sound increase
significantly at low temperatures. Another difference is that in
superfluid @xmath He, second sound is predominantly a temperature wave
for almost all temperatures, except for a regime close to the critical
temperature. This shows that the behavior of the sound waves is very
sensitive to the details of the underlying theory, i.e., the details of
the interaction. We see from ( 12.14 ) that even in the
ultra-relativistic, scale-invariant limit the speed of second sound
depends on thermodynamic functions that can be significantly different
in different theories. Another feature of the second sound in @xmath He
is a rapid decrease in a regime where rotons start to become important [
2 ] , [ 14 ] . Our model for a complex scalar field also gives rise to a
massive mode whose mass is @xmath (the difference from rotons being that
the minimum of the dispersion is at zero momentum). For instance for the
case @xmath this means that the mass in units of the critical
temperature is @xmath (for the weaker coupling @xmath ) and @xmath (for
the stronger coupling @xmath ). Therefore, our sound velocities are
dominated by the Goldstone mode only for temperatures @xmath while for
higher temperatures the massive mode plays an important role, even
though there appears to be no characteristic drop in @xmath at the onset
of that mode.

Nonzero superflow. In the presence of a nonzero, uniform superflow - a
relative flow between superfluid and normal-fluid components, measured
in the normal-fluid rest frame - the sound velocities obviously become
anisotropic (see equations 13.1 and 13 for the explicit anisotropic
result in the low-temperature approximation). In figures 14.3 and 14.4 (
@xmath and @xmath , respectively) we plot the speeds of sound and the
corresponding mixing angles for the amplitudes for seven different
directions of the sound wave with respect to the superfluid velocity
@xmath , from downstream propagation (uppermost curves in all panels)
through perpendicular propagation (dashed curves in all panels) to
upstream propagation (lowermost curves in all panels). We see that both
sound speeds are faster in the forward direction, as was already
observed in the low-temperature results. Since the superflow @xmath ,
like the mass parameter @xmath , introduces an additional energy scale,
the speed of first sound @xmath deviates from the scale-invariant value,
at least at low temperatures. In the ultra-relativistic limit, @xmath
approaches the scale-invariant value at high temperatures from above
(from below) for a downstream (upstream) sound wave. The value of the
superflow used in the figures corresponds to about 1 % of the critical
temperature, @xmath for the stronger coupling, figure 14.3 , and to
about 0.4 % of the critical temperature for the weaker coupling, figure
14.4 . The critical temperatures are @xmath for @xmath and @xmath and
@xmath for @xmath and @xmath .

To compare to the analytical results in the low-temperature limit, we
use equations ( 13.1 ) and ( 13 ) for the massless case and equations (
13.3 ) for finite mass , see figure 14.2 . Even though we only show the
comparison for @xmath , we have checked that the numerical results agree
with the low-temperature approximation also for @xmath .

At the critical point, there is a sizable nonzero value of the speed of
second sound for all angles. In contrast to the case without superflow,
this is not only due to our use of the Hartree approximation. Remember
from the discussion in section 11.4 that @xmath is the point beyond
which there is no stable uniform superfluid, see in particular the phase
diagram in figure 11.4 . At that critical point, the condensate is not
zero (and is not expected to be zero in a more complete treatment), and
therefore we do not expect @xmath to go to zero.

Comparing figures 14.3 and 14.4 we observe that a weaker coupling leads
again to a more pronounced avoided crossing effect. This is particularly
obvious from the upper right panel of figure ( 14.4 ), where we observe
the avoided crossing effect now for each angle separately. Like for
vanishing superflow, a weaker coupling tends to shift the point of the
role reversal to lower temperatures, even though this statement is not
completely general. Namely, in the ultra-relativistic limit we see that
changing the coupling has a more complicated effect for the sound waves
that propagate in the backward direction, see curves below the dashed
one in the lower left panels of figures 14.3 and 14.4 . As a
consequence, we find the following interesting phenomenon: depending on
the external parameters, there can be a sizable temperature regime of
intermediate temperatures where a second sound wave, sent out in the
forward direction, is almost a pure chemical potential wave while sent
out in the backward direction it is almost a pure temperature wave (and
vice versa for the first sound). This effect is most pronounced for weak
coupling and the ultra-relativistic limit. We have checked that it gets
further enhanced by a larger value of the superflow. In other words, the
role reversal in the sound modes does not only occur by changing
temperature (most pronounced in the non-relativistic case at weak
coupling), but can also occur by changing the direction of the sound
wave (most pronounced in the ultra-relativistic case at weak coupling).

### 15 Conclusion

We have derived the wave equations which described sound excitations of
a relativistic superfluid and calculated the corresponding solutions
which are the velocities of first and second sound. In a first step, we
calculated the sound excitations in a low-temperature approximation in
the presence of a nonzero superflow. (The calculation of the sound modes
always requires at least an infinitesimal superflow; by nonzero
superflow we mean larger than infinitesimal.)

To obtain non zero-temperature corrections it has turned out to be
crucial to go beyond the linear approximation of the dispersion of the
Goldstone mode. Cubic corrections in the dispersion give rise to @xmath
corrections in the pressure and @xmath corrections in the velocity of
second sound, while the velocity of first sound remains
temperature-independent. We have found that the velocity of second sound
increases with low temperatures.

The numerical calculation up to @xmath within the 2PI formalism requires
us to numerically evaluate first and second derivatives of the pressure
with respect to the temperature, chemical potential, and superflow. To
avoid numerical uncertainties we have computed these derivatives in a
semi-analytical way (see section 11.5.1 ). The low-temperature limit of
the self consistent calculation agree perfectly with the analytic
results obtained in the low-temperature calculation and show that this
approximation is valid only for a very low temperatures regime whose
size depends on the value of the coupling. Even for the smallest
coupling we have used, @xmath , the approximation deviates significantly
from the full 2PI numerical result for all temperatures higher than
about 0.1 % of the critical temperature. The main reason seems to be the
temperature dependence of the condensate which is not included in the
low-temperature calculation. This approximation also neglects the
massive mode that is present in our theory (and which is not unlike the
roton in superfluid helium); the massive mode becomes important for
temperatures higher than about 10 % of the critical temperature.

We have investigated the dependence of the sound velocities on the boson
mass @xmath and the superflow @xmath . For @xmath the speed of first
sound assumes the universal value @xmath for all temperatures, while an
additional scale, provided by @xmath and/or @xmath , leads to a
deviation from this result. For temperatures higher than that scale but
still lower than the critical temperature (if such a regime exists) the
speed of first sound again approaches @xmath . The speed of second sound
is more sensitive to details of the system and has a non-universal
behavior even for @xmath . In our particular model we found a strong
increase for low temperatures before a decrease sets in, eventually
leading to a vanishing speed of second sound at the critical point, if
the superflow is zero.

By computing the amplitudes in chemical potential and temperature of the
sound waves for all temperatures, one finds that first sound is always
an in-phase oscillation of chemical potential and temperature (and thus
also of density and entropy) and second sound is always an out-of-phase
oscillation, which can thus be viewed as their defining property.
However, the degree to which a given sound wave is a density or entropy
wave depends on the temperature. We have shown that, with respect to
this property, first and second sound typically reverse their roles as a
function of temperature: the in-phase (out-of-phase) mode is a pure
density (entropy) wave at low temperatures and becomes a pure entropy
(density) wave at high temperatures. This observation is in agreement
with non-relativistic studies. While in the non-relativistic case this
role reversal occurs rather abruptly in the very low-temperature regime,
it is more continuous in the ultra-relativistic case. We have also found
that for certain parameters of the model and intermediate temperatures,
there can be a role reversal at a fixed temperature: if there is a
nonzero superflow, the first sound is (almost) a pure entropy wave
parallel to the superflow and (almost) a pure density wave anti-parallel
to the superflow, while the second sound behaves exactly opposite. This
interesting effect is most pronounced in the ultra-relativistic limit at
weak coupling.

## Part IV A mixture of two superfluids

### 16 Effective description

In the final part of this thesis, we will investigate another kind of
two-fluid system which is qualitatively different from the one we
considered before: a mixture of two superfluids. First, we will
construct an effective theory for a such a mixture. We will do so
strictly at zero temperature (i.e. in the absence of a normal-fluid
component) and discuss the translation into a set of coupled
hydrodynamic equations. Such a study is useful in the context of compact
stars where usually more than one superfluid is present and also for
example for mixtures of superfluid @xmath and @xmath or cold atoms (see
for instance [ 127 ] , [ 128 ] ). Hydrodynamics for such complicated
systems have for example been discussed in [ 69 , 129 ] , for a modern
relativistic description of multicomponent superfluids see reference [
68 ] . The key ingredient is once again entrainment - even at zero
temperature (see section 5.1 for a discussion and references). We have
discussed that the microscopic mechanisms leading to this zero
temperature entrainment can be very complicated. At this point, we shall
not be concerned with these details but rather introduce entrainment in
an effective way, by requiring that the current @xmath of particle
species @xmath is proportional to the conjugate momenta of both
particles species , say @xmath and @xmath . As we will see, this can be
achieved by introducing a gradient coupling in the effective Lagrangian.
The strength of this coupling will be tunable by the parameter @xmath .
Such a coupling makes a rigorous renormalization as we have discussed it
in the case of a single particles species impossible (which is of no
further concern to the zero temperature calculations of this section).
At finite temperature, one would need to introduce a cutoff to execute
thermal integrals. We work in the same approximations as introduced in
section 8.1 and assume a uniform density and flow of the superfluid.
Since there are now two superfluid velocities, there are two different
rest frames even at zero temperature. In other words, a temperature
limit in which the pressure is isotropic does no longer exist. We shall
therefore rely on the generalized two-fluid formalism of section 5 right
from the beginning.

The starting point is again a complex scalar field theory

  -- -- -- --------
           (16.1)
  -- -- -- --------

where the fields @xmath and @xmath are coupled by a gradient interaction

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (16.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

The interaction term ins manifestly @xmath invariant (the “chemical
index” @xmath denotes the particle species) and the complex conjugates
are chosen such that the currents calculated as @xmath and @xmath are
complex conjugates of each other. To compensate for the extra mass
dimensions of the gradients, the coupling @xmath cannot be dimensionless
but rather has @xmath . In complete analogy to section 7 we introduce
the condensates to the fields @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (16.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

For our tree-level analysis, we can neglect all fluctuations @xmath and
are only concerned with the potential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (16.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here we have introduced the usual definitions @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
. For dimensional considerations, it is helpful to keep in mind that the
combination @xmath is dimensionless. The equations of motions for @xmath
and @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (16.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (16.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

As expected, the gradient coupling leads to entrainment in equations (
16.5 ) and ( 16.6 ). The equations of motion for @xmath and @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (16.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (16.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

### 17 Hydrodynamics

In the zero temperature case, the microscopic representation of the
coefficients @xmath , @xmath and @xmath can be conveniently read off
from equations ( 16.5 ) and ( 16.6 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (17.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (17.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, we have implicitly assumed that the phase-gradients @xmath are
indeed the conjugate momenta to @xmath as we derived for the single
fluid case in section 8.2.1 . We shall see that this assumption is
consistent with the generalized two-fluid framework. The microscopic
stress-energy tensor reads:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (17.3)
                                         
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and the corresponding two-fluid expression is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (17.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

After contraction with @xmath , equation ( 17.4 ) can be solved for the
generalized pressure density,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (17.5)
  -- -------- -- --------

With the aid of equations ( 17.1 ) and ( 17.2 ), we can obtain the
generalized pressure in its natural form expressed solely in terms of
the momenta @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (17.6)
  -- -------- -- --------

This on the other hand is precisely the negative tree level potential
from equation ( 16.4 ). We have now reestablished the important relation
between the effective pressure and the (tree level) effective action:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (17.7)
  -- -------- -- --------

Starting from @xmath one can obtain the coefficients @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath from

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (17.8)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be used as a consistency check. The generalized energy density
@xmath can be obtained with the help of equations ( 17.3 ) and ( 17.6 )
,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (17.9)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This expression is formulated in terms of momenta rather than currents.
A microscopic construction of @xmath is difficult even in the zero
temperature case since the condensates @xmath are complicated functions
of the momenta determined by equations ( 16.7 ) and ( 16.8 ) (see next
section for explicit results). One can check the limit case without
entrainment ( @xmath ) where one obtains the generalized energy density
as the sum two of non interacting superfluid energy-densities (compare
to equation ( 8.16 ))

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (17.10)
  -- -------- -- ---------

With the above results at hand, it is easy to check the validity of the
generalized thermodynamic relation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (17.11)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which confirms the role of @xmath as the conjugate momenta to @xmath .

#### 17.1 Frame dependent hydrodynamics

Now that the invariant formalism is set up, it remains to determine the
physical meaning of the conjugate momenta @xmath . From the discussion
of sections 5.3 and 10.4.1 it should be clear that the field theoretic
expressions are obtained in a global rest frame, the rest frame of the
heat bath (or equivalently of the normal fluid, see also discussion in
section 10.3 ). If we set the coupling @xmath to zero, we are left with
a hydrodynamic system of two independent superfluids and the results of
section 8.2.1 can be adopted. In particular, @xmath plays the role of a
chemical potential in the respective rest frame of each superfluid while
@xmath and @xmath are chemical potential and superfluid velocity in the
rest frame of the heat bath. At first glance, it might seem obvious that
these identifications still remain intact once the coupling @xmath is
turned on. However, in particular the microscopic definition of the
chemical potential has to be carefully checked. As we know, the chemical
potential enters the Lagrangian similar to the zeroth component of a
gauge field (i.e. @xmath ). The situation at hand is more complicated as
the derivatives of @xmath and @xmath appear coupled to each other in
16.1 . In appendix G we clarify that the microscopic definition of the
chemical potential remains intact (i.e. even in the presence of a
nonzero coupling @xmath the chemical potential is introduced to the
Lagrangian by replacing all time derivatives by @xmath ) and there is no
reason to doubt that we can identify @xmath as the chemical potential
@xmath in the normal-fluid rest frame.

Let‘s now discuss the role of the spatial components of @xmath . By
setting @xmath we assume that superfluid 1 is at rest in the frame of
the heat bath and only superfluid 2 is in motion. To simplify notation,
we define the generalized pressure expressed in this frame as @xmath .
The components of the pressure thus are @xmath and @xmath with respect
to @xmath . Then, using the projection operators introduced in section
5.4 , one can easily confirm that in this particular frame the following
relations hold (compare also with the left column of table 1):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (17.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Furthermore, we can confirm for @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (17.14)
  -- -------- -- ---------

### 18 Phase diagram at zero temperature

#### 18.1 Stability condition and global minima

So far, we have ignored the possibility that the coexistence of the
condensates @xmath and @xmath might be forbidden for some values of the
parameter space spanned by @xmath , @xmath , the couplings @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , the velocities @xmath , @xmath and the angle @xmath
between @xmath and @xmath . Possible scenarios include no condensation,
the existence of a single condensate @xmath or @xmath and the
coexistence of both. Therefore we have to construct a phase diagram
where we compare the potentials @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

Before we do so, we have to check the stability of the potential ( 16.4
). The potential must be bounded from below in all directions in the
space spanned by @xmath and @xmath . The asymptotic behavior of the
tree-level potential is determined by the interaction terms @xmath . We
first observe that as long as we move along a trajectory of fixed @xmath
, @xmath has to be larger than zero and vice versa which leads to the
restrictions @xmath and @xmath . It remains to find a similar condition
for the coupling @xmath . Obviously the case @xmath leads to a stable
potential. To investigate the case of @xmath , we define:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Along the @xmath and @xmath axes the potential @xmath is zero and lies
below the potential @xmath , which has a parabolic shape and is only
zero at the origin. An instability occurs, if @xmath becomes large
enough compared to @xmath and @xmath for the potentials @xmath and
@xmath to intersect. This leads to ( @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (18.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order for such an intersection not to occur, the square root must
become imaginary which happens for

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (18.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

Observe that @xmath can change its sign if either @xmath or the product
@xmath becomes negative (the factor @xmath is always larger than or
equal to zero). It is interesting to observe that entrainment manifests
itself in a coupling of the chemical potentials @xmath and @xmath and is
thus present even if there is no relative motion between both
superfluids (i.e. @xmath ).

We can now continue with the discussion of the phase structure. The axes
of the phase diagrams will be given by @xmath and @xmath while the
parameters @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
fixed in each diagram. Any phase must fulfill the following set of
conditions in order to represent the ground state:

1.  The (minimized) condensates in each phase must be real.

2.  The phase under consideration must be a local minimum.

3.  In addition, the phase under consideration must also be a global
    minimum.

Condition (2) is fulfilled, if the eigenvalues of the Hesse matrix
@xmath are positive. In the most general case, @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (18.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

No condensation. We begin with the simplest case of no condensation (
@xmath and @xmath ). The Hesse matrix ( 18.4 ) takes the simple form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (18.5)
  -- -------- -- --------

The eigenvalues can be read off right away and the local minimum
requirements are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

As long as the conditions ( 18.6 ), ( 18.7 ) are met, @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath are all larger than zero and @xmath represents the global
minimum.

Single condensation. Next we consider @xmath and @xmath . The case of
@xmath and @xmath can be obtained from this case by exchanging the
chemical index 1 with 2. The Hesse matrix reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (18.8)
  -- -------- -- --------

Observe that the coupling between both condensates stills plays a role,
even though @xmath is set to zero.

Condition (1) is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (18.9)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be used to simplify @xmath . The local minimum conditions (2)
then read:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

From equation ( 18.9 ) and ( 18.10 ), we find that condition (1) is
fulfilled in a region where @xmath represents a local minimum. The
minimized potential reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.13)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since this expression is manifestly negative, it will be the preferred
ground state compared to @xmath (as long as inequalities ( 18.11 ) and (
18.12 ) are fulfilled). To determine whether it represents the global
minimum we still have to compare it to the case of the coexistence of
@xmath and @xmath .

Coexistence phase. If both condensates are present, the Hesse matrix is
given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.14)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here we have used the equations of motion ( 16.7 ) and ( 16.8 ) to
simplify the Hesse matrix ( 18.4 ). The eigenvalues calculate to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.15)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In case of @xmath we can see right away that one eigenvalue turns out to
be negative, while the other is positive (i.e. we found a saddle point
rather than a minimum). A local minimum is therefore only given for
@xmath . Observe that this is also precisely the stability condition
from equation ( 18.3 ). Condition (1) can be checked by solving the
equations of motion ( 16.7 ) and ( 16.8 ) for @xmath and

@xmath whereby we find the following expressions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.17)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Using condition ( 18.3 ), we can see that @xmath is real and positive
and it is sufficient to check the expressions in the numerators of
@xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.19)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

While the combination @xmath appears quadratically in the stability
condition ( 18.3 ), it appears linear in equations ( 18.19 ) and ( 18.20
). In case @xmath is negative, condition (1) leads to the following set
of equations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath               (18.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Consider the plane spanned by positive and negative values of @xmath and
@xmath . In quadrant I and III, equations ( 18.19 ) and ( 18.20 ) are
valid for @xmath while equations ( 18.21 ) and ( 18.22 ) are valid for
@xmath . In quadrants II and IV it is the other way around.

It remains to check whether the coexistence phase indeed represents a
global minimum.The full minimized potential reads:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.23)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For vanishing coupling @xmath , this reduces to the potential of two
non-interacting condensates

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.24)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To compare ( 18.23 ) to the case of no condensation and the single
condensate phases, we re-organize the numerator

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18.25)
              @xmath   @xmath      (18.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The denominator is always positive. In the numerator, the expressions in
the square brackets are always positive due to inequalities ( 18.19 )-(
18.22 ). Thus, the potential is always negative and preferred to case of
no condensation. In order to compare this to the single condensate case,
we can ask for example in which cases

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.27)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is fulfilled. Inserting both potentials from equations ( 18.13 ) and (
18.25 ), we find that this condition is equivalent to

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This is precisely the condition of @xmath to be real. The condition
@xmath leads to the second reality condition @xmath . In other words, in
regions of the parameter space, where the coupled phase is a valid
candidate according to condition (1) and (2) , it indeed represents the
ground state. We can also pose the inverse condition @xmath which is
obviously equivalent to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the condition for the existence of a phase with condensate of only one
condensate (in this case @xmath ). Again, we could repeat this analysis
by comparing @xmath with @xmath .

#### 18.2 Phase diagrams

Conditions ( 18.6 ), ( 18.7 ) as well as ( 18.10 )-( 18.12 ) and ( 18.19
)-( 18.22 ) together with the restrictions @xmath and @xmath contain all
necessary information to construct the zero temperature phase diagrams.
To determine the phase structure in a plane spanned by @xmath and @xmath
, we turn all inequalities into equations which we solve for @xmath .
This leaves the couplings, @xmath , @xmath and the angle @xmath as
tunable parameters. To obtain an analytic condition for the boundary
between the two single condensate phases, we can solve @xmath for @xmath
. Since some of these equations are cubic in @xmath , an analytic
construction of the phase diagram is difficult. We shall rather compare
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath numerically for each point in the
phase diagram. This of course involves checking the respective
conditions (1)-(3) for each phase and each point in the phase diagram.
To check the numerical results, we can compare the numerically
calculated phase boundaries with the analytical solutions of the set of
equations discussed above. We shall not attempt to obtain all possible
topologies of the phase diagram but rather aim to identify regions in
the parameter space, in which the coexistence of both condensates in the
presence of entrainment is in principle allowed. The left panel of
figure 18.1 displays the phase space which is “cut out” by stability
conditions for positive and negative entrainment coupling.

Let us begin with the very simple scenario of @xmath . The potential is
given by ( 18.24 ) and single condensation occurs if @xmath or @xmath .
In regions where both conditions are satisfied, we find the coexistence
of both condensates. This scenario is illustrated in the figure 18.1 .
We do not specify, in which units the chemical potentials @xmath are
measured in the phase diagrams we present here as this is a general
study.

Once we switch on entrainment interactions, the phase diagram changes in
two ways: first of all, the straight lines of @xmath representing the
phase boundaries in the @xmath case become deformed and are determined
by ( 18.10 ), ( 18.11 ) and ( 18.19 )-( 18.22 ) (with the exception of
the phase with no condensation which of course still resides in the area
defined by @xmath ). Secondly, condition ( 18.3 ) significantly reduces
the available phase space, see left panel of figure 18.1 . Different
values for the superfluid velocities lead to slight modifications of the
magnitude of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath which will not induce a new
topology of the phase structure. This was checked numerically by varying
the the superfluid velocities @xmath between zero and @xmath , which is
the upper bound for the critical velocity - at least in the absence of
entrainment. The impact on entrainment on the critical velocity is an
interesting subject for future studies. Qualitative changes of the phase
structure are driven by the magnitude and sign of @xmath (of course we
need to guarantee @xmath and @xmath !). To demonstrate the symmetry
properties between positive and negative values of @xmath , we shall
plot all four quadrants of the phase diagram. The results for positive
and negative entrainment couplings @xmath are displayed in figure 18.2 .
As expected from inequalities ( 18.19 )-( 18.22 ), changing the sign of
@xmath

corresponds to a @xmath rotation of the phase diagram. As we can see in
the left panel of figure 18.2 , the coexistence phase occupies a larger
region in the second and fourth quadrant of the phase phase diagram
which is constrained by the stability condition ( 18.3 ) of the
tree-level potential as well as a smaller region in the first and third
quadrant constrained by the phase boundary to the single condensate
phases ( @xmath ). In the second and fourth quadrant, we find regions
which are generically unstable. For @xmath , we see that these unstable
regions are “rotated” into the first and third quadrant. There is no
choice for @xmath (except @xmath ) at which the phase diagram is
generically stable for all chemical potentials. It is important to
realize that the instability can be directly related to the gradient
coupling. If we had coupled the fields directly by an interaction term
of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with a dimensionless coupling @xmath , we would have obtained the
stability condition @xmath . This condition is independent of the
chemical potentials @xmath and does not induce any instabilities in the
phase diagram.

Increasing @xmath will result in an increase of unstable regions. At a
limit value of

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (18.28)
  -- -------- -- ---------

(here we have set @xmath ) the stability condition intersects with the
edges of the square defined by @xmath and @xmath and the “bubble” in
which the coexistence phase resides in quadrants I and III disappears (
@xmath ). In quadrants II and IV one can check numerically that the
coexistence phase persists in a small area even in case of very large
values of @xmath (see figure 18.3 ).

#### 18.3 Conclusion

We have studied the effect of two individual Bose-Einstein condensates
on a microscopic scalar field theory with gradient interaction. As
usual, we have decomposed the condensates @xmath in terms of a modulus
@xmath and a phase @xmath . The overall Lagrangian is invariant under
two independent @xmath transformations. Hydrodynamically, this
corresponds to a system of two coupled superfluids, which can
effectively be described by a generalized pressure of the form @xmath
which is given by the (negative) tree-level potential. We have seen that
gradients of the phase @xmath constitute the conjugate momenta to the
currents @xmath . Calculating the equations of motion, one can see that
the currents @xmath and @xmath exhibit entrainment even at zero
temperature. Even in a case of no relative motion between both fluid
components, entrainment plays a significant role since it leads to a
coupling of the chemical potentials.

We have further studied the stability of the tree-level potential.
Depending on the sign of the product @xmath the gradient interaction
must either be positive or negative. There is no nonzero value for
@xmath at which the phase diagram is stable for any value of @xmath and
@xmath . The occurring instabilities can be related to entrainment since
the only appear in the presence of a gradient coupling. Furthermore, we
have identified a critical value for @xmath at which the coexistence
phase completely disappears in two out the four quadrants of the phase
diagram.

## Part V Outlook

The results presented in this thesis are an important step in connecting
the microscopic foundations of superfluidity with the corresponding
macroscopic hydrodynamical approach. Hydrodynamically, a superfluid can
be described in terms of a two-fluid model. At zero temperature only the
superfluid is present and above the critical temperature only the fluid
component termed normal fluid persist. The microscopic dynamics on the
other hand are determined by a quantum field theory. The necessary
ingredients to study superfluidity on a microscopic level are the
spontaneous breaking of a continuous symmetry by a Bose-Einstein
condensate as well as the elementary excitations of a given system. We
have shown explicitly how the effective hydrodynamic description of
superfluidity evolves from the underlying microscopic physics in part II
of this thesis. Analytic results for all non-dissipative hydrodynamic
quantities were obtained in the low-temperature limit. Based on these
results, a numerical and self-consistent study was carried out for all
temperatures below the critical temperature. In particular, superfluid
and normal-fluid densities, entrainment effects and the critical
velocity were studied for all temperatures. A more detailed summary of
the obtained results and the methods which have been applied can be
found in the conclusions of sections 10 and 11.

Based on this microscopic realization of the two-fluid model, we have
studied the sound excitations of a superfluid. Relative oscillations
between superfluid and normal-fluid densities allow for an additional
sound wave, which has been termed “second sound”. We have studied this
sound modes for all temperatures with rather surprising results: first
and second sound undergo what we termed “role reversal” as a function of
the temperature: while the first sound behaves like a pure pressure
(density) wave at low temperatures and transforms into a pure
temperature (entropy) wave for high temperatures, the second sound mode
behaves exactly the other way around. In addition, we studied the
near-nonrelativistic limit of the sound modes and compared the results
to other physical systems such a superfluid helium and cold atomic
gases. For a more detailed summary of the results obtained for the sound
modes, refer to the conclusion in section 15.

Finally we have investigated a two-fluid system consisting of a mixture
of two superfluids instead of one superfluid and one normal fluid in
section 16.

The results of this thesis should prove extremely useful in future
applications. Among the many existing (equivalent) formulations of
non-viscous superfluid hydrodynamics, we put special emphasis on the
canonical formulation introduced in section 5 since this is the
preferred framework to describe superfluidity in modern astrophysics.
With this important groundwork at hand, the consequent next step is to
approach applications in compact star physics. In section 4 , we have
seen that the rich and complex physics of dense matter in compact stars
require numerous extensions of the results presented in this thesis. We
shall now discuss some of these extensions.

-   We have seen in section 4.1.2 that usually more than one superfluid
    component is present in the interior of a compact star (e.g. neutron
    superfluids and proton superconductors, dense quark or nuclear
    matter with meson condensation etc.). In part IV we have discussed
    how such a coupled system of superfluids can be described at least
    qualitatively at zero temperature. At finite temperature an
    additional normal current appears. The corresponding hydrodynamic
    equations to be derived in this case are very complex since
    entrainment effects are expected to introduce couplings between all
    three fluid components resulting in a generalized pressure of the
    from

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    In analogy to chapters 10 and 11 all hydrodynamic parameters can be
    calculated in terms of field-theoretic variables either analytically
    in a low-temperature approximation or numerically for all
    temperatures.

-   A local gauge symmetry has to be introduced to consider charged
    particles (in particular to study proton-superconductivity). While a
    global U(1) symmetry led to a massless Goldstone mode in the
    excitation spectrum, a local will lead to a Meissner-mass for the
    gauge boson.

-   Actually most superfluids in a compact star are made of fermions (be
    it neutrons, protons or even quarks). Thus, BCS theory should be
    introduced to the existing microscopic calculations. From this point
    of view, the bosonic model described above corresponds to an
    effective low energy description when fermionic excitations are
    gapped. However, in light of recent measurements suggesting a
    critical temperature for neutron superfluidity of about @xmath K
    (see discussion in section 4.2 ), fermionic excitations should
    definitely be considered. The temperatures of compact stars,
    especially shortly after they a born in a supernova explosion can be
    as high as @xmath

-   The kaon condensate spontaneously breaks conservation of strangeness
    which is explicitly broken due to weak interactions in the first
    place. In which sense such a system still exhibits superfluid
    behavior should be analyzed by adding an explicit symmetry breaking
    term to the Lagrangian. The results can be implemented to refine the
    derivation of hydrodynamics for .

-   Probably the most significant complication is given by the
    introduction of viscous effects. In hydrodynamic terms this
    corresponds to a coupling of a superfluid to a viscous normal fluid
    described by a Navier-Stokes equation. One of the peculiarities of
    the two-fluid formalism is that more viscosity coefficients appear
    than in the description of a normal fluid. In addition to the shear
    viscosity mode, three bulk viscosities are present. If there are two
    superfluid components in addition to the normal fluid, the number of
    coefficients is even larger. For a discussion of nuclear matter see
    reference [ 76 ] , viscosity coefficients in CFL quark matter are
    discussed in [ 130 ] . Bulk viscosity in kaon-condensed color-flavor
    locked quark matter has been investigated before, see for example
    reference [ 131 ] . Equipped with a deeper understanding of the
    microscopic origin of the two fluid model, it might be possible to
    improve on existing calculations of the viscosity coefficients. In
    the context of compact stars, viscous effects are essential since
    they are expected to affect the r-mode instability.

In addition to these refinements in the derivation of the hydrodynamic
equations, there are plenty of interesting phenomenological aspects
which could be analyzed in this framework:

-   As we have discussed, stable regions of superfluidity are bounded by
    the critical temperature and velocity. In addition, another boundary
    is given by regions where collective excitations (i.e. the sound
    modes) become unstable. This phenomenon is also termed “two-stream
    instability” and can be related to observable phenomena such as
    pulsar glitches discussed in section 4.2 . A study of the two-stream
    instability based on the hydrodynamics derived in this thesis has
    already been carried out [ 117 ] and is in agreement with existing
    literature [ 132 ] in astrophysics. Taking into account two
    superfluid components, the resulting three fluid system at finite
    temperature will show an even richer spectrum of sound modes and
    additional instabilities are likely to occur. The study of these
    instabilities might provide new insights into the dynamics of pulsar
    glitches.

-   Of special interest are properties of the crust of a compact star
    which have a strong influence on most observables of a compact star
    including X-ray bursts, magnetar flares or pulsar glitches. In this
    context, the superfluid phase within the crust and especially
    entrainment effects are important. These entrainment effects between
    crust and superfluid are assumed to be of a different origin as
    those discussed in section 5.1 : it is speculated that neutrons can
    be scattered by the crystalline structure of the crust according to
    Bragg’s law [ 57 , 58 ] . As a result, it might be necessary to take
    into account an effective reduction of the flux of superfluid
    neutrons in the vicinity of the crust.

-   Another particularly interesting field of study are the heat
    transport properties in superfluids. The most important channel for
    heat transport in superfluid helium is convection. However, we have
    discussed in section 4.2 that convection might be suppressed in the
    nuclear matter due presence of electrons while in CFL it might
    indeed be dominant. A calculation of the thermal conductivity (and
    probably also the specific heat) under careful consideration of all
    available excitations in the various superfluid phases might shed
    some light on this question.

Many more projects could be added to this list. It should be emphasized
that the proposed studies are certainly not a “one way road” leading
from fundamental field theory to astrophysics. Much more, a fruitful
symbiosis has evolved at the interface of these two disciplines: a
deeper understanding of dense hadronic matter from first principles
allows for a more accurate modeling of compact stars whereas at the same
time observations of compact stars can be used as a testing ground for
fundamental physics. In particular, the outline of the QCD phase diagram
at intermediate densities is one of the most challenging open problems
in modern particle physics: as mentioned in the introduction, only in a
region of asymptotically high density, quark matter can be analyzed from
first principles and important information such as the magnitude of the
superconducting gap can be obtained. In intermediate density regions, a
rich variety of candidate ground states have been studied. Among them
are the phase, two-color superconductors or crystalline phases. Even a
continuous transition from quark to hadronic matter is in principle
possible. These fundamental questions can most likely not be attacked by
conventional techniques: heavy ion collisions and lattice calculations
are powerful tools to probe the phase structure in a regime of high
temperatures and low densities, but their applicability at higher
densities is very limited. The study of compact stars as the only
“laboratory“ where such intermediate densities are realized could prove
to be invaluable as the maximum value for the chemical potential inside
a compact star is estimated to be high enough for deconfined quark
matter to be conceivable.

Finally it should be remarked that the results obtained from the studies
presented in this theses are not limited to relativistic superfluids
appearing in high energy physics. We have discussed how the
non-relativistic limit can be extracted from the relativistic version of
the two-fluid equations and the solutions for first and second sound. In
particular the effects of instabilities which are induced by the
critical velocity, the two-stream instability or the instability of the
(zero-temperature) thermodynamic pressure in a system of two-coupled
superfluids are subject of intense research in the fields of cold atomic
gases or liquid helium. The obtained results and the outcome of possible
future studies are therefore of interest to a large community of
scientist.

## Part VI Appendix

### Appendix A Matsubara sum with anisotropic excitation energies and
the low-temperature limit

Here we derive the result ( 10.4 ) for the effective action. The
calculation shown here is formulated in a general way, such that it is
also applicable to the stress-energy tensor and the current. In order to
perform the Matsubara sum in ( 10.3 ), we write the determinant of the
inverse propagator in terms of its zeros,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the presence of a superflow @xmath , the zeros are very complicated.
The reason is the linear term in @xmath in the off-diagonal elements.
With the help of Mathematica we obtain analytical, but very lengthy
expressions for @xmath . For small momenta, we can write

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We now use the Matsubara sum

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath if @xmath and vice versa, and an arbitrary function @xmath
(without poles in the complex @xmath plane). For the effective action,
@xmath is given by ( 10.5 ), for the stress-energy tensor and the
current see ( 10.4 ), ( 10.29 ). In the low-temperature approximation
which we discuss in appendix D , we may neglect the contribution from
the massive mode, i.e., the two of the four terms in the sum where
@xmath . More precisely: later, after writing @xmath with the Bose
distribution @xmath , we shall only keep the thermal contribution,
which, in the case of the massive mode, is suppressed for low
temperatures. For the non-thermal (divergent) contribution, all terms
have to be kept in principle. However, after renormalization, the
contribution is subleading since it contains an additional factor of the
coupling constant @xmath and we shall neglect it. Therefore, after
taking the thermodynamic limit, we can write

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where, in the last step, we have changed the integration variable of the
second integral @xmath , and have used @xmath as well as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This relation is easily checked for the small-momentum expressions ( A.1
), ( A.2 ), and also holds for the full results. Due to the symmetries
with respect to reflection of @xmath , the poles @xmath have thus
dropped out of the result, and the only physical excitations are @xmath
. Therefore, in the main text, we have simply denoted @xmath and @xmath
.

### Appendix B Path integrals over complex fields

In this section of the appendix, we evaluate path integrals for
expectation values of a microscopic (grand canonical) ensemble of
particles which are given by (see also equation ( 10.10 ))

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Obviously, this involves solving the path integral for the partition
function @xmath which we shall discuss first. Later we turn to the
discussion of the slightly more complicated integral in the numerator.

#### b.1 The partition function in momentum space

We consider the Fourier transform of the partition function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

By @xmath we denote the momentum four vector @xmath , @xmath denotes a
complex doublet field and @xmath a hermitian @xmath matrix. Since in
position space @xmath is real, we seem to have doubled dimensions by
using the complex fields @xmath and @xmath . In order to account for
this, we have to restrict ourselves to positive values for @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Rewriting the second term

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

we find that both contributions add up to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

This identity holds for the case of vanishing as well as for finite
background superflow where @xmath is of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the integration measure, we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

We now diagonalize @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The columns of the matrix @xmath are given by the eigenvectors
corresponding to the eigenvalues @xmath , @xmath . After reinserting
@xmath into the exponent of ( B.2 ), we redefine the fields @xmath by
using the matrix @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The integration measure remains unaffected by this transformation. We
thus find:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

After decomposing the complex fields into real and imaginary part (
@xmath , @xmath ) and calculating the corresponding Jacobian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can now independently integrate all real and imaginary parts (which
are now simple scalar Gauss functions):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In the last step, we used @xmath . Finally using

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

we arrive at the final result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The additional factor of @xmath compared to the case of real fields
@xmath again is a result of the doubled number of dimensions in the
integral and can be absorbed by a normalization factor @xmath of the
path integral.

#### b.2 The stress-energy tensor and current

Next, we have to calculate the numerator of equation ( B.1 ). We insert
an operator @xmath which leads to the expectation value of @xmath and
@xmath . To construct this operator and evaluate @xmath from ( 10.9 ),
we first need to calculate the propagator in position space . We
introduce the shifted complex fields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and insert them into

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

This results in

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.17)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We can thus denote @xmath (the quadratic terms in the fluctuations
@xmath ) in the @xmath space spanned by @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the notation @xmath denotes @xmath (alternatively, using partial
integration one can show that it is sufficient to have all operators act
to the right). Partition function and pressure in position space are
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

We use the pressure as effective action and construct the stress energy
tensor in from

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

This amounts to the calculation of an expectation value of @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.21)
              @xmath   @xmath      (B.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Explicitly, the inserted operator reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

To perform the actual integration, it is again advantageous to transform
to momentum space

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

At this point we should remind ourselves that gradients of the
Goldstones fields in the applied approximation are constant

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

and hence remain unaffected by Fourier transformations. The Fourier
transformed operator thus reads (technically, after Fourier
transformation this matrix is no longer an operator and we shall denote
it

as @xmath instead of @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The matrix @xmath is then given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the following abbreviations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This amounts to the calculation of the following path integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us pick out one term in the sum over @xmath and @xmath in the
integrand of the numerator (we shall suppress the Lorentz indices in the
following discussion)

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath                  (B.29)
     @xmath   @xmath         
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

The only non-vanishing contributions to the path integral are obtained
by choosing @xmath and @xmath . The integration over all remaining
@xmath can be canceled with the corresponding integrals in the
denominator. Repeating this for all @xmath and @xmath , we are left with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

To restrict @xmath to positive values, we have to consider @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Parametrizing @xmath and @xmath in exactly the same way as in the
calculation of the denominator, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

The variables @xmath can now be integrated out resulting in

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that we have now explicitly included the fact that the off diagonal
elements of @xmath and @xmath are imaginary. All quantities that appear
in the above equation are now real ( @xmath in the formula below now
refers to @xmath .) To simplify the result we use

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

leading to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

In summary, the integral ( B.30 ) calculates to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting the definition of the matrix @xmath , reintroducing the
Lorentz indices and denoting @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

we finally arrive at the result ( 10.11 )

  -- -- -- --------
           (B.39)
  -- -- -- --------

One can calculate the charge current in exactly the same way,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

This time, the inserted operator is given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (B.41)
  -- -- -- --------

resulting in ( 10.12 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with @xmath .

### Appendix C Renormalization and useful identities for the
stress-energy tensor

With the function @xmath from ( 10.14 ) we can write the effective
action ( 10.1 ) as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

On the other hand, using ( 10.3 ), we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with the four-vector @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , @xmath given in (
10.15 ). A useful relation between @xmath , @xmath , @xmath can be
derived with the help of the explicit form of the determinant of the
inverse tree-level propagator,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Next, we rewrite the stress-energy tensor. With

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

we can write the stress-energy tensor from ( 10.11 ) as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have used the definition of @xmath ( 10.14 ) and have added a
constant, diagonal tensor @xmath which has to be determined such that
the conditions @xmath and @xmath are fulfilled. In order to implement
these conditions we now set @xmath and @xmath . In this case, because of
the first line of ( C ), the pressure @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

In order to compute the energy density @xmath we need

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where we have used the form of the pressure ( C.1 ) and @xmath (due to
the linear temperature-dependence of the Matsubara frequencies).

Consequently,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

On the other hand, the nonzero components of the stress-energy tensor
without superflow are, from ( C.5 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

By comparing ( C.10 ) with ( C.6 ) and ( C.11 ) with ( C.9 ) we conclude
that @xmath . Inserting this into ( C.5 ), we can write the renormalized
stress-energy tensor as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath .

### Appendix D Small-temperature expansion

Here we explain the small-temperature expansion for the effective
action, the stress-energy tensor, and the current density which is used
in section 10.4 . We focus on the effective action in this appendix, but
the other results are obtained analogously.

Expanding in powers of the temperature corresponds to expanding the
integrand in powers of @xmath . In order to obtain the result up to
@xmath , we expand the integrand of the momentum integral in 10.4 as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and, for the dispersion in the argument of the Bose distribution,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are angular-dependent,
dimensionless coefficients. Inserting these expansions, introducing a
dimensionless integration variable @xmath , expanding in @xmath , and
performing the resulting integration over @xmath yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have used the integrals

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the case without superflow, @xmath , the angular integral becomes
trivial. In this case, with @xmath , the full dispersions are given by
equation ( 10.30 ), and we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

We thus find for the pressure

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (D.7)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The expressions for the case with superflow are quite lengthy in
general, and we give the final results in the limit @xmath in the main
text, see table 2 in section 10.4 .

### Appendix E Renormalization in 2PI

In this appendix we discuss the renormalization of the 2PI approach. The
renormalization procedure is done on the level of the effective action.
Its general form ( 11.1 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have abbreviated

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the @xmath term we have used the tree-level propagator ( 10.2 ) and
the ansatz for the propagator ( 11.9 ), while for @xmath we have used
the definition ( 11.4 ) and the fact that the propagator is
antisymmetric, @xmath .

We shall add a counterterm @xmath to @xmath , such that the effective
action becomes renormalized at the stationary point. It is instructive
to start with the non-superfluid case where there is no condensate, then
discuss the case with condensate but without superflow, and then turn to
the most complicated case that includes condensate and superflow.

#### e.1 Uncondensed phase with (spurious) background field

First we consider the high-temperature, non-superfluid, phase. We can
formally include a background field @xmath also in this phase, although
we shall see that the physics will turn out to be independent of @xmath
. If the condensate vanishes, there is no need to introduce two
different self-consistent masses @xmath and @xmath , and the full
propagator is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

From the poles of the propagator we obtain the dispersion relations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . These are simply the usual particle and anti-particle
excitations, carrying one unit of positive and negative charge,
respectively, but with the spatial momentum shifted by @xmath , for
particles and anti-particles in opposite directions.

The effective action in the uncondensed phase is given by equation ( E.1
) with @xmath . Moreover, since there is only one self-consistent mass
@xmath , we also have @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

We now add counterterms to the effective action in order to cancel the
infinities in @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The recipe for finding these counterterms is very simple: we add
counterterms @xmath and @xmath to each mass squared and each coupling
constant that appears in the action ( E.5 ) (neither @xmath nor @xmath
depend on @xmath or @xmath explicitly). This will be a bit less
straightforward in the condensed phase, where we shall need two
different counterterms @xmath and @xmath , see next subsection. The mass
counterterm @xmath is of order @xmath , while @xmath is of order @xmath
. The crucial point will be to show that all divergences can be canceled
with medium independent quantities @xmath and @xmath . Of course, the
total counterterm @xmath does depend on the medium because @xmath and
@xmath depend on @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Let us first discuss the
renormalized stationarity equation. In the uncondensed phase there is
only one equation, for the self-consistent mass @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

In evaluating integrals like @xmath we will use a notation where a
subscripted argument indicates subtraction of the function’s value when
that argument is zero,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using that notation, we split the integral @xmath into a zero
temperature part that depends on the cutoff @xmath and a part @xmath
that depends on @xmath but goes to zero as @xmath and is
cutoff-independent,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the dependence on @xmath is not explicitly shown. Evaluating the
Matsubara sum, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Bose distribution function. The terms in the
large-momentum expansion of the integrand that lead to cutoff
dependences are shown in table 4 (with @xmath for the uncondensed case).

We evaluate the momentum integral @xmath via proper time regularization
[ 111 ] , using the general relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, in this case, @xmath , and exchange the order of the @xmath and
@xmath integrals. The @xmath integral is now finite, so we can eliminate
@xmath because it is simply a shift of the integration variable. The
ultraviolet cutoff @xmath is implemented by setting the lower limit of
the proper time integral to @xmath . This yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have introduced the renormalization scale @xmath , and where
@xmath is the Euler-Mascheroni constant. We can now insert the
regularized integral into the stationarity equation ( E.7 ), and
separate it in to a cutoff-independent part

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

and a cutoff-dependent part

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the ambiguity in performing this separation corresponds to
choosing the renormalization scale @xmath . In order to determine @xmath
and @xmath , we eliminate @xmath with the help of equation E.14 . The
resulting equation has two contributions, one of which is medium
independent and one of which is proportional to @xmath . Both
contributions have to vanish separately, and thus we obtain two
equations for @xmath and @xmath whose solutions are

  -- -- -- --------
           (E.16)
  -- -- -- --------

If we introduce the bare mass @xmath and the bare coupling, @xmath , we
can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next, we need to check whether the same counterterms cancel all
divergences in the pressure @xmath . Again, we write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where again we do not show the dependence on @xmath , and where, after
performing the Matsubara sum and taking the thermodynamic limit, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Proper time regularization eliminates the cutoff-dependent term that
depended explicitly on the background field @xmath , and we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Inserting this into @xmath , using the stationarity equation ( E.7 ) to
eliminate @xmath , and making use of the relations ( E.17 ), we find
that indeed all medium dependent divergences in @xmath are canceled.

We are left with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The first three terms on the right-hand side are independent of the
thermodynamic parameters @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , and hence have
no effect on the physics.

#### e.2 Condensed phase without superflow

As a next step, we consider the condensed phase, but first without
supercurrent, @xmath . In this case, with @xmath , the inverse
propagator is ³⁵ ³⁵ 35 Remember that @xmath is just a notation for two
different self-consistent masses, as in reference [ 50 ] , i.e., @xmath
should not be confused with a counterterm.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

which leads to the dispersion relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, the counterterm ( E.6 ) is generalized to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the condensed phase it is necessary to introduce two different
counterterms @xmath and @xmath for the two structures @xmath and @xmath
[ 133 ] ³⁶ ³⁶ 36 In the notation of [ 133 ] , @xmath , @xmath . . We
could have put another different counterterm in front of the @xmath
term, but we have already anticipated the result that this counterterm
is a particular linear combination of @xmath and @xmath .

The stationarity equations become, in agreement to [ 133 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the first one is obtained from extremizing the action with respect
to @xmath and the second and the third are the two nontrivial components
of the Dyson-Schwinger equation. Inserting ( E.26 ) into ( E.25 ) as
well as adding and subtracting ( E.26 ) and ( E.27 ) to/from each other
yields the simpler system of equations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.28)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the first equation already has its final, renormalized form. Using
the notation of ( E.8 ), we rewrite @xmath by first separating off the
@xmath -dependent term, and then separating off the @xmath -dependence
at @xmath , leaving a @xmath vacuum term that contains all the cutoff
dependence,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where each quantity has dependence on @xmath which is not explicitly
shown. As in [ 133 ] , when we set @xmath or @xmath to zero we keep
unchanged the mass parameters of the full propagator @xmath and @xmath ,
even though in reality they depend on @xmath and @xmath . Evaluating (
E.31 ), ( E.32 ) with the help of ( E.2 ) and ( E.22 ), the @xmath
integrals are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.33)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The thermal integrals @xmath are simply given by @xmath with an
additional factor @xmath in the integrand, which renders them
cutoff-independent.

The vacuum contribution is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

and its cutoff-dependence arises from the terms given in table 4 (after
setting @xmath ). This can be evaluated using proper-time
regularization,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.37)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The finite parts @xmath of @xmath are then given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is obtained via ( E.32 ), by numerically evaluating @xmath
, combining them into one cutoff-independent integral. Now we can come
back to the stationarity equations ( E.28 - E.30 ). The first of these
equations does not contain any divergences anymore. With ( E.29 ) and (
E.30 ) we proceed analogously as explained for the uncondensed phase: we
insert equations ( E.36 ) and separate finite and infinite
contributions. The finite contributions are the renormalized equations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.39)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.40)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In the equations for the infinite contributions we first eliminate
@xmath and @xmath with the help of equations ( E.39 ), ( E.40 ) and then
separate medium-independent terms from terms proportional to @xmath for
equation ( E.29 ) and @xmath for ( E.30 ). The requirement that all
infinities cancel yields the conditions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.41)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which confirms that @xmath and @xmath are indeed different. By
introducing the two bare couplings @xmath and the bare mass @xmath we
can write this in a more compact way,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, we need to check that all divergences in the pressure cancel.
This requires evaluation of @xmath in ( E.1 ). In analogy with our
evaluation of @xmath , we separate the @xmath and @xmath dependence from
the vacuum term, writing

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.43)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The @xmath “vacuum” integral is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Evaluating this using a proper-time regulator we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.45)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The finite part of @xmath is then the finite part of the vacuum
contribution plus the @xmath and @xmath dependence,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

By using equations ( E.29 ) and ( E.30 ) to eliminate @xmath and @xmath
we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                                
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

With the help of ( E.42 ) we rewrite the last two terms of this
expression,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.50)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We see that the divergences appearing here cancel all divergences from
@xmath in ( E.45 ) that depend on @xmath and @xmath , and we arrive at
the renormalized pressure

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first three terms on the right-hand side are independent of the
thermodynamic parameters @xmath and @xmath , and hence have no effect on
the physics; the next two terms are the renormalized tree-level
potential; then, @xmath is the finite part of the @xmath term, while the
last two terms are the renormalized version of the combined terms coming
from @xmath and @xmath .

#### e.3 Renormalization with Goldstone mode

As discussed in section 11.3 , the present formalism violates the
Goldstone theorem, and since our discussion of the superfluid properties
requires an exact Goldstone mode we need to consider modified
stationarity equations. We thus have to check how our modification
affects the renormalization and what the renormalized pressure at the
new “Goldstone point” is (which is slightly off the “stationary point”).
To this end, we emphasize that the renormalization procedure explained
above is designed to work at the stationary point. In particular,
equation ( E.51 ) is the renormalized pressure at that point because we
have used the stationarity equations ( E.28 - E.30 ) that include finite
as well as infinite parts. It seems we would have to redo our whole
analysis for the “Goldstone point”. However, we may simply do the
modification in the finite part of the stationarity equations, thus
preserving all the results for the counterterms. This amounts to
changing equation ( E.40 ) to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

but keeping the two other renormalized equations ( E.28 ) and ( E.39 )
as well as all infinite contributions in equations ( E.29 ) and ( E.30 )
as they are. It is then obvious that the counterterms are still given by
( E.41 ). All we need to do is compute the finite part of the pressure;
by construction, all infinities in the pressure will still cancel. We
can thus simply replace all integrals in the effective action ( E.1 ) by
their finite parts, and use ( E.39 ) and ( E.52 ) to find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### e.4 Condensed phase with superflow

Following the procedure of section E.2 , we first separate the integrals
@xmath and @xmath into their thermal parts @xmath and @xmath and the
cutoff dependent integrals ³⁷ ³⁷ 37 For explicit numerical calculations,
the identity

@xmath

can be useful, the right-hand side being simpler due to the fewer
appearances of the complicated excitation energies.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.54)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.55)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the positive solutions to ( 11.25 ), which depend on
the angle between the momentum of the excitation and the superflow.
Next, we need to regularize @xmath and @xmath . The divergent
contributions of these integrals are shown in Table 4. The integrals
@xmath show exactly the same divergences as for the case without
superflow discussed in section E.2 . In @xmath , however, there is a
divergent contribution that depends explicitly on @xmath . This
divergence is exactly the same as for the uncondensed case discussed in
section E.1 . In that case, the @xmath dependent divergence in the
pressure was spurious because after regularization with the proper time
method the integrals in pressure and self-energy did not depend on
@xmath anymore.

One might think that, in order to regularize the divergent integrals, we
should subtract the same integrals at the point @xmath . However, this
procedure would not take care of the @xmath dependent divergence. Thus
we seem to be forced to subtract the integrals at the point @xmath with
@xmath kept fixed, i.e., @xmath , which reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

and analogously for @xmath . The @xmath dispersion turns out to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

The presence of the two square roots in this expression renders a
straightforward application of the proper time regularization very
complicated and one would have to proceed numerically.

We notice, however, that there is another way to treat the ultraviolet
divergences, using the same proper time regularization. Since the
structure of the divergences is a simple combination of the divergences
of the cases discussed above, it is easy to “guess” a generalization of
the subtraction terms to the present case,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.58)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.59)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

is simply the @xmath dispersion of the uncondensed phase in the presence
of a @xmath , see equation ( E.4 ), generalized to two different mass
parameters @xmath and @xmath . It is also the @xmath dispersion of the
condensed phase without @xmath , see equation ( E.35 ), with @xmath
added as a simple shift of the three-momentum. According to the
structure of the divergences, it is clear that the second integrals on
the right-hand sides of equations ( E.58 ) and ( E.59 ) are finite. And,
the first integrals can be regularized with the proper time method just
as in the previous subsections: the @xmath dependence drops out since
the proper time integrals “ignore” this dependence, and the resulting
cutoff-dependent terms together with the finite parts @xmath , @xmath
are exactly the same as in section E.2 . Therefore, the renormalization
works as above, with exactly the same medium independent counterterms as
given in ( E.41 ).

The choice of the subtraction term corresponds to a renormalization
condition, and usually this term is the vacuum contribution. The
appearance of the superflow in the divergent contributions appears to
make the choice ambiguous, and it is not a priori clear whether using (
E.56 )-( E.57 ) or ( E.58 )-( E.61 ) is the correct physical choice. We
are rather led to the conclusion that the very existence of the @xmath
dependent divergence is problematic, because we seem to have found two
renormalization conditions that differ in their predictions of how
physical observables depend on the superflow. Here we only point out
this problem, and leave its solution to further studies. It will not
affect our physical results because we shall restrict ourselves to weak
coupling strengths where these ambiguous terms are negligibly small, see
discussion in section 11.4 .

In the main part we summarize the results of the renormalization
procedure using equations ( E.58 )-( E.61 ), see equations ( 11.16 )-(
11.18 ) for the stationarity equation and ( 11.21 ) for the pressure.

### Appendix F Calculation of sound velocities

#### f.1 Derivation of the wave equations

We start from the hydrodynamic equations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Before we evaluate them, we collect some useful relations. We denote
@xmath and thus can write with ( 5.4 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and we have eliminated @xmath
and @xmath by using

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the enthalpy density of the normal fluid. In the linear
approximation, @xmath times a space-time derivative is negligible,
because @xmath and we neglect products of @xmath with space-time
derivatives. Therefore, we may approximate

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

This relation is needed to express derivatives of any thermodynamic
quantity in terms of derivatives of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . For
instance, we can write @xmath etc. and obtain the following useful
identities,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath has been used. With these preparations we can discuss the
hydrodynamic equations. The current conservation ( F.1 ) obviously
becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have used @xmath and @xmath . Inserting ( F.7 ) and ( F.10 )
into this equation, taking the time derivative of the result, and
multiplying the whole equation by @xmath yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Due to the linear approximation, all expressions have the form
(equilibrium quantity) @xmath (second space-time derivative), since
products of two first space-time derivatives are of higher order.

The entropy conservation ( F.2 ) reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting ( F.8 ), taking the time derivative of the result and
multiplying the whole equation by @xmath yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is convenient for the following to add ( F.1 ) and ( F.14 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we have rewritten the derivative with respect to @xmath in terms
of the derivative with respect to @xmath . Finally, we need the
vorticity equation ( F.3 ). The temporal component becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can neglect this equation completely, since in both terms the
normal-fluid velocity is multiplied with a space-time derivative. The
spatial components are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath from equations ( F.5 ) has been used. The last term needs
some rearrangements,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Inserting ( F.7 ), ( F.8 ) and ( F.9 ) into this relation, the result
into ( F.16 ) and taking the divergence of

the resulting equation, we arrive at

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The normal-fluid velocity can now be eliminated by solving this relation
for @xmath and inserting the result into the other two equations:
inserting it into F.14 yields, after multiplying the whole equation with
@xmath , ( 12 ), while inserting it into ( F.1 ) yields ( 12 ). These
are the sound wave equations from which the sound velocities are
computed as follows.

#### f.2 Solution of sound wave equations and low-temperature
approximation

Replacing the chemical potential and the temperature in all space-time
derivatives of the sound wave equations ( 12 ), ( 12 ) by @xmath and
@xmath , the sound wave equations become

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (F.20)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , and we have abbreviated

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In general, the determinant of the coefficient matrix of the system of
two equations ( F.20 ), ( F.2 ) yields a complicated quartic equation
for @xmath . However, we can simplify the result in the low-temperature
approximation as follows. First one can check, for instance by explicit
calculation, that the temperature dependence of the various coefficients
is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.23)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , and where the prefactors in front of the various
powers of @xmath depend on the superfluid velocity @xmath . Since we
have computed the pressure up to order @xmath , all terms of order
@xmath and higher must be neglected in these expressions. We see in
particular that only the @xmath ’s contribute in the limit @xmath . Now,
for the determinant we encounter two kinds of products, namely @xmath
and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The first line shows that the @xmath terms are unknown in our expansion
because a @xmath term in @xmath would give rise to a @xmath term in
@xmath , but we have not computed @xmath . Therefore, we must neglect
all products of the form given in the second line since they are all of
order @xmath and higher. In other words, it is consistent with our
approximation to set @xmath and use the @xmath results for @xmath . In
this case the quartic equation for @xmath factorizes into two quadratic
equations,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

After dividing out the overall factor @xmath of the quartic equation,
the highest remaining power of temperature is 2, i.e., our approximation
allows us to reliably compute the sound velocities up to @xmath . From
the first equation we see that one of the solutions has no @xmath
correction. This is the velocity of first sound. The second equation
yields the velocity of second sound which does have a @xmath correction.
We see that the coefficients @xmath are needed to compute this
correction. These coefficients arise from the @xmath terms in the
entropy, i.e., from the @xmath terms in the pressure. Had we truncated
our expansion of the pressure at order @xmath , the velocity of second
sound would have turned out to be independent of temperature. There are
two physical solutions of ( F.2 ), ( F.26 ), @xmath . For the explicit
calculation of the two sound velocities @xmath , @xmath we need @xmath
and @xmath from ( 10.40 ) ( 10.41 ) and the entropy @xmath (obtained by
taking the derivative with respect to temperature of @xmath from table
2). The results are shown given in ( 13.1 ), ( 13 ) .

#### f.3 Sound velocities at low temperatures for arbitrary m

In this appendix we derive the result ( 13.3 ) for the sound velocities
in the low-temperature approximation and in the limit of vanishing
superflow. As input, we need the tree level (and @xmath ) expression of
the condensate

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the low-temperature approximation for the pressure

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the dispersion relation of the Goldstone mode,
containing the superflow; the massive mode only becomes relevant at
higher temperatures and can be neglected. With the help of relation (
11.38 ) we write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using that the dispersion @xmath is given by the zeros of the
determinant of the inverse free tree-level propagator @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where ( F.27 ) has been used, we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here, @xmath is the longitudinal component of the momentum with respect
to the superflow, and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the dispersion of the Goldstone mode at vanishing superflow. Now the
only nontrivial angular integration is the one over @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For low temperatures, we can expand the integrand in ( F.29 ) for small
@xmath . We find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

and with the dimensionless coefficients

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.33)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the integrals

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.35)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

for the dimensionless variable @xmath have been used. Inserting the
coefficients from ( F.33 ) into ( F.34 ) yields the result for the
superfluid density

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The pressure ( 10.32 ), evaluated at @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (F.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is all we need to compute the sound velocities: we can now
straightforwardly take all relevant derivatives of the pressure, compute
the normal-fluid density via @xmath , and insert the results into the
wave equation for the sound velocities.

### Appendix G Chemical potential in a system of two coupled superfluids

In this part of the appendix, we shall prove that the usual way in which
a chemical potential is introduced in a field theory (i.e. similar to
the zeroth component of a gauge field) remains intact in the presence of
a gradient coupling. To this end, we start from the Lagrangian

  -- -- -- -------
           (G.1)
  -- -- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and decompose the complex fields @xmath in the usual way

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (G.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (G.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

This results in the following kinetic terms

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                                
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and interaction terms

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with the abbreviation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

All remaining terms in ( G.1 ) are irrelevant for this analysis. The
canonically conjugate momenta @xmath are given by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (G.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (G.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This relation can easily be inverted to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (G.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The currents are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Note that after plugging in the conjugate momenta from ( G.11 ), the
zeroth components of these currents simply read:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (G.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (G.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

To eliminate the dependence of @xmath on @xmath in favor of the momenta
@xmath , we need calculate the factor required for the Legendre
transform of @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Observe that for @xmath this reduces to @xmath . From ( G ) and ( G ) we
need all contributions which include time derivatives of @xmath . From
these, we calculate all contributions to @xmath which involve time
derivatives (we could carry along terms in @xmath through the whole
calculation but they are irrelevant), eliminate them in favor of @xmath
and obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This is not yet the expression which appears in the path integral of the
partition function (see equation ( 5.35 )). We need

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (G.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Plugging in equations ( G.12 ), ( G ) and ( G ), we obtain a result
which can be summarized as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (G.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is the inverse of the matrix defined in ( G.8 ) with an
additional factor @xmath because @xmath appears in formula ( G.16 ). We
can now use

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (G.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have introduced the shifted fields @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (G.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The second term on the right hand side of equation ( G.18 ) is now
quadratic in the shifted momenta and can easily be integrated out (the
linear shift doesn’t affect the integration measure @xmath ). The first
term on the right hand side represents the new shifted Lagrangian and
evaluates to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (G.20)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (G.21)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This corresponds precisely to

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This completes the proof.