The hydrodynamic description of a superfluid is usually based on a
two-fluid picture. In this thesis, basic properties of such a
relativistic two-fluid system are derived from the underlying
microscopic physics of a complex scalar quantum field theory. To obtain
analytic results of all non-dissipative hydrodynamic quantities in terms
of field theoretic variables, calculations are first carried out in a
low-temperature and weak-coupling approximation. In a second step, the
2-particle-irreducible formalism is applied: This formalism allows for a
numerical evaluation of the hydrodynamic parameters for all temperatures
below the critical temperature. In addition, a system of two coupled
superfluids is studied. As an application, the velocities of first and
second sound in the presence of a superflow are calculated. The results
show that first (second) sound evolves from a density (temperature) wave
at low temperatures to a temperature (density) wave at high
temperatures. This role reversal is investigated for ultra-relativistic
and near-nonrelativistic systems for zero and nonzero superflow. The
studies carried out in this thesis are of a very general nature as one
does not have to specify the system for which the microscopic field
theory is an effective description. As a particular example,
superfluidity in dense quark and nuclear matter in compact stars are
discussed.

Dedicated to my parents with deep and profound gratitude. I would not be
the person I am today without their constant support and guidance.
