What can we say about the quantum system if we have incomplete
information? How do we write down a statistical operator as an estimator
for the physical system at hand, consistent with the incomplete
information that we already possess? This thesis looks at a basic case:
the case when we possess the probability values for some but not all
measurement bases required to fully characterize the quantum system.
Specifically, we shall consider a three-dimensional quantum system.

We will consider maximum entropy methods and ways to compute the mean
quantum state, in order to calculate a state, an estimator, that is as
‘representative’ of prior data as possible. To this end we will provide
numerical methods to compute some of these estimators, and compare these
methods amongst each other. We will find that these estimators perform
quite closely to each other, settling the question of which method is
the best.

Within the problem of incomplete measurement, there is the puzzle about
the different possible future measurements to complete the measurement
of the quantum system. Each of these possibilities constitutes a
different way of parameterizing the quantum system. We approach this
puzzle by initially not assuming that any particular future measurement
might be better than others, and eventually come to the conclusion that
there exists a particular set of measurement that is ‘best’ in order to
complete the measurement of the quantum system. This is a line of
approach independent of existing theory in quantum measurements, yet
complementary as well. It provides us with a deeper understanding of the
connection of the optimal set of measurements and the quantum system.
