In this thesis, we consider domino tilings of three-dimensional regions,
especially those of the form @xmath . In particular, we investigate the
connected components of the space of tilings of such regions by flips,
the local move performed by removing two adjacent dominoes and placing
them back in the only other possible position. For regions of the form
@xmath , we define a polynomial invariant @xmath that characterizes
tilings that are “almost in the same connected component”, in a sense
discussed in the thesis. We also prove that the space of domino tilings
of such a region is connected by flips and trits, a local move performed
by removing three adjacent dominoes, no two of them parallel, and
placing them back in the only other possible position. For the general
case, the invariant is an integer, the twist, to which we give a simple
combinatorial formula and an interpretation via knot theory; we also
prove that the twist has additive properties for suitable decompositions
of a region. Finally, we investigate the range of possible values for
the twist of tilings of an @xmath box.

\key Three-dimensional tilings \key Dominoes \key Dimers \key Flip
accessibility \key Connectivity by local moves \key Writhe \key Knot
theory

\AfterBegin

itemize \BeforeBegin equation \BeforeEnd equation \BeforeBegin theo
\BeforeEnd theo \BeforeBegin definition \BeforeEnd definition
\BeforeBegin coro \BeforeEnd coro \BeforeBegin prop \BeforeEnd prop
\authorR Pereira, Pedro Henrique Milet Pinheiro \advisor Nicolau Corção
Saldanha \advisorR Saldanha, Nicolau Corção \titlebr Coberturas de
regiões tridimensionais por dominós 05 \dayOrd 5th February \monthN 02
2015 \city Rio de Janeiro \CDD 510 \department Matemática \program
Matemática \programbr Matemática \school Centro Técnico Científico
\university Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio de Janeiro \uni
PUC-Rio \jury \jurymember Carlos Gustavo Tamm de Araújo MoreiraInstituto
Nacional de Matemática Pura e Aplicada – IMPA \jurymember Carlos
TomeiDepartamento de Matemática – PUC-Rio \jurymember Robert David
MorrisInstituto Nacional de Matemática Pura e Aplicada – IMPA
\jurymember Roberto Imbuzeiro Moraes Felinto de OliveiraInstituto
Nacional de Matemática Pura e Aplicada – IMPA \jurymember Thomas Maurice
LewinerDepartamento de Matemática – PUC-Rio \jurymember Juliana Abrantes
FreireDepartamento de Matemática – PUC-Rio \schoolhead José Eugenio Leal
\resume The author completed his undergraduate studies in Mathematics at
PUC-Rio in 2009, and obtained the degree of Mestre from PUC-Rio in 2011.
\acknowledgment To CNPq, FAPERJ and PUC-Rio, whose support made this
research possible. To my advisor, Prof. Nicolau Corção Saldanha, for his
patience, support and willingness to share his knowledge. To the
Department of Mathematics, Kátia and Creuza in particular, for their
availability and efficiency in helping in various situations. To my
family, for their constant love and support. \keywordsbr \key Coberturas
tridimensionais \key Dominós \key Dímeros \key Acessibilidade por flips
\key Conectividade por movimentos locais \key Writhe \key Teoria dos nós
\abstractbr Nessa tese, consideramos coberturas de regiões
tridimensionais por dominós, especialmente as da forma @xmath . Em
particular, nós investigamos as componentes conexas do espaço de
coberturas desse tipo de região por flips, o movimento local que
consiste em remover dois dominós paralelos adjacentes e colocá-los de
volta na única outra posição possível. Para regiões da forma @xmath ,
nós definimos um invariante polinomial @xmath que caracteriza coberturas
que estão “quase na mesma componente conexa”, num sentido discutido na
tese. Também provamos que o espaço de coberturas desse tipo de região é
conexo por flips e trits, um movimento local que consiste em remover
três dominós adjacentes e ortogonais entre si e colocá-los de volta na
única outra posição possível. No caso geral, o invariante é um inteiro,
o twist, para o qual damos uma fórmula combinatória simples, bem como
uma interpretação via teoria dos nós; também provamos que o twist tem
propriedades aditivas para decomposições adequadas de uma região. Por
fim, investigamos também o conjunto de valores que são twists de
coberturas de uma caixa @xmath . \tablesmode noshow
