##### Contents

-    I Introduction
    -    1.1 Cosmological perturbation theory
        -    1.1.1 The Friedmann equations
        -    1.1.2 Gauge invariance
        -    1.1.3 Mukhanov–Sasaki equation
    -    1.2 The power spectrum
        -    1.2.1 Quantization
        -    1.2.2 Behavior of the power spectrum
-    II Regularization of the power spectrum
    -    2.1 Adiabatic regularization
    -    2.2 Minimally coupled k-inflation
        -    2.2.1 k-inflation
        -    2.2.2 The adiabatic subtraction term for the scalar
            perturbation
        -    2.2.3 The adiabatic subtraction term for the tensor
            perturbation
    -    2.3 Non-minimally coupled k-inflation
    -    2.4 Time development of the subtraction terms
        -    2.4.1 Freezing out and the subtraction terms
        -    2.4.2 The subtraction term in terms of the slow-roll
            parameters
-    III Conformal transformations and physicality
    -    3.1 Einstein equation for non-minimal coupling model in Jordan
        frame
    -    3.2 Conformal transformation and invariance
        -    3.2.1 Conformal transformation
        -    3.2.2 Conformal invariance and physicality
-    IV Conclusion
-    V Appendices
    -    A Hubble flow equations in detail
    -    B The time development of the adiabatic subtraction terms
        during inflation
        -    B.1 The slow-roll inflation model in quasi-de Sitter
            spacetime
        -    B.2 DBI inflation model
    -    C The time development of the adiabatic subtraction terms after
        inflation
    -    D The subtraction terms in the Jordan frame

## Part I Introduction

The inflationary paradigm [ 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 ] is a fascinating approach to
solving various cosmological problems. Although inflation can describe
the solutions naturally, we do not know how it occurs, or even whether
or not it really occurred.

To examine inflation, we have a tool to see the early universe: the
cosmic microwave background (CMB) radiation. The CMB consists of photons
which became free at early times (the last scattering surface) and now
fill the observable universe. We can observe the temperature and the
polarization, and we know that the temperature of these photons from
each direction is almost identical.

However, tiny fluctuations in the temperature and the polarization have
a large amount of information of the early universe because it is
considered that they reflect the primordial perturbations of inflaton or
gravitation. If we can analyze the observation data properly, it means
that we can see the universe at the last scattering surface. Indeed, the
CMB is the oldest light that we can observe. To know the details of the
universe before the last scattering surface directly, we are forced to
detect other signals such as gravitational wave signatures.

We can infer from the CMB that the early universe went through an
inflationary era [ 8 ] . However, the precision is still not enough to
determine which inflation model was realized, and many inflation models
have been advocated from various theoretical motivations. To compare
theoretical inflation models with the observed CMB, the power spectrum
which will be shortly explained in section ( 1.2 ) is used. Therefore
the method used to estimate the theoretical power spectrum is an
important matter of cosmology.

Although the amplitude of the perturbation which is the integrand of the
power spectrum has divergences (before regularization), usually it has
been assumed that regularization is not necessary ² ² 2 Recently, a
review of the problem [ 9 ] has even claimed that there is no need to
regularize the power spectrum from the standpoint of observations
(although interacting theories would still require a regularization
according to [ 9 ] , see also [ 10 ] ). . However, since the paper of
Parker [ 1 ] quite a lot of discussion has arisen concerning this issue.
He applied the adiabatic regularization method, which is a
regularization method used in quantum field theory in curved spacetime,
to the power spectrum.

The purpose of this thesis is to review the adiabatic regularization for
the power spectrum and to expand it to more general cases. In the rest
ot this part, Part 1, we review cosmological perturbation theory and we
also review adiabatic regularization and k-inflation in the first half
of Part 2. Then we expand our interest to non-minimally coupled
k-inflation, and derive the adiabatic subtraction terms for the model in
the last part of Part 2. In Part 3, we discuss the issue of the
physicality Einstein and Jordan frames that are related by a conformal
transformation, where of relevance to this thesis we show the conformal
equivalence of the adiabatic subtraction terms in each frame. In Part 4
we conclude and mention future work. We include detailed calculations in
Appendices: In Appendix A, we calculate Hubble flow functions in detail.
In Appendices B and C, the time development of the adiabatic subtraction
terms is discussed in some specific models. Finally, in Appendix D, we
try to express the subtraction terms in the Jordan frame and discuss the
generality of the derived subtraction terms.

### 1.1 Cosmological perturbation theory

#### 1.1.1 The Friedmann equations

Observationally, the universe is nearly homogeneous and isotropic and
hence perturbation theory is usually considered around such a
background. In this thesis, we go up to linear order in perturbations,
although in principle higher order could be considered.

##### The background metric

The homogeneous and isotropic background universe is written by the
Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker (FLRW) metric.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.1.1)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath is spatial curvature. @xmath is a scale factor which
denotes the size of the universe at specific time. In this thesis, only
the spatially flat ( @xmath ) case will be considered.

To simplify the calculations, conformal time @xmath defined as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is also used. The metric is written in terms of @xmath as follows

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Both proper time @xmath and conformal time @xmath are used in this
thesis. The derivatives is written by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

However, we use Eq. ( 1.1.3 ) as the background metric unless otherwise
specified.

##### Metric perturbations

Then let us consider the perturbations. The metric perturbations has
three modes. 1) Scalar perturbation @xmath . 2) Vector perurbation
@xmath . 3) Tensor perturbation @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.1.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.1.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.1.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

If we pick all scalar modes only, the line element is written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The above metric will eventually be used to derive an equation of motion
for the inflation perturbations, known as the Muhkanov–Sasaki equation.

##### Hydrodynamical perturbations

Classically, the universe is homogeneous and isotropic, and matter can
be approximated by a perfect fluid.

The energy-momentum tensor of perfect fluid is given by following form.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the energy density of the matter and @xmath is the
pressure. @xmath is a four vector which satisfy the classical part
@xmath and @xmath .

In perturbation theory, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath also have the
spatial-dependent perturbation part. Let us write the classical part
like @xmath . e.g.) @xmath . The perturbation of @xmath can be
decomposed scalar part and vector part, so write them explicitly.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath is the scalar part.

The classical part of the energy-momentum tensor becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the linear perturbation part (only scalar modes) are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.1.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

These equations will be used later on to derive the Muhkanov–Sasaki
equation after we have first defined the cosmological background.

##### The Friedmann equations

Using these metric and energy-momentum tensor, we can get the Friedmann
equation from the Einstein equation @xmath ³ ³ 3 In this thesis @xmath
is normalized so that @xmath . .

The classical part is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath . The continuity equation is also derived

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Or in terms of conformal time,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath .

The equation of scalar perturbation is more complicated because the
metric perturbation contains non-physical degrees of freedom. To deal
with this problem, we fix the gauge or compose gauge invariant
quantities as discussed in the following section.

#### 1.1.2 Gauge invariance

Gauge fixing can remove the non-physical degrees of freedom in the
perturbed metric Eq. ( 1.1.8 ). However, the variables in the gauge are
not always physical quantity, i.e., they may be not gauge invariant.

In this thesis the conformal-Newtonian gauge will be considered.

##### The conformal-Newtonian gauge

The conformal-Newtonian (longitudinal) gauge is defined by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

i.e., @xmath .

In this gauge, the perturbations of the metric and inflaton are gauge
invariant. Thus we can rewrite metric Eq. ( 1.1.17 ) or equations in
conformal-Newtonian gauge in terms of gauge invariant variables. Using
the gauge invariant perturbations @xmath and @xmath , the metric becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

@xmath corresponds to the Newtonian potential. There seems to be two
degrees of freedom for the scalar mode. Actually, @xmath and @xmath are
related via the Einstein equation and not independent. In minimal
coupling case, these two are identical @xmath .

For other perturbations, the overlines will be used to express gauge
invariant variables. e.g., @xmath .

##### The comoving gauge

The comoving gauge which is another gauge fixing way is also considered
in some references. We will not use it in this thesis, but briefly
explain it.

The comoving gauge is defined by the condition

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The scalar part of the metric becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the comoving curvature perturbation which is a
gauge-invariant quantity composed by scalar perturbations in the metric
and the inflaton.

This gauge is particularly well suited to performing calculations using
the ADM formalism [ 11 ] in cosmology, e.g., see [ 12 , 13 ] .

#### 1.1.3 Mukhanov–Sasaki equation

After gauge fixing, the first order Einstein equations can be solved. We
can calculate it in conformal-Newtonian gauge, and then replace the
perturbations by the gauge invariant ones.

In the minimal coupling case, we can combine the Einstein equations and
get the Mukhanov–Sasaki equation describing the behavior of the comoving
curvature perturbation @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The comoving curvature perturbation @xmath [ 13 ] is a gauge invariant
scalar which is conserved and is equal to the curvature perturbation on
uniform-density hypersurfaces @xmath on superhorizon scales.

Finally, we should mention that @xmath is the ”sound speed,” the
propagation speed of the perturbation. In models which have canonical
kinetic terms we have @xmath .

### 1.2 The power spectrum

#### 1.2.1 Quantization

In this section, the definition and the physical property of the power
spectrum of the CMB temperature is introduced.

First, we consider how to quantize the Mukhanov–Sasaki variable @xmath
to @xmath . At first, define the canonical momentum @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the Lagrangian. We then assume that the quantized
variable @xmath also obeys Mukhanov–Sasaki equation.

We now require the canonical commutation relation on @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Let us consider the Fourier components

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with the normalization

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then @xmath and @xmath have the canonical commutation relation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The power spectrum of two point correlation function for scalar
perturbation @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Using @xmath and Eqs. ( 1.2.4 )–( 1.2.6 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.2.8)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

If we set @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

On the other hand, from Eq. ( 1.2.7 ):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The integrand of Eq. ( 1.2.9 ) @xmath is called the dimensionless power
spectrum. In this thesis, we will sometimes call @xmath the power
spectrum. However, we make it clear which we indicate from the context
when the distinction is needed.

#### 1.2.2 Behavior of the power spectrum

Given that the comoving curvature perturbation @xmath is conserved after
the Hubble horizon crossing, the power spectrum also time-independent
after crossing. This is the reason why we are especially interested in
large scales. The modes in large scales exit early in the history of the
universe, and they keep more information of primordial perturbations
than the modes in small scales.

Is it known that the dimensionless power spectrum of the scalar
perturbation in de Sitter spacetime can be exactly solved and it does
not depend on @xmath . Moreover, the observations support the nearly
@xmath -independent power spectra [ 8 ] . If the dimensionless power
spectrum can be expressed (or approximated) by power series, the
integral Eq. ( 1.2.9 ), which is the variance of the perturbation, has
the divergences on UV scales. Thus we need to regularize the power
spectrum in theoretical arguments.

In next part, we will discuss the adiabatic regularization which is a
way to regularize the power spectrum. We will see the behavior the
adiabatic subtraction term in the latter half of Part 2.

## Part II Regularization of the power spectrum

To obtain the finite expression of power spectrum, adiabatic
regularization [ 1 , 14 ] , which is one of regularization schemes of
quantum field theory in curved spacetime, is considered. In this
regularization, we perform WKB-like expansion of the solution of
perturbations, and subtract the isolated divergence part. Then we regard
the regularized power spectrum as the corresponding one to the
observable power spectrum.

In this chapter, we review the adiabatic regularization method. And then
we apply it to the power spectrum for k-inflation model.

### 2.1 Adiabatic regularization

Let us consider a scalar field @xmath obeying the following equation of
motion ⁴ ⁴ 4 We formulate the adiabatic regularization method using the
conformal time for some convenience. The original formulation [ 1 , 14 ]
uses the proper time, and the both subtraction terms are equivalent. We
can obtain the subtraction term in terms of proper time by using either
the differential equation by proper time or by the variable
transformation of the subtraction term derived by Eq. ( 2.1.1 ). .

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are functions of time and these can be
derived from the given metric and Lagrangian ⁵ ⁵ 5 We assume that the
potential is not steep. .

In this case, the coefficient functions from the metric depends on only
time because we are considering up to first order of perturbations. For
the power spectra, we will consider the equation of motion of the
perturbation part only. The background metric is Eq. ( 1.1.18 ), which
has the both dependence of time and spatial coordinates. However, the
dependence on the spatial coordinates appears as the perturbations.
Therefore the spatial-dependence of the metric appears the second or
higher order perturbation parts, and we can use the Eq. ( 2.1.1 ) in our
discussion without loss of generality.

Consider the Fourier transformation:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The following normalization of @xmath is also imposed.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If we define @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath obeys the following equation.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is an equation of motion of a harmonic oscillator if we regard
@xmath as the frequency. Indeed, in the case of a massive scalar field
in the Minkowski spacetime,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and Eq. ( 2.1.5 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath is the square of the frequency and the solution is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In a curved spacetime, the square of effective frequency @xmath depends
on time and the coefficient function @xmath from the Christoffel symbol
in covariant derivative exists. Therefore we perform a WKB-like
(adiabatic) expansion for the solution.

Introducing a fictitious parameter @xmath in the metric.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The order of differentiation of the metric becomes the adiabatic order
of the term. We now require the adiabatic condition. i.e., In lowest
adiabatic order, @xmath should have the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Under the adiabatic condition, we can get uniquely the adiabatic
expansion of the solution @xmath , and the solution is schematically
written by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

up to @xmath th adiabatic order. @xmath is obtained later by the
effective frequency of the equation of motion each order.

@xmath become the complete orthogonal set of solutions, and @xmath and
@xmath becomes annihilation and creation operators after requiring the
canonical commutation relations

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and an adiabatic vacuum state @xmath is constructed.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Neglect the higher order terms in Eq. ( 2.1.12 ). i.e., Consider the
@xmath th adiabatic order solution.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

@xmath obeys the following equation.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Rewrite Eq. ( 2.1.5 ) to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In @xmath th adiabatic order, we can choose @xmath so that the left hand
side vanishes by using Eq. ( 2.1.16 ).

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

i.e., The right hand side is higher adiabatic order than @xmath th
order. We can get from Eq. ( 2.1.18 )

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath in arbitrary order.

Note that @xmath of Eq. ( 2.1.6 ) can be decomposed to the terms of 0th
adiabatic order and 2nd order because @xmath is 1st adiabatic order.
Therefore we can write @xmath in terms of the 0th adiabatic order part
@xmath and the 2nd order part @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

@xmath is decomposed as following by using the Eq. ( 2.1.19 ).

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The unregularized (“bare”) two point function of @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.1.22)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

and take limit @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.1.23)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

To regularize this, we need @xmath up to second order.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now the divergent part is uniquely isolated by the adiabatic expansion.
Because only @xmath and @xmath contain the divergent parts, we subtract
these two terms and define the physical two point function (minimal
subtraction scheme)

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

From Eq. ( 2.1.25 ), it is found that the 0th order subtraction term
@xmath corresponds to the zero-point energy and its time dependence is
due to the expansion of the universe and/or the non-canonical kinetic
term. The second order term does not exist in Minkowski spacetime.

We can use this method to regularize the power spectrum. The calculation
for usual slow-roll inflation model has done, and it is shown that the
subtraction terms for the scalar perturbation and the tensor
perturbation become sufficiently negligible after the horizon crossing [
3 ] (see also [ 15 ] ).

While the adiabatic subtraction terms for slow-roll inflation model is
studied very well, for other inflation models is not. Hence we
generalize it for k-inflation model which has more generic Lagrangian
than slow-roll model.

### 2.2 Minimally coupled k-inflation

#### 2.2.1 k-inflation

k-inflation (kinetically driven inflation) is a inflation model
advocated by [ 16 , 17 ] . In this model, the inflaton have
non-canonical kinetic terms and they make it possible that the universe
expands exponentially. We will review briefly k-inflation model in this
section.

The Lagrangian of inflaton in k-inflation model given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is inflaton and @xmath . However, the explicit form of the
Lagrangian will not be specified except Appendix B , and the general
form @xmath will be used.

The action in minimally coupled case is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The energy-momentum tensor under the perfect fluid approximation is

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      ( 1.1.9 )
  -- -------- -- -----------

Using this expression and the definition of the energy-momentum tensor

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

the energy @xmath is obtained as @xmath where the four-velocity @xmath .

To derive the adiabatic subtraction terms in following sections, it is
need to obtain the expression of the sound speed. The sound speed of
k-inflation is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath can be negative and @xmath can exceed @xmath by definition.
However, @xmath is required in general for stability [ 16 ] and @xmath
does not exceed the speed of light as long as the Lagrangian does not
contain the negative power of @xmath .

Also @xmath is expressed in terms of @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

#### 2.2.2 The adiabatic subtraction term for the scalar perturbation

The Mukhanov–Sasaki equation Eq. ( 1.1.21 ) is a second derivative
equation and we can derive the adiabatic subtraction term for the
comoving curvature (scalar) perturbation @xmath from this.

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      ( 1.1.21 )
  -- -------- -- ------------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In this case, using the notation in the section 2.1 ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the physical amplitude is schematically given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is a adiabatic solution of @xmath up to second order.

Then the adiabatic subtraction term for k-inflation model can be
calculated

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.2.10)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

The third term in the parenthesis in the second line comes from the
derivative of @xmath . In the models having canonical kinetic terms (for
example slow-roll model etc.), the sound speed @xmath is equal to one,
and this derivatives are equal to zero. This result accords with the
result in [ 3 ] , which considered slow-roll inflation model.

#### 2.2.3 The adiabatic subtraction term for the tensor perturbation

The tensor perturbation or the gravitational wave @xmath is one of the
modes of the metric perturbations Eq. ( 1.1.7 ). The tensor perturbation
is gauge invariant itself, and has only two degrees of freedom because
of the property of the metric.

While the scalar perturbation propagates at the sound speed, the tensor
perturbation propagates at the light speed even in k-inflation case. The
each degree of freedom of tensor perturbation obeys the following
equation like Mukhanov–Sasaki equation with @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath . @xmath denotes one of two polarized gravitational waves
and we must add each results at the end of calculation.

The subtraction terms can be derived similarly. In this cace,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The calculation of the subtraction term has done by [ 3 ] in slow-roll
model case, and the same analysis can be used in k-inflation model case.
The expression of the subtraction term for tensor perturbation is
obtained as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and it is efficiently suppressed at late time.

### 2.3 Non-minimally coupled k-inflation

The inflation models which has the coupling terms of inflaton and scalar
curvature have been considered. Higgs inflation model (see e.g. [ 18 ] )
is one of these models, and of course there is no reason to prohibit
inflaton from coupling to scalar curvature in general. Then let us
generalize more the Lagrangian and obtain the adiabatic subtraction term
for non-minimally coupled inflation models.

The action of non-minimally coupled k-inflation model is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath corresponds to the minimally coupled case and @xmath corresponds
to the conformally coupled case.

In non-minimal case, the Einstein equation differs from the minimal
couping case, and the scalar perturbation does not obey the
Mukhanov–Sasaki equation. However, according to [ 19 ] , it is shown
that the scalar curvature obeys the equation like Mukhanov–Sasaki
equation by using ADM formalism [ 11 ] .

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath and @xmath have been estimated directly by ADM formalism in [ 19
] .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

i.e., @xmath / @xmath corresponds to @xmath / @xmath respectively in the
minimal coupling case.

Using Eq. ( 2.3.2 ), we can get the subtraction terms for non-minimal
coupled case,

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.3.6)
  -- -- -- ---------

This subtraction term depends on time and @xmath in a complex manner.
Moreover, the ADM formalism uses a very long method of calculation to
derive the equations of motion. Once we have the expression Eq. ( 2.3.6
), there is no need to search for other methods. However, for checking
physicality and simplifying the process, we will consider a different
method to obtain the subtraction terms for non-minimal coupling case in
Part 3 (based upon using the equations of motion).

### 2.4 Time development of the subtraction terms

#### 2.4.1 Freezing out and the subtraction terms

The bare power spectrum has a property whereby certain parameters
“freeze out”: they do not develop after horizon crossing @xmath in
canonical case, or the sound horizon crossing @xmath in the
non-canonical case. The reason is that the comoving curvature
perturbation @xmath becomes constant in the large scale limit @xmath or
@xmath .

The frozen modes of the perturbation become observable after the horizon
re-entry, which occurs in radiation dominant era or matter dominant era,
see Fig. ( 1 ).

The arrows indicate a specific comoving scale @xmath of the power
spectrum. The comoving horizon (or the comoving Hubble radius) shrinks
during the inflation and the scale exits to the outside of the horizon
at (a). After reheating around (b), the radiation dominant era begin and
the comoving Hubble radius grows. The mode re-enter into the horizon at
(c). It is considered that the primordial perturbations are transformed
into the observables with some processes after (a). However, it is
unclear when it occurred.

The longer the time the perturbations are freezing, the more primordial
information we can obtain. Therefore we are interested in the large
scale limit.

When the adiabatic regularization scheme was adopted to evaluate the
power spectrum, it was considered that the subtraction terms also freeze
out after crossing at first [ 1 ] . The subtraction terms for slow-roll
inflation models at horizon crossing are not small and cannot be
neglected, therefore the author claimed, see [ 1 ] , that the amplitude
of the perturbations was changed from the bare one.

However, the time dependence of the subtraction term is not obvious from
Eq. ( 2.2.10 ) even if we take the large scale limit. Moreover, it
should be estimated up to the stage of reheating or up to times just
before the primordial perturbations are transformed into classical
quantities.

The method of subtraction has been argued by various authors (see the
review [ 9 ] ). Based on the above, we adopt the scheme adopted by
Urakawa and Starobinsky [ 3 ] . Their scheme is similar to Parker’s one,
but not quite the same. In this scheme:

-   We subtract up to the second adiabatic order term for the power
    spectra.

-   We consider the time development of the subtraction terms even after
    horizon crossing.

-   To consider time development, we do not require any cutoff of the
    range of the @xmath integrals.

The first condition is the minimal subtraction scheme as usual. The
second condition is different from the original idea of Parker [ 1 ] ,
while the third condition is required to maintain the equation of motion
of the inflaton in coordinate space [ 9 ] .

Importantly, we are of the view that this scheme is simple and does not
need any fictitious assumptions or processes; hence we use this method
to analyze the observable power spectrum.

In the following sections, we see how large a subtraction term remains
after the inflation era. Although it may be not so important for
observational physics, we also investigate the time development of the
subtraction term during inflation in two specific cases, see Appendix B
.

#### 2.4.2 The subtraction term in terms of the slow-roll parameters

It is useful to rewrite the subtraction term in terms of the slow-roll
parameters which we are familiar with to see the time development. There
are several ways to define the slow-roll parameters. Among them, we use
the Hubble flow functions and the sound flow functions. The Hubble flow
functions @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the sound flow functions @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is @xmath -folding number. The subscript @xmath means the
initial value which is irrelevant, but we should fix it at the horizon
exit to compare the subtraction term to the frozen bare spectrum.

The definitions are also written in alternative forms

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then rewrite @xmath in terms of @xmath . First,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is equal to the slow-roll parameter @xmath defined in usual.

From Friedmann equations Eq. ( 1.1.13 ) and Eq. ( 1.1.15 ) ⁶ ⁶ 6 In
first order perturbation theory, it is enough considering only the
zeroth order part of @xmath because the comoving scalar curvature @xmath
itself is the first order of perturbation. ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Substitute this into Eq. ( 1.1.22 ),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Using this expression, we can rewrite @xmath [ 20 ] .

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We can also rewrite the third them of Eq. ( 2.2.10 ).

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The calculation in detail is given Appendix A for completeness.

Finally, we obtain the expression of the adiabatic subtraction term.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Here we defined two variables:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and have isolated the explicit effect of the non-canonical kinetic
terms.

During inflation, we usually expect small slow-roll parameters, which
can be constructed by the Hubble flow functions and the sound flow
functions, and @xmath and @xmath are smaller than @xmath . Even after
inflation, @xmath is not so large because @xmath and @xmath in the
radiation dominant era @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath in the matter
dominant era @xmath . How large @xmath is depends on the model. However,
the “sound speed” @xmath does not exceed @xmath in usual k-inflation
models, and we expect that @xmath does not become too large.

Therefore it depends on the behavior of the factors @xmath and @xmath
how the subtraction term develops. Let us see how the each term behaves
at late time.

The zeroth order subtraction term @xmath becomes exponentially small in
general because

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and @xmath expands exponentially during inflation. @xmath also become
large while @xmath cannot become too large. This is a natural
consequence because the zeroth order term corresponds to the zero-point
energy in the Minkowski spacetime.

Concerning the second order subtraction term, mainly the behavior
depends on @xmath because it is known that @xmath at the late time is
sufficiently suppressed compared to the its value at the horizon
crossing in canonical case [ 3 ] . Because @xmath in post-inflation era
is bigger than during inflation and @xmath in radiation and matter
dominant era.

In the non-canonical case,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore if there is a model in which @xmath becomes sufficiently
small, the subtraction terms of the model can be large enough such that
it affects the power spectrum.

## Part III Conformal transformations and physicality

In Part 2, we discussed how the adiabatic subtraction term for the
non-minimal k-inflation model can be derived by using the ADM formalism.
However, minimal coupling models are studied more often than non-minimal
inflation models, where part of the reason is the calculations are
easier. Therefore, it is convenient to analyze non-minimal models if we
can apply knowledge from minimal inflation models in some form.

Using a conformal transformation, we can rewrite the Lagrangian of the
non-minimal coupling model as that of one in the minimal coupling model.
The metric and the pressure are altered by such a conformal
transformation, hence the physical properties of the
conformal-transformed universe are different from the true minimal
coupling case, even though the action has the same form as a minimal
coupling model.

The frame which has the non-minimal coupling term is denoted the Jordan,
while the conformally-transformed frame is denoted the Einstein frame.
It is interesting to note that the physical interpretation is completely
altered, yet the observations do not change in the transformation (see
e.g. [ 21 ] ).

Importantly, in this chapter, we will show that we can derive the
adiabatic subtraction terms (extracted from the Mukhanov–Sasaki
equation) for non-minimal k-inflation with the conformal transformation,
without using the ADM formalism.

### 3.1 Einstein equation for non-minimal coupling model in Jordan frame

Before the discussion of the conformal transformation, let us review the
calculations in Jordan frame. How different it is from the minimal case
is also argued.

The action in the Jordan frame is

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      ( 2.3.1 )
  -- -------- -- -----------

and the Einstein equation becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To simplify, define three tensors and rewrite the Einstein equation as
follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If we pick up only the first order part of the perturbations,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Hereafter the subscript @xmath denotes the classical part and @xmath
denotes the first order part of the perturbations respectively.

The gauge fixing is needed to calculate the equation of the scalar
perturbation. We use the conformal-Newtonian gauge Eq. ( 1.1.17 ) in
this section because the correspondence to gauge-invariant variables is
clearer than other gauges.

From the transformation law of the tensor, the gauge-invariant @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath is written by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

and so on. The gauge invariant @xmath is also obtained from the
transformation law of the scalar,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In conformal-Newtonian gauge, @xmath , and we get the gauge-invariant
Einstein equation by replacing the tensors by the gauge-invariant ones.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then calculate the tensors and the equation in accordance with the
definitions Eq. ( 3.1.2 )–( 3.1.5 ). After the tedious calculations, we
can obtain @xmath [ 22 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.1.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.1.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.1.12)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The Einstein equations are then as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.1.18)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

Let us set @xmath in the Eq. ( 3.1.18 ). Because the non-diagonal
content of @xmath is zero by definition then

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The spatial non-diagonal components of the Einstein equations are zero
in the minimal coupling case. The existence of this anisotropic inertia
is a big difference between the minimal and non-minimal couplings model.

The explicit form of @xmath depends on the model, but we calculate the
general form for generality.

From Eq. ( 3.1.4 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.1.20)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

where the Christoffel symbol @xmath (the notation is temporarily changed
for simplicity). The first line is the classical part @xmath , and the
rest is the linear order part @xmath . In up to first order perturbation
theory, @xmath and we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.1.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.1.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.1.23)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

Then when @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In the minimal coupling case, there is no anisotropic inertia and we can
combine the Einstein equations to get the Mukhanov–Sasaki equation [ 22
] . However, due to the anisotropic inertia term and other additional
terms from @xmath , it is difficult to combine straightforwardly the
equations in the non-minimal coupling case without resorting to
different mathematical techniques, such as the ADM formalism.

### 3.2 Conformal transformation and invariance

#### 3.2.1 Conformal transformation

Again consider the non-minimal coupling k-inflation model in the Jordan
frame.

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      ( 2.3.1 )
  -- -------- -- -----------

To derive the adiabatic subtraction term without ADM formalism, perform
the conformal transformation @xmath to obtain the action in the Einstein
frame [ 23 , 24 ] :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Note that the coordinates are not changed by the conformal
transformation when we use conformal time. i.e.) @xmath , @xmath . Then
the line element in the conformal-Newtonian gauge becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.2.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

After expanding each coefficient up to linear order of perturbations, we
can get the transformation laws of the scalar perturbations [ 25 ] .

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Let us check whether or not the anisotropic inertia in the Jordan frame
vanishes in the Einstein frame. Substituting Eq. ( 3.2.4 ) into Eq. (
3.1.24 ) leads to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore, we can find the correct relation: @xmath in the Einstein
frame.

#### 3.2.2 Conformal invariance and physicality

The conformal invariance of the comoving curvature perturbation @xmath
and its correlation functions @xmath was shown in [ 25 , 24 ] . i.e.,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then, if we regularize the correlation functions by adiabatic
regularization, the subtraction terms in each frame must also agree with
each other. Because otherwise the regularized power spectra depends on
the frames and the method of either conformal transformation or the
adiabatic regularization is spoiled.

In this section, we will derive the adiabatic subtraction terms in the
Einstein frame and show the conformal invariance of the adiabatic
subtraction terms in both the Jordan and Einstein frames.

First, consider the equation from the action Eq. ( 3.2.1 )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

From the universality of the conformal time, the equation becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We can get the adiabatic subtraction terms for the power spectrum from
Eq. ( 3.2.9 ) as the same way in the minimal coupling case.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

From the adiabatic subtraction term in the Jordan frame Eq. ( 2.3.6 )
and in the Einstein frame Eq. ( 3.2.10 ), it is shown that the adiabatic
subtraction terms of non-minimally coupled k-inflation model depend on
only @xmath / @xmath and @xmath / @xmath . Therefore, if @xmath and
@xmath are equal to the effective quantities Eq. ( 2.3.3 )–( 2.3.4 )
after conformal transformation, the subtraction terms in both the Jordan
frame and Einstein frame correspond to each other.

Once it has shown the correspondence of the subtraction terms in both
frame, it is not necessary to derive it in Jordan frame by using ADM
formalism. We can calculate it in the Einstein frame, and transform it
into the Jordan frame if we want to see the physical property due to the
non-minimal coupling.

For conformal transformation, it is convenient to define two functions
like Eq. ( 2.3.5 ).

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.2.11)
  -- -- -- ----------

Using Friedmann equations in the Einstein frame, @xmath and @xmath are
expressed by

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.2.12)
  -- -- -- ----------

Thus we should transform three quantities @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.2.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.2.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.2.15)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

To transform @xmath , we used Eq. ( 3.2.2 ) and the following relation.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.2.16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.2.17)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

Substitute them into ( 3.2.12 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.18)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Comparing the results with Eq. ( 2.3.3 )–( 2.3.4 ), it is realized that
the effective variables in the Jordan frame and the variables in the
Einstein frame agree with each other.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore the adiabatic subtraction terms in both Einstein and Jordan
frame are identical, and we get the same results of regularized power
spectrum in either frame.

Of course, because the comoving curvature perturbation itself is
conformally invariant, the equations the perturbations obey should also
be conformally invariant. The above calculations show this explicitly.

## Part IV Conclusion

We have investigated the adiabatic regularization of the power spectrum
in general single scalar field inflation. We derived the adiabatic
subtraction terms and found that (due to the sound speed) their behavior
is not trivial. The analysis was partly done by assuming some specific
models or approximations [ 26 ] , and there may be the models which have
growing or non-vanishing subtraction terms.

We have also calculated the subtraction terms for the non-minimally
coupled inflaton case. The subtraction term is completely determined by
the equation of motion of the frame-invariant scalar curvature
perturbation, and we confirmed its frame invariance explicitly.

### Discussion and future work

#### What do vanishing subtraction terms mean?

In section 2.4 , we have considered the time development of the
adiabatic subtraction terms. We saw that the speed of sound may be able
to make the subtraction terms large enough to affect the observable
power spectrum: in canonical inflation, it generally decays after
inflation era (see Appendix C ) and we expect that it becomes
sufficiently small when they are transferred to observables.

We assumed a scheme where the bare spectrum freezes at the (sound)
horizon crossing, while the subtraction terms remain time-developing.
The vanishing subtraction terms mean that the integral of the bare
spectrum at the crossing has no divergence to begin with. This result
agrees with the conventional interpretation about the observable power
spectrum: the observable spectrum has no high frequency modes because
they have not yet exited the horizon and not yet become “classical”.

However, even if the result with regularization does not differ from the
result “without” regularization, it does not mean that the argument for
regularization of the power spectrum is unnecessary. Indeed, it gives
mathematical support to the observable power spectrum, and also it is
needed in an interacting theory.

#### Future work

In section 2.4 , we have investigated how the subtraction terms behave
qualitatively at late times with the subtraction scheme used in [ 3 ] .
Related to this scheme, there are some problems still to be solved.

The subtraction scheme was not established completely. There are many
discussions about this issue (e.g. [ 27 , 3 , 28 , 29 , 9 ] ) and some
papers such as [ 27 , 9 ] claim that the regularization of the power
spectrum is originally unnecessary. Some of these claims have already
been rejected, nevertheless, the argument is still continuing. This is
possibly due to our poor knowledge of the “freezing out” and the unclear
nature of the renormalization condition using adiabatic subtraction (see
also [ 30 ] ).

Understanding “freezing out” is an important problem of cosmology. While
it is true that the comoving curvature perturbation loses its
time-dependence at large scales: @xmath , how to become classical is
still unclear. The scheme we take in this thesis assumes that the
freezing out does not occur at the horizon crossing, in a sense. When
the quantum fluctuations become observables is a fundamental problem we
should consider in more detail.

We should also mention that we have only calculated the value of the
subtraction terms qualitatively. As we saw in section 2.4 , it is
possible for terms to survive or become large when the model has
non-canonical kinetic terms. We therefore need to know how large these
surviving terms are and compare the regularized power spectrum with the
bare one. Some models might need to be modified to achieve a realistic
power spectrum if the subtraction terms remain significant at the time
of classicalization: we can use the regularized power spectrum to
constrain an inflationary model by combining it with other theoretical
constraints.

## Part V Appendices

### Appendix A Hubble flow equations in detail

#### The effective potential of Mukhanov–Sasaki equation

Let us derive the explicit form of the effective potential Eq. ( 2.4.8 )

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      ( 2.4.8 )
  -- -------- -- -----------

From Eq. ( 2.4.7 ),

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      ( 2.4.7 )
  -- -------- -- -----------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then let us calculate the time derivative of @xmath . After some
calculation, we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Substitute them into Eq. ( A.1 ).

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.4)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Then rewrite this in terms of the Hubble and sound flow functions. Eq. (
A.4 ) contains the third derivative of @xmath and we need up to the
third Hubble flow function @xmath .

The explicit forms of the flow functions are below.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The term @xmath can be rewrote by using @xmath , but then the term
proportional to @xmath remains. To rewrite it we need the square of
@xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Rewrite the second line of Eq. ( A.4 ).

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (A.10)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

Also up to the second sound flow function @xmath is needed.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Rewrite the third line of Eq. ( A.4 ).

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (A.13)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

By combining Eq. ( A.10 ) and eq.( A.13 ), we can get the explicit form
of the effective potential Eq. ( 2.4.8 ).

#### The third term of the adiabatic subtraction term

Next, let us rewrite the third term of the subtraction term Eq. ( 2.4.9
).

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      ( 2.4.9 )
  -- -------- -- -----------

To use the above calculation, we need translate this terms in terms of
proper time derivatives.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.14)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Combining Eq. ( A.14 ) with the effect by time dependent sound speed in
the effective potential Eq. ( A.13 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then we have rewritten the adiabatic subtraction term in terms of the
flow functions

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      ( 2.4.10 )
  -- -------- -- ------------

where

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      ( 2.4.11 )
  -- -------- -- ------------

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      ( 2.4.12 )
  -- -------- -- ------------

### Appendix B The time development of the adiabatic subtraction terms
during inflation

We have investigated the time dependence of the adiabatic subtraction
term for non-canonical inflation in the section 2.4 . The zeroth
adiabatic order term decays in general, while we cannot say anything
about the second order term unless we specify the models (see [ 26 ] ).

From the view point we take in the section 2.4 , the time dependence of
the subtraction term during inflation is irrelevant. However, some
people still claim that the subtraction term should be estimated at the
horizon exit [ 15 , 31 ] .

Hence we estimate the time development of the subtraction term during
inflation in the following two cases: (1) the slow-roll inflation model
in quasi-de Sitter spacetime and (2) DBI inflation model. As a result,
we find that the subtraction terms at the horizon exit exceedingly
suppress the bare power spectrum in these two cases.

#### b.1 The slow-roll inflation model in quasi-de Sitter spacetime

Let us review the case of slow-roll inflation model in de Sitter
background spacetime first. Of course, however, the exact de Sitter
universe can be achieved by the cosmological constant rather than
inflaton. We set the slow-roll inflaton with perturbations on a de
Sitter background, and hence the derivation of the power spectrum is an
approximation.

In the case of exact de Sitter universe,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath is constant. The Hubble flow functions @xmath ( @xmath ) are
equal to zero by definition. The sound flow functions are also zero.
Furthermore, we are assuming a model with canonical kinetic term.

Then the effective potential of Mukhanov–Sasaki equation becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the following expression is obtained.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here we use that @xmath . In the large scale limit,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is equal to the bare power spectrum of the slow-roll model in the
large scale limit.

Under the slow-roll condition, we assume that the second derivative of
inflaton @xmath is small. We can neglect the time dependence of @xmath
in the denominator of Eq. ( B.3 ) during the inflation, and find that
the first term exponentially decays but the second term is constant in
the time development. It is shown in the Fig. ( 2 ).

Take the difference between the bare power spectrum after the horizon
exit (in large scale limit) and the subtraction term,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Because @xmath and @xmath is nearly constant during slow-roll inflation,
the physical power spectrum in large scale limit is exceedingly
suppressed by the subtraction term. This result agrees with the prior
research [ 1 , 15 , 31 ] which argue the amplitude of the fluctuation of
not the comoving curvature but the inflaton itself: @xmath is also
suppressed by the subtraction term during inflation.

#### b.2 DBI inflation model

Next let us to see how the adiabatic subtraction term behaves in DBI
inflation model [ 32 ] . DBI inflation is motivated by string theory and
it achieves the inflation by the “D-cceleration” mechanism. The
cosmological property of this model has been analyzed, see e.g. [ 32 ,
33 ] .

The Lagrangian of DBI inflation model is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the (squared) warp factor and we redifine @xmath in
terms of the proper time metric ⁷ ⁷ 7 We set the sring coupling @xmath
because it only affects the overall magnitude of the power spectrum at
large scale limit. , i.e., @xmath .

The adiabatic subtraction term in this model can be calculated by using
the general result Eq. ( 2.2.10 ) or Eq. ( 2.4.10 ).

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      ( 2.4.10 )
  -- -------- -- ------------

Let us calculate the speed of sound and @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that both @xmath and @xmath do not depend on the potential @xmath
in general (not limited to DBI model) because @xmath is derivative of
@xmath . However, the behavior of @xmath is determined by the @xmath and
@xmath .

We can obtain the subtraction term in terms of @xmath and @xmath by
substituting @xmath and @xmath into Eq. ( 2.4.10 ). However, there are
many choices of the two functions. In this section, we assume a simple
model which has @xmath and @xmath . @xmath is the ’t Hooft coupling and
@xmath is the mass of the inflaton. This model is analyzed in detail in
[ 33 ] and can achieve a power law inflation.

In this model, each function behaves at late time (but it is still
inflation era) as following [ 33 ] .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a slow-roll parameter.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e. @xmath is necessary to achieve accelerated expansion.

@xmath can be calculated by using the Friedmann equation and Eq. ( B.11
)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

and it is approximately constant at late time. Let us see the
relationship between @xmath and the flow functions.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore @xmath and @xmath and @xmath are constants during the
inflation.

Then we can also use the factors @xmath and @xmath to see the time
dependence of the subtraction term. Substitute Eq. ( B.11 ) into them
and we obtain the following expression.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The zeroth adiabatic order factor becomes small, while the second term
is constant. This is also the same as the bare power spectrum of this
model is given by (in the Bunch–Davies vacuum and in large scale limit)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The time development is shown in the Fig. ( 3 ).

Therefore the regularized power spectrum at the large scale is also
strongly suppressed in this model.

### Appendix C The time development of the adiabatic subtraction terms
after inflation

As mentioned, we assume that the subtraction terms do not freeze out at
horizon crossing. The subtraction terms shrink after inflation in the
canonical kinetic term case [ 3 ] . In the non-canonical case, they also
decrease if we assume the nearly scale invariant power spectrum [ 26 ] .

Then, the following question comes to mind; How small the subtraction
terms become? No one seems to check this quantitatively. In this
appendix, we see it via a very rough estimate for the following
research.

We restrict ourselves to considering the models which have neither the
non-canonical kinetic terms nor the coupling with the scalar curvature.
Also we assume that the scalar perturbation obeys the only one equation
throughout the history of the universe, and we neglect the dark energy
dominant era.

The second adiabatic order subtraction term is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the simplicity of the formula, we set the magnitude of the
dimensionless bare power spectrum to @xmath . Then, to compare the
magnitude of the subtraction terms with the bare one, we only have to
see the time development of Eq. ( C.1 ) for a specific mode. Eq. ( C.1 )
can be rewritten in terms of slow-roll parameters [ 3 ] .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the e-folding at the horizon exit. Here we define the
e-folding @xmath with @xmath .

We need separate the range of integral to calculate this. We consider
three parts: inflation era (from @xmath to @xmath ), radiation dominant
era (from @xmath to @xmath ), and after that.

We assume the inflation ends abruptly at @xmath . The behavior of the
subtraction terms during inflation era can be calculated (see Appendix B
). It has model dependence through the slow-roll parameters and
e-folding, but is typically reduced to @xmath – @xmath .

After the inflation, the slow-roll parameters become large and the time
behavior of the subtraction terms lose the inflational-model dependence
(except for the sound speed).

In radiation dominant era, the integrand of Eq. ( C.2 ) is equal to
@xmath . The subtraction terms become small @xmath . @xmath is depend on
the temperature at the end of inflation era. However, using the scale
factor at the recombination and at the time the energy density of
radiation and matter became equal, the subtraction terms are reduced at
least to @xmath from the value at the end of inflation. Because

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the scale factor at the recombination.

The ambiguity of the calculation becomes trivial in matter dominant era.
In this era, the integrand of Eq. ( C.2 ) is equal to @xmath and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

the subtraction terms are reduced to about @xmath .

Combining these results, the adiabatic subtraction terms are reduced at
least to @xmath by the present. However, the power spectrum including
subtraction terms should be estimated at the time it become “classical”.

It is unknown when and how the power spectrum became classical. It
perhaps is in inflation era or radiation dominant era. If the
subtraction terms was not sufficiently small at the time, we may have
the opportunity to observe the difference.

This calculation is very roughly. We need more precise consideration
including the effect by reheating and higher order quantum corrections.

### Appendix D The subtraction terms in the Jordan frame

In this section, we calculate the explicit form of the subtraction terms
in the Jordan frame by using the conformal transformation to see how the
non-minimal coupling term affects on it.

The subtraction term has been derived in the section 3.2.2 .

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      ( 3.2.10 )
  -- -------- -- ------------

where

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      ( 3.2.18 )
  -- -------- -- ------------

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      ( 3.2.19 )
  -- -------- -- ------------

Let us rewrite @xmath in terms of @xmath which is the variables in the
minimal case.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

To derive the explicit form of the subtraction terms in the Jordan
frame, we need the second derivative of @xmath and @xmath . We can use
some convenient calculations as below.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### Derivatives of @xmath

Let us calculate the derivatives of @xmath first. For simplicity, define
a function @xmath ,

  -- -- -- -------
           (D.4)
  -- -- -- -------

This function approaches to zero in minimal coupling limit bacause
@xmath is equal to @xmath in the case of minimal coupling model.

Then @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (D.6)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Using the relation Eq. ( D.2 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (D.7)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Again, to simplify this, define @xmath vanishing in minimal coupling
limit

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

so that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Similarly,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath                     (D.11)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This is the expression of coefficient function of the second term of Eq.
( 3.2.10 ) in the Jordan frame.

#### Derivatives of @xmath

Next, we need the expression of the derivatives of @xmath in the Jordan
frame. By definition,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Eq.( D.5 ) and Eq. ( 3.2.14 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

To see the difference from minimal coupling model, rewrite @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we define @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and it vanishes in the minimal coupling limit. @xmath is the first
Hubble flow function of the minimal coupling model.

Then we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

and calculate the derivatives.

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (D.17)
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

Define @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath approaches to @xmath in minimal coupling limit.

Therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is defined as Eq. ( D.18 ).

#### Results

Substitute the expressions to Eq.( 3.2.10 ), we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We have to calculate the derivatives of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath to
obtain the final expression. However, the expression is very complicated
and there seems to be no further use in continuing in this fashion. It
is actually enough to see that the coincidence of the expression in the
minimal coupling limit, and the results definitely coincide. Although
our expression of the adiabatic subtraction terms for “general”
(non-minimal) k-inflation depends on the non-minimal coupling term in a
complex manner, it includes the expression for the usual (minimal)
k-inflation as a special case.