# Acknowledgment

First of all, I would like to express my sincerest gratitude to my
supervisor, Professor Hidetoshi Nishimori for his guidance, continuous
encouragements and spiritual support. I also greatly acknowledge
Professor Yoshiyuki Kabashima for his guidance, fruitful discussions and
collaborations on my studies.

I express my gratitude to the members of the Nishimori group and the
condensed matter theory group of Tokyo Institute of Technology for
stimulating discussions and warm atmosphere by them. Especially, Yoshiki
Matsuda kindly taught me some technical details of numerical
calculations and I am particularly appreciative of him.

I also thank Doctor Antonello Scardicchio, Doctor Markus Müller, and
Professor Federico Ricci-Tersenghi for fruitful discussions and kindness
when I visited Italy for research collaborations. Professor Eric Vincent
kindly taught me some experimental properties of spin glasses and
discussed my studies. I am also grateful to him.

This work was supported by the Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science (JSPS) Research Fellowship for Young Scientists program,
CREST(JST), the 21th Century COE Program ‘Nanometer-Scale Quantum
Physics’ and the Global COE Program ‘Nanoscience and Quantum Physics’ at
Tokyo Institute of Technology, and by the Grant-in-Aid for Scientific
Research on the Priority Area “Deepening and Expansion of Statistical
Mechanical Informatics” by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports,
Science and Technology. A portion of the numerical calculations have
been performed on the TSUBAME Grid Cluster at the Global Scientific
Information and Computing Center (GSIC), Tokyo Institute of Technology.

Finally, I thank my family for spiritual support.

###### Contents

-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 Spin glasses
    -    1.2 Mean-field theory
    -    1.3 Pure state and its implications
        -    1.3.1 A simple introduction to the concept of pure states
        -    1.3.2 Relations between pure states and dynamical behaviors
        -    1.3.3 Hierarchical structure of pure states in the
            mean-field model
        -    1.3.4 Experimental supports of the hierarchical structure
        -    1.3.5 The mean-field theory and more
    -    1.4 The replica method
    -    1.5 Overview of thesis
-    2 Review of the replica method and its interpretations
    -    2.1 Replica calculations for the fully-connected @xmath -spin
        interacting model
        -    2.1.1 Replica symmetric ansatz
    -    2.2 The solution in the limit @xmath
        -    2.2.1 Failure of the RS solution
        -    2.2.2 Microcanonical approach
    -    2.3 Replica symmetry breaking
        -    2.3.1 The 1RSB solution for the @xmath -spin interacting
            model
        -    2.3.2 The 1RSB solution in the @xmath limit
    -    2.4 Pure state statistics of the 1RSB level
        -    2.4.1 Pure states of the limit @xmath
    -    2.5 Viewpoint from the large deviation theory
        -    2.5.1 Re-derivation of the 1RSB transition
    -    2.6 Finite @xmath cases
        -    2.6.1 de Almeida-Thouless instability
        -    2.6.2 Phase diagrams for the @xmath cases
    -    2.7 Microscopic description of pure states
        -    2.7.1 TAP method
        -    2.7.2 Zero temperature limit
    -    2.8 Summary
-    3 Analyses of weight space structure and rare events in the Ising
    perceptron
    -    3.1 Model
    -    3.2 Formalism
        -    3.2.1 The replica symmetric solution
        -    3.2.2 The 1RSB solution
        -    3.2.3 The complexity and 1RSB formulation revisited
    -    3.3 Theoretical predictions
        -    3.3.1 Complexity for @xmath
        -    3.3.2 Rate function for @xmath and a transition at @xmath
        -    3.3.3 Phase diagram on the @xmath - @xmath plane
    -    3.4 Numerical validation
    -    3.5 Summary
-    4 The replica zeros of @xmath Ising spin glass at zero temperature
    -    4.1 Fundamental knowledge about models and formulations
        -    4.1.1 Definition of the Cayley tree and the properties
        -    4.1.2 Bulk properties of Cayley trees
        -    4.1.3 Zeros and singularities
        -    4.1.4 Energetic zero-temperature limit for replica zeros
    -    4.2 General formula for ladders and Cayley trees
        -    4.2.1 The cavity method
        -    4.2.2 Use of the replica method
        -    4.2.3 Energetic zero-temperature limit in the cavity
            recursions
        -    4.2.4 Uniqueness of the analytic continuation
    -    4.3 Results for the ladders
    -    4.4 Results for the CTs
        -    4.4.1 Plots of the replica zeros for CTs
        -    4.4.2 The thermodynamic limit and phase transitions of BLs
        -    4.4.3 Possibility of the full-step replica symmetry
            breaking
        -    4.4.4 Physical implications of the obtained solutions
    -    4.5 RZs for RRGs
    -    4.6 Summary
-    5 The replica symmetry breaking and the partition function zeros
    for Bethe lattice spin glasses
    -    5.1 Phase boundaries and critical properties of Bethe lattice
        spin glasses
    -    5.2 Formulations
        -    5.2.1 The partition function zeros of Bethe lattices
        -    5.2.2 Population method to evaluate the CFD
        -    5.2.3 Numerical procedures
    -    5.3 Result
        -    5.3.1 Zeros on the complex field plane
        -    5.3.2 Zeros on the complex temperature plane
        -    5.3.3 Phase diagram
        -    5.3.4 The divergence of the spin-glass susceptibility
    -    5.4 Summary
-    6 Conclusion
-    A Calculations for chapter 3
    -    A.1 Derivation of the RS saddle-point equations and the limit
        @xmath .
    -    A.2 Derivation of the AT condition
        -    A.2.1 AT instability of the RS2 solution
-    B Calculations for chapter 4
    -    B.1 Derivation of the generating function @xmath and free
        energy of regular random graphs
    -    B.2 Location of replica zeros of the width- @xmath ladder
    -    B.3 Rate function for a CT with @xmath
    -    B.4 AT condition for the @xmath Bethe lattice
-    C Calculations for chapter 5
    -    C.1 Divergence point of the spin-glass susceptibility at zero
        temperature

## Chapter 1 Introduction

Random spin systems are one of the major research subjects in
statistical physics. The spatial randomness of conflicting interactions
introduces random frustration into the system. The frustration can
produce many metastable states and the system becomes affected by such
states. If the structure of the metastable states is highly complex, the
system shows strange behaviors like the extraordinary susceptibility
against external fields, the extremely slow dynamics, and so on. Spin
systems with such behaviors are called spin glasses.

At present time, one of the most important progresses of the theory of
spin glasses is its mean-field description. The mean-field theory is
constructed by several mathematical tools. The replica method is one of
the most powerful tools and the main purpose of this thesis is to review
and examine this method. Because of the intricacy of the replica theory,
there still remain many problems in the theory itself. We review recent
progress about this topic and provide some new approaches to reveal the
mysteries related to the replica method. Before going into the details,
we start with reviewing histories and topics on spin glasses and related
subjects.

### 1.1 Spin glasses

A simple description of spin glasses is by its low temperature state.
For ferro and anti-ferro magnets, the low temperature states are uniform
or periodic, but those of spin glasses are spatially disordered and
frozen ones. The existence of such states usually needs two
requirements; one is the existence of competing interactions among spins
which leads to no single configuration favored by all the interactions
(this is called the frustration). Second is the spatial randomness of
the interactions, which is necessary for disordered configurations
stable at low temperatures.

Experimentally, materials satisfying the above two requirements are
found in several alloys consisting of noble metals (Au, Ag, Cu, etc.)
weakly diluted with transition metals (Fe, Mn, etc.). Interactions
between the moments of the impurity atoms (spins) effectively appear
through the interactions with the conducting electrons. The effective
interaction is called the RKKY interaction [ 1 , 2 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the distance between two impurity atoms and @xmath is
the Fermi wave number. The RKKY interaction takes both positive and
negative values of @xmath due to randomness in the position of
impurities and random frustration is introduced between the localized
spins.

One of the important problems is how to characterize these disordered
frozen states. To characterize a ferromagnetic state, the averaged
magnetization @xmath is sufficient, where the brackets @xmath denote the
thermal average over the Boltzmann factor @xmath and @xmath denotes the
site index, and @xmath is the inverse temperature @xmath , where we put
the Boltzmann constant to unity @xmath . Meanwhile, to precisely
describe the disordered frozen states, more detailed information about
the local spontaneous magnetization @xmath is required. If the
spin-glass phase exists, the characteristic property that spins randomly
freeze should be reflected in that phase. The local magnetization @xmath
is expected to take a non-zero value in such a situation but the sign is
randomly distributed from site to site, which implies that the global
magnetization vanishes @xmath . Hence, to detect the spin-glass
ordering, the square value of the local magnetization @xmath is useful.
This speculation leads to an order parameter @xmath defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

This quantity @xmath was first introduced by Edwards and Anderson [ 3 ]
and is called the spin-glass order parameter. The disordered frozen
phase at low temperatures is called the spin-glass phase and is
characterized by @xmath , while the paramagnetic phase has @xmath and
the ferromagnetic phase is characterized by @xmath .

In a ferromagnet, the ferromagnetic phase transition is accompanied by a
rapid increase of the spin-correlation length which diverges at the
critical temperature. This can be observed in the divergence of the
linear susceptibility @xmath

  -- -- -- -------
           (1.3)
  -- -- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the local field applied to the site @xmath . For
the spin-glass problem we can also expect a similar phenomenon coming
from the spin-glass ordering, but the simple spin-correlation function
@xmath does not show the long range correlation because of the
frustration. Instead, the square of @xmath can diverge at the critical
temperature of the spin-glass ordering, which leads to the spin-glass
susceptibility @xmath the definition of which is given by

  -- -- -- -------
           (1.4)
  -- -- -- -------

Although the spin-glass susceptibility @xmath is a suitable quantity to
detect the spin-glass ordering, it cannot be directly observed in
experiments. A more tractable quantity in experiments is the nonlinear
susceptibility whose definition and the relation with @xmath is given as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the uniform external field. This equation shows that the
divergence of @xmath also leads to the divergence of @xmath . For
example, a plot of @xmath for AuFe near the transition point is given in
fig. 1.2 .

Another characteristic property of spin glasses is the strong hysteresis
phenomena. We depict an example of the linear susceptibility of CuMn
alloys in fig. 1.2 . To obtain this figure, the linear susceptibility
was observed in two different situations. One is the so-called
zero-field cooling. In this situation, the system is first cooled down
below the critical temperature @xmath in the absence of the external
field. After that, a constant field ( @xmath G in this experiment) is
applied and the linear susceptibility is observed at several
temperatures with increasing temperature. The other is the field
cooling, in which a constant field ( @xmath G) is applied to the system
above @xmath and the linear susceptibility is observed at several
temperatures with decreasing temperature. Figure 1.2 shows clear
differences in those two situations, which implies the ergodicity
breaking of the spin-glass system at low temperatures. The ergodicity
breaking means that the system cannot explore all the states and the
state of the system even after a long time depends on the initial
condition. Once the spin-glass transition occurs, the ergodicity breaks
and the system shows the strong dependence on the initial condition,
which can be observed in the hysteresis of the linear susceptibility as
fig. 1.2 . This interesting behavior of spin glasses strongly motivated
the researchers in the 1970-80’s, and theoretical interpretations were
intensively explored. In the next section, we will briefly see the
mean-field description of spin glasses.

### 1.2 Mean-field theory

In the previous section, we have seen some concepts and quantities to
characterize the spin-glass behaviors, and some experimental
observations were provided. The next step for understanding spin glasses
is to define a model of spin glasses to deal with the problem in
theoretical ways. The so-called EA model introduced by Edwards and
Anderson [ 3 ] is the first model of spin glasses. In this model, the
interactions are introduced between the nearest neighbor spins and are
assumed to be the random variables drawn from an identical independent
distribution. The EA Hamiltonian takes the following form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes an Ising variable and @xmath is the random
interaction. The symbol @xmath means that the summation runs over all
the pairs of neighboring spins. Edwards and Anderson solved this model
within a mean-field scheme, but the detailed properties were unclear.
Then, to investigate the EA model in more detail, Sherrington and
Kirkpatrick introduced the infinite-range version of the EA model, which
is called the SK model [ 6 ] . The SK Hamiltonian is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the summation runs over all pairs. The SK model is more tractable
than the EA model because all the spins are fully connected and are
symmetric. By analyses of the SK model, it was shown that a second order
phase transition occurs and the spin-glass phase appears at a finite
temperature @xmath . In the SK model, the cusp of the linear
susceptibility and the divergence of the spin-glass susceptibility are
observed, and some aging phenomena are also confirmed by some analytical
and numerical results [ 7 , 8 , 9 ] . Because of this good agreement
with experimental results, it is considered that the mean-field model
extracts some essence of spin-glass behaviors and nowadays the SK model
is regarded as a standard model of spin glasses.

An especially remarkable property of the SK model is the coexistence of
a huge number of thermodynamical states. These states are called “pure
states” and the properties are considered as the essence of the
mean-field description of spin glasses. In the next section, the notion
of pure states and some related properties are explained.

### 1.3 Pure state and its implications

#### 1.3.1 A simple introduction to the concept of pure states

A pure state is a somewhat abstract concept and represents a certain
unit of the state of the system in the thermodynamic limit. To explain
this concept, let us first review a pure ferromagnetic system as an
example. In a ferromagnetic system, there are two possible thermodynamic
states at low temperatures. The first one is the state for which the
magnetization is positive, and for the other one the magnetization is
negative. If there is no element favoring one of signs of the
magnetization (i.e. boundary condition, magnetic field etc.), the
partition function of the system includes both contributions equally and
we can express this statement symbolically

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the summation of @xmath over the spin configurations for
which the magnetization is positive, and similarly for @xmath . However,
when a perturbation favoring a direction of the magnetization is applied
to the system, e.g. the positive magnetic field, the value of @xmath
exceeds @xmath . This difference becomes larger and larger in the
thermodynamic limit even when the magnetic field is a positive
infinitesimal, and the partition function converges to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

If the magnetic field is negative, the partition function @xmath
converges to @xmath . These facts indicate that there are two
distinguishable states in the thermodynamic limit. These distinguishable
states are the ‘pure states’, and the number of pure states for this
system is two.

Meanwhile, the present mean-field theory of spin glasses, which was
mainly constructed by Sherrington and Kirkpatrick [ 6 ] and solved by
Parisi [ 12 , 13 ] , tells that the number of pure states of spin
glasses increases exponentially as the system size grows. Let us assume
that an index @xmath denotes a pure state and the corresponding
partition function is expressed by @xmath . Each pure state has its own
free energy @xmath . In the large system limit @xmath , the mean-field
description tells us that the number of pure states with the free energy
value @xmath , @xmath , is scaled as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the characteristic exponent @xmath is called the ‘complexity’ or
‘configurational entropy’. For the ferromagnetic case, the unbiased
partition function ( 1.8 ) includes two pure states, @xmath and @xmath ,
and both of them give the same value of the free energy. For spin-glass
systems, however, each pure state can yield a different value of the
free energy. From a naive speculation of thermodynamics, it seems that
the actual system prefers the lowest free energy state than the other
states with higher values of free energy, but it is not the case. A
reasonable explanation to this fact is to remember that each pure state
cannot access each other because of infinitely high free energy barrier.
This is the same situation as in the ferromagnetic case. Thus, when the
system is once stuck in a pure state, the system never reaches other
pure states without external forces. In the statistical mechanical
model, all of such states are included in the partition function, and
both the free energy value and the number of pure states are important.
For general spin-glass systems, using eq. ( 1.10 ), we can write the
partition function as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation indicates that the equilibrium value of free energy @xmath
is equal to the saddle point value @xmath . This relation is quite
similar to the conventional microcanonical one @xmath , where @xmath is
the internal energy and @xmath is the corresponding entropy, and implies
that the complexity @xmath plays the role as the effective ‘entropy’ for
the ‘internal’ free energy @xmath .

Before ending this subsection, we note that the notion of the pure state
is different from that of the metastable state. Intuitively, metastable
states are simply local minima of the free energy in the phase space.
The system with many metastable states shows the slow dynamics at low
temperatures but it ultimately relaxes to its equilibrium state because
the metastable states are not completely separated by free energy
barriers and can be accessed each other in a sufficiently long term. On
the other hand, pure states are also minima but they are separated by
infinitely high free energy barriers. The system with many pure states
also shows slow relaxation but never reaches its equilibrium state due
to those infinitely high free energy barriers. Hence, pure states are
very stable in comparison with simple metastable states, and the
discrimination of pure and metastable states is the key concept of the
mean-field theory of spin glasses.

However, when we perform real and numerical experiments, we can only
treat finite size systems in a finite time scale. This leads to a
difficulty in identifying the origin of the slow dynamics of spin
glasses, because the phase spaces are never completely separated in
finite size systems and the observation in a finite time scale cannot
reject the possibility that the observed slow dynamics is due to the
shortness of the observing time. Hence, we cannot easily distinguish
pure and metastable states. This difficulty is an essential problem for
studying spin glasses. To support the mean-field description, we should
examine more detailed properties predicted from the mean-field theory.
In the following subsections, we present some numerical and real
experiments supporting the mean-field description.

#### 1.3.2 Relations between pure states and dynamical behaviors

Existence of many pure states directly explains the ergodicity breaking
of spin glasses. At high temperatures, the system has only one pure
state and the system relaxes to the pure state without depending on the
initial state. Below the critical temperature, however, the system goes
into the spin-glass phase and many pure states appear. Since each pure
state has different properties (order parameters) and is separated by
infinitely high free energy barriers, once the system is stuck in one of
the pure states, properties of the system is determined only by that
state and the system never reaches other states without external
perturbations.

This description can be examined by some numerical experiments for the
theoretical models of spin glasses. We here elucidate a simple example
of such experiments. To this end, let us consider an annealing
experiment of glassy and non-glassy spin systems. Such numerical
experiments are called simulated annealing. The actual procedures are as
follows:

1.  Set the temperature so high that the system is in the equilibrium
    state.

2.  Decrease the temperature to zero gradually.

3.  Observe the energy of the system at zero temperature.

When the decreasing rate @xmath is too large, the system cannot follow
the equilibrium state and cannot reach the ground state at zero
temperature. On the other hand, if the decreasing rate @xmath is
sufficiently small, we can find that a typical non-glassy spin system is
always in the equilibrium state and finally reaches the ground state at
zero temperature. For a typical spin-glass system, however, this
procedure does not work and the system cannot reach the ground state. In
an idealized situation (the system is infinitely large), this is the
case even in the slow cooling limit @xmath . An important point is that
we can qualitatively predict the value of the energy which the
spin-glass system takes in the slow cooling limit @xmath , by accepting
the description of pure states. For the typical spin-glass system, the
complexity @xmath takes finite values in a range @xmath , and can be
assessed in the statistical mechanical framework without any
considerations about the dynamics. In the zero temperature limit,
contributions from entropy vanish and the complexity becomes a function
of the energy @xmath , @xmath , defined in a range @xmath . The typical
functional form of @xmath is given in fig. 1.4 .

As in fig. 1.4 , the complexity usually takes its maximum at the maximum
of the energy range, which means that it is highly possible that the
system is trapped by the pure states with the energy @xmath . Actually,
for the annealing experiments conducted in some infinite range models,
it is observed that the energy which the system finally takes is equal
to @xmath as in fig. 1.4 [ 10 , 11 ] . This accordance in the
qualitative level between the analysis of pure states and the dynamical
behavior in annealing experiments strongly supports the validation of
the present mean-field theory of spin glasses in a certain kind of
spin-glass models.

#### 1.3.3 Hierarchical structure of pure states in the mean-field model

A fact that many pure states coexist in a system also implies that the
values of a certain kind of order parameters can vary from sample to
sample of materials, or from trial to trial of experiments. To precisely
explain this matter, let us consider a situation that we have two
replicated spin-glass systems, where these systems share the same
interactions @xmath but the states of spins independently vary, and
compare the behaviors of these systems. This situation is unfeasible in
real experiments but is easily realizable in numerical experiments. In
this situation, the following quantity, which observes the mutual
overlap between the two replicated systems labeled by @xmath and @xmath
, becomes important for revealing the emergence of many pure states

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the @xmath th spin of the system @xmath . If there
is only one pure state, the systems @xmath and @xmath are in the same
pure state at equilibrium and @xmath always takes the value independent
of the initial conditions and trials of experiments. Hence, the typical
distribution of @xmath , @xmath where the brackets @xmath denote the
average over the random interactions @xmath and are called the
configurational average, shows a delta function @xmath with a certain
average value @xmath . However, if there are many pure states, each
system will be trapped in a different state since the dynamics of the
systems @xmath and @xmath are independent each other. Hence, @xmath
takes a different value at every experiment and the distribution @xmath
becomes a broad function. Interestingly, this @xmath can be analytically
assessed in the mean-field theory [ 12 , 13 ] and the schematic diagram
of @xmath is presented in fig. 1.5 .

Of course, the distribution @xmath can also be assessed in numerical
experiments and we refer to a numerical result in fig. 1.6 .

The correspondence between the analytical and numerical results is good
and this fact justifies the present mean-field solution for the SK
model.

The broad @xmath implies that the overlap between two pure states @xmath
and @xmath , i.e. @xmath where @xmath denotes the thermal average over
the pure state @xmath , takes different values depending on the
selection of two pure states. The mean-field theory can provide not only
the behavior of @xmath but also some useful information of the structure
of the pure states. Let us consider a three-point probability
distribution @xmath , which represents a joint probability of the
overlaps between three arbitrary pure states; for three arbitrary pure
states @xmath and @xmath , @xmath represents the probability that their
mutual overlaps @xmath and @xmath take the values @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the probability weight of the pure state @xmath .
In the mean-field solution of the SK model, it is known that this
distribution shows a characteristic behavior

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is the step function which takes @xmath for
@xmath and @xmath otherwise. The first term on the right hand side is
non-vanishing only if the three overlaps are equal to each other, and
the second term requires that the overlaps be the edges of an isosceles
triangle @xmath . This means that the distances between three pure
states should form either equilateral or isosceles triangles. This
property is called the ultrametricity, and the ultrametricity implies
that the pure states consist a hierarchical structure as in fig. 1.7 .

The ultrametricity seems to be highly mathematical and to have no useful
information about real experiments. However, there are some experiments
indicating that real spin glasses have hidden hierarchical structures in
the phase space. Next, we present some examples of such experiments.

#### 1.3.4 Experimental supports of the hierarchical structure

Two characteristic effects are observed in spin-glass materials. One is
the ‘rejuvenation’ effect and the other is the ‘memory’ effect. These
are considered to be the evidence that the states of real spin glasses
constitute the hierarchical structures in their phase spaces. We here
give a simple explanation about these two effects.

Consider an experimental situation that a small ac field is applied to a
spin-glass material. The magnetic ac response is observed. If the ac
response is delayed, the susceptibility has two components; an in-phase
one @xmath and an out-of-phase one @xmath . This out-of-phase @xmath is
zero in the paramagnetic phase but becomes finite in the spin-glass
phase and relaxes slowly as fig. 1.8 , which signals the aging of the
system.

In the above experiment, we can change the temperature and observe the
response of the system. Figure 1.9 shows the behavior of @xmath in a
cycle of temperature; the temperature is kept a constant @xmath K @xmath
for @xmath min.. During in the aging, the temperature is suddenly
decreased from @xmath to @xmath K and kept at @xmath K for @xmath min.,
and the temperature is increased to the initial temperature @xmath K and
@xmath is observed for @xmath min..

This figure 1.9 clearly shows two extraordinary behaviors. One is that
the relaxation of @xmath shows a sudden jump when the temperature is
decreased, which implies that the aging restarts from a ‘younger state’.
This is the rejuvenation effect. The other is the continuity of the two
separated curves at @xmath K, although the system has experienced the
rejuvenation along the way. This phenomenon indicates that the spin
glass has held the perfect memory about the past state at @xmath K. This
is the memory effect.

These phenomena are characteristic behaviors of spin glasses, and can be
interpreted by assuming that the metastable states of a spin glass
constitute a hierarchical structure. This structure splits into many
states as the temperature decreases and becomes more and more
complicated as fig. 1.10 .

According to this description, the rejuvenation effect occurs as the
result of splitting of the metastable states when the temperature
decreases. Decreasing temperature produces new more stable states by
splitting the space of the states and the system restarts relaxing to
those stable states. On the other hand, the memory effect is due to the
vanishing of the metastable states by increasing temperature. The states
which the system explores at a low temperature are integrated into the
same state when the temperature increases. This means that the process
of the system at the low temperature does not influence the state at the
high temperature, which causes the memory effect of the temperature.
This hierarchical structure of the metastable states is considered to be
related to the hierarchical structure of pure states in the mean-field
theory.

#### 1.3.5 The mean-field theory and more

In the previous subsections, we have seen some evidence supporting the
mean-field theory of spin glasses. In addition, a recent mathematical
study [ 17 ] shows that the mean-field solution constructed by Parisi [
12 , 13 ] is rigorous for the SK model. These facts constitute the firm
foundation of the mean-field description of spin glasses.

At this point, there are some ways to proceed with the spin glass theory
further.

One way is to go beyond the mean-field theory. Treating more realistic
models, e.g. finite dimensional systems or systems with correlated
interactions @xmath etc., is a naive one to better understand real
spin-glass systems. However, in spite of the success of the SK model,
direct knowledge on finite-dimensional spin glasses or correlated
systems is yet limited. Analytical approaches in finite dimensions are
rather difficult and many researches rely on numerical calculations.
However, even numerical approaches often do not work well for spin
glasses because of the slow dynamics at and below the critical
temperature. Frustrated systems like spin glasses often have many
metastable states, and these metastable states prevent the system from
relaxing to the equilibrium states, which means that the correct
sampling of equilibrium states for frustrated systems at low
temperatures often fails. Although the spin-glass transition of the SK
model is definitely the equilibrium one and the phase space splits into
many pure states at the transition point, the numerical simulations
cannot identify the appearance of the pure states as the origin of the
slow dynamics. Consequently, we do not have sufficient theoretical
descriptions of finite dimensional spin glasses and there are some
different arguments about their low-temperature behaviors [ 18 , 19 , 20
] . These are very important and interesting problems, but we do not
treat them in this thesis.

Another way is to refine the mean-field theory of spin glasses and to
apply it to other subjects. Actually, in the last two decades, the
spin-glass theory has been applied to many subjects and compared with
other approaches in different disciplines [ 21 ] . The notion of pure
states can be generalized to other problems and many research areas are
included in the scope of the mean-field theory of spin glasses. For
example, structural glasses [ 22 ] , super-cooled liquids [ 23 ] ,
information processing tasks [ 24 , 25 ] and so on. Especially, a
statistical mechanical approach based on the spin-glass theory to the
information tasks has provided many fruitful results which influence not
only the informatics but also the spin-glass theory itself.

As the basis of such interdisciplinary researches, the mean-field theory
of spin glasses provides some useful concepts and mathematical tools.
The replica method is the most powerful one of such tools. Expressing in
a simple term, we can identify the replica method as a mathematical
technique to calculate the averaged quantities which are hard to assess
by other usual methods. Many problems can be treated in a unified way in
the framework of the replica method [ 24 ] . On the other hand, in spite
of many successes of the replica method, the mathematical foundation and
the physical interpretation of this method still have some mysterious
parts. Such mysteries of the replica method are the main subject of this
thesis. Next, we briefly explain the basic concept of the replica method
and how it is used in actual situations, and eventually state the
objective of this thesis.

### 1.4 The replica method

For the study of spin-glass models, the exchange interactions @xmath
between spins should be treated as the random variables. There are some
ways to treat the randomness based on the time scales of the spins and
the exchange interactions. The time scale of spins are determined by how
often the spin flipping occurs in the system, while the time scale of
the exchange interactions is dominated by the spatial motion of the
atoms (impurities in alloys). If time scales of spins and interactions
are almost the same, we should take both the averaging simultaneously.
This situation is called the annealed case. The annealed partition
function becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath means the summation over the spins. The angular brackets
@xmath denote the average over the random interactions @xmath and are
called the configurational average. Some frustrated systems like spin
glasses are, however, not correctly described by the annealed average,
because the frustration is relaxed by motions of the atoms. To correctly
describe spin glass behaviors, we must consider a situation that the
time scale of spins is drastically shorter than that of interactions.
This situation is called the quenched case, in which the interactions
are fixed as constants, and the partition function becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

In quenched systems, we should treat the partition function leaving the
random variable dependence @xmath , but this treatment is quite
difficult. For a class of quantities, however, the values of the
quantities depending on random variables converge to the averaged values
with the probability @xmath in the large system size limit @xmath .
These quantities are called the self-averaging quantities, and an
important point is that the free energy is also one of such quantities.
Accordingly, we just calculate the averaged free energy @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Assessing eq. ( 1.17 ) is, however, seriously difficult. The replica
method is employed to overcome this difficulty. To precisely state the
details, we here define the generating function @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.18)
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The basic idea of the replica method is the following identity expressed
in terms of @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thanks to this identity, the average of the logarithm @xmath is replaced
by the average of the @xmath th moment @xmath . Unfortunately, assessing
the average @xmath for general @xmath is still difficult. To avoid this
difficulty, the replica method additionally performs the following
procedures;

-   The asymptotic behavior of @xmath in the limit @xmath is calculated
    for natural numbers @xmath by using some analytical techniques like
    the saddle-point method.

-   The obtained solution of @xmath for @xmath is extended to @xmath by
    using their analytical continuation.

The first step is necessary because the direct assessment of @xmath is
unfeasible even for @xmath , and the second one is inevitable to take
the @xmath limit.

The procedures of the replica method mentioned above are necessary but
appear rather mysterious. Actually, these procedures cause two possible
problems:

1.  The uniqueness of the analytical continuation from natural to real
    numbers. Even if all the moments of @xmath are given for @xmath , it
    is impossible to uniquely continue the analytical expressions for
    @xmath to @xmath (or @xmath ).

2.  The analyticity breaking of @xmath . In general, even if @xmath is
    analytic with respect to @xmath for finite @xmath , the analyticity
    of @xmath can be broken.

Especially, the second problem is essentially related to the complex
behavior of spin glasses. It is known that the analyticity breaking with
respect to @xmath actually occurs in some spin-glass models and such
analyticity breaking relates to the replica symmetry breaking (RSB).
Nowadays, we have some prescriptions to handle the RSB and we can obtain
a correct solution, which is proposed by Parisi in 1979 [ 12 , 13 ] ,
even though the RSB occurs. Unfortunately, however, the Parisi solution
requires some mysterious procedures in the evaluation of the free
energy, and its full comprehension is not still obtained.

The subject of this thesis is to investigate the problems related to the
RSB from some perspectives. We have mainly two results; one is about the
interpretation of the RSB. The RSB is considered to correspond to the
emergence of many pure states. We reexamine this description by treating
a specific model and resolve some new aspects of the replica method.
Second is a proposition of a new method to detect the RSB as
singularities with respect to @xmath . This method is based on the
Lee-Yang description of phase transitions [ 26 ] and is applicable to
any singularities with respect to @xmath . Our results will be useful
for supporting the correctness of the replica method and making the
meaning of the RSB clearer.

### 1.5 Overview of thesis

In this thesis, we treat the problems related to the replica method and
the RSB. Some considerations and new methods are proposed to reveal the
mysteries of the RSB.

To state the problem precisely, we introduce the replica method with a
detailed explanation in the next chapter. Its practical applications are
also presented by treating some typical models. To reconsider the
replica result from a microscopic viewpoint, we also present the
so-called TAP equation [ 27 ] . This method reproduces the replica
result and is useful to understand the microscopic properties of pure
states.

In chapter 3, we reexamine recent progresses about the replica method.
Particular ingredients of the progresses are summarized as follows:

1.  Relationship between the generating function @xmath and the
    probability @xmath that the free energy @xmath takes a value @xmath
    .

2.  Connection with complex structures of phase spaces (pure states) and
    a formalism of the RSB.

To extensively investigate these two statements, we concentrate on the
investigation of the Ising perceptron [ 24 ] by using the replica method
with the RSB. The Ising perceptron is a model of a neuron which
generates a map from @xmath to @xmath , and is characterized by the
value of ratio @xmath , where @xmath is the number of random patterns
stored in the perceptron. The reason why we treat this model is that the
meaning of complexity for the perceptrons of finite size is clearer than
that for other systems. For the fully connected models, including the
Ising perceptrons, a pure state at zero temperature can be identified
with a stable cluster, the detailed definition of which will be given in
the same chapter, with respect to single spin flips [ 28 , 29 ] . For
samples of small systems, the size of the clusters can be numerically
evaluated by exhaustive enumeration without any ambiguity. This property
is extremely useful for justifying theoretical predictions through
numerical experiments. Investigating the Ising perceptron analytically
and numerically, we have found that the replica method cannot correctly
detect the phase-space structure of the Ising perceptron, which is due
to the strange distribution of the cluster size. This also affects the
probability distribution of the free energy @xmath and the replica
method cannot correctly calculate @xmath in a certain region. The origin
of this failure is also explained in the same chapter.

In chapter 4, apart from the notion of pure states, we concentrate on
the analyticity of @xmath with respect to the replica number @xmath .
For this purpose, we propose a new scheme based on the Lee-Yang theory
about phase transitions [ 26 ] . In particular, we observe zeros with
respect to @xmath of the averaged @xmath th moment @xmath . In terms of
the analyticity, the RSB can be regarded as an analyticity breaking of
@xmath . This motivates us to observe the zeros of @xmath to obtain
useful information about the RSB. To investigate these zeros, we treat
some tractable systems, i.e. the @xmath models with a symmetric
distribution on two types of lattices, ladder systems and Cayley trees
with random fields on the boundary. There are two reasons for using
these models: Firstly, these models can be investigated in a feasible
computational time by the cavity method [ 30 , 31 ] . Especially, at
zero temperature this approach gives a simple iterative formula to yield
the partition function. Employing the replica method and the cavity
method, we can perform symbolic calculations of the @xmath th moment of
the partition function @xmath , which enables us to directly solve the
equation of the objective zeros @xmath . The second reason is the
existence of the spin-glass phase. It is known that the spin-glass phase
is present for Cayley trees [ 32 , 33 , 34 , 35 ] and is absent for
ladder systems. Therefore, we can compare the behavior of the zeros,
which are considered to be dependent on the spin-glass ordering. Our
results indicate that the zeros approach the real axis of @xmath for
some Cayley trees but not for ladder systems, which seems to be
consistent with the presence and absence of spin glass ordering.
However, further investigations reveal that the singularities speculated
from the zeros of Cayley trees are not related to the RSB. This topic is
quite complicated and the details are given in the main texts of chapter
4. We also discuss a general possibility that the zeros of @xmath with
respect to @xmath cannot examine the full-step RSB, but this argument
has some uncertainties and we cannot give a reliable conclusion. To
investigate this point futher, we also examine the zeros of @xmath with
respect to @xmath for the so-called regular random graph. The regular
random graph is locally similar to the Cayley tree, which enables us to
treat this system in a manner similar to the Cayley tree in the large
system limit, but has some global loops, which introduce nontrivial
correlations into the system and is considered to lead to the RSB at low
temperatures. However, any appealing result cannot be obtained by this
investigation because of the computational difficulty for assessing
@xmath of the regular random graph. The RSB is still a great mystery
both from mathematical and physical points of view.

To remove some ambiguities of the discussions given in chapter 4, we
tackle the RSB by investigating some tree-like systems in another way in
chapter 5. In this chapter, we observe the zeros of the partition
function with respect to the external field @xmath and temperature
@xmath for the @xmath model on Bethe lattices. A Bethe lattice is an
interior part of the infinitely-large Cayley tree and shares similar
properties to those of the Cayley tree. The result shows that an
extraordinary response to deviations of the external field and
temperature exists for spin glasses on Bethe lattices, which is often
identified with the RSB and implies the existence of the RSB in these
models. This observation supports our previous discussion that the zeros
of @xmath with respect to @xmath cannot detect the full-step RSB, which
means that we need some modifications to obtain information about the
RSB from the zeros with respect to @xmath . Investigation along this
line is an important future work.

The last chapter is devoted to a conclusion of this thesis.

## Chapter 2 Review of the replica method and its interpretations

In this chapter, we review the replica method in detail. This method
requires some complicated and mysterious prescriptions in the
calculations. Hence, the meaning of the mathematical manipulations and
physical interpretations have been examined from various perspectives
for a long time. Our review in this chapter includes the recent progress
in this point. In particular, a relation between the replica symmetry
breaking and pure state statistics, and a relation with the large
deviation theory, are quite important for the interpretations of the
replica method. We will explain these topics by demonstrating the actual
calculations for some typical models.

### 2.1 Replica calculations for the fully-connected @xmath-spin
interacting model

The SK model presented in the previous chapter is the basic model of
spin glasses. This model has long-range interactions and each spin is
connected to all the other spins. This property is useful for the exact
treatment of the model because all the spins are symmetric and can be
equally treated. The detailed analyses of the SK model developed many
useful concepts and analytical tools, and eventually provided a
comprehensive view of spin glasses.

When investigating spin systems, we only treat the two-spin interactions
usually. This is because the interactions between the nearest
neighboring spins are considered to be sufficient to capture the
behavior of many physical systems. Actually, the SK model also has only
the two-spin interactions. However, to demonstrate the replica method,
we here treat the fully-connected @xmath -spin interacting model as an
example. The reason is the following:

1.  The SK model @xmath is naturally included.

2.  It is known that there are qualitatively different phase transitions
    for @xmath .

3.  A particular limit @xmath makes the analysis easier, which is
    suitable for the demonstration of the replica method.

Thus, we hereafter concentrate on the analysis of the fully-connected
@xmath -spin interacting model. The Hamiltonian of this system can be
written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the site index and @xmath is the Ising spin variable.
The interaction @xmath is a quenched random variable, the distribution
function of which is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

We adopt appropriate normalizations @xmath and @xmath . This is because
the physical quantities should be appropriately scaled, e.g. the average
of the Hamiltonian is extensive, in the limits @xmath and @xmath which
we will take afterward. If we set @xmath , this model is reduced to the
SK model. Following the prescription of the replica method, we calculate
the generating function @xmath . Assuming @xmath , the @xmath th moment
of the partition function can be assessed as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the symbol @xmath denotes the trace over all the spins and @xmath
and @xmath represent the replica indices. In deriving the final
expression in eq. ( 2.3 ), we have used the following relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

and left only the leading term. It is convenient to introduce the
variables

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

to replace the spin product terms @xmath in eq. ( 2.3 ). We treat @xmath
as a dummy integrating variable and use delta functions @xmath to
satisfy the constraint ( 2.5 ). We also use the Fourier-transformed
expression of the delta function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Substituting these expressions, we rewrite eq. ( 2.3 ) as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The spin trace can now be independently taken at each @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using the saddle point method, we obtain the generating function @xmath
for @xmath as

  -- -- -- -------
           (2.9)
  -- -- -- -------

where the symbol @xmath represents to take the extremization with
respect to @xmath . The extremization condition yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking this extremization condition is, however, quite difficult in the
general form. Hence, we need some ansatz to reduce this extremization
problem to a tractable one.

#### 2.1.1 Replica symmetric ansatz

To proceed further, we are required to determine the explicit dependence
of @xmath on the replica indices @xmath and @xmath at the saddle point.
For @xmath , an equality @xmath , where @xmath denotes the average over
the replicated Boltzmann factor @xmath , holds for any different
combinations of replicas ( @xmath and @xmath ), which is due to the
permutation symmetry of @xmath with respect to the replica indices. This
observation naturally leads to an ansatz that the saddle point of eq. (
2.9 ) has also the same symmetry, which is the so-called replica
symmetry (RS). Under the RS, the order parameter matrix @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the physical meaning of @xmath is easily understood. To see this, we
note that eq. ( 2.10 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is almost clear from the definition of @xmath ( 2.5 ). In the RS
ansatz, each replica is independent and equivalent, which means that the
contributions from replicas @xmath are canceled out and the averaged
quantity belonging to different replicas gives the same value

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is the spin-glass order parameter explained in chapter 1.

Using the RS, we can easily calculate the terms in eq. ( 2.9 ) to derive

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last equation is derived by using the Hubbard-Stratonovich
transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Gaussian measure @xmath and we hereafter assume that
the domain of integration of @xmath is @xmath if there is no explicit
indication. Substituting the above expressions, we can reduce @xmath in
eq. ( 2.9 ) to @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
                 (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we hereinafter put @xmath for simplicity of the notation. Taking
the extremization condition with respect to @xmath and @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Fortunately, under the RS the expression of @xmath can be extended to
@xmath , which enables us to take the @xmath limit. The resultant free
energy @xmath can be derived as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The extremization condition gives the state equations ( 2.18 ) in the
limit @xmath , and now the problem is solved in the RS level.
Unfortunately, this RS solution gives unphysical behaviors, e.g.
negative entropy, at low temperatures. Next, we study this point in more
detail by treating the particular limit @xmath .

### 2.2 The solution in the limit @xmath

#### 2.2.1 Failure of the RS solution

To demonstrate the failure of the RS ansatz, we here analyze the @xmath
limit. In this limit, the system becomes rather simple and we can derive
the exact solution without employing the replica method. First, let us
study the RS solutions. In the limit @xmath , there are two possible
solutions to eqs. ( 2.18 ), namely the paramagnetic solution @xmath and
the spin-glass solution @xmath . Substituting these solutions into eq. (
2.19 ), we obtain the paramagnetic and spin-glass free energies, @xmath
and @xmath respectively, as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The divergence of @xmath clearly shows an inconsistency of this
spin-glass solution. On the other hand, the paramagnetic solution also
shows the unphysical behavior at low temperatures. The entropy of the
paramagnetic solution @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

This clearly becomes negative below @xmath , which implies that there
should be a phase transition above @xmath . At least in the RS level, we
do not have any candidate to correctly express the low temperature
behavior of this system. Before seeing the correct solution in the
framework of the replica theory, we employ the microcanonical approach
in order to obtain the correct low temperature behavior.

#### 2.2.2 Microcanonical approach

The microcanonical approach starts from calculations of the energy
distribution of the system ( 2.1 ) in the limit @xmath as the
microcanonical ensemble

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The configurational average can be carried out by using the Fourier
expression of the delta function. The result becomes a Gaussian
distribution and does not depend on the spin configuration

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

The two-point probability distribution @xmath for two independent
configurations of spins @xmath and @xmath is similarly calculated

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Under the assumption that the spin configurations @xmath
and @xmath are thermodynamically distinguishable, the value of @xmath is
smaller than @xmath , which means that @xmath goes to @xmath in the
limit @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, the energy distribution of two different spin configurations is
completely independent for each configuration. We can prove that the
same property holds for any multi-point distributions by following
similar discussions. Consequently, each energy level for each spin
configuration can be treated as an identically independently distributed
(i.i.d.) Gaussian random variable, the distribution of which is given by
eq. ( 2.24 ). Due to this property, this model is called the random
energy model (REM) [ 36 ] and the free energy of the REM can be assessed
by the microcanonical approach.

The microcanonical approach utilizes the entropy to yield the
thermodynamical behavior of the system. Because each energy level is
i.i.d. for the REM, the number of states with energy @xmath can be
calculated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we put @xmath , which represents the energy per spin. This
relation implies that in the limit @xmath , there are very many states
for the range @xmath but none in the other range @xmath , and the
entropy for @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

An illustration of the entropy @xmath of the REM is given in fig. 2.1 .

Using this entropy function @xmath , we can construct the free energy
@xmath from the definition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the temperature. In the usual case, the temperature
@xmath is equal to @xmath as the definition of temperature in the
microcanonical ensemble. This is actually the case for @xmath . In this
region, eq. ( 2.29 ) gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand, for @xmath , the maximum of eq.  ( 2.29 ) is given by
@xmath and the free energy is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

These free energies ( 2.30 ) and ( 2.31 ) are the exact solution of the
REM.

The above discussion is easily understood by using pictorial expressions
given in figs. 2.3 and 2.3 . What we should do is to find a tangent to
the curve @xmath with slope @xmath . We denote the abscissa of the
tangent point as @xmath . For @xmath , this abscissa @xmath is in the
range @xmath , and then the maximum in eq. ( 2.29 ) is given by @xmath .
The figure corresponding to this situation is fig. 2.3 . On the other
hand, for @xmath , this value @xmath is out of the range @xmath , which
means that there is no physical state for the energy level @xmath . In
such a situation, the maximum of eq. ( 2.29 ) is the nearest value of
@xmath to @xmath under the condition @xmath , which leads to @xmath .

Before ending of this subsection, let us consider relations between the
microcanonical solution ( 2.29 ) and the RS result. As we can see
easily, for @xmath the paramagnetic solution of the RS ( 2.20 ) is
identical to the microcanonical solution. As the temperature decreases,
the entropy of the paramagnetic solution decreases and vanishes at
@xmath , and below @xmath the free energy is kept as a constant at the
value of @xmath . These observations imply that the spin glass
transition of the REM is due to the vanishing entropy of the
paramagnetic phase. This is a characteristic feature of the REM and this
transition is sometimes called the frozen transition.

To obtain the correct solution in the replica theory, it is known that
the so-called replica symmetry breaking (RSB), which allows @xmath to
depend on the replica indices, is required. Next we introduce the RSB in
a general framework.

### 2.3 Replica symmetry breaking

In order to obtain the low temperature spin-glass phase, we must treat
@xmath in more general forms. Although the correct form of @xmath is
unknown, Parisi has proposed a particular ansatz which describes a
hierarchical breaking of replica symmetry [ 12 , 13 ] . The Parisi
scheme is constructed from the following recursive algorithm:

(i) First step: The @xmath replicas are grouped in @xmath clusters of
@xmath replicas. Within the same cluster, each @xmath has a value @xmath
. Two replicas in different clusters have an overlap @xmath .

(ii) Second step: Each cluster of size @xmath is broken up into @xmath
sub-clusters of @xmath replicas. Any two replicas in the same
sub-cluster have overlap @xmath . The other overlaps remain unchanged.

Continuing this procedure, we obtain the general @xmath -step RSB (
@xmath RSB) situation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Each @xmath is interpreted as a hierarchically constructed spin-glass
order parameter and @xmath is called the breaking parameter. The
following example is for the case of the @xmath -step RSB such that
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking the limit @xmath , we assume that the parameters @xmath become
continuous and the following inequalities hold;

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

which are the inverse relations of eq. ( 2.32 ). All the parameters
@xmath are determined by taking the extremization condition of @xmath .
The above procedures are all the ingredients of the Parisi scheme. The
full-step ( @xmath -step) RSB (FRSB) is also constructed in a similar
manner but the concrete procedure is quite complicated and we here only
refer to [ 24 ] .

Physically, the RSB is considered to be related to the emergence of
enormous number of pure states. According to this speculation, the RS
ansatz describes situations that only a small number (subexponential
number of the system size @xmath ) of pure states exist, and the failure
of the RS solution at low temperatures is due to the neglect of many
pure states in the spin-glass phase.

Curiously, it is known that most models only show two types of RSB: The
1RSB and FRSB. In either case, it is considered that there are many pure
states but the intricacy of the phase space structure is different
depending on the step of RSB. Generally speaking, as the step of RSB
becomes higher and higher, the phase space structure is considered to
become more and more complicated.

Although our knowledge about the FRSB is still rather poor because of
intricacy of the FRSB construction, the 1RSB solution has been
intensively studied and its relation to pure states is well understood
nowadays [ 37 ] . In the following, we mainly treat the 1RSB solution
and explain the relation with many pure states in detail.

#### 2.3.1 The 1RSB solution for the @xmath-spin interacting model

Under the 1RSB ansatz, the replica indices are divided into @xmath
groups of identical size @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath are
parameterized as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Under this assumption, we can transform the term @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the first term on the right-hand side fills up all matrix elements
of @xmath with @xmath . The second term replaces the elements in the
block part with @xmath and the last term sets the diagonal elements to
zero. Similarly, we derive

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Combining the Hubbard-Stratonobich transformation and eq. ( 2.36 ), we
obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this expression, we can perform the spin trace for each replica spin
independently. Substituting all the results into eq. ( 2.9 ), we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
                 (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we put @xmath . Taking the extremization condition, we get the
following equations of states:

  -- -------- -- --------
                 (2.41)
                 (2.42)
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we set @xmath , the RS solution ( 2.17 ) and ( 2.18 ) is reproduced.
In the limit @xmath , we can derive the free energy parameterized by
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

The extremization condition re-derives eqs. ( 2.41 )-( 2.43 ) with the
condition @xmath . Although the physical meaning of @xmath is unclear at
this moment, we here treat @xmath as an artificial parameter and take
the extremization condition to erase the @xmath -dependence of the free
energy at the final step of calculations. We will come back to this
problem later after deriving the correct solution of the REM in the 1RSB
level.

#### 2.3.2 The 1RSB solution in the @xmath limit

It is time to solve the REM in the framework of the replica theory. What
we should do at first is to find the solution of eqs. ( 2.41 )-( 2.43 ).
There are three solutions for these equations in the limit @xmath ,
namely @xmath and @xmath . For the 1RSB solution to be non-trivial, an
inequality @xmath must hold, which means that @xmath is the appropriate
solution. Substituting this solution, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

Variation with respect to @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting this value, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is identical to the microcanonical solution ( 2.31 ) below the the
transition temperature @xmath . In the replica theory, the transition
temperature is determined by the direct comparison of the free energy
value @xmath , which is surely identical to that of the microcanonical
approach. Hence, for the REM, the 1RSB solution gives the exact result.

The above is the conventional construction of the 1RSB solution without
recent perspectives about the physical meaning of @xmath . Actually, the
RSB solution has more information about the phase space structure of the
system. We elucidate this point in the next section.

### 2.4 Pure state statistics of the 1RSB level

As already mentioned in chapter 1, in the mean-field description of spin
glasses, there are many pure states in a spin-glass system and the
partition function becomes the summation over contributions from all the
pure states. Each pure state @xmath has its own free energy @xmath and
the number of pure states having the free energy value @xmath , @xmath ,
is scaled as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is called the complexity. Note that an inequality @xmath
must hold, because the complexity is the logarithm of the number of pure
states, which cannot become negative. This is the same reason as the
entropy cannot become negative. Under these assumptions, we can write
the partition function as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the index of pure states and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the indicator function where @xmath when @xmath and
@xmath otherwise. Equation ( 2.49 ) indicates that the partition
function is dominated by the saddle point of @xmath . For convenience,
we define another generating function @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the bounds @xmath and @xmath for the range of @xmath come from the
constraint @xmath . Equation ( 2.51 ) implies that, when the complexity
@xmath is a convex upward function, the complexity can be calculated
from the generating function @xmath in the parameterized form as
follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

So far, we are discussing about one sample of quenched disorder. We here
assume that @xmath is a self-averaging quantity and we can replace
@xmath by @xmath . This averaged function @xmath can be expressed by the
replica method as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Although exact evaluation of the right-hand side of eq. ( 2.53 ) is
difficult, for @xmath we can derive the following expression:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the evaluation of this equation, the following observations are
important.

-   The summation is taken over all possible configurations of @xmath
    replica spins.

-   However, the factor @xmath allows only contributions from
    configurations in which @xmath replicas are equally assigned to
    @xmath pure states by @xmath .

These observations are nothing more than the physical situation of the
1RSB ansatz, in assessing @xmath with substitution of @xmath and @xmath
(fig. 2.4 ).

Accepting this interpretation, we obtain the following expression:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the 1RSB solution considered in the previous section.
Then, combining eqs. ( 2.53 ) and ( 2.55 ), we obtain the generating
function @xmath in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the 1RSB free energy shown in the previous section.
Hence, the RSB breaking parameter @xmath corresponds to the parameter
@xmath which controls the generating function @xmath of complexity,
which leads to the following relations from eq. ( 2.52 );

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 2.4.1 Pure states of the limit @xmath

Here, let us see the complexity of the REM as an example. According to
eqs. ( 2.44 ) and ( 2.57 ), the generating function of the @xmath -spin
model is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
                 (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we put @xmath because the nontrivial 1RSB solution exists only
under this condition. The value of @xmath is determined by eq. ( 2.41 ).
Taking the limits @xmath and @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

The parameterized free energy and the complexity are derived from eq. (
2.52 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

Clearly, this complexity @xmath is identical to the microcanonical
entropy @xmath if we identify @xmath . This can be understood if we
remember the construction of the REM. For this model, each spin
configuration is completely independent of each other as we see the
independence of each energy level in section 2.2.2 . This means that
each pure state of the REM is constructed from only one configuration,
which indicates that the entropy of a pure state defined as the
logarithm of the number of configurations belonging to the state, is
@xmath . Hence, the free energy of a pure state corresponds to the
energy of the state, which leads to the agreement between the complexity
@xmath and the entropy @xmath . As might be expected, this is a peculiar
property of the REM, and in general the complexity @xmath is different
from the entropy @xmath .

In the microcanonical approach, the phase transition and free energy in
each phase were easily derived by the pictorial interpretation of eq. (
2.29 ). We here reexamine this derivation from a view point of the
complexity. The form of @xmath is identical to that of @xmath given in
fig. 2.1 by reading @xmath and @xmath . There are two things which we
should do. One is to derive the phase transition and the equilibrium
value of the free energy @xmath in each phase. The other is to elucidate
relations between the derivation of @xmath and the conventional
prescription of the 1RSB. We start from the first point. The equilibrium
free energy @xmath is obviously equal to @xmath from the definition. The
relation between @xmath and the complexity @xmath is derived from eq. (
2.51 ) and ( 2.60 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is equal to @xmath . As mentioned in section 2.4 , the
complexity is the logarithm of the number of pure states and cannot be
negative. Keeping @xmath , for @xmath we can easily see that the maximum
of eq. ( 2.61 ) is given by @xmath , which is identical to the abscissa
of the curve @xmath with slope @xmath as given in fig. 2.6 . For @xmath
, that abscissa @xmath is out of the range @xmath and the maximum of
eq. ( 2.61 ) is given by @xmath as the microcanonical case, which leads
to the correct result @xmath .

The free energies are correctly reproduced from the viewpoint of the
complexity. Next, we see the relation with the conventional 1RSB
prescription. The inequality @xmath in the 1RSB construction is
naturally understood from the specialty of @xmath . For @xmath , the
generating function @xmath directly relates to the correct @xmath unless
the corresponding complexity becomes negative. Hence, in the usual case
we should keep @xmath and calculate @xmath , which gives the correct
solution for @xmath . For @xmath , however, a naive calculation of
@xmath leads to the negative complexity, but this inconsistency is
overcome in the 1RSB construction as follows. An important point is that
the point @xmath where the complexity vanishes is determined by a
tangent to @xmath with the slope @xmath . Hence, to select @xmath below
@xmath , we can modify @xmath of @xmath as @xmath . This artificial
prescription is just the extremization condition of @xmath with respect
to @xmath . In fact,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

which means that the extremization condition of @xmath with respect to
@xmath leads to the point where the complexity vanishes. The equilibrium
free energy @xmath is expressed in the 1RSB prescription as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, the correct solution is reproduced. These procedures are also
illustrated in fig. 2.6 .

### 2.5 Viewpoint from the large deviation theory

In the previous sections, we gave the replica analysis with the RSB and
its interpretation from the pure state statistics. In this section, we
reexamine this result from the viewpoint of the large deviation theory,
which treats asymptotic small probabilities of rare events in the large
system limit.

For disordered systems, the probability that the free energy, @xmath ,
will take a certain value @xmath , @xmath , fluctuates from sample to
sample. The large deviation theory tells us that, in most cases for
large @xmath , this probability @xmath can be scaled as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is referred to as the rate function. The rate function
relates to the generating function @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the bounds @xmath and @xmath are required to satisfy the
constraint @xmath , as in the case of pure state statistics. If the rate
function is a convex upward function, we can express the free energy and
the rate function in forms parameterized by @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation and the constraint @xmath require that the following
equation holds for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equations ( 2.65 ) and ( 2.66 ) indicate that the typical value of
@xmath , which is characterized by the condition @xmath , can be
evaluated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is the basic identity of the replica method. The above discussion
indicates that @xmath corresponds to atypical samples of @xmath
representing a small probability. This means that the replica method can
be regarded as a formula that infers the behavior of typical samples by
extrapolating the behavior for atypical samples.

#### 2.5.1 Re-derivation of the 1RSB transition

Again we treat the REM as an example. As mentioned in section 2.2 ,
there are two solutions for the equations of states ( 2.18 ) in the
limit @xmath , namely the paramagnetic @xmath and spin-glass @xmath
solutions. Hence, there are corresponding two solutions for @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.69)
     @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

The RS1 and RS2 solutions correspond to the paramagnetic and RS
spin-glass solutions, @xmath and @xmath given in section 2.2 ,
respectively ¹ ¹ 1 Two limits @xmath and @xmath are not exchangeable and
the values of free energy are different between @xmath and @xmath . . If
we follow the concept of the saddle-point method, the correct solution
is given by larger @xmath , but naive application of this criterion
yields incorrect results. To treat this problem precisely, we should
distinguish regions @xmath and @xmath .

We first treat the high temperature region @xmath . The correct solution
of @xmath in this region is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

which gives the correct free energy @xmath . Note that the boundary
@xmath is determined by equating two solutions @xmath and @xmath , which
agrees with the concept of the saddle-point method, but another
intersection at @xmath is ignored in the solution ( 2.71 ) even though
the RS2 solution exceeds the RS1 below @xmath . The correctness of this
prescription in the present case can be understood from the following
criteria which should be satisfied by the correct @xmath :

1.  The generating function @xmath is a convex downward function with
    respect to @xmath .

2.  The rate function @xmath is nonpositive.

3.  An equality @xmath should hold basically ² ² 2 In some cases, the
    identity @xmath can be broken even though the similar equality for
    finite @xmath , @xmath , holds, due to taking the thermodynamic
    limit first. We will see such an example in chapter 3. .

4.  The entropy @xmath cannot be negative.

The RS2 solution clearly violates the third criterion which comes from a
fact that for finite @xmath the generating function @xmath necessarily
becomes @xmath at @xmath . Hence, we choose the RS1 solution as the
correct one in the whole range of @xmath . This solution is illustrated
in the left panel of fig. 2.7 . Empirically, it is known that an
intersection at @xmath should be neglected in most cases, but the
general reason is not found and we only point out this fact here.

On the other hand, for the low temperature region @xmath , we need to
construct another solution for @xmath since the solution ( 2.71 ) gives
incorrect results. It is known that the correct solution is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

and is illustrated in the right panel of fig. 2.7 . The content of this
solution is as follows. For large @xmath , the larger RS solution,
@xmath , is correct as the high temperature region. Decreasing @xmath ,
we find an intersection of the RS1 and RS2 solutions at @xmath , but as
mentioned in the previous paragraph this intersection should be
neglected. Actually, if we adopt the RS1 solution, we obtain the
negative entropy at @xmath , which violates the fourth criterion in the
previous paragraph. Proceeding to the range of @xmath , we can find that
the rate function @xmath becomes positive below @xmath , which violates
the constraint @xmath . A natural prescription to avoid this
inconsistency is keeping the value of @xmath as @xmath below @xmath ,
which leads to the solution ( 2.72 ). This prescription can be proved to
be correct in more mathematically proper procedures which focus on the
convexity of @xmath and the monotonicity of @xmath [ 38 ] .

The solution ( 2.72 ) relates to the 1RSB solution. In fact, if we set
@xmath in eq. ( 2.40 ), which is a necessary condition for the
nontrivial 1RSB in the current case solution ³ ³ 3 The nontrivial
solution of equations of states ( 2.41 )-( 2.43 ) is only given by
@xmath and @xmath in the present model. , the functional form of @xmath
can be expressed by using the RS solution as ⁴ ⁴ 4 Another 1RSB order
parameter @xmath is identified with the RS one @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

The interpretation of this equation is simple. The equality @xmath means
that each pure state is perfectly uncorrelated. Thus, @xmath becomes
proportional to @xmath , as we can see in fig. 2.4 , which comes from
the independent @xmath sets of replicas. In each set of the replicas,
@xmath replicas are included and the overlap @xmath takes a value, which
is the same situation as the RS one. These considerations naturally lead
to eq. ( 2.73 ).

Taking the extremization condition of eq. ( 2.73 ) with respect to
@xmath with fixing @xmath , we find that the breaking parameter @xmath
becomes equal to @xmath , and the solution ( 2.72 ) is reproduced.
Hence, the solution @xmath can be regarded as the 1RSB solution. Using
eqs. ( 2.71 ) and ( 2.72 ), we can depict a phase diagram of the REM on
the @xmath - @xmath plane and the result is given in fig. 2.9 .

If we see the complexity and rate function, the relation between the
1RSB construction and large deviations becomes clearer. Using eqs. (
2.57 ) and ( 2.73 ), we can express the complexity as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

the functional form of which is obviously identical to that of the rate
function @xmath , though their domains of definition are disjointed
except for a point of typical value of free energy @xmath (which is
identified with the equilibrium free energy @xmath in the context of
pure state statistics), where the complexity and rate function become
@xmath . This is also illustrated in fig. 2.9 .

Summarizing the above discussions, we have seen the physical
significance of the RSB from various perspectives by treating the REM as
an example. In the remaining sections of this chapter, we treat the
finite @xmath cases by utilizing the above discussions. In addition, we
present some arguments about the microscopic description of pure states,
which becomes important when we treat problems requiring microscopic
information like the optimization problems.

### 2.6 Finite @xmath cases

In this section, we treat the finite @xmath cases of the fully-connected
@xmath -spin interacting model. Especially, we concentrate on the @xmath
and @xmath cases, since it is known that the qualitative behavior for
@xmath is similar to either one of those cases. To treat the @xmath
cases, we need to consider the transition to the FRSB. Although the 1RSB
transition can be observed by calculating the complexity in the 1RSB
framework, the FRSB is signaled by the local instability of the RS
solution, which is called the de Almeida-Thouless (AT) instability [ 39
] . Hence, we first explain the AT instability, and then present the
phase diagrams of the @xmath cases.

#### 2.6.1 de Almeida-Thouless instability

Let us remember that the generating function @xmath has the following
form

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.75)
  -- -- -- --------

We consider the deviations of the order parameter @xmath around the RS
saddle-point

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

and expand @xmath with respect to @xmath to second order. The conjugate
order parameter @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

hence the leading two terms in eq. ( 2.75 ) become

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we leave only the second order terms because the zeroth order
terms are irrelevant to the variation of @xmath , @xmath , and the first
order terms become @xmath since we take the saddle-point condition with
respect to @xmath . Similarly, we can expand the last term of eq. ( 2.75
) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the brackets @xmath denote the average over the RS weight @xmath .
Regarding that an equality @xmath holds, we eventually derive the
variation of the generating function @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
                 (2.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Kronecker delta function which yields @xmath when
@xmath and @xmath otherwise. We denote the matrix of coefficients of
@xmath by @xmath which is called the Hessian matrix. The local stability
of the RS solution requires all the eigenvalues of @xmath be positive.
Here we classify the elements of @xmath by using the following notations

  -- -------- -- --------
                 (2.81)
     @xmath      (2.82)
     @xmath      (2.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Eigenvalues of the Hessian and the AT condition

Let us find the eigenvectors of @xmath by a heuristic approach found by
Almeida and Thouless. The first eigenvector @xmath is obtained by
assuming @xmath for any @xmath . In this condition, from the eigenvalue
equation @xmath we can easily derive the first eigenvalue @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

The next type of solution @xmath is obtained by treating a replica
@xmath as a special one. We assume @xmath without loss of generality.
This solution @xmath has @xmath when @xmath or @xmath is equal to @xmath
, @xmath otherwise. The first row of the eigenvalue equation @xmath
gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

We here impose the orthogonal condition of the solutions @xmath and
@xmath , which leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

Solving eqs. ( 2.85 ) and ( 2.86 ) under the condition @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

The third mode @xmath is obtained by treating two replicas @xmath as
special ones. This solution @xmath has @xmath , @xmath when @xmath and
@xmath otherwise. Without loss of generality, we put @xmath and @xmath .
The orthogonal condition of @xmath and @xmath yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the orthogonal condition of @xmath and @xmath also gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first row of the eigenvalue equation @xmath leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

Solving eqs. ( 2.88 )-( 2.90 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

The eigenvectors @xmath , @xmath and @xmath construct @xmath
-dimensional space, hence all the eigenvalues are exhausted by these
three modes.

For the stability of the saddle point, all of the eigenvalues must be
non-negative. We hereafter concentrate on a region @xmath . In this
region, from simple algebras we can see that inequalities @xmath hold,
which means that the mode @xmath is the relevant mode for the stability
of the RS solution and is called the replicon mode. To obtain an
explicit form of @xmath , we calculate the factor @xmath in @xmath and
the result is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

Remembering @xmath in @xmath and @xmath is equal to @xmath given in
eq. ( 2.18 ), we finally obtain

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.93)
  -- -- -- --------

as the AT stability condition of the RS solution. Once the AT stability
breaks, it is believed that the FRSB solution is required to describe
the behavior of the system.

##### Connection to the divergence of the spin-glass susceptibility

As we can expect, the AT condition is related to the divergence of the
spin-glass susceptibility @xmath which is defined in section 1.1 . To
elucidate this point, we here calculate the spin-glass susceptibility
for the fully-connected @xmath -spin interacting model. The following
calculations are based on those in reference [ 40 ] .

We first introduce the modified generating function @xmath , in which we
introduce the RS interaction @xmath among @xmath out of @xmath replicas,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

We hereafter assume that the indices @xmath run only among @xmath
replicas, while @xmath run all @xmath replicas. Note that not only the
limit @xmath but also the limit @xmath reproduce the normal generating
function @xmath from eq. ( 2.94 ). The limit @xmath can be taken by
using the analytic continuation from @xmath to @xmath

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.95)
  -- -- -- --------

where we have used the Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation. To see the
stability of the system against introduction @xmath , let us expand
@xmath with respect to @xmath . Denoting @xmath , we can express the
first derivative as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the brackets @xmath and @xmath denote the following averages

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.97)
     @xmath      (2.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we define @xmath , and the second derivative becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first term of this equation gives the following three contributions

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (2.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Hereafter, we concentrate on the case where @xmath is slightly larger
than unity @xmath . In this case, eq. ( 2.100 ) yields @xmath terms. On
the other hand, the second term in eq. ( 2.99 ) is negligible because
the order is @xmath . Taking the limit @xmath , we can find that the
@xmath replicas become completely independent and @xmath is reduced to
the thermal average @xmath with respect to the @xmath -replicated
original Hamiltonian @xmath , which yields the following expressions of
the derivatives up to the order @xmath ,

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.101)
  -- -- -- ---------

where the brackets @xmath denote @xmath . Hence, we obtain the modified
generating function as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath denotes the transpose matrix of @xmath and @xmath
represents the spin-glass susceptibility matrix having the component
@xmath . Equation ( 2.102 ) implies that the largest eigenvalue of the
matrix @xmath is related to the stability of the system against
introduction @xmath . We can expect that the system statistically has
the translational invariance, which implies that the eigenvector of the
largest eigenvalue is given by @xmath . Hence, the largest eigenvalue
becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This gives a natural extension of the spin-glass susceptibility to the
finite replica case and implies the relation between the divergence of
the spin-glass susceptibility and the instability against introduction
of interactions between replicas.

Next, we express @xmath in a more tractable form. Using the replica
method and following the calculations in section 2.1 , we can obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The interaction @xmath breaks the replica symmetry and we should choose
the appropriate form of @xmath to take the saddle point. Without loss of
generality, we can assume that the RS interaction @xmath is introduced
into the first @xmath replicas, @xmath . A natural form of @xmath is
then expressed as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Under this ansatz, we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The saddle-point condition gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.109)
     @xmath      (2.110)
     @xmath      (2.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In this expression, the derivatives of @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For obtaining the eigenvalue of the Hessian @xmath , we should calculate
@xmath . The (statistically) translational invariance of the system
enables us to simplify the calculation by putting @xmath for @xmath .
Differentiating eq. ( 2.109 ) with respect to @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the particular form of the factor @xmath is irrelevant for our
current purpose and is omitted here. The second term in the braces
@xmath is again negligible if we consider the case @xmath because it is
@xmath . In addition, in the limit @xmath we can expect that @xmath and
@xmath become the RS spin-glass order parameter @xmath , which leads to
that the average @xmath becomes identical to the average @xmath in the
limit @xmath . These conditions yield

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (2.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are defined in eqs. ( 2.18 ) and ( 2.92 ),
respectively. Substituting these conditions and @xmath into eq. ( 2.114
), we finally get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Using eqs. ( 2.18 ) and ( 2.92 ), we find that this condition is
identical to the AT condition. From ( 2.101 ) and ( 2.113 ), the
spin-glass susceptibility is proportional to @xmath and hence the AT
condition coincides with the divergence of the spin-glass
susceptibility.

#### 2.6.2 Phase diagrams for the @xmath cases

As mentioned in section 2.5.1 , the 1RSB solution can be calculated by
the RS solution as @xmath in the present model ⁵ ⁵ 5 This is a
particular property of models with @xmath . If the external field is
introduced into the present model, the equality @xmath does not hold any
more, and we must consider the 1RSB solution directly. We will treat
such a model with @xmath in chapter 3. . The AT condition is also
assessed by the RS solution and hence the RS solution is sufficient to
derive phase diagrams for finite @xmath . The resultant plots for @xmath
and @xmath are given in figs. 2.11 and 2.11 , respectively.

The solid lines in figs. 2.11 and 2.11 represent phase boundaries. We
see the contents of these phase diagrams in the following.

First, let us consider the @xmath case. In this case, the transition
temperature @xmath at @xmath is assessed by the perturbative approach
because the transition is of second order. We expand the right-hand side
of eq. ( 2.18 ) with respect to @xmath to second order and get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This equation indicates that for @xmath the transition is of second
order and the transition temperature is @xmath and a phase boundary
exists in a vertical form at @xmath from @xmath to @xmath . For larger
@xmath , the transition is of first order and it is required to
numerically solve eq. ( 2.18 ). Above the line labeled by @xmath in fig.
2.11 , there are two stable solutions @xmath and @xmath , and we call
them the RS1 and RS2 solutions, respectively, similarly to the REM case.
For large @xmath the RS2 solution dominates the system in the whole
range of temperature. For small @xmath , at high temperatures @xmath we
can draw a phase boundary between the RS1 and RS2 phases by equating
@xmath and @xmath and the actual boundary is indicated by the line
@xmath in fig. 2.11 . On the other hand, at low temperatures @xmath , we
must consider the RSB of the RS2 solution. The line where the AT
stability breaks is the AT line which indicated by @xmath in fig. 2.11 .
Below the AT line, the system requires the FRSB solution. Although there
exists a region where the rate function assessed by the RS2 solution
becomes positive below the AT line, that region is irrelevant because
the RS solution does not hold any meaning below the AT line. In the low
temperature limit @xmath , we can analytically derive the asymptotic
behavior of the AT line. We here omit the detailed calculations and only
give the result

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Hence the AT line diverges in the @xmath - @xmath plane.

Next, we consider the @xmath case. In this case, transitions are of
first order and we need numerical calculations to determine phase
boundaries. Unlike the SK @xmath case, there is a region where the 1RSB
solution is relevant, which is signaled by the behavior of the rate
function @xmath . The line indexed by @xmath denotes the critical
condition @xmath and below this line the rate function is naturally
continued to the positive complexity, which means the emergence of the
1RSB phase. The meaning of other symbols in fig. 2.11 are the same as in
the @xmath case. The equilibrium transition from the paramagnetic to
1RSB phases occurs at @xmath and the equilibrium free energy @xmath
shows a singularity at this temperature. In addition, at lower
temperatures the AT line @xmath exceeds the line @xmath , which leads to
another phase transition at @xmath . The system is dominated by the FRSB
solution below the AT line, and the transition from the 1RSB to FRSB is
sometimes called the Gardner transition [ 41 ] .

Another important fact for the @xmath case is that a non-equilibrium
transition, the so-called dynamical transition, occurs at @xmath . At
this temperature, the equilibrium free energy does not show any
singularity, but the phase structure of the system drastically changes.
For @xmath , only the paramagnetic solution @xmath exists for @xmath ⁶ ⁶
6 Remember the 1RSB-RS correspondence ( 2.73 ), i.e. the replica number
@xmath of the RS solution corresponds to the 1RSB breaking parameter
@xmath , and the specialty of @xmath . , which means that the complexity
takes @xmath at @xmath and @xmath otherwise. On the other hand, for
@xmath , there are two solutions @xmath and @xmath , which indicates
that the nontrivial 1RSB saddle point exists and many pure states
appear, which yields the complexity in a certain range of free energy.
These pure states affect the dynamics of the system and the system
cannot reach the equilibrium states, although the equilibrium value of
free energy @xmath is completely the same as the paramagnetic one @xmath
for @xmath . This transition is sometimes called the dynamical 1RSB
transition (d1RSB). In the REM, there exist two solutions @xmath and
@xmath in the whole temperature region and we did not realize the
existence of this dynamical transition ⁷ ⁷ 7 We can also interpret as
that the dynamical transition temperature of the REM is @xmath . . This
dynamical transition revealed by the complexity analysis is also
confirmed by some numerical approaches [ 10 , 11 , 42 ] which directly
investigate dynamical properties. The complexity is nowadays considered
to be one of the most important concepts to understand not only
dynamical behaviors of various systems but also the replica method
itself.

### 2.7 Microscopic description of pure states

In this final section of this chapter, we present the microscopic
description of pure states of spin glasses. A basis of this attempt is
the so-called TAP equation which is a set of equations with respect to
the local magnetizations @xmath and is first derived by Thouless et al.
[ 27 ] .

#### 2.7.1 TAP method

We here treat the SK model, the @xmath case, as an example. The TAP
equation for the SK model is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For readers interested in the derivation of this equation, we refer to [
43 ] . The corresponding TAP free energy @xmath is expressed as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.121)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the spin-glass order parameter and equals to @xmath .
Taking variation of @xmath with respect to @xmath , we again obtain
eq. ( 2.119 ).

In the TAP context, pure states are identified with the solutions of
eq. ( 2.119 ) ⁸ ⁸ 8 Historically, the notion of pure state was first
founded through analyzing the TAP equation. . The number of TAP
solutions with the free energy value @xmath , @xmath , is hence given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.122)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the Hessian of the TAP free energy

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.123)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The TAP complexity is defined by @xmath and is assumed to be self
averaging, which leads to the quantity to be calculated as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.124)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This was first formulated by Bray and Moore [ 44 ] and is reexamined
many times [ 37 , 45 , 46 , 47 ] . The calculations are straightforward
but rather involved and we only give a sketch of actual calculations and
refer the results of [ 47 ] . The evaluation procedure is as follows:

1.  Replace @xmath by @xmath by using the replica method.

2.  The modulus of @xmath is removed to simplify the calculation (there
    is no a priori justification of this assumption) and @xmath is
    expressed by using Grassmann variables @xmath in an integral form
    @xmath .

3.  The delta functions in eq. ( 2.122 ) are transformed into the
    Fourier expressions as @xmath , and all the relevant factors are
    expressed in an exponential form @xmath with an effective action
    @xmath .

4.  The configurational average is performed and then the RS and the
    Becchi-Rouet-Stora-Tyutin (BRST) supersymmetry are imposed on the
    effective action @xmath .

5.  Finally, the complexity is assessed by using the saddle-point method
    and taking the @xmath limit.

Note that it is known that the RS assumption usually yields the same
result with the annealed approximation @xmath , and actual calculations
are also performed in this approximation in [ 47 ] as other references [
44 , 45 , 46 ] . Leaving a parameter @xmath which determines the value
of TAP free energy @xmath , we can express the TAP complexity as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Taking the maximization with respect to @xmath gives the TAP complexity
for a free energy value @xmath , @xmath . Comparing eqs. ( 2.58 ) with
@xmath and ( 2.125 ), we can find a formal correspondence between the
TAP complexity and the generating function @xmath assessed in the 1RSB
level as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Taking the minimization with respect to @xmath of the right-hand side
yields the complexity in the replica theory of the 1RSB level, hence the
TAP and replica theories completely give the same result. This fact
supports not only the consistency of different methods but also the
correctness of microscopic description of pure states based on the TAP
equation.

#### 2.7.2 Zero temperature limit

In the previous discussion, we have seen that pure states statistics
based on the microscopic description, the TAP method, gives the same
result as the replica one. To investigate the microscopic description of
pure states in more detail, we here concentrate on the zero temperature
limit. In this limit, pure states are related to stable configurations
against single spin flips.

Although it is possible to propose some stabilities of a spin
configuration at zero temperature, the stability against single spin
flip can be considered as the most natural one. Consider a spin @xmath
at site @xmath and the effective field @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The stability condition of @xmath against any single spin flip is that
inequalities

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.128)
  -- -------- -- ---------

hold for all @xmath . This is the same condition as equalities

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.129)
  -- -------- -- ---------

hold for all @xmath . Since @xmath can be identified with the spin
@xmath in the limit @xmath , eq. ( 2.129 ) is nothing but the TAP
equation at zero temperature with a condition ⁹ ⁹ 9 This condition has
some delicate points as pointed out in [ 47 ] , but we do not treat this
problem and only adopt the condition @xmath in the limit @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.130)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Equation ( 2.129 ) and the discussion in the previous subsection imply
that pure states at zero temperature are connected to stable spin
configurations against any single spin flip.

Note that this simple relation is, however, considered to be peculiar to
the fully-connected models. This important fact was first pointed out by
Biroli and Monasson [ 29 ] . In order to follow their discussion, we
here define a @xmath -stable configuration as the configuration the
energy of which cannot be decreased by flipping any subset of @xmath (or
less than @xmath ) spins. In this context, pure states of
fully-connected models at zero temperature correspond to @xmath -stable
spin configurations. Denoting the number of @xmath -stable
configurations with the energy density @xmath as @xmath , we can define
a kind of entropy of @xmath -stable configurations, @xmath , as @xmath
in the @xmath limit. Biroli and Monasson have shown that the TAP
complexity @xmath is identical to @xmath by treating a hybrid system of
one dimensional and fully-connected models. They have also alleged that
the @xmath -stable entropy @xmath does not depend on @xmath in the
fully-connected models, which leads to an accidental correspondence
between @xmath and @xmath . This peculiar property to the
fully-connected models can be understood as follows: Let us denote the
energy deviation induced by flipping a spin @xmath as @xmath . If we
flip two spins @xmath and @xmath , the energy deviation @xmath equals to
@xmath . This energy deviation @xmath becomes, however, @xmath in the
@xmath limit because @xmath is scaled as @xmath , which means that a
@xmath -stable configuration is also @xmath -stable, and the same holds
for all @xmath . Therefore, @xmath does not depend on @xmath and @xmath
.

In conclusion, the microscopic description of pure states is given by
the TAP equation. The TAP method gives a simple description of pure
states for the fully-connected models, but for more realistic models
there still remain some unclear points about the existence and the
properties of pure states.

### 2.8 Summary

In this chapter, we reviewed the replica method in detail by treating
the fully-connected @xmath -spin interacting model as an example. The
relation between the replica symmetry breaking (RSB) and the emergence
of many pure states was closely explained and the distribution of pure
states, the complexity @xmath , was calculated in the @xmath -step RSB
(1RSB) level. This description of the 1RSB was also reexamined from a
viewpoint of the large deviation theory, and the 1RSB transition was
interpreted from the rate function @xmath . In our particular model, the
complexity and rate function share the same functional form, which
implies a close relation between these quantities. In addition, the
microscopic description of pure states was presented from the TAP
context. At zero temperature it was explained that stable spin
configurations against @xmath -spin flips correspond to pure states, but
for the fully-connected models pure states are also identical to the
stable spin configurations against single spin flip. It was shown from a
simple discussion about the energy balance that this property is
peculiar to the fully-connected models.

Viewpoints from pure state statistics and the large deviation theory
proposed in this chapter are rather recent results. In past days the RSB
formulation was performed without realizing these backgrounds and some
confusing discussions were proposed. This chapter is written to clarify
these points by comparing conventional and modern operations of the RSB.

Pure states at zero temperature generally correspond to spin
configurations stable against @xmath -spin flips after taking the
thermodynamic limit @xmath , but for the fully-connected models such
configurations are the same as @xmath -stable spin configurations. This
peculiar property is useful for identifying pure states to numerically
evaluate the complexity. In the next chapter, we will utilize this
property and calculate the complexity numerically to verify the
prediction of the replica result.

## Chapter 3 Analyses of weight space structure and rare events in the
Ising perceptron

In the previous chapter, we introduced the replica method and also
elucidated its aspects as a tool to obtain the pure state statistics and
large deviations. In this chapter, we reexamine these aspects
extensively by treating a model of a neuron, namely the so-called Ising
perceptron.

As seen in sec. 2.5 , the rate function @xmath , which represents a
small probability of atypical samples, and the complexity @xmath , which
represents a large number of pure states that appear for typical
samples, share not only the similar mathematical structure but also the
same functional form for the fully-connected @xmath -spin interacting
model. This fact naturally motivates us to further explore more general
relationships between @xmath , and @xmath , including cases for which
the formal accordance of functional forms between @xmath and @xmath does
not hold.

The Ising perceptron considered here is a simple model of a neuron and
stores random input-output patterns. There are two reasons for
considering this system. First, the Ising perceptrons can be
macroscopically characterized by a few sets of order parameters and are
relatively easier to handle. Despite the simplicity, it is known that
this model exhibits rich behavior in the phase space involving
nontrivial RSB phenomena [ 48 , 49 ] and is considered to show different
functional forms of @xmath and @xmath , which is highly suitable for our
purpose. The second reason is that the meaning of complexity for the
Ising perceptrons of finite size is clearer. For the Ising perceptrons,
a pure state at zero temperature can be identified with a stable
cluster, the definition of which will be given in section 3.4 , with
respect to single spin flips [ 28 , 29 , 50 ] . For samples of small
systems, the size of the clusters can be numerically evaluated by
exhaustive enumeration without any ambiguity. This property is extremely
useful for justifying theoretical predictions through numerical
experiments.

Our investigations reveal that the generating function @xmath of the
complexity @xmath shows an extraordinary behavior, the origin of which
is that @xmath and @xmath of the Ising perceptron are not convex upward
functions, which is assumed in usual analyses. The results presented in
this chapter are summarized in reference [ 51 ] .

### 3.1 Model

A simple perceptron is a model of a neuron, the function of which is a
map from @xmath to @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the input pattern and @xmath is the output label. The
vector @xmath denotes the synaptic weights.

We hereafter focus on the Ising weight case, in which each synaptic
weight only takes @xmath . In a general scenario, the perceptron stores
a given set of @xmath labeled patterns

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

by adjusting the weight @xmath so as to completely reproduce the given
label @xmath for the input @xmath for @xmath .

In the following, we consider a situation in which the patterns are
independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.). In the conventional
situations of the neural networks, a network consisting from Ising
perceptrons is considered and in that situation the input @xmath is a
set of outputs of other perceptrons [ 24 ] . This means that the input
@xmath is usually chosen as random signs @xmath , but in the
thermodynamic limit we can regard @xmath as multivariate Gaussian random
variables due to the central limit theorem. Hence, it is convenient to
assume the following distributions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

from the beginning of the analysis. The question we address here is how
the space of the weights that store @xmath is characterized
macroscopically when the pattern ratio @xmath is fixed as @xmath and
@xmath tend to infinity. In order to express this problem in the
statistical mechanical context, we define the Hamiltonian as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

which counts the number of patterns which are incompatible with the
weight @xmath . The function @xmath is the step function where @xmath
and @xmath otherwise. Using the Hamiltonian we can define the partition
function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The quantity @xmath varies randomly depending on the quenched randomness
@xmath , which naturally leads us to evaluate the generating function
@xmath , where @xmath represents the operation of averaging with respect
to @xmath .

### 3.2 Formalism

The generating function @xmath can be evaluated by using the replica
method. Following the standard prescription of the replica method, we
calculate the averaged @xmath th moment in @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the brackets @xmath denote the average over the quenched
randomness @xmath . According to eq. ( 3.3 ), the variable @xmath @xmath
can be regarded as multivariate Gaussian random variable, which is
characterized as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath ( @xmath ). This observation yields the following
expression

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
                 (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the average with respect to the multivariate
Gaussian variables the moments of which are given by eq. ( 3.8 ), and
the independency of @xmath examples is reflected in eq. ( 3.9 ). Using
the Fourier expression of the delta function, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we put @xmath . Using the saddle point method, we obtain the
generating function as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the symbol @xmath expresses to take the extremization condition
with respect to @xmath .

#### 3.2.1 The replica symmetric solution

The replica symmetric (RS) ansatz gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

which leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and we assume that the domain of integration of @xmath is
@xmath if there is no explicit indication. Under the RS ansatz, the
Gaussian variable @xmath can be decomposed to two independent Gaussian
variables of zero mean and unit variance @xmath and @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is easy to check that this assumption satisfies eq. ( 3.8 ). Applying
this expression, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we define the complementary error function @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the relation @xmath holds. Using the above expressions, we get
the RS generating function as

  -- -------- -- --------
                 
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The saddle point conditions yield

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

the detailed derivation of which is given in appendix A.1 . Before
discussing the significance of the RS solution, we proceed to the
replica symmetry breaking (RSB) solution. Especially, we utilize the
1RSB ansatz for investigating the complexity and the rate function in a
unified framework.

#### 3.2.2 The 1RSB solution

The 1RSB ansatz is expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

This assumption yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is the Parisi’s breaking parameter and expresses
the size of a block. In the 1RSB ansatz, the Gaussian variable @xmath is
decomposed to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the variables @xmath are drawn from the normal distributions and
the index @xmath indicates a block and @xmath specifies a replica in the
@xmath th block. This transformation enables us to derive

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The saddle point conditions yield the following equations of state

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
     @xmath      (3.30)
                 (3.31)
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
     @xmath      (3.34)
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that we omit the arguments of @xmath and @xmath in eqs. ( 3.29 )-(
3.32 ). Before investigating the equations of state ( 3.29 )-( 3.32 ),
we again discuss the physical meaning of the 1RSB formulation for
exploring the relation between the concepts of @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath .

#### 3.2.3 The complexity and 1RSB formulation revisited

##### Two ways of the zero-temperature limit

Let us focus on the @xmath (or @xmath ) limit as in section 2.4 .
Remember that the generating function @xmath of the complexity satisfies
the following relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the perceptron problems, we are mainly interested in the structure
of the weight space at zero temperature since it directly relates to the
learning process of the perceptrons.

To investigate the weight space, there are two different ways for
accessing the limit of @xmath .

One way is to take the @xmath limit with keeping @xmath , and we call
this limit the entropic limit. For our Hamiltonian ( 3.5 ), the ground
state energy @xmath is given by @xmath or positive constant depending on
the sample @xmath . In such a situation, the @xmath th moment of the
partition function of pure state @xmath , @xmath becomes in the @xmath
limit

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the entropy of the pure state @xmath . Hence, this limit
enables to investigate the weight space structure with @xmath in detail,
while it is ill defined for instances with @xmath . The corresponding
generating function becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

This entropic limit is appropriate when samples with @xmath are
typically produced, which corresponds to the low @xmath case. Note that
if we want to directly investigate this limit we can choose the
Boltzmann factor @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is obtained by taking the limit @xmath in @xmath and is equal to
the number of patterns that are incompatible with the weight @xmath .

The other way is to take the @xmath limit with the @xmath limit keeping
@xmath , and we call this limit the energetic limit. Although the
entropic limit cannot treat instances with @xmath , but the energetic
limit works well for such instances. For a simple explanation, we here
use two arguments for the complexity @xmath . In this notation, the
generating function @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we take the limit @xmath under the condition @xmath , the entropic
term becomes irrelevant. After that, we take @xmath limit keeping @xmath
and obtain the finite result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

This limit is appropriate for the case that samples with @xmath
typically produced, which corresponds to the high @xmath region. In such
a region, we can investigate the energy landscape by using the energetic
limit.

The two limits, entropic and energetic, are in a complementary relation.
Both limits can detect the critical capacity @xmath , below which
typical samples are separable ( @xmath ) but not separable for @xmath .
However, for our present purpose, i.e. to investigate the relation among
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , the entropic limit is more suitable. We
can expect that for @xmath behaviors of separable samples which are
atypically generated can be investigated by introducing the finite
replica number @xmath into the entropic limit, which naturally extends
the applicable range of this limit. On the other hand, for the energetic
limit we do not have any clear reason to introduce the finite replica.
We can also expect that introducing @xmath into the energetic limit
enables to investigate @xmath region for @xmath , but the @xmath region
can also be treated by introducing finite temperature @xmath for the
typical case @xmath . Thus, we cannot probably distinguish the effects
of finite replica @xmath and of finite temperature @xmath . Hence, we
hereafter concentrate on the entropic limit.

##### The RS and 1RSB solutions in the entropic limit

The entropic limit is easily taken by performing the limit @xmath in
eq. ( 3.18 ). In this limit, there are two solutions for eqs. ( 3.20 )-(
3.21 ):
RS1: @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.43)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

RS2: @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly, we can find three solutions of the 1RSB saddle-point
equations ( 3.29 )-( 3.32 ):
1RSB1: @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath take the same values
as those for @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

1RSB2: @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath take the same values
as those for @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

1RSB3: @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

In usual analyses, Parisi’s 1RSB parameter @xmath is determined by the
extremum condition in evaluating @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . In
addition, there might be no need to classify @xmath and @xmath as 1RSB
solutions because @xmath and @xmath are completely reduced to @xmath and
@xmath , respectively. However, handling these three solutions as 1RSB
solutions with leaving the @xmath -dependence of @xmath explicitly, is
crucial for the current purpose as we will see in section 3.3 .

The formulation relating @xmath and @xmath is easily obtained by
following the same discussion as section 2.4 . Assuming that the
complexity @xmath is a convex upward function, we can get the
parameterized forms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand, the relation @xmath also holds in the entropic limit.
This means that the rate function can be assessed from @xmath as
follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we define the equilibrium value of entropy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

which corresponds to the total number of weights that are compatible
with @xmath . In eq. ( 3.49 ), the parameter @xmath can vary only in
such a range that both @xmath and @xmath hold. Similarly, the conditions
@xmath and @xmath restrict the range of @xmath in eq. ( 3.51 ). These
constitute the main result of this chapter.

Here, three issues are noteworthy. First, for a class of disordered
systems, including the @xmath -spin interacting model without external
fields, two equalities @xmath and @xmath , hold in assessing the
complexity and rate function, respectively, where @xmath is an identical
RS solution of the generating function @xmath . Inserting these
functions into eqs. ( 3.49 ) and ( 3.51 ) offers an identical functional
form both for the complexity and the rate function, while their domains
of definition are disjointed, except for a point of the typical value of
free energy @xmath (or entropy @xmath ), as mentioned in section 2.5 .
The current system, however, does not possess this property because
@xmath does not hold for 1RSB1 , 1RSB2 , or 1RSB3 while @xmath is always
satisfied. Second, eqs. ( 3.49 ) and ( 3.51 ) are valid only when @xmath
are stable against any perturbation for a further RSB. Fortunately, in
the present problem, a stable solution against any known RSB
instabilities can be constructed for @xmath and @xmath . This implies
that, in the present analysis, there is no need to consider further RSB.
Finally, however, we have to keep in mind that eqs. ( 3.49 ) and ( 3.51
) depend on the assumptions that correct @xmath and @xmath are convex
upward functions, respectively. When the convex property does not hold,
the estimates of eqs. ( 3.49 ) and ( 3.51 ) represent not the correct
solution, but rather its convex hull. The following analytical and
experimental assessment indicates that this is the case for @xmath of
sufficiently low @xmath and @xmath of sufficiently high @xmath .

### 3.3 Theoretical predictions

We are now ready to use the formalism developed above to analyze the
behavior of the weight space of the Ising perceptron.

#### 3.3.1 Complexity for @xmath

In order to perform the analysis, it is necessary to select a certain
solution (functional form) among the three candidates of 1RSB1 , 1RSB2 ,
and 1RSB3 . Analyticity and physical plausibility are two guidelines for
this task.

The replica method is a scheme to infer the properties for real replica
numbers @xmath by analytical continuation from those for natural numbers
@xmath . This indicates that, for examining typical ( @xmath ) behavior,
it is plausible to select the solution of @xmath that is dominant around
@xmath , because unity is the natural number that is closest to zero.
For @xmath , this solution is @xmath . In addition, the relevant @xmath
must agree with this solution at @xmath . These considerations offer two
candidates of @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

We combine these solutions to construct an entire functional form of
@xmath based on physical considerations. For @xmath , @xmath should vary
approximately linearly with respect to @xmath , because a single pure
state of the largest entropy typically dominates @xmath . In addition,
@xmath for @xmath should be smaller than that for @xmath because @xmath
should increase monotonically with respect to @xmath . Furthermore,
@xmath must be a continuous function. These considerations reasonably
yield an entire functional form of @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

which yields the complexity as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

The piecewise linear profile of eq. ( 3.55 ) is somewhat extraordinary.
This is thought to be because the correct complexity is not convex
upward in this system. When @xmath is convex upward, the current
formalism using the saddle-point method defines a one-to-one map between
@xmath and @xmath . However, if @xmath is not convex upward, the
functional profile of a region in which the correct complexity is convex
downward is lost and only the convex hull is obtained by the
transformation from @xmath , as shown in figure 3.2 . The piecewise
linear profile of @xmath presumably signals that this actually occurs in
the current problem. Similar behavior of the complexity could also be
observed in a certain type of random energy models [ 52 ] .

The physical implication of eq. ( 3.56 ), the profile of which is
obtained by connecting two points @xmath and @xmath with a straight line
having a slope of @xmath , is that the weight space is equally dominated
by exponentially many clusters of vanishing entropy and a subexponential
number of large clusters composed of exponentially many weights. The
existence of large clusters may accord with an earlier study which
reported that local search heuristics of a certain type manage to find a
compatible weight efficiently up to a considerably large value of @xmath
near to the capacity @xmath [ 53 ] . On the other hand, the coexisting
exponentially many small clusters may be a major origin of a known
difficulty in finding compatible weights by Monte Carlo sampling schemes
[ 54 , 55 ] .

#### 3.3.2 Rate function for @xmath and a transition at @xmath

For @xmath , eq. ( 3.56 ) becomes negative, which implies that there
exist no compatible weights for typical samples of @xmath . In such
cases, the rate function @xmath , which characterizes a small
probability that atypical samples that are compatible with the Ising
perceptrons are generated, becomes relevant in the current analysis.
Therefore, we focus on the assessment of this exponent for this region.

For @xmath , @xmath dominates the generating function @xmath in the
vicinity of @xmath as for @xmath . This means that @xmath should be used
to assess @xmath of relatively frequent events that correspond to @xmath
. However, this function is minimized to a negative value at a certain
point at which @xmath , which implies that assessment by naïvely using
@xmath for @xmath leads to incorrect results, which yield a negative
equilibrium value of the entropy @xmath . In order to avoid this
inconsistency, we fix the value of @xmath to @xmath , which is reduced
to the conventional construction of a frozen RSB solution. In
particular, this yields an assessment of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

which has the physical meaning of a characteristic exponent of a small
probability that a given sample set @xmath is separable by certain Ising
perceptrons. For @xmath , on the other hand, the dominant solution of
@xmath in the vicinity of @xmath is updated from @xmath to @xmath ,
which yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to provide a visual representation of the above discussions, we
depict the behaviors of @xmath in figure 3.3 .

The difference in physical behavior between @xmath and @xmath is
expected to be as follows. For @xmath , the dominant solution around
@xmath , @xmath , varies smoothly. This leads to the following behavior
of @xmath in the vicinity of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a certain constant, which implies that large clusters
can appear with a relatively large probability although typical samples
of @xmath are not separable by the Ising perceptrons. On the other hand,
for @xmath , @xmath is constant for @xmath , which is characterized by
@xmath and @xmath , and is switched to @xmath for @xmath at @xmath ,
which is accompanied by a jump in the first derivative. This indicates
that the rate function @xmath is not convex upword in the region of
@xmath as was mentioned for @xmath in the previous subsection, which
implies that the events of @xmath overwhelm those of @xmath in relative
probabilities. Therefore, the generation of large clusters should be
considerably rare for @xmath of this region.

#### 3.3.3 Phase diagram on the @xmath-@xmath plane

The above considerations are sufficient to draw a phase diagram on the
@xmath - @xmath plane, which is depicted in figure 3.4 .

The value of the tricritical point @xmath is identical to the critical
ratio of the perfect learning of the Ising perceptrons in the
teacher-student scenario [ 56 , 57 ] . Formally, this agreement is
explained as follows. The dominant solution for @xmath is determined by
whether @xmath or @xmath dominates around @xmath . Since @xmath is
always guaranteed, the critical condition is given as @xmath . On the
other hand, @xmath generally provides the equilibrium value of entropy
after learning in the teacher-student scenario, the target of which can
be dealt with as an @xmath -replicated system, in which the teacher is
handled as an extra replica. Therefore, the condition of perfect
learning, which indicates that the weight of the student agrees
perfectly with that of the teacher after learning, is identical to the
vanishing entropy condition of the @xmath -replicated system in the
limit @xmath , which agrees with @xmath , giving the critical value
@xmath in the current problem. Although the agreement is justified
formally in this manner, its physical implication remains somewhat
unclear. The line @xmath , which passes through the tricritical point,
may have an analogous relation to the concept of Nishimori’s line in the
theory of spin glasses [ 24 , 58 ] .

Finally, we mention the de Almeida-Thouless (AT) condition in this model
[ 39 ] . The AT (stability) condition of @xmath with the order
parameters @xmath and @xmath is expressed as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

The derivation is given in appendix A.2 . This condition for @xmath is
broken in a certain region on the @xmath - @xmath plane, but is
irrelevant because the region is always included in @xmath , for which
the relevant solution is already switched to that of the frozen RSB. On
the other hand, @xmath is stable for @xmath but becomes unstable only on
@xmath , the deviation of which is also given in appendix A.2 , as
reported in [ 59 ] . The relevance of this instability for @xmath may
require more detailed discussions, but we assume herein that this
instability can be ignored because only the asymptotic behavior of
@xmath in the limit @xmath is relevant in procedures of the replica
method.

### 3.4 Numerical validation

For validating the theoretical predictions obtained in the previous
section, we carried out extensive numerical experiments.

In describing the experiments, let us first define the cluster in the
present system. The cluster is a set of spin configurations that are
stable with respect to single spin flips [ 28 , 29 ] . Clusters have the
following properties:

-   Any configuration belongs to a cluster.

-   When a spin configuration “A” can be moved to another configuration
    “B” by a single spin flip without changing the number of
    incompatible patterns, “A” and “B” belong to the same cluster.

In the following, we concentrate on vanishing energy clusters, which are
composed of weights that are perfectly compatible with @xmath .

Before going into details, we elucidate the relation between the cluster
and the pure state. Identifying the microscopic description of a pure
state is generally a delicate problem, but in the Ising perceptron a
pure state can be identified with a cluster, as mentioned in the opening
sentence in this chapter. There is no proof of this statement but it is
naturally understood by considering the following aspects of the present
problem: The Boltzmann weight of @xmath in eq. ( 3.39 ) becomes
completely zero if there is any incompatible pattern. This means that
accessing from a cluster to a different cluster by single spin flips is
impossible because those clusters are completely separated by states
with zero probability @xmath . This naturally leads to identifying a
cluster with a pure state, because a pure state is a set of
configurations which cannot be accessed from other sets by natural
dynamics. Several earlier studies support this description [ 28 , 29 ,
50 ] , and we hereafter admit this assumption.

Now let us return to the experiments. We denote the size of a cluster as
@xmath and the number of size- @xmath clusters for a sample @xmath as
@xmath . The entropy of a cluster @xmath is considered to be identified
by @xmath , and the complexity @xmath corresponds to @xmath . The
clusters can be numerically evaluated, and hence we can construct the
1RSB generating function from the numerical data as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the sample average operation with respect to @xmath
. In the typical limit @xmath , this yields the following expression:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the step function @xmath comes from the differentiation of @xmath
with respect to @xmath . This means that if there is no cluster for a
sample @xmath , then the contribution of @xmath vanishes.

In order to examine the consistency with the replica analysis, we assess
eq. ( 3.62 ) based on data obtained in extensive numerical experiments.
The function @xmath is evaluated by the exact enumeration of weights
that are compatible with @xmath , which are referred to hereinafter as
solutions . The procedure is summarized as follows:

1.  Generate @xmath examples @xmath .

2.  Enumerate all solutions.

3.  Partition the solutions into clusters, and calculate @xmath for an
    appropriate set of @xmath . We actually took @xmath points between
    @xmath and @xmath .

4.  Repeat the above procedures until sufficient data are obtained and
    calculate

    @xmath by taking the sample average.

The resultant plots of @xmath for @xmath are shown in fig. 3.6 .

As the system size grows, the numerical data for @xmath exhibit flatter
slopes approaching the theoretical prediction @xmath for @xmath . This
can also be seen in fig. 3.6 as the systematic approaching of @xmath to
the theoretical value of @xmath derived from the replica analysis. The
difference between the numerical extrapolation and the analytical result
at @xmath is considered to be the systematic error due to higher order
contributions of @xmath . The profiles of @xmath , on the other hand,
are approximately straight lines, and the gradient of the slopes appear
smaller than that of the theoretical prediction @xmath . However, the
data still slowly move closer to @xmath ( @xmath ) as @xmath becomes
larger as a whole, implying consistency with the theoretical prediction.

Complexity @xmath can also be assessed from the numerical data. One
scheme for evaluating @xmath is to use the relation ( 3.49 ) with a
polynomial interpolation of the numerical data. We determined the order
of the polynomial using Akaike’s information criteria [ 60 ] and
eventually selected a @xmath th degree polynomial, but the obtained
results were not so sensitive to details of the choice of the
polynomial. The assessed profiles of @xmath are plotted in fig. 3.7 .

The curves appear to approach the line predicted in the previous section
as @xmath increases, which supports our replica analysis.

However, the complexity curve shown in fig. 3.7 might lose the
information about the correct distribution of the clusters, as mentioned
in section 3.3.2 . In order to examine this possibility, we directly
evaluate the distribution of pure states in a rather naive manner. We
refer to the result of this assessment as the raw complexity, which is
defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking the sample average yields the typical profile of @xmath as @xmath
, the result of which for @xmath is shown in fig. 3.9 . We took @xmath
samples in the evaluation for each size and joined the plots to obtain
smooth curves.

This figure indicates that @xmath approaches the value of the
theoretical prediction @xmath from below as @xmath increases. However,
@xmath for @xmath appears to remain approximately constant at zero,
indicating that @xmath converges to a convex downward function. We also
plot the function @xmath in figure 3.9 . This plot shows two peaks and
one dip of @xmath , indicating that @xmath is convex downward. The
position of the right-hand peak tends to move left to the right terminal
point @xmath of the theoretical prediction as the system size increases,
while the dip appears to be bounded at the point @xmath as shown in the
inset. In conclusion, these figures indicate that the exponent that
characterizes the size distribution of the pure states, @xmath , is not
a convex upward function in this system and does not agree with @xmath ,
which is evaluated by the relation ( 2.52 ).

Next, we assessed the rate function for the region of @xmath . In this
region, the generation of samples that are perfectly compatible with the
Ising perceptrons rarely occurs and is dominated by @xmath . Therefore,
we numerically evaluated the probability that a given set of samples
@xmath could be separated by the Ising perceptron, @xmath , and
estimated @xmath as @xmath .

The resultant plots are given in figures 3.11 and 3.11 for @xmath and
@xmath , respectively. The solid lines in these figures were obtained by
the linear fitting for the numerical data. These figures show that the
theoretical predictions are reasonably consistent with the values of
extrapolation of the numerical data. The statistical errors are
sufficiently small, and hence the differences between the analytical and
numerical results should be the systematic errors due to the
nonlinearity of the Ising perceptron.

### 3.5 Summary

In this chapter, we investigated the structure of the weight space of
Ising perceptrons in which a set of random patterns is stored using the
derivatives of the generating function of the partition function. This
was achieved by carrying out a finite- @xmath replica analysis under the
assumption of one-step replica symmetry breaking (1RSB) handling
Parisi’s 1RSB parameter as a control parameter. To directly investigate
the weight space structure, we took the zero-temperature limit and
studied the entropy of the zero-energy weight. For @xmath , the analysis
of @xmath indicates that the characteristic exponent of the size
distribution of pure states is not convex upward, which implies that the
weight space is equally dominated by a single large cluster of
exponentially many weights and exponentially many clusters of a single
weight. For @xmath , a set of random patterns is rarely compatible with
the Ising perceptron. The @xmath analysis enables us to assess the rate
function that characterizes a small probability that a cluster of a
given entropy will emerge after the storage of random patterns. We found
that a cluster of finite entropy is generated with a relatively high
probability for @xmath , but this is very rare for @xmath . These
theoretical predictions have been validated by extensive numerical
experiments. We also drew a complete phase diagram on the @xmath -
@xmath plane, in which @xmath becomes a tricritical point. The line
@xmath that passes through the tricritical point is analogous to the
Nishimori line in the theory of spin glasses.

## Chapter 4 The replica zeros of @xmath Ising spin glass at zero
temperature

In the previous chapters, we have seen that the generating function
@xmath shows the analyticity breaking leading to phase transitions with
respect to the replica number @xmath in several models. Employing the
Parisi scheme and some discussions based on the physical plausibility,
we have detected such transitions and constructed the reasonable
solutions after the transitions. These schemes are very powerful and can
give physically plausible predictions, but still involve some questions
about the mathematical correctness, as pointed out in section 1.4 . The
possible problems are summarized as follows:

1.  The uniqueness of the analytical continuation from natural to real
    (or complex) numbers.

2.  The consistency between the analytical continuation of @xmath in the
    replica prescription and the possible analyticity breaking of @xmath
    .

The first problem claims that even if all the moments of @xmath are
given for @xmath , in general it is impossible to uniquely continue the
analytical expressions for @xmath to @xmath (or @xmath ). The Carlson’s
theorem guarantees that the analytical continuation from @xmath to
@xmath is uniquely determined if @xmath holds as @xmath tends to
infinity [ 61 ] . Unfortunately, the moments of the SK model grow as
@xmath , where @xmath is a constant, and therefore this sufficient
condition is not satisfied. van Hemmen and Palmer conjectured that the
failure of the RS solution of the SK model might be related to this
issue [ 62 ] , but as we have seen in chapter 2 this is not the case
because @xmath actually loses its analyticity in a certain region of
@xmath and @xmath .

The second issue concerns the possible breaking of the analyticity of
@xmath . The naive premise of the analytical continuation in the replica
theory is the analyticity of @xmath with respect to @xmath . However,
even if @xmath is analytic with respect to @xmath for finite @xmath ,
the analyticity of @xmath can be broken, as we have seen in the previous
chapters. Once the analyticity breaking occurs, in general we cannot
depend on the analytical continuation from large @xmath to small @xmath
to obtain @xmath ; but the Parisi scheme somehow gives the correct
behavior of @xmath by partly utilizing the analytical continuation. The
question is how the Parisi scheme overcomes the analyticity breaking and
reaches the small @xmath region.

For considering this question, in this chapter, we investigate the
analyticity breaking of @xmath with respect to @xmath in completely
different ways. To this end, we propose a method based on the Lee-Yang
theory [ 26 ] of phase transitions. In particular, we observe the zeros
of @xmath with respect to complex @xmath , which will be referred to as
“replica zeros” (RZs), and examine how some sequences of the zeros
approach the real axis of @xmath as the system size @xmath grows. For
some discrete versions of the random energy models [ 36 , 63 , 64 , 65 ]
, this strategy is known to successfully characterize the 1RSB
transition accompanied by the singularity of the rate function @xmath [
66 ] . We extend the scheme to be applicable to other tractable systems,
@xmath models with a symmetric distribution on two types of lattices,
ladder systems and Cayley trees (CTs) with random fields on the
boundary. There are some reasons for treating these models. First, these
models can be investigated in a feasible computational time by the
cavity method [ 30 , 31 ] . Especially, at zero temperature this
approach gives a simple iterative formula to yield the partition
function. Employing the replica method and the cavity method, we can
perform symbolic calculations of the moment @xmath , which enables us to
directly solve the equation of RZs @xmath . The second reason is the
existence of the spin-glass phase. It is known that the spin-glass phase
is present for CTs [ 32 , 33 , 34 , 35 ] and is absent for ladder
systems. Therefore, we can compare the behavior of RZs, which are
considered to be dependent on the spin-glass ordering.

Our result indicates that the RZs of CTs are relevant to neither 1RSB
nor FRSB. We consider some possible explanations about this fact, and
also refer to some relatives of CTs, which are considered to show the
RSB, to clarify the properties of the relatives from the RZs of CTs.

The results in this chapter are written in reference [ 67 ] .

### 4.1 Fundamental knowledge about models and formulations

We start from reviewing the models and formulations which will be needed
in the following sections.

#### 4.1.1 Definition of the Cayley tree and the properties

The definition of the Cayley tree is summarized as follows:

-   The Cayley tree (CT): A tree of finite size consisting of an origin
    and its neighbors. The first generation is built from @xmath
    neighbors which are connected to the origin. Each site in the @xmath
    th generation is connected to new @xmath sites without overlap and
    all these new sites comprise the @xmath th generation. Iterating
    this procedure to the @xmath th generation, we obtain the CT, and
    the @xmath th generation becomes its boundary.

As an example, we give a picture of a CT in fig. 4.1 .

Let us consider a general Ising system defined on the CT

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

For CTs, it is possible to efficiently assess the partition function by
an iterative method, i.e. the cavity method ¹ ¹ 1 The term ‘cavity
method’ is usually used in a different meaning and is considered to be a
generalized Bethe approximation [ 25 , 43 ] . Mathematical and physical
aspects about the cavity method in this sense are very fruitful, but in
this thesis we only use this term to indicate the generic name of the
iterative methods to calculate the partition function. . The basis of
the cavity method for a CT is a formula for evaluating an effective
field by a partial trace:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

A simple algebra offers

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The fields @xmath and @xmath are sometimes termed the cavity field and
cavity bias, respectively.

For CTs, iterating the above equations from the boundary gives the
series of cavity fields and biases @xmath . In general, a cavity field
becomes a summation of the cavity biases from its @xmath descendants (
@xmath is the coordination number):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

For simplicity, we mainly concentrate on the @xmath case, the local
structure of which is given in fig. 4.2 , but the generalization to
general @xmath is straightforward.

Let us denote the partition function in the absence of @xmath ’s
ascendants as @xmath . Equations ( 4.2 )–( 4.5 ) imply that the
partition function is updated as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the one-site marginal in the absence of @xmath ’s ascendants and
@xmath is the bond Hamiltonian added by a propagation procedure. As a
final step, the contribution from the origin of the tree is calculated
as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the external field on the origin and the whole partition
function @xmath is derived.

For the sake of simplicity, we consider pure ferromagnets @xmath and
@xmath for a while. In this case each cavity field depends only on the
generation @xmath and the recursion relation becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the index of the generation, but for simplicity of
notation, we labeled the boundary as @xmath and the origin as @xmath ,
which is in the inverse relation to fig. 4.1 . The partial partition
function @xmath , which represents the partition function of a branch
consisting from a @xmath th-generation spin and its descendants, is also
calculated by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

At the origin, we need to merge @xmath branches, which yields the whole
partition function @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

These formulas enable us to efficiently assess the partition function.

#### 4.1.2 Bulk properties of Cayley trees

Usually, phase transitions are related to the bulk properties of the
system. Contributions from the boundary condition are negligible and the
inside part of the system dominates the whole behavior. Unfortunately,
this is not the case for a CT, because the CT is extraordinary in that
the number of the boundary spins @xmath are comparable to the whole
number of the spins @xmath . Due to this peculiarity, the CTs are known
to show some extraordinary critical behaviors [ 68 , 69 , 70 ] . This
problem may be also interesting but we are not involved in this topic.

On the other hand, considering the bulk part of a CT is also meaningful.
For this, we define the following two systems which are closely related
to CTs:

-   The Bethe lattice (BL): A lattice consisting of the first @xmath
    generations of a CT, for which @xmath is taken. Alternatively, we
    can define a BL as a finite CT of @xmath generation, the boundary
    condition of which is given by the convergent cavity field
    distribution of the infinite CT. Unlike for a CT, the boundary
    condition depends on the external parameters, e.g. the temperature
    @xmath and the external field @xmath .

-   The regular random graph (RRG): A randomly generated graph under the
    constraint of a fixed connectivity @xmath . There exist many cycles
    in this lattice, which makes it difficult to calculate the partition
    function for finite @xmath . In the limit @xmath under appropriate
    conditions, however, the contribution coming from the loops becomes
    negligible and the RRG becomes an exactly solvable model. Moreover,
    it is known that the RRG and the BL share many identical properties
    [ 30 , 71 , 72 ] .

As examples, we give diagrams of a BL and RRG in figs. 4.4 and 4.4 ,
respectively.

The RRG is sometimes identified with the BL, but we here distinguish
these two systems. That is because the main purpose of this chapter is
to clarify the asymptotic properties of @xmath from finite @xmath to
infinite @xmath , and our definition of the BL is useful to compare
these limits. Here, the term “RRG” is used only to refer to systems of
infinite size.

A BL is the deep inside part of a CT and the behavior is determined by
the limit @xmath in eq. ( 4.9 ). In this limit, we can easily derive the
self-consistent equations satisfied by the converging cavity field
@xmath and bias @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that this equation is identical to the ‘Bethe approximation’. The
name of ‘Bethe lattice’ comes from this fact that the Bethe
approximation is exact on this lattice. When the external field is zero
@xmath , these self-consistent equations have the paramagnetic solution
@xmath at high temperatures and the ferromagnetic solution @xmath at low
temperatures. Expanding eq. ( 4.12 ) with respect to @xmath , we can
obtain the following equation determining the critical temperature

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

For general tree systems, it is known that the free energy can be
expressed as the following form [ 30 , 31 , 43 , 73 , 74 , 75 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is the bond and site contributions of the free
energy, respectively and @xmath is the number of bonds that site @xmath
has. For regular CTs, @xmath holds if @xmath is inside the tree, while
@xmath for the boundary sites. The explicit forms of @xmath and @xmath
are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the external field applied on site @xmath and
@xmath denotes the cavity bias. The symbol @xmath denotes the neighbors
of site @xmath and @xmath represents the neighbors of site @xmath except
for site @xmath . These are expressed in the pictorial forms in figs.
4.6 and 4.6 .

For pure ferromagnets on CTs, the cavity bias takes different values
depending on the generation, and we cannot obtain a simple form of the
free energy. On the other hand for BLs, the cavity bias takes an
identical value @xmath , which leads to the Bethe free energy @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath represent the fractions of the number of sites
inside the tree and on the boundary, respectively, and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The explicit expressions of bond and site contributions, @xmath and
@xmath , are derived from eqs. ( 4.15 ) and ( 4.16 ), respectively, by
putting @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . These formulas give the free energy
of the BL.

Although the uniformness of the cavity fields is recovered in the BL by
applying the convergent cavity field to the boundary spins, the BL still
has a distinctive feature as a tree system, which appears in the
existence of the boundary free energy ( 4.19 ). Nevertheless, the
complete separation of contributions between the inside and the boundary
in the equation ( 4.17 ) implies that it is physically plausible to use
@xmath , instead of @xmath , in handling problems concerning the bulk
part of the CT. In general, @xmath agrees with the free energy of an RRG
which can be derived by using the replica method and the derivation is
given in appendix B.1 . This fact provides the basis of the
correspondence between BLs and RRGs.

Using the relations between CTs, BLs, and RRGs discussed so far, we
compare the analytical results of RRGs with the numerical plots of RZs
of CTs for exploring possible links between them. The BL will be also
useful to connect those distinctive results. According to this
advantage, we clearly distinguish the three systems, CTs, BLs, and RRGs,
throughout this thesis.

#### 4.1.3 Zeros and singularities

Phase transitions are generally reflected as the singularities of the
free energy @xmath . Lee and Yang pointed out that those singularities
are related to the zeros of the partition function with respect to the
complex parameters [ 26 ] . For simplicity of explanation, let us
consider an Ising system with an complex external field @xmath . The
partition function for finite @xmath becomes the following polynomial

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the partition function of the system with the fixed
magnetization @xmath , and @xmath equals to @xmath . The partition
function is the polynomial of @xmath and has its zeros. Of course, these
zeros are distributed in the complex @xmath plane and never on the real
axis of @xmath for finite @xmath . However, as the system size @xmath
grows, in several cases some sequences of the zeros approaches the real
axis, and finally a part of the zeros touch the real axis in the limit
@xmath . Roughly speaking, Lee and Yang proved that these zeros on the
real axis are directly related to the phase transition of the system,
and that if the zeros never touch the real axis, the system never shows
the phase transition. They also showed that for several models the
existing region of the zeros is strongly limited and the phase
transitions of those systems are well observed by the behavior of the
zeros of @xmath for finite @xmath .

The discussion by Lee and Yang that the zeros of the partition function
are closely related to the singularities of @xmath is quite general and
we can apply this to our problem, which motivates us to investigate the
RZs given by the equation @xmath for studying the singularities of
@xmath

#### 4.1.4 Energetic zero-temperature limit for replica zeros

Solving

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

with respect to @xmath is our main objective. Unfortunately, this is, in
general, a hard task even by numerical methods because eq. ( 4.21 ) is a
transcendental equation unlike eq. ( 4.20 ), and becomes highly
complicated as the system size @xmath grows. In the @xmath limit,
however, the main contributions to the partition function only come from
the ground state and eq. ( 4.21 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the energy of the ground state and @xmath is the
degeneracy. If @xmath is finite when @xmath , the term @xmath diverges
or vanishes and there is no meaningful result. Therefore, we suppose
that non-trivial solutions exist only in the limit @xmath and @xmath .
This is the same limit as the energetic zero temperature limit referred
to in section 3.2.3 . Under this condition, eq. ( 4.22 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the following, we focus on the @xmath model whose Hamiltonian is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the distribution of interactions is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

assuming that the total number, @xmath , of interacting spin pairs
@xmath is proportional to @xmath , which is the case for ladder systems
and CTs. This limitation restricts the energy of any state to an integer
value. As a result, eq. ( 4.23 ) can always be expressed as a polynomial
of @xmath , which significantly reduces the numerical cost for searching
for RZs.

### 4.2 General formula for ladders and Cayley trees

#### 4.2.1 The cavity method

We have already demonstrated the cavity method for pure ferromagnetic
systems on CTs in section 4.1 , and we here only give a simple
explanation of its generalization to treat random systems, @xmath -body
interactions, and ladder systems.

Equations ( 4.2 )–( 4.5 ) are applicable to random systems in the
unchanged forms. Generalizing these equations to @xmath -spin
interacting CTs ( @xmath -CTs) is straightforward; the only necessity is
to replace the partial trace ( 4.2 ) with that for a @xmath -spin
interaction, as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath -CT’s local structure with @xmath is shown in fig. 4.8 as an
example.

For ladder systems, similar relations can be derived with some slight
modifications. We treat the width @xmath ladder as an example. Summation
over the two spins of @xmath ’s previous layer as in fig. 4.8 , we can
obtain an expression corresponding to eq. ( 4.2 ) of the CT as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

From simple algebras we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

which means that the effective bonds @xmath between @xmath and @xmath
becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

As eq. ( 4.6 ) in the CT case, the partition function is also updated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the partial Hamiltonian added by an iterative procedure.
The above formulas for the CTs and ladders enable us to assess the
partition function of a given bond configuration @xmath in a feasible
computational cost.

Taking the @xmath limit yields the ground-state energy for a given bond
configuration. For the @xmath CT, eqs. ( 4.4 ) and ( 4.6 ) become

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
                 (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we put the ground-state energy as @xmath and assume @xmath . The
extension to general @xmath and @xmath -body interactions is
straightforward and we here omit. Similarly, for the ladder, we can
derive

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
                 (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

For a given single sample of interactions and boundary conditions, a
simple application of the cavity method enables us to evaluate the
partition function in a feasible computational time. Unfortunately, this
does not fully resolve the problem of the computational cost for
assessing the moments ( 4.21 ) since the cost for evaluating the average
over all possible samples of interactions and boundary conditions grows
exponentially with respect to the number of spins.

#### 4.2.2 Use of the replica method

To overcome the difficulty mentioned immediately above, we perform the
configurational average for @xmath and use the analytical continuation
of the obtained expressions to @xmath in the level of the cavity
recursions, the method of which may be considered as a generalization of
the replica method.

For this purpose, we first evaluate the @xmath th moment of the
partition function @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath , where @xmath is the replica index. Let us denote the
effective Hamiltonian as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath stands for the configurational average with respect to the
interactions @xmath . This means that eq. ( 4.39 ) is simply the
partition function of an @xmath -replicated system, which is defined on
the same lattice as the original system, and is free from quenched
randomness. Therefore, we can again use the cavity method to calculate
@xmath .

##### The case of the CT

For the @xmath CT, we can derive the following recursion relation for
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
                 (4.41)
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the one-site marginal distribution of site @xmath . The
expressions ( 4.41 ) and ( 4.42 ) define the updating rules of @xmath
and @xmath .

So far, we have made no assumptions or approximations and therefore
eq. ( 4.42 ) yields exact assessments for @xmath , but to practically
calculate @xmath , we need to specify the form of @xmath . In the
present case, the form of @xmath can be determined as follows. First, we
assume the RS which requires that the correlation functions are
independent of combinations of replica indices

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the brackets @xmath denote the average over the distribution
@xmath . This assumption is correct for @xmath because the replicated
Hamiltonian eq. ( 4.40 ) is invariant under the permutation of the
replica indices. Moreover, in our case as long as the number of spins
@xmath is finite, the RS is exact even for real @xmath . This is because
the @xmath model satisfies the necessary conditions of the Carlson’s
theorem [ 61 ] , as explained in section 4.2.4 . With the RS, the
expression of @xmath is uniquely determined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the symbol @xmath stands for a summation over all combinations of
@xmath choices from @xmath replicas and @xmath denotes the correlation
functions among @xmath replica spins. It is easy to check that the
normalization condition is satisfied and all the moments are recovered
in this expression. Generally, eq. ( 4.44 ) can be transformed as
follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the distribution function @xmath must be defined to satisfy
relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath is bounded by @xmath , the nonnegativity of the distribution
@xmath is satisfied. Under this assumption, we can perform a variable
transformation @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

This expression can be interpreted as that the cavity field @xmath
fluctuates by the randomness and has the distribution @xmath .

Inserting eq. ( 4.47 ) into eq. ( 4.42 ) and performing some simple
algebraic steps give

  -- -------- -- --------
                 (4.48)
     @xmath      (4.49)
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equations ( 4.49 ) and ( 4.50 ) provide the cavity equation of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

which are applicable to @xmath . When the algorithm reaches the origin
of the CT, the moment of eq. ( 4.39 ) is assessed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is two terms with the indices @xmath rotated.

##### The case of the ladder

For the width- @xmath ladder, the moment @xmath is updated as

  -- -------- -- --------
                 
     @xmath      (4.55)
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

These equations also define the recursion rule of the two-site marginal
distribution @xmath . As in the CT case, we can specify the form of
@xmath from symmetries of the present problem as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be interpreted as that the effective bond fluctuates by
quenched randomness. The equation of the moment @xmath then becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equations ( 4.55 )-( 4.57 ) imply that the recursion relation of @xmath
becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

These relations yield the algorithm to calculate @xmath for the width-
@xmath ladder.

#### 4.2.3 Energetic zero-temperature limit in the cavity recursions

Let us take the energetic zero-temperature limit @xmath , @xmath keeping
@xmath in the iterative procedures of the cavity method.

We first focus on the width- @xmath ladder. In our present model, the
interaction @xmath takes @xmath with an equal probability @xmath , which
means that the initial condition of the recursion relation ( 4.59 ),
@xmath , takes the following form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the initial condition of the moment @xmath becomes in the energetic
zero-temperature limit as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

The relation ( 4.37 ) and the fact that @xmath equals to @xmath mean
that for @xmath @xmath only takes five integers @xmath at zero
temperature. This condition considerably simplify the current problem.
The cavity equation ( 4.59 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
                 (4.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the distribution @xmath takes the following form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath represents a probability vector satisfying @xmath and
@xmath . The symmetry @xmath comes from the symmetric distribution of
@xmath . Equations ( 4.62 ) and ( 4.63 ) offer the simple recursion
equations as follows;

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the recursion relation of the moment @xmath ( 4.55 ) is also
simplified as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equations ( 4.64 ) and ( 4.65 ) indicate that only @xmath is relevant
for the evaluation of the moment. This is a peculiar property to the
symmetric distribution of @xmath . We here write down the explicit form
of the cavity equation of @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

The formulas ( 4.65 ) and ( 4.66 ) enable us to assess the moment @xmath
in a feasible computational time and therefore offer a useful scheme for
examining the RZs.

Next, we proceed to the CT case. Unlike the ladder case, for the CT we
should choose the boundary conditions appropriately. This is because the
CT has no cycle in the graph and hence the frustration cannot be
introduced into the system unless the boundary condition is
appropriately chosen.

The boundary condition we here treat is the random external field @xmath
, the sign of which is determined with an equal probability of @xmath .
As the result of this boundary condition, the cavity field distribution
and the moment at the boundary, @xmath and @xmath , become

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

respectively, which yield the initial conditions of the cavity
recursions. The relevance of the boundary condition to the current
objective systems is discussed later.

Equation ( 4.67 ) in conjunction with the property @xmath again restrict
the functional form of @xmath in eq. ( 4.51 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

The symmetry @xmath comes from the symmetry of the boundary-field
distribution ( 4.67 ) as in the ladder case.

After the configurational average is performed, the cavity-field
distribution @xmath depends only on the distance, @xmath , from the
boundary. Therefore, we hereafter denote @xmath as @xmath and represent
the distance of the origin from the boundary as @xmath . The current
scheme assesses @xmath using its descendents @xmath For the @xmath case,
the actual formula is derived from eq. ( 4.51 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly to the ladder case, the relevant part to the assessment of
@xmath is only for @xmath , the precise recursion relation of which is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

being accompanied by an update of the moment

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

After evaluating @xmath and @xmath using this algorithm up to @xmath ,
the full moment, @xmath , in the current limit @xmath and @xmath keeping
@xmath is finally assessed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

As eqs. ( 4.64 ) and ( 4.65 ) for the ladder case, eqs. ( 4.71 )–( 4.73
) enable us to calculate the moment @xmath in a feasible time, which
constitute the main result of this chapter.

#### 4.2.4 Uniqueness of the analytic continuation

The analytical continuation from @xmath to @xmath cannot be determined
uniquely in general systems. However, in the present system, we can show
the uniqueness of the continuation. Therefore, the RS solution assumed
above is correct.

For this, let us consider the modified moment @xmath , where @xmath is
the total number of bonds. This quantity satisfies the inequality

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.74)
     @xmath      (4.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

for finite @xmath . Suppose that we have an analytic function @xmath
that satisfies the condition @xmath . The Carlson’s theorem guarantees
that if the equality @xmath holds for @xmath , @xmath is identical to
@xmath for @xmath . Because @xmath is a non-vanishing constant, this
means that the analytic continuation of @xmath is uniquely determined.
This indicates that expressions in the above subsections, which
analytically continued under the RS ansatz, are correct for finite
@xmath (or equivalently, finite @xmath ). Hence, in the current problem,
the possible problem of the analytic continuation of @xmath is
summarized into the point whether the analyticity breaking on the real
axis occurs or not in the limit @xmath .

### 4.3 Results for the ladders

The concrete procedure to obtain RZs for the width- @xmath ladder with
the length @xmath is summarized as follows:

1.  To obtain a series of @xmath , eq. ( 4.66 ) is recursively applied
    under the initial condition @xmath until @xmath reaches @xmath .
    This can be symbolically performed by using computer algebra systems
    such as Mathematica .

2.  Using the series @xmath , the moment @xmath is recursively
    calculated by using eq. ( 4.65 ) under the initial condition @xmath
    until @xmath becomes @xmath . Then, the full moment @xmath is
    obtained.

3.  Solving @xmath with respect to @xmath numerically.

Although the right hand side of eq. ( 4.66 ) is expressed as a rational
function, the moment @xmath is guaranteed to be certain polynomials of
@xmath since the contribution from the denominator is canceled in each
step of eqs. ( 4.65 ) and ( 4.66 ). The procedures of 1, 2 and 3 can be
performed in a polynomial time with respect to the number of spins.
Figure 4.10 shows the plot for a @xmath ladder. Notice that all RZs lie
on a line @xmath . This fact can be mathematically proven, as detailed
in B.2 . The physical significance of this behavior is that the
generating function @xmath is analytic with respect to real @xmath even
for the @xmath limit.

We also investigated larger-width ladders. However, the larger-width
systems requires many-body interactions to calculate the marginal
distribution @xmath . It makes the problem complicated and simple
relations like ( 4.57 ) cannot be obtained. Hence, when treating
larger-width ladders, we directly use the cavity method for a given
sample @xmath to obtain the ground state energy [ 76 ] , which is just
the use of the cavity method we mentioned in the end of section 4.2.1 .
In this prescription, we numerically assess the distribution of the
ground state energies @xmath by enumerating all the bond configurations
@xmath . Using the distribution @xmath , the RZs equation is derived as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation is solved numerically in the same way as the width- @xmath
case. Note that computational times required in the counting process to
obtain @xmath exponentially increases as @xmath grows, which makes it
infeasible to obtain @xmath for large @xmath , unlike the width- @xmath
case.

The RZs for @xmath ladder were calculated and found qualitatively
similar results as for the width-2 case. For a width- @xmath ladder, the
RZ plot is given in fig. 4.10 . We can observe that some zeros approach
the real axis around @xmath and @xmath , but the rate of approach
decreases rapidly as @xmath grows. This implies that the RZs do not
reach the real axis, which agrees with a naive speculation that ladders
are essentially one-dimensional systems and therefore do not involve any
phase transitions as long as the width is kept finite.

These results indicate that the RZs for the ladders do not reach the
real axis of @xmath in the limit @xmath . This means that the
analyticity breaking of @xmath does not occur for the ladder systems,
which accords with an intuition that the ladders are essentially
one-dimensional systems in the thermodynamic limit and should not
exhibit the spin-glass ordering.

### 4.4 Results for the CTs

As for the ladder case, we first summarize the concrete procedure to
obtain RZs for the CT:

1.  Recursively applying ( 4.71 ) under the initial condition @xmath
    until @xmath reaches @xmath to obtain the series @xmath .

2.  The moment @xmath is recursively assessed from eq. ( 4.72 ) by using
    the series @xmath until @xmath becomes @xmath .

3.  The full moment @xmath is derived from eq. ( 4.73 ) using @xmath and
    @xmath

4.  Solving @xmath with respect to @xmath numerically.

The procedures 1–4 can be performed in a polynomial time with respect to
the number of spins, which is the same as the ladder case.

On the other hand, for CTs the number of spins and the degree of the
polynomial @xmath increase exponentially as @xmath as @xmath grows,
which makes it infeasible to solve @xmath for large @xmath . For
instance, it is computationally difficult to evaluate RZs beyond @xmath
for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath by use of today’s computers of
reasonable performance. This prevents us from accurately examining the
convergence of RZs to the real axis in the limit @xmath by means of
numerical methods.

However, the data of small @xmath still strongly indicate that the
qualitative behavior of RZs can be classified distinctly depending on
whether certain bifurcations occur for the cavity field distribution in
the limit of @xmath , which implies that the RZs of the CTs reflect the
phase transitions with respect to @xmath . Unfortunately, we also
clarify that the transitions are related to no RSB by some analytical
discussions. In the following subsections, we give detailed discussions
to lead this conclusion presenting plots of RZs.

#### 4.4.1 Plots of the replica zeros for CTs

We here present the results for CTs.

The plots for a CT and for a @xmath -CT with @xmath are shown in figs.
4.12 and 4.12 , respectively. It is known that the FRSB and 1RSB
transitions occur in RRGs with @xmath and @xmath , respectively [ 10 ,
30 , 72 , 77 ] .

Figure 4.12 shows that RZs of the @xmath CT lie on a line @xmath .
Interestingly, this behavior is the same as the @xmath ladder case in
fig. 4.10 . This result indicates that there is no phase transition or
breaking of analyticity of @xmath with respect to real @xmath . This
strongly suggests that the RZs of CTs cannot detect the FRSB transitions
in RRGs.

On the other hand, for the @xmath -CT case in fig. 4.12 , a sequence of
RZs approaches a point @xmath on the real axis from the line @xmath as
the number of generations @xmath increases, although the value of @xmath
is far from @xmath where the corresponding RRG occurs the 1RSB
transition. The arrow in fig. 4.12 represents the speculated value of
@xmath from the analysis of the corresponding BL, the detail of which is
given in the next subsection.

A similar tendency is also observed for a CT and @xmath -CT with @xmath
, plots of which are presented in figs. 4.14 and 4.14 , respectively.
The 1RSB critical values are @xmath for the CT and @xmath for the 3-CT.
Again, these values are far from the values of @xmath , which can be
observed in figs. 4.14 and 4.14 .

These results indicate that certain phase transitions occur for some
CTs, although they are irrelevant to 1RSB and FRSB. It is difficult to
identify the critical value @xmath from the plots because of the
computational limits. Instead, in the following subsection we
investigate the @xmath limit of these models. The arrows in figs. 4.12 –
4.14 represent the transition points @xmath determined by this
investigation.

#### 4.4.2 The thermodynamic limit and phase transitions of BLs

In order to identify the value of @xmath , we here consider the
thermodynamic limit. Direct investigation of CTs in this limit is
difficult, and we employ BLs to speculate the behavior of CTs.

##### Transitions of the convergent cavity-field distribution

The first step is to take the @xmath limit by equating @xmath and @xmath
in the iterative equation of @xmath , which yields the boundary
condition @xmath of the BL. For a @xmath 3-CT, the iterative equation is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

A return map of the recursion of @xmath and the convergent solution
@xmath in the initial condition @xmath are presented in figs. 4.16 and
4.16 , respectively. The return map shows that there are three fixed
points for @xmath @xmath @xmath , while @xmath is the only fixed point
for @xmath @xmath @xmath . This situation is in contrast to the @xmath
CT case, in which the cavity-field distribution uniformly converges to
an analytic function:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be derived from eq. ( 4.71 ). This implies that when eq. (
4.67 ) is put on the boundary of the CT, the boundary condition of the
BL, which was obtained by an infinite number of recursions @xmath ,
exhibits a discontinuous transition from @xmath to @xmath at @xmath as
@xmath is reduced from the above. Actually, in fig. 4.12 , RZs of the
@xmath 3-CT seem to approach @xmath , marked by an arrow. This indicates
that RZs obtained by our framework are relevant to the phase transition
of the boundary of a BL, which is not related to 1RSB.

This can be also confirmed from the initial condition dependence of the
RZs behavior. Equation ( 4.77 ) implies that the fixed point @xmath is
always stable, which can be seen from fig. 4.16 , and a sufficiently
large initial condition @xmath leads to the convergence to this fixed
point. In that case, it is reasonable that RZs do not approach the real
axis of @xmath . The actual plot of RZs for a @xmath @xmath -CT with the
initial condition @xmath is given in fig. 4.17 .

This figure clearly shows that the RZs do not approach the real axis. It
can be also observed that as the initial condition @xmath becomes close
to @xmath , RZs tend to go to the limit @xmath and @xmath , and become
to never approach the real axis. These observations support the present
description that the RZs of CTs correspond to the transition at the
boundary of BLs.

The same analysis for a @xmath CT shows that bifurcation of another type
can occur for even @xmath . For this model, the recursive equation of
@xmath has a trivial solution @xmath for @xmath , which is always the
case when @xmath is odd. The return map and plots of @xmath are shown in
figs. 4.19 and 4.19 , respectively.

These figures indicate that there exists a continuous transition from
@xmath to @xmath at a certain value of @xmath , which can be assessed as
@xmath . This is consistent with a certain sequence of RZs approaching
the real axis around @xmath in fig. 4.14 , which supports the analytical
assessment of the critical points.

In general, the discontinuous transition appears for cases of @xmath
spin interactions and the continuous transition occurs when @xmath is
even. Actually, for a @xmath 3-CT, both discontinuous and continuous
transitions occur at @xmath and @xmath , respectively. Figure 4.14 shows
a sequence of RZs approaching @xmath , while it is difficult to clearly
identify a sequence converging to the other critical point @xmath . We
consider that this is because the system size is not large enough, since
a portion of the RZs in the left shows a tendency to approach the real
axis, though further increase of the system size is practically
unfeasible due to the limitations of current computational resources.

In conclusion, the RZs of CTs are related to the phase transitions on
the boundary of the corresponding BLs. Regardless of the type of
transition, a sequence of RZs approaches a critical point on the real
axis when the BL provided from a CT in the limit @xmath exhibits a phase
transition on the boundary.

##### Relevance of the boundary condition and bulk properties of CTs

Equations ( 4.71 )–( 4.73 ) imply that the generating function @xmath
for CTs can also be separated into the bond and site contributions as
eq. ( 4.14 ) in the case of free energy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

As discussed in section 4.1.2 , for a BL, the boundary condition given
by the convergent solution of eq. ( 4.71 ), @xmath , which becomes a
function of @xmath , simplifies the expression of eq. ( 4.79 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.81)
     @xmath      (4.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath represent contributions from a site inside the
tree and on the boundary, respectively. In general, @xmath and @xmath
are expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.83)
     @xmath      (4.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the distribution of the cavity bias, which is related to
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

These can be interpreted that cavity biases fluctuate due to the average
over the quenched randomness. These formulas are generalizations of
eqs. ( 4.14 )–( 4.16 ) to the generating function @xmath . For @xmath in
the limit @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.87)
     @xmath      (4.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

In general, @xmath agrees with @xmath of an RRG, which is the same as
the free energy case.

In spin-glass problems on cycle-free graphs, the replacement of @xmath
with @xmath is crucial. To see this, let us investigate the rate
function @xmath as in section 2.5 . We denote the boundary condition as
@xmath . Since CTs and BLs have no cycle, for the @xmath model defined
on those lattices the boundary condition is the only relevant factor
determining the property of the model. Combining this fact with eq. (
4.23 ), we can express the moment @xmath of CTs and BLs as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the ground state energy when @xmath is imposed on the
boundary. This yields the following equation with respect to the rate
function for finite @xmath , @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we define the probability distribution @xmath as @xmath and
introduce the so-called Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence @xmath between
@xmath and @xmath , which takes a positive value unless @xmath becomes
identical to @xmath . This equation guarantees the non-positivity of the
rate function @xmath . The constraint @xmath is always satisfied even
when @xmath . However, as discussed in section 2.5 , this is not
necessarily the case when we first take the thermodynamic limit @xmath
and then calculate the rate function by using the analytically continued
@xmath as @xmath . This function @xmath can be positive, and the
condition @xmath signals the onset of @xmath RSB as shown in section 2.5
.

The condition @xmath has already been investigated for RRGs and
indicates that 1RSB transitions occur for some types of RRGs [ 10 , 72 ]
. However, it is considered that such a symmetry breaking cannot be
detected by an investigation based on eqs. ( 4.71 )–( 4.73 ) because the
boundary contribution is inevitably taken into account for a BL as well
as for a CT.

An example will clearly illustrate this point. Let us calculate the
generating function of the @xmath BL and RRG. The generating function of
the RRG (assessed only in the thermodynamic limit) is given by
substituting eqs. ( 4.71 ), ( 4.87 ), and ( 4.88 ) into @xmath , and the
plot is given in fig. 4.21 .

This shows a 1RSB critical value @xmath at @xmath and demonstrates the
failure of the analytic continuation of @xmath . On the other hand, the
generating function of the BL for finite @xmath is given by eq. ( 4.80 )
with the conditions ( 4.71 ), ( 4.87 ), and ( 4.88 ). Clearly, the
@xmath -dependence of @xmath only appears in two factors @xmath and
@xmath through the total generation @xmath . These factors are analytic
with respect to @xmath even in the limit @xmath , which guarantees the
uniform convergence of @xmath to @xmath . Hence, the analytic
continuation of @xmath is successfully performed and the resultant rate
function @xmath never violates @xmath , which can be actually seen in
fig. 4.21 . Also, we can prove the absence of the 1RSB transition for
CTs by showing the uniform convergence of @xmath . We succeeded to prove
this for a @xmath CT and the details are shown in appendix B.3 .

In summary, the RZs of CTs provided by the current scheme are irrelevant
to the 1RSB because it does not appear in BLs and CTs due to the huge
boundary effect. However, this does not mean the absence of another RSG,
FRSB, in BLs and CTs. Next we examine this point.

#### 4.4.3 Possibility of the full-step replica symmetry breaking

The AT condition, which is critical for the FRSB, has not yet been
characterized for sparsely connected spin models [ 77 , 78 , 79 ] . In
fact, a previous research has found that critical values of the
continuous transitions from @xmath to @xmath are candidates for those of
the AT condition for systems of even @xmath [ 10 ] . This motivates us
to further explore a possible link between RZs and the AT instability.

As discussed in section 2.6.1 , the AT condition is identical to the
divergence of the spin-glass susceptibility @xmath in the
fully-connected @xmath -spin interacting model. Hence, it is reasonable
to adopt the divergence of @xmath as the critical condition of the FRSB
for BLs and RRGs [ 80 , 81 , 82 ] . Using the (statistical) uniformness
of BLs and RRGs, it is sufficient to see the susceptibility of only the
root site @xmath . The spin-glass susceptibility of BLs for finite
replica @xmath is generally written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath means an average with respect to a modified distribution of
coupling and boundary field

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

In a cycle-free graph, an arbitrary pair of nodes is connected by a
single path. Let us assign node indices from the origin of the graph
@xmath to a node of distance @xmath along the path as @xmath . For a
fixed set of couplings and boundary fields, the chain rule of the
derivative operation indicates that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.93)
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.94)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

as @xmath depends linearly on @xmath as @xmath , where @xmath represents
a sum of the cavity biases from other branches that flow into node
@xmath . For a BL of @xmath , the cavity equation yields an evolution
equation of the cavity bias

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.95)
     @xmath      (4.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the coupling between nodes @xmath and @xmath , and
similarly for other cases.

To assess eq. ( 4.91 ), we take an average of the square of eq. ( 4.94 )
with respect to the modified distribution @xmath . Here, @xmath can be
regarded as a sample of a stationary distribution determined by the
convergent solution of eq. ( 4.71 ) for the BL. As @xmath is limited to
being an integer and @xmath , eq. ( 4.96 ) gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the value of @xmath or @xmath for the case of @xmath is determined
depending on the value of @xmath . When @xmath eqauls @xmath (and @xmath
), the values @xmath and @xmath are chosen with equal probability @xmath
since the sign of the infinitesimal fluctuation of @xmath , @xmath , is
determined in an unbiased manner due to the mirror symmetry of the
distribution of couplings. On the other hand, under the condition of
@xmath , the case of @xmath (and @xmath ) always yields @xmath . This is
because @xmath is guaranteed for @xmath under this condition.

Equation ( 4.97 ) indicates that the assessment of eq. ( 4.94 ) is
analogous to an analysis of a random-walk which is bounded by absorbing
walls. We denote by @xmath the probability that @xmath never vanishes
during the walk from @xmath to @xmath and the value of @xmath is kept to
unity. This indicates that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

holds. Summing all contributions up to the boundary of the BL yields the
expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

The critical condition for convergence of eq. ( 4.99 ) in the limit
@xmath is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This serves as the “AT” condition in the current framework.

For a BL, eq. ( 4.100 ) can be assessed by analyzing the random walk
problem of eq. ( 4.97 ), as shown in appendix B.4 . We evaluated the
critical @xmath values of eq. ( 4.100 ) for several pairs of @xmath ,
shown in Table 4.1 along with other critical values.

These results show that the values of @xmath , which signal the phase
transitions of the boundary condition of the BL, agree with neither
@xmath or @xmath for @xmath implying irrelevance of RZs of CTs to the
replica symmetry breaking, while for @xmath the values @xmath and @xmath
agree each other. We consider that the correspondence for the @xmath
cases is accidental since the case @xmath offers strong evidence that
the AT instability cannot be detected by the current RZs. This point may
require more detailed discussions but we here leave it as a future work.

To investigate the irrelevance of RZs to the AT instability further, let
us examine the singularities of RZs of a @xmath BL. The moment of the BL
for finite generation @xmath , @xmath , is easily derived from eqs.  (
4.72 ), ( 4.73 ) and ( 4.78 ), and the result is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the moment of a boundary spin, and the quantities @xmath
and @xmath represent the probabilities that the convergent cavity field
takes @xmath and @xmath , respectively. The explicit forms of @xmath and
@xmath are obtained from eq. ( 4.70 )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The RZs of the BL is easily derived as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This result implies that RZs of BLs are also irrelevant to the FRSB,
because there is no RZ on the real axis of @xmath .

The irrelevance of RZs to the AT instability may be interpreted as
follows. Remember the discussions given in section 2.6.1 . We can link
the spin-glass susceptibility to @xmath by considering the modified
generating function

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.104)
     @xmath      (4.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in which the interaction @xmath are introduced among @xmath out of
@xmath replica systems. Analytically continuing eq. ( 4.105 ) to @xmath
and expanding the obtained expression around @xmath for @xmath yield

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath represents the spin-glass susceptibility matrix. Equation (
4.106 ) implies that the divergence of the spin-glass susceptibility is
linked to analytical singularities of @xmath for @xmath . However, for
@xmath , which corresponds to @xmath examined in this chapter, it is
difficult to detect the singularity because the factor @xmath with
@xmath makes the divergence of the spin-glass susceptibility irrelevant
to the analyticity breaking of @xmath . This explains the irrelevance of
the RZs to the AT instability in the current framework. Considering
systems of @xmath may enable us to detect the AT instability by the RZs
formula, but such an investigation is beyond the current purpose and we
leave it as a future work.

#### 4.4.4 Physical implications of the obtained solutions

We concluded that bifurcations of the fixed point solutions of the
cavity-field equation correspond to phase transitions of the boundary
condition of a BL and are not relevant to either 1RSB or FRSB. Before
closing this section, we discuss the physical implications of the
obtained solutions.

A naive consideration finds that the solution of @xmath corresponds to a
paramagnetic phase implying that any cavity fields vanish and therefore
all spin configurations are equally generated. Note that this phase is
of the ground states in the limit @xmath and is different from the usual
temperature-induced phase.

For finite @xmath , relevant fractions of the spins can take any
direction without energy cost because the cavity field on the site is
@xmath . This implies that the ground state energy is highly degenerate,
which means that this solution describes a RS spin-glass phase.
Actually, it is easy to confirm that the following equality holds:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Hence, the singularity of the cavity-field distribution in the limit
@xmath can be regarded as the transition of the spin-glass
order-parameter. A finite jump of @xmath for the @xmath case is the
first-order transition from the RS spin glass to paramagnetic phases,
and such a transition is also observed in the mean-field models. The
transitions from @xmath to finite- @xmath for the @xmath case can be
regarded as a saturation of @xmath to @xmath . We infer that these are
the transitions from RS to RS phases. Notice that such a transition has
not been observed for infinite-range models. Our results indicate that
this @xmath phase appears only when @xmath is even. This means that such
a phase is highly sensitive to the geometry of the objective lattice.
This may be a reason why such a transition has not been observed in
other models.

### 4.5 RZs for RRGs

In section 4.4.3 , we have investigated the AT instability for BLs and
RRGs and concluded that the instability cannot be detected by RZs of CTs
and BLs. We have also inferred that the AT instability is difficult to
observe in the systems without interactions among replicas. To examine
this proposition, we present RZs for @xmath RRGs in this section.

Constructing the RZ equation @xmath for a RRG is a rather involved work
because the average @xmath requires not only the calculations of
configurations of @xmath but also the geometrical structure of the
graph. To overcome this difficulty, we fix a geometrical structure and
only treat the configurations of the bond value @xmath when constructing
the RZ equation @xmath . This prescription is not faithful to the
definition of the RRG but we can expect that gaps coming from the
difference of the definitions vanish in the thermodynamic limit.

Actual procedures we performed for calculating the RZs of RRGs are
rather simple:

1.  Generate a @xmath RRG with a size @xmath .

2.  Set a bond configuration @xmath and calculate the ground-state
    energy by exploring all the spin configurations.

3.  Continue the procedure @xmath until all the bond configurations are
    completed and make the distribution of the ground-state energy
    @xmath .

4.  Construct the RZ equation @xmath and solve it.

5.  Generate other RRGs with the same size @xmath and compare the
    results (actually we generate @xmath samples for a size).

Clearly, these procedures require huge computational times, which makes
it infeasible to calculate for @xmath .

Some typical behavior of RZs of RRGs for the sizes @xmath and @xmath are
given in figs. 4.23 and 4.23 , respectively. We can see that the RZs lie
on the line @xmath for @xmath . Actually for @xmath , we could not find
any samples which show RZs approaching to the real axis. For the @xmath
case, some sequences of the zeros exist apart from the line @xmath .

This result implies that RZs of RRGs approach the real axis as the
system size grows, which may signal the AT instability of the RRGs.
However, it is difficult to draw any distinct conclusion from figs. 4.23
and 4.23 because the system sizes are not sufficiently large. For
further investigation, we need some other idea to overcome the
computational difficulty of large systems, and leave this problem as a
future work.

### 4.6 Summary

In this chapter, we have investigated RZs for CTs and ladders in the
limit @xmath . Most of the zeros exist near the line @xmath in all cases
investigated; in particular, for the @xmath CT and the width- @xmath
ladder all the zeros lie on this line. For the width- @xmath ladder we
have proved that the generating function is analytic with respect to
@xmath in this model. On the other hand, for some CTs, a relevant
fraction of the RZs spreads away from the line @xmath and approaches the
real axis as the generation number @xmath grows. This implies that
@xmath has a singularity at a finite real @xmath in the thermodynamic
limit. A naive observation finds that the RZs collision points
correspond to phase transitions of the boundary condition of the BL. We
have compared them with known critical conditions of the 1RSB and FRSB
and concluded that these conditions are irrelevant to the behavior of
RZs. This is consistent with the absence of RSB in CTs reported in some
earlier studies [ 32 , 33 , 34 , 35 ] .

The irrelevance of RZs to the 1RSB and FRSB has been considered in many
aspects. By considering the boundary effect of CTs and BLs, we have
concluded that the 1RSB cannot be observed by the current framework. On
the other hand, the AT instability, the critical condition of the FRSB,
has required some delicate discussions. We have inferred that the AT
instability cannot be detected by the current formula without
introducing the interaction among several replicas and the peculiarity
of CTs and BLs is not essential. We have examined this statement by
considering RZs of @xmath RRG but any distinct conclusion could not be
obtained because the system sizes are not sufficiently large, which is
caused by the computational difficulty of the moment @xmath of RRGs.
Overcoming this difficulty needs some more idea and is left as a future
work. Another possible way to examine the statement is considering the
replicated systems with interactions among replicas. This strategy seems
to be more hopeful but here we leave this problem as a future work too.

## Chapter 5 The replica symmetry breaking and the partition function
zeros for Bethe lattice spin glasses

In the previous chapter, we have investigated replica zeros of Cayley
trees and discussed the possible links to the RSB. Our conclusion is
that the replica zeros of Cayley trees and Bethe lattices cannot detect
any RSB. According to some discussions about the boundary condition of
Bethe lattices we have clarified that the peculiarity of Cayley trees
and Bethe lattices makes it difficult to identify the 1RSB transition by
the replica zeros. On the other hand, the FRSB has required more
delicate discussions and we have finally inferred that the replica zeros
are essentially not able to detect the FRSB, not due to the peculiarity
of Cayley trees and Bethe lattices. To examine this conclusion, we
investigate the partition function zeros of Bethe lattices with respect
to the external field @xmath and temperature @xmath in this chapter.

As mentioned in chapter 1, the spin-glass susceptibility is directly
related to the nonlinear susceptibility as eq. ( 1.5 ). This fact
implies that singularities with respect to the external field @xmath
well signal the AT condition, which is expected to be the same as the
divergence of the spin-glass susceptibility.

Utilizing the cavity method, we can accurately calculate the partition
function zeros of Bethe lattices of infinite sizes. Our result implies
that the FRSB is related to the continuous zeros of the partition
function and can be detected in Bethe lattices despite the peculiarity,
which supports our conclusion in the previous chapter. In addition, this
result directly confirms a common belief that the AT instability leads
to the continuous singular behavior of the system [ 83 ] .

The results given in this chapter is in reference [ 84 ] . Note that
most of numerical calculations in this chapter was done by Yoshiki
Matsuda and he has the priority of those results. The zeros formulation
given in section 5.2.1 was mainly investigated by Antonello Scardicchio
and Markus Müller. The contributions of the author of this thesis to the
results are mainly on investigating the formulation of the AT
instability based on the divergence of the spin-glass susceptibility.
Especially, the zero-temperature analysis of the AT instability given in
appendix C.1 was performed exclusively by the present author.

### 5.1 Phase boundaries and critical properties of Bethe lattice spin
glasses

Before proceeding to the formulation of the partition function zeros, we
first review some critical properties of Bethe lattice spin glasses in
this section. When the external field @xmath is absent, the critical
conditions of Bethe lattice spin glasses are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The first relation gives the boundary between the paramagnetic and
ferromagnetic phases, and the latter corresponds to the transition from
the paramagnetic to spin-glass phases. We here derive these relations by
using the cavity method. Taking the @xmath limit in eq. ( 4.51 ), we can
find the equation of the cavity-field distribution (CFD) @xmath as

  -- -- -- -------
           (5.3)
  -- -- -- -------

If the external field @xmath is absent, this equation always has the
paramagnetic solution @xmath . Instability of this paramagnetic solution
signals phase transitions to other phases. To perform the stability
analysis, we expand the relation ( 4.5 ) with respect to @xmath and get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . Near the phase boundary, we can expect that the moments
@xmath decrease rapidly as @xmath grows, which validates to ignore
higher order terms. Here, we treat up to the third order. Taking powers
of eq. ( 5.4 ) and averaging with respect to @xmath which is denoted by
the brackets @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
     @xmath      (5.6)
                 (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we assume the @xmath model

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and denote @xmath . To investigate the stability of the paramagnetic
solution @xmath , we linearize eqs. ( 5.5 )–( 5.7 ) to yield

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

This matrix has three eigenvalues @xmath . It is quite straightforward
to rewrite these eigenvalues for general distribution @xmath , and the
explicit form is @xmath . When an eigenvalue exceeds unity, the
paramagnetic solution becomes unstable, which yields the critical
conditions ( 5.1 ) and ( 5.2 ). In this chapter, we treat the @xmath
model with @xmath on a @xmath Bethe lattice, and here present the phase
diagram in fig. 5.1 .

Symbols P, F, SG in fig. 5.1 represent the paramagnetic, ferromagnetic,
and spin-glass phases, respectively. The boundary between the
ferromagnetic and spin-glass phases is not given in this figure because
there is no known method to calculate this boundary. Although we did not
discuss the AT condition so far, we provide the AT line as the dashed
line in fig. 5.1 . The detailed derivation of the AT line will be given
in section 5.3.4 .

From eqs. ( 5.5 )–( 5.7 ), we can also obtain the critical exponents.
Near the phase boundary between the paramagnetic and ferromagnetic
phases, we can define a small parameter @xmath by @xmath . For @xmath ,
the paramagnetic solution is stable but for @xmath it becomes unstable
and the ferromagnetic solution emerges. For the lowest order with
respect to @xmath , we find the ferromagnetic solution as follows;

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (5.10a)
     @xmath      (5.10b)
     @xmath      (5.10c)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Equations ( 5.10 ) indicate that the critical exponent @xmath , which
yields the temperature dependence of spontaneous magnetization @xmath ,
equals to @xmath . Near the P-SG boundary, similar calculations are
possible. In this case, we need the moments up to the fourth order.
Assuming the absence of the ferromagnetic order @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (5.11a)
     @xmath      (5.11b)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Putting @xmath , we find the solution of eqs. ( 5.11 ) in powers of
@xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (5.12a)
     @xmath      (5.12b)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This implies that the spin-glass order parameter @xmath is proportional
to @xmath , which is known to be the same property as the SK model.

### 5.2 Formulations

Next, we present the formulation to yield the zeros of the partition
function. The cavity method again plays a key role for this purpose.
Antonello Scardicchio and Markus Müller mainly contributed to the
derivation of the zeros formula given in section 5.2.1 . Actual
implementation of the formula was done by Yoshiki Matsuda and the author
of this thesis.

#### 5.2.1 The partition function zeros of Bethe lattices

Let us first consider the zeros of the partition function with respect
to the uniform external field @xmath , the Lee-Yang zeros [ 26 ] . The
Lee-Yang zeros are known to be related to the magnetization of the
system, and here we start from illustrating this point. In general, the
partition function of an Ising system in the external field @xmath is
expressed as degree @xmath polynomial with respect to @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the system size and @xmath is the partition function for
a fixed magnetization @xmath . In the last equation, we factorize the
polynomial and introduce the zeros @xmath . The leading factor @xmath is
an irrelevant constant and hereafter omitted. Taking the logarithm of
eq. ( 5.13 ) and dividing by @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the density of zeros on the complex @xmath plane. The
magnetization @xmath is then expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking an infinitesimal closed line integral with respect to complex
@xmath , we can derive @xmath from the magnetization as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

This relation enables us to evaluate the density of zeros from the
magnetization.

Next let us turn to discuss the properties of Bethe lattices. We have
defined a Bethe lattice as an interior part of an infinitely large
Cayley tree. This means that a Bethe lattice is statistically uniform
and the typical magnetization is represented by the magnetization of the
central spin, which is expressed by using the CFD of the central spin,
@xmath , as

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.17)
  -- -- -- --------

Note that the domain of integration is two-dimensional (as @xmath )
because we are now treating the complex cavity field. The central CFD
@xmath is derived from the convergent CFD @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 The convergence
of the CFD is shown rigorously in [ 32 ] for the real cavity-field case.
Although this proof is not directly applicable to our case of complex
cavity field, we numerically observed the convergence for @xmath and
hereafter assume it. , where @xmath denotes the CFD of the @xmath th
generation of a Cayley tree, as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting eq. ( 5.17 ) to eq. ( 5.16 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath                     (5.19)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the second line, we used the residue theorem under the condition that
the radius @xmath is sufficiently small. Equation ( 5.19 ) enables us to
calculate the density of zeros from the central CFD @xmath .

For a Bethe lattice, eq. ( 5.19 ) can also be interpreted as follows.
Remember that the partition function of the whole system of a Bethe
lattice is given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.20)
  -- -- -- --------

This implies that the equation of zeros @xmath becomes identical to ² ²
2 Note that eq. ( 5.20 ) seems to diverge when the factor @xmath becomes
@xmath , but this is not the case. That is because the condition @xmath
always involves @xmath and the factor @xmath yields a finite value.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equations ( 5.19 ) and ( 5.21 ) provide a simple interpretation of the
zeros of the Bethe lattice. That is the probability distribution that
the partition function of a central spin becomes @xmath is identical to
the distribution of zeros of the whole Bethe lattice. This
interpretation is useful for evaluating the density of zeros with
respect to complex temperature. What we should do is to evaluate @xmath
at the temperature @xmath fixed on a complex value and to calculate
@xmath using the relation ( 5.19 ). This prescription is one of the
advantages by considering Bethe lattices and constitutes the main result
of this chapter.

#### 5.2.2 Population method to evaluate the CFD

In the previous subsection, we have derived the relation to obtain the
distribution of zeros from the central CFD @xmath . The next step is to
actually calculate the CFD. A widely-used numerical method for this
purpose is the “population method”, the main idea of which is to
represent the distribution by a population of @xmath cavity fields
@xmath . The actual procedure is as follows:

1.  Set the initial population of @xmath cavity fields.

2.  Choose @xmath fields randomly and compute a new field according to
    eqs. ( 4.4 ) and ( 4.5 ).

3.  Replace a randomly chosen field with the new field.

These procedures define a Markov chain on the space of the @xmath
fields. Usually, it is known that this chain has a stationary
distribution and the stationary distribution satisfies the
self-consistent equation of the convergent CFD @xmath in the limit
@xmath [ 30 ] . This population method is usually employed to evaluate
the real CFD but we here apply this to the complex CFD case.

We should here notice that there are two delicate points in applying the
population method to complex @xmath .

One is related to the relevance of the boundary condition. Even in the
real parameter case, the boundary condition is very important to
correctly consider the spin-glass problem on Cayley trees and Bethe
lattices, as discussed in the previous chapter. The selection of the
boundary condition is directly related to the selection of the
convergent CFD or the selection of the saddle-point of the corresponding
regular random graph. Moreover for the complex parameter case, there is
a possibility that other additional solutions of @xmath appear depending
on the boundary condition. To avoid confusions coming from such a
situation, we choose the boundary condition by referring to an
“adiabatic” criterion, which is based on an intuition that the
physically relevant complex @xmath should be smoothly continued to the
real solution. This means that in principle the correct complex @xmath
is derived by gradually increasing the imaginary part of the parameter
during the cavity update. As one of the simplest choices according to
this adiabatic criterion, we choose the fixed boundary condition, which
yields the initial cavity bias as @xmath where @xmath is the bond
between the outermost site @xmath and its ascendant.

The other is the dimensionality of the zeros distribution @xmath .
Hereafter let us focus on the @xmath model, the bond distribution of
which is given by eq. ( 5.8 ). For the @xmath ferromagnetic case, the
Lee-Yang zeros are distributed only in a one-dimensional subspace of the
complex field plane, which is also the case for the zeros with respect
to the complex temperature [ 26 , 85 ] . On the other hand, for several
spin-glass systems the zeros are known to two-dimensionally spread in
the complex plane [ 63 , 64 , 86 , 87 , 88 , 89 , 90 , 91 ] . These
facts imply that the existence region of the zeros gradually spread as
the ferromagnetic bias @xmath decreases and the zeros distribution
@xmath has its one and two-dimensional parts, @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively, in a certain range of @xmath . The problem is the
one-dimensional part is difficult to detect by the population method
because we use the two-dimensionally distributed population. For the
Lee-Yang zeros case, however, we can expect that @xmath takes non-zero
values only on the imaginary axis, which enables us to calculate @xmath
from the the following relation ³ ³ 3 This relation is easily understood
by regarding the relation ( 5.14 ) between the free energy and the zeros
distribution is the same as the one between the electrostatic potential
and the charge distribution in a two-dimensional space. In this context,
the magnetization corresponds to the electric field, which has the
discontinuous jump on the line density of the charge. This analogy leads
to eq. ( 5.22 ). [ 85 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

In general, if the region where @xmath takes non-zero values is exactly
known, the evaluation of @xmath is possible by using a similar relation
to eq. ( 5.22 ). Unfortunately, however, the exact location of such
region of @xmath is not known in general situations. In the remainder of
this thesis, we calculate @xmath only on the imaginary axis of the
external field @xmath , and ignore other possible region of @xmath .

#### 5.2.3 Numerical procedures

In the previous subsections we present the conceptual explanation of the
procedures to obtain @xmath and the convergent CFD @xmath . However, the
implementation of those procedures is also involved and we here
summarize actual numerical procedures.

To this end, we first write down the update rule of the cavity bias
@xmath , which is more numerically tractable than the cavity field, as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the bond between the site @xmath and its ascendant. We
hereafter assume that the function @xmath takes the principal branch,
which restricts the value of the imaginary part of the bias to a range
@xmath . The cavity bias distribution (CBD) for the @xmath th generation
@xmath is represented by a population and is updated by eq. ( 5.23 )
until @xmath converges.

After the convergence, the central CFD @xmath is calculated from the
convergent CBD @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is calculated from @xmath by using eqs. ( 5.19 ) and ( 5.22
).

Before closing this subsection, we summarize the actual steps of the
algorithm:

1.  Generate the initial population @xmath as @xmath according to the
    distribution ( 5.8 ).

2.  Update the population by the relation ( 5.23 ) until @xmath
    converges.

3.  Calculate the central CFD @xmath by eq. ( 5.24 ).

4.  Estimate the two-dimensional part of the zeros density @xmath by

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.25)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

    for a given @xmath and @xmath .

    1.  When the external field is pure imaginary @xmath , estimate
        @xmath separately by

          -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
             @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.26)
                               @xmath   @xmath   
          -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the remainder of this thesis, we assume the conditions @xmath and
@xmath . We performed at least @xmath cavity iterations until the
population converged. After the convergence, we took the average of the
objective quantities ( @xmath and @xmath ) over additional @xmath steps
to avoid possible fluctuation due to the finiteness of the population.

### 5.3 Result

In this section, using the formula given above, we derive the
distributions of the zeros of the presented model for several values of
temperature @xmath , external field @xmath , and ferromagnetic bias
@xmath . The physical significance of the zeros distribution is
discussed and the phase diagram of this model is re-derived in terms of
the zeros. The relevance of the zeros distribution to the AT instability
is also argued, which leads to a conclusion that the AT instability
corresponds to the continuous distribution of zeros on the real axes of
@xmath and @xmath .

#### 5.3.1 Zeros on the complex field plane

First, we show the density of zeros on the complex field plane, the
Lee-Yang zeros, for fixed real temperatures. For simplicity of
calculations, we rescale the complex field @xmath as @xmath when
analyzing the Lee-Yang zeros hereafter.

Figure 5.2 is the distributions of zeros on the complex @xmath plane
with @xmath and @xmath (left) and @xmath (right). To draw this figure,
we changed the value of @xmath from @xmath to @xmath with the increment
@xmath and of @xmath from @xmath to @xmath with the increment of @xmath
. Each evaluated point locates at the center of each cell in fig. 5.2
and the corresponding value of @xmath represents the value of the cell.
The density out of the range is omitted, since the range is sufficient
to see zeros near the real axis which are relevant to the critical
phenomena. Both @xmath and @xmath are plotted in the same figure and
colored in logarithmic scale; the black dots show a very high density.

The left panel of fig. 5.2 ( @xmath ) is for the paramagnetic phase. In
both @xmath and @xmath parts, the zeros do not reach the real axis,
which means there is no phase transition. On the other hand, the right
panel of fig. 5.2 is in the spin-glass phase ( @xmath ) and the zeros
reach the real axis at a certain value @xmath . This means that there is
a phase transition at @xmath in the Bethe lattice. Besides, below the
critical field @xmath , zeros continuously touch the real axis, which
indicates that the phase transitions continuously occur in the range of
@xmath . This behavior is quite different from usual phase transitions,
and seems to be related to the chaos effect of a small change of field.
The chaos effect is considered to be the result of the instability of
randomly frozen spin configurations in the spin-glass phase and to be
one of the characteristic properties of spin glasses. Note that the
one-dimensional density @xmath is numerically zero at all the range of
@xmath in this @xmath case, which implies the absence of singularities
of the magnetization. This fact suggests that the Griffiths singularity
[ 92 ] , which is the essential singularity of the free energy with
respect to the external field @xmath at @xmath and is considered to
appear in some diluted ferromagnets and spin glasses, is absent in the
current Bethe lattice spin glass without the ferromagnetic bias ( @xmath
).

As the ferromagnetic bias @xmath increases, the ferromagnetic phase
appears and the situation changes. Figure 5.3 is of the case @xmath .

The right panel of fig. 5.3 is in the ferromagnetic phase, in which
@xmath does not reach the real axis but only @xmath touches the origin.
Besides, comparing to the left panel of fig. 5.2 , we can find that
@xmath has a finite value on the imaginary axis away from the origin.
These observations indicate that the ferromagnetic ordering is
characterized by @xmath , while @xmath signals the spin-glass ordering.
According to this distinction of roles of @xmath and @xmath , we can
draw the phase diagram of the current system and will present the result
in section 5.3.3 .

#### 5.3.2 Zeros on the complex temperature plane

Assuming the temperature is complex, we can also obtain the density of
zeros on the complex temperature plane at a fixed @xmath .

Figure 5.4 shows the zeros on the temperature plane at @xmath with
@xmath (left) and @xmath (right).

All the (two-dimensional) zeros below the spin-glass transition
temperature @xmath also reach the real temperature axis. This result
reconfirms that the spin-glass transition differs from usual phase
transitions where zeros touch the real axis only at the transition
temperature. The continuous singularities in the range of @xmath again
implies the chaos effect against temperature deviation. The right panel
of fig. 5.4 shows that the spin-glass phase is stable under a weak field
( @xmath ), which is in accordance with the Lee-Yang zeros result (the
right panel of fig. 5.2 ).

The distributions at high @xmath are also interesting. Figure 5.5 shows
the density at @xmath with @xmath (left) and @xmath (right).

The critical temperature between the paramagnetic and ferromagnetic
phases is known as @xmath at @xmath . We can find that the zeros
protrude and tend to distribute in a sharp curve near this critical
temperature @xmath , which implies the existence of the one-dimensional
part of the zeros density near @xmath . As mentioned in section 5.2.2 ,
however, we cannot directly detect this one-dimensional part by the
current formalism using the two-dimensionally distributed population.
Instead, we introduce a small pure imaginary field @xmath and
investigate @xmath , the result of which is in the right panel of fig.
5.5 . This figure clearly shows the presence of a critical temperature
near @xmath ; zeros have finite densities on the real axis below @xmath
, which reflects that @xmath is finite for @xmath in the ferromagnetic
phase. On the other hand, the two-dimensional part of the zeros
distribution, @xmath , also touch the real axis at and below @xmath .
This situation is the same as fig. 5.4 and indicates that the system is
in the spin-glass phase in this region. As shown in later, this critical
temperature quantitatively accords with the AT line, which we identify
with the divergence point of the spin-glass susceptibility as the
chapter @xmath . This fact strongly supports our speculation that the
two-dimensional part of the zeros distribution, @xmath , dominates the
spin-glass behavior of the system.

#### 5.3.3 Phase diagram

The previous observations lead to an ansatz that two types of
transitions are classified by one- and two-dimensional parts of the
zeros distribution; the one-dimensional part @xmath detects the
ferromagnetic phase transition and the two-dimensional part @xmath
signals the emergence of the spin-glass ordering. According to this
ansatz, we can plot the @xmath - @xmath phase diagram and the result is
given in fig. 5.6 .

Note that the @xmath - @xmath phase diagram is also drawn by the same
procedure. That diagram has also some interesting features but we here
omit it because the @xmath - @xmath phase diagram is sufficient for the
current purpose of examining the AT instability of the Bethe lattice
spin glass.

The resulting phase boundaries in fig. 5.6 well agree with the
analytical ones, @xmath (para and ferro) and @xmath (para and spin
glass). This fact supports our ansatz that @xmath and @xmath correspond
to the ferromagnetic and spin-glass ordering, respectively. To examine
the relation between @xmath and the AT instability further, in the next
subsection we investigate the relation between the boundary obtained
from @xmath in fig. 5.6 and the AT line, which we identify with the
divergence of the spin-glass susceptibility.

#### 5.3.4 The divergence of the spin-glass susceptibility

Let us remember the discussions in section 4.4.3 and develop a similar
argument in the limit @xmath . The spin-glass susceptibility is then
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Considering the fact that on a Bethe lattice an arbitrary pair of sites
is connected by a single path and using the chain rule of the derivative
operation, we can rewrite this quantity as

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.28)
  -- -- -- --------

where the factor @xmath denotes the number of sites of distance @xmath
from the central site @xmath . This yields the divergence condition of
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to estimate the divergence points of the spin-glass
susceptibility at finite temperatures, we numerically implement the
calculation of the factor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

A naive consideration that the derivative can be estimated by the
difference coming from a small deviation yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The procedure to evaluate this equation is as follows. We arrange two
replicas of an identical population @xmath expressing the convergent CBD
@xmath . In addition, we introduce a uniform perturbation ( @xmath )
into only one of two replicas, and then observe the square average of
the variation @xmath after a certain number of the cavity updates.

In particular, we update two populations by @xmath iterations with the
same set of @xmath . A critical line of the divergence of the spin-glass
susceptibility is determined whether the square average is numerically
zero or much larger than the original perturbation. The result is shown
in fig. 5.7 where the spin-glass susceptibility diverges below this
line. This result well agrees with the phase boundary drawn by @xmath in
fig. 5.6 , which implies that the continuous distribution of @xmath on
the real axis corresponds to the divergence of the spin-glass
susceptibility. Combining the behavior of @xmath and the discussions
about the divergence of the spin-glass susceptibility in section 2.6.1 ,
we can expect that the current results reveal a physical aspect of the
AT instability or the FRSB. Namely, the FRSB is related to the
continuous singularities of the partition function, which is the common
belief about the AT instability as mentioned in the beginning of this
chapter. Consequently, we can reasonably conclude that the presented
results leads to the AT instability of the Bethe lattice spin glass as
the continuous singularities of the partition function and meets the
purpose of this chapter.

Note that at zero temperature, evaluating the condition ( 5.29 ) can be
performed in a more analytical manner. The result gives the critical
value of the ferromagnetic bias @xmath which well agrees the estimated
value by the finite-temperature results derived by both the zeros and
spin-glass susceptibility analyses. The details of the zero temperature
analysis are rather involved and presented in appendix C.1 .

### 5.4 Summary

In this chapter, we founded the formulation to investigate the partition
function zeros of Bethe lattices by utilizing the cavity method, for the
purpose of investigating the AT instability of the Bethe lattice spin
glasses. In the formulation, the cavity field distribution, which can be
evaluated by using the population method, is directly linked to the
density of zeros. This enables us to assess the zeros density in
infinite-size Bethe lattices by using the cavity method.

Using this formulation, we investigated the @xmath model on the
coordination @xmath Bethe lattice. The density of zeros consisted of two
parts: One-dimensional and two-dimensional densities. We found that the
two-dimensional density is related to the spin-glass ordering, while the
one-dimensional part on the imaginary axis of the external field
corresponds to the ferromagnetic transition. These observations were
confirmed by comparison with the conventional critical conditions. The
resultant @xmath - @xmath phase diagram was drawn by those two different
ways, and the accordance between them is excellent.

Our result about the zeros indicates that the system is singular
everywhere in the spin-glass phase. This observation and the relation
between the AT instability and the divergence of the spin-glass
susceptibility enable us to reasonably conclude that the continuous
singularities reveals a physical aspect of the AT instability and the
FRSB phase is present in the Bethe lattice spin glass, which meets the
purpose of this chapter.

Throughout this thesis, we consider the 1RSB and FRSB transitions
separately. A possible further work is to clarify the behavior of zeros
of the systems with the 1RSB. In the random energy model, it is known
that the zeros touch the real axis at only the transition point [ 63 ,
91 ] , which is in contrast to our result of the FRSB case. The current
formalism can treat any RSB in the same framework and can be expected to
give useful information about other types of the RSB. Investigation
along this line is quite hopeful and is currently under way.

## Chapter 6 Conclusion

In this thesis, the replica method was reviewed and examined from
several viewpoints. The replica symmetry breaking (RSB) was the central
concept about this issue and was investigated by several ways. The
generating function of the partition function @xmath , @xmath appearing
in the replica method, played a key role in the investigation.

In chapter 2, we presented a review of the replica method in a form
including recent descriptions of the method. The important concepts for
this purpose are the probability distribution of the free energy and the
pure states which are disjointed sets of configurations in the phase
space. Two characteristic exponents, the complexity characterizing the
number of pure states and the rate function characterizing a small
probability of the free energy, are naturally embedded in the replica
procedures. Practical calculations of those quantities were demonstrated
on the fully-connected @xmath -spin interacting model for several values
of @xmath . Especially, since the limit @xmath makes the calculations
easier, many aspects of the RSB in the one-step level (1RSB) were
elucidated in this limit. As a result, we found that the transition to
the 1RSB phase occurs due to the crisis of the complexity. This
consequence was re-derived from the large deviations of the free energy,
and it was revealed that the 1RSB is also signaled by the rate function
of the probability distribution of the free energy. We also pointed out
that the behavior of the rate function is closely related to the
analytical properties of the generating function @xmath and can be
understood by some necessary conditions which should be satisfied by the
correct @xmath .

On the other hand, another RSB, the full-step RSB (FRSB), is
characterized by the de Almeida-Thouless (AT) condition which is the
local stability condition of the replica symmetric (RS) saddle-point. We
demonstrated this point for @xmath and @xmath cases. The relation
between the AT instability and the divergence of the spin-glass
susceptibility was also discussed. In addition, for @xmath , we pointed
out that the dynamical 1RSB transition exists, which cannot be observed
by the RS ansatz and require the 1RSB prescription with the complexity
analysis. As a consequence of the above considerations, the phase
diagrams for @xmath and @xmath on the @xmath - @xmath plane were
presented.

Besides, in the end of chapter 2, the microscopic description of the
pure states were presented. To this end, the formulation by Thouless,
Anderson and Palmer (TAP) was discussed and the equivalence with the
replica result was shown; the characteristic exponent of the number of
solutions of the TAP equation becomes identical to that of the
complexity. We also showed that the solution of the TAP equation at zero
temperature can be identified with the spin configurations stable
against any single spin flip, which provides a simple interpretation of
the pure state and is useful for identifying the pure states by
numerical methods.

In chapter 3, we analyzed the Ising perceptron, which is a model of a
neuron, by the replica method. To study the structure of the synaptic
weight space, we intensively used the concept of the pure states and
calculated the complexity in the 1RSB level. The complexity analysis
revealed that the weight space consists of many clusters (pure states)
for @xmath where @xmath is the ratio of the number of the embedded
patterns @xmath to the system size @xmath . Besides, it was shown that
the weight space is equally dominated by a single large cluster of
exponentially many weights and exponentially many small clusters of a
single weight. This fact means that any information about the
middle-size clusters cannot be obtained in the replica method due to the
convex downward form of the cluster-size distribution. On the other
hand, for @xmath , we calculated the rate function to evaluate the small
probability that a given set of random patterns is atypically separable
by the Ising perceptron. The result showed that for @xmath the rate
function takes the minimum for @xmath and the system freezes out below
@xmath , which is a new type of frozen RSB phases and is not directly
related the conventional 1RSB ones. For @xmath , it was shown that the
analyticity of the rate function drastically changes, which implies that
the dominant configuration of the atypically separable patterns exhibits
a phase transition at this critical ratio. Extensive numerical
experiments were also conducted and supported the above theoretical
predictions.

In chapter 4, zeros of the @xmath th moment of the partition function
@xmath were investigated to directly reveal the analyticity breaking of
@xmath in a vanishing temperature limit @xmath , @xmath keeping @xmath
by combining the replica and cavity methods. In this limit, the moment
parameterized by @xmath characterizes the distribution of the
ground-state energy. We numerically investigated the zeros for @xmath
Ising spin glass models defined on several Cayley trees and ladders. For
several Cayley trees, we found that the zeros tend to approach the real
axis of @xmath in the thermodynamic limit, which implies that the moment
cannot be described by a single analytic function of @xmath as the
system size tends to infinity. To explore the possible links of those
analyticity breaking to the RSB, we examined the analytical properties
of @xmath and assessed the spin-glass susceptibility which can be
identified with the AT instability. To this end we employed two
relatives of Cayley trees, Bethe lattices and regular random graphs. The
result revealed that the analyticity breaking indicated by the zeros of
Cayley trees is relevant to neither the 1RSB and FRSB. We concluded that
the peculiarity of Cayley trees and Bethe lattices makes the 1RSB not
appear in those systems. On the other hand, the FRSB required some
delicate discussions. According to the analysis of the modified
generating function introduced interactions between replicas, we finally
inferred that the AT instability cannot be detected by the current
formula.

In chapter 5, to remove a possibility that the FRSB does not occur on
Cayley trees and Bethe lattices considered in chapter 4, we investigated
the zeros of the partition function of the @xmath model with respect to
the external field @xmath and temperature @xmath on a Bethe lattice with
the coordination number @xmath , by utilizing the cavity method. The
result indicates that once the spin-glass phase emerges, the
two-dimensional part of the zeros continuously tough the real axis,
which means that the system is singular everywhere in the spin-glass
phase. Combining this observation and the relation between the AT
instability and the divergence of the spin-glass susceptibility, we
could reasonably conclude that the continuous singularities of the
partition function reveals a physical aspect of the AT instability and
the FRSB phase is present in the Bethe lattice spin glass.

Main results of this thesis are summarized as follows:

1.  Clarifying the behavior of the generating function when the
    complexity and rate function are not convex upward (chapter 3).

2.  Comparing the analytical value of the rate function with the
    numerical one qualitatively and supporting the validity of the
    replica method (chapter 3).

3.  Proposing a new method to investigate zeros of the moment @xmath
    with respect to the replica number @xmath and finding the
    analyticity breaking of @xmath by using the zeros (chapter 4).

4.  Clarifying the relation among Cayley trees, Bethe lattices, and
    regular random graphs in the context of the RSB (chapter 4).

5.  Drawing a phase diagram of a Bethe lattice spin glass in terms of
    the partition function zeros and reasonably identifying the FRSB
    phase by the continuous singularities of the free energy (chapter
    5).

Although the spin-glass theory has its long history, the essential
comprehension of physics of spin glasses is still lacking. One of the
main controversial points in the theory is whether the mean-field
description is applicable to finite-dimensional systems or not. To
obtain the solution to this problem, much effort have been made not only
on directly studying finite-dimensional systems but also on improving
the mean-field theory itself. The presented researches in this thesis
can be regarded as one of such improvements in that our results provide
some new aspects of the replica method being one of the central methods
of the mean-field theory of spin glasses.

Besides, our results suggest further possibilities. Deeper understanding
about pure states can provide some insights on several other problems,
e.g. structural glasses, optimization problems and so on. The zeros
formulations given in chapter 4 and 5 are in principle applicable to
finite-dimensional systems, which can lead to further comprehension of
finite-dimensional spin glasses. Also, our results of the Lee-Yang zeros
in chapter 5 can provide a possibility of detecting the RSB in real
experiments by observing the response of the system to the external
field, like the Griffiths singularities [ 93 ] .

In the light of the above possibilities, we have several hopeful future
works.

Lessons from chapter 3 tell us that in other research fields there
probably exist many other systems exhibiting extraordinary behavior of
the generating function, complexity and rate function. This implies that
investigation of such systems can reveal not only the properties of the
systems but also the remaining mysteries of the replica theory.
Researches along this line are already one of the rapidly-expanding
mainstreams of the current spin-glass theory and will continue to
develop at least for the near future.

The replica-zeros formulation in chapter 4 should be improved to be a
more tractable form. In the current formulation, the replica zeros
require huge computational time which prevents us from treating systems
of large sizes. Moreover, we should clarify the relation between the
replica zeros and the AT instability to investigate whether the AT
instability occurs in finite-dimensional systems or not. The formulation
of the inter-replicas interactions may be useful for this purpose and
should be developed in the future.

The Lee-Yang zeros in chapter 5 may be most hopeful in clarifying the
properties of real spin glasses, since they are directly related to the
external field being controllable in real experiments. To give concise
predictions for real experiments, we should obtain more detailed
information about the distribution of the Lee-Yang zeros. The precise
functional form of the distribution may enable to distinguish the RSB
response from the normal one in the scaling form of the magnetization
with respect to the external field. Obviously, we should find out the
behavior of the zeros distribution in different types of RSB.
Investigation of this point is a promising research and is currently
underway.

It would be expected that the future direction of the spin-glass theory
is classified broadly into two lines. One is the mathematical foundation
of the mean-field theory in a more rigorous way. The other is the
application of the spin-glass theory to a wide variety of different
systems; real spin glasses, structural glasses, information processing
tasks, and so on. The results presented in this thesis probably
contribute to both of the two directions. This is because the
mathematical structure of the replica method is closely related to both
of the mathematics and physics of spin glasses. We hope that the reviews
and results in this thesis become a basis to researches in such
directions and inspire further study and understanding of spin glasses
and beyond.

## Appendix A Calculations for chapter 3

### a.1 Derivation of the RS saddle-point equations and the limit
@xmath.

Differentiation of eq. ( 3.18 ) with respect to @xmath yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The following integration requires some algebras

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The differentiation of @xmath with respect to @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Inserting this expression into eq. ( A.2 ) and integrating by parts with
respect to @xmath give

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Substituting this equation into eq. ( A.1 ) and reducing some factors,
we finally get the saddle-point equation ( 3.21 ). The other
saddle-point equation ( 3.20 ) is also derived in a similar way.

Next we take the limit @xmath in eqs. ( 3.20 - 3.21 ). In this limit,
the argument of @xmath , @xmath , diverges to @xmath or @xmath depending
on the sign of @xmath and we need the asymptotic behavior of @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

which leads to @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . Hence, we can
calculate the asymptotic behavior of @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

This condition @xmath enables us to calculate the following integration

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Substituting these results into eq. ( 3.18 ), we obtain the RS2 solution
( 3.44 ).

### a.2 Derivation of the AT condition

We consider small deviations of eq. ( 3.11 ) around the RS saddle
points. We use the notation @xmath , @xmath and expand eq. ( 3.11 ) with
respect to the perturbations @xmath and @xmath . The terms of first
order of @xmath and @xmath becomes automatically @xmath because we
impose the saddle-point conditions with respect to @xmath and @xmath .
Hence, the relevant terms in the first term of eq. ( 3.11 ) become

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Similarly, for the second term of eq. ( 3.11 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the brackets @xmath denote the following average

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

To expand the third term of eq. ( 3.11 ), we need some more algebras.
First, we write down the general form of the probability distribution of
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath expresses the @xmath vector whose @xmath th component is
@xmath and @xmath is the matrix whose elements are spin-glass order
parameters

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

This distribution satisfies relations ( 3.8 ). We here employ the
following identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using these formulas, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the brackets @xmath denote the following average

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

This average with respect to @xmath can be transformed to the average
with respect to @xmath by using the integral by parts

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
                 
     @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the symbol @xmath means

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

and note that @xmath is the same average as defined in Sec. 3.2 .
Summarizing above results, we can derive the explicit form of the
Hessian @xmath around the RS ansatz

  -- -------- -- --------
                 
     @xmath      (A.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here we classify the elements of @xmath by using the following notations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.20)
     @xmath      (A.21)
     @xmath      (A.22)
     @xmath      (A.23)
                 (A.24)
     @xmath      (A.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Using these notations, we can express the Hessian @xmath
as

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.26)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath is the unit matrix of rank @xmath .

Let us find the eigenvectors of this matrix by a heuristic approach
found by de Almeida and Thouless. The first eigenvector @xmath is
obtained by assuming @xmath and @xmath for any @xmath . The upper half
of the eigenvalue equation @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the lower half yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

These equations have the eigenvalue @xmath with non-vanishing @xmath ,
which must satisfies the following relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . This equation says that this mode constructs a
two-dimensional space.

The next type of solution @xmath is obtained by treating a replica
@xmath as a special one. We assume @xmath without loss of generality.
This solution @xmath has @xmath and @xmath when @xmath or @xmath is
equal to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath otherwise. The first low of the
eigenvalue equation @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the first low of the lower half yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

We here use the orthogonal condition of the solutions @xmath and @xmath
. We expect that the upper half of @xmath is orthogonal with that of
@xmath independent of the lower half space. This leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the same relation holds for @xmath and @xmath . Substituting these
conditions, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.33)
     @xmath      (A.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

and with non-vanishing @xmath and @xmath , this leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . There are @xmath possible choices of the
special replica @xmath and there are two eigenvalues for the solutions
@xmath and @xmath , which means that @xmath and @xmath construct @xmath
-dimensional space.

The third mode @xmath is obtained by treating two replicas @xmath as
special ones. This solution @xmath has @xmath and @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , and @xmath and @xmath otherwise. Following the similar argument
to the case of @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . This solution constructs @xmath -dimensional
space and all the eigenvalues are exhausted by these three modes.

For the stability of the saddle point, all of the eigenvalues must be
non-negative. This condition corresponds to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the desired condition is @xmath but not @xmath . That is
because @xmath is originally pure imaginary variable, which means that
@xmath is associated with a factor @xmath and @xmath is with a factor
@xmath . Hence, if we change the variable from @xmath to @xmath , the
diagonal block of lower half of @xmath yields a factor @xmath and the
off-diagonal part becomes @xmath , which leads to the positivity
condition of the eigenvalues as eq. ( A.37 ).

The most relevant mode is @xmath and to check this condition we next
calculate eqs. ( A.20 - A.25 ). The order parameter @xmath is already
given by eq. ( 3.20 ) and the quantity @xmath is calculated in a similar
way to the derivation of eq. ( 3.20 ). The result is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

The factor @xmath requires to assess @xmath . This factor is calculated
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we used the explicit form of the function @xmath and denoted
@xmath . All the derivatives in the factor @xmath can be similarly
calculated. The result is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we omit the argument @xmath of the functions @xmath and @xmath ,
and the explicit forms of @xmath and @xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally we obtain the AT condition as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### a.2.1 AT instability of the RS2 solution

The AT condition for the RS2 saddle point is calculated by taking the
limits @xmath and @xmath . In the limit @xmath , the function @xmath is
reduced to the complementary error function @xmath defined in eq. ( 3.17
), and we need to calculate the following integral to obtain the
explicit form of the AT condition of the RS2 solution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Remembering the argument of @xmath in the AT condition is @xmath and
using eq. ( A.5 ), we find that for @xmath the function @xmath goes to
@xmath and the integrand of eq. ( A.43 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

This contribution vanishes in a rapid manner for any @xmath . Meanwhile,
for @xmath eq. ( A.43 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

which vanishes for @xmath but a constant @xmath remains if @xmath .
Assuming @xmath , we obtain the AT condition in this limit as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Recalling eq. ( A.6 ) indicating @xmath , we can see that this condition
is always satisfied for @xmath but is violated on @xmath , which was
already pointed out by Gardner [ 59 ] .

## Appendix B Calculations for chapter 4

### b.1 Derivation of the generating function @xmath and free energy of
regular random graphs

At first, we give the explicit form of the generating function @xmath
for the @xmath -spin interacting regular random graph with coordination
number @xmath , since the derivation requires rather involved
calculations. The generating function @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
     @xmath      (B.3)
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The functions @xmath and @xmath are determined by the saddle-point
conditions. The saddle point conditions for @xmath and @xmath yield

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

These relations are identical to those of the cavity field @xmath and
bias @xmath of BLs. Substituting solutions of eqs. ( B.5 ) and ( B.6 )
to eq. ( B.1 ), we obtain an explicit expression of @xmath .

Next, we turn to the derivation of eq. ( B.1 ).

The first procedure is to calculate the number of possible
configurations of a random graph. Let us define @xmath as a
characteristic function which takes @xmath when a coupling exists
between a @xmath -spin combination @xmath and @xmath otherwise. The
number of possible graphs is expressed by using @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . This can be transformed as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we used an identity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

for the first formula. We expand @xmath and keep only the first-order
term @xmath since higher-order terms correspond to multiple interactions
for a combination @xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

We use an asymptotic formula @xmath for large @xmath to introduce a
variable @xmath . Expressing this constraint by a delta function and
using the Fourier expression, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The integration with respect to @xmath can be performed and eq. ( B.11 )
reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The saddle-point method yields the asymptotic behavior of @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.13)
     @xmath      (B.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Secondly, we calculate @xmath . The expression using @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the same transformation as eqs. ( B.7 )-( B.10 ), we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

We introduce the following transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denote the additional spin variable and @xmath is the
indicator function which takes @xmath when the spin variables @xmath
completely accord with @xmath and @xmath otherwise. This formula leads
to

  -- -------- -- --------
                 (B.18)
     @xmath      (B.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

For each configuration @xmath , we impose the constraint ( B.20 ) by a
delta function and introduce its Fourier expression by employing the
conjugate variable @xmath . The result is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Performing spin trace with respect to @xmath and integration with
respect to @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The saddle-point method is again useful to evaluate this equation. Under
the RS ansatz of the saddle-point, @xmath and @xmath are generally
written in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.23)
     @xmath      (B.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting these formulas to eq. ( B.22 ), we can calculate all the
terms in the argument of exponential. The result is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath - @xmath are defined in eqs. ( B.2 )-( B.4 ). Then, eq. (
B.22 ) is rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking the saddle-point conditions with respect to @xmath and @xmath ,
we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting these conditions and eq. ( B.14 ) into eq. ( B.26 ), we
find that irrelevant constants are canceled out and obtain eq. ( B.1 ).

The free energy is easily obtained from eq. ( B.1 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.29)
     @xmath      (B.30)
     @xmath      (B.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

These distributions @xmath and @xmath satisfy eqs. ( B.5 ) and ( B.6 )
in @xmath . Note that the first term in eq. ( B.28 ) corresponds to the
bond contribution ( 4.15 ) and the second and third terms are the site
contribution ( 4.16 ), which shows the correspondence between the free
energy of an RRG @xmath and that of internal part of a BL @xmath in
eq. ( 4.18 ). Although the second and third terms in eq. ( B.28 ) take
different mathematical expressions, the saddle-point conditions with
respect to @xmath and @xmath guarantee the accordance of these terms.

### b.2 Location of replica zeros of the width-@xmath ladder

We prove that all RZs of a @xmath ladder lie on the line @xmath for any
@xmath . We introduce the notation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are polynomials of @xmath and @xmath is assumed
to be irreducible. The outline of the proof is as follows. First we
present the general solution of @xmath and show that the denominator
@xmath has @xmath roots which are all purely imaginary. The function
@xmath is the floor function, which is defined to return the maximum
integer @xmath in the range @xmath . Also, we show that the number of
nontrivial solutions of @xmath is equal to @xmath and @xmath can be
factorized as @xmath , where @xmath is a polynomial of @xmath . From the
correspondence of the numbers of the roots, we conclude that all the
zeros of @xmath are equivalent to the roots of @xmath and @xmath takes
the form @xmath .

The iteration for @xmath ( 4.66 ) has a solvable form and its general
solution is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

The roots of the numerator in eq. ( B.33 ) can be easily calculated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the imaginary unit and @xmath is a natural number.
Then, we concentrate on finding the roots of the denominator in eq. (
B.33 ) except for those of the numerator ( B.35 ). From numerical
observations in sec. 4.3 , we found that any of the roots @xmath , which
satisfy @xmath , are purely imaginary and bounded by @xmath . Hence, we
assume these conditions and perform the variable transformation @xmath .
Equating the denominator of eq. ( B.33 ) to @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now enumerate the number of solutions under conditions that @xmath is
real and bounded as @xmath . Under these conditions, we can transform
eq. ( B.36 ) into a simple form by using the polar representation. The
result is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . While @xmath varies from @xmath to @xmath
continuously, the radius @xmath stays at a constant @xmath and the
argument @xmath varies from @xmath to @xmath in the positive direction.
In the same situation, @xmath changes from @xmath to @xmath in the
negative direction. The radius @xmath is not constant, but is finite in
this range. The variables @xmath and @xmath are obviously continuous and
monotonic functions of @xmath . Therefore, the argument of the left-hand
side of eq. ( B.37 ) starts from @xmath and rotates with angle @xmath in
the positive direction and the counterpart of the right-hand side varies
from the same point @xmath to @xmath . This means that there are @xmath
values of @xmath where the factor @xmath becomes equal to @xmath except
for trivial solutions @xmath . When @xmath is even, these solutions
contain a trivial solution @xmath , which can also be confirmed from
eq. ( B.33 ). Hence, the number of nontrivial roots of @xmath becomes
@xmath for odd @xmath and @xmath for even @xmath , which is equivalent
to @xmath .

As already noted, the number of nontrivial solutions of @xmath is equal
to @xmath . This can be understood by considering that the number of
terms of @xmath is determined by the maximum number of defects @xmath .
In the @xmath ladder case, the value of @xmath is given by @xmath and
the number of terms is @xmath . The highest degree of the relevant
polynomials for RZs comes from the difference between the highest and
lowest ground-state energies and is given by @xmath , which yields the
number of nontrivial solutions of @xmath .

Finally, we prove that @xmath takes the form @xmath by induction. From
eqs. ( 4.66 ) and ( 4.65 ) with the initial conditions @xmath , we
derive

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

which satisfies the desired form. Assuming that the condition @xmath is
true for @xmath , we substitute this expression into eq. ( 4.65 ) to get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.39)
     @xmath      (B.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equation ( 4.66 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

which gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a polynomial and satisfies @xmath . Substituting this
relation, we can rewrite eq. ( B.40 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we have already shown, the number of nontrivial zeros of @xmath is
equal to that of @xmath . This means that @xmath cannot have nontrivial
roots and hence @xmath takes the form @xmath . This completes the proof
by induction and demonstrates our proposition that all RZs for the
@xmath ladder have a constant imaginary part @xmath .

### b.3 Rate function for a CT with @xmath

We here calculate the generating function @xmath for finite @xmath .
Consider an @xmath -generation branch of a @xmath CT. An explicit form
@xmath is easily derived from eq. ( 4.72 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

using the same notations as in section 4.2 . The rate function with
finite generations @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.46)
     @xmath      (B.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the factor @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us denote @xmath . Because the inequality @xmath always holds, the
1RSB transition does not occur as long as the condition @xmath is
satisfied.

In the range @xmath , the factor @xmath is bounded as @xmath . This
guarantees the uniform convergence of @xmath . The boundedness of @xmath
can also be shown with some calculations. These conditions guarantee
that @xmath converges to a function @xmath uniformly. Hence, from
elementary calculus, the equality @xmath holds, which implies the
absence of 1RSB. The same conclusion is more easily derived for a BL
because @xmath does not depend on @xmath .

### b.4 AT condition for the @xmath Bethe lattice

We derive the AT condition for a BL. Especially, we explain the case
@xmath in detail. The extension to general @xmath is somewhat involved
but straightforward. To evaluate @xmath , we construct the transition
matrix of our random-walk problem. For a given @xmath , the posterior
distribution of @xmath is given as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the prior distribution of @xmath . This enables us to
derive the concrete expression of @xmath , summarized in Table B.1 .

We can distinguish three states of the walker at the @xmath -step as
follows:

 @xmath  :  

    The walker has already vanished.

 @xmath  :  

    The walker survives and @xmath .

 @xmath  :  

    The walker survives and @xmath .

Hence, using the relation ( 4.97 ), the transition matrix @xmath can be
written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath represents @xmath and the condition @xmath applies. When
@xmath and @xmath , the states @xmath and @xmath occur with equal
probability @xmath , while @xmath is always chosen when @xmath and
@xmath . This is due to the correlation between @xmath and @xmath . To
see this, let us consider the evolutional equations for biases and
perturbations. Their explicit forms are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.51)
     @xmath      (B.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

From eqs. ( 4.96 ) and ( 4.97 ), we can obtain all possible values of
@xmath and @xmath , and summarize the result under the condition @xmath
in Tables B.3 and B.3 . A notation @xmath represents the conditional
probability for @xmath under the condition @xmath .

Comparing the Tables B.3 and B.3 , we can find that when @xmath , @xmath
becomes never positive. Similarly, when @xmath holds, @xmath is
positive. It is easy to see that these facts hold for @xmath . Hence, an
inequality @xmath is necessarily required, which explains the transition
rules between the states @xmath and @xmath .

The matrix @xmath has three eigenvalues: @xmath and @xmath . The
eigenvector of the largest eigenvalue @xmath corresponds to the state
@xmath or the vanishing state. Hence, the surviving probability @xmath
is given by @xmath , where @xmath is the state of the walker at the
@xmath step. For large @xmath , the relevant state is of the
second-largest eigenvalue @xmath , and we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the stationary solution ( 4.78 ), we obtain @xmath as a function
of @xmath . The AT condition becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

This condition is easily examined numerically and we can verify that the
AT instability occurs at @xmath for @xmath .

Before closing this section, we give some brief comments on general
@xmath . For general @xmath under the case @xmath , the evolution
equation of the cavity bias becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
                 
     @xmath      (B.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation implies that the table B.3 is modified and becomes a new
table between @xmath and @xmath . Other discussions are almost the same
as the case @xmath . Using the notation @xmath and the symmetry @xmath
as the @xmath case, the transition matrix @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the term @xmath in the second column is included in the
transition rate from @xmath to @xmath . This is because the inequality
@xmath holds in the general @xmath cases. The second largest eigenvalue
@xmath of @xmath determines the AT condition by @xmath .

For the @xmath case, the update rule of the cavity bias is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the cavity field coming from the other branch of
the tree and @xmath again represents @xmath . Since the cavity field
@xmath is uncorrelated with the biases @xmath , it is sufficient to
consider the correlation among the biases @xmath as eq. ( B.49 ). This
fact leads to a similar list to table B.3 . Difference between the
@xmath and @xmath cases appears in the transition matrix. According to
eq. ( B.57 ), when the cavity field @xmath equals to @xmath , @xmath
becomes @xmath and the walker vanishes independently of the values of
@xmath . This yields the transition matrix as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the probability that the cavity field @xmath
becomes @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 For the @xmath case, the probability @xmath is
already given as the convergent solution of eq. ( 4.77 ), or the solid
line in fig. 4.16 . . The second largest eigenvalue of this matrix
@xmath again gives the AT condition by @xmath .

## Appendix C Calculations for chapter 5

### c.1 Divergence point of the spin-glass susceptibility at zero
temperature

Our starting point is the self-consistent equation satisfied by the
convergent CBD @xmath in the absence of the external field

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Analytical assessment of the solution of this equation is possible only
at zero temperature as in appendix B.4 , which enables us to treat the
problem in an analytical manner.

The evolution equation of the cavity bias is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.2)
     @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the coupling between sites @xmath and @xmath . This
relation implies the cavity fields and biases become integers, because
we are treating the @xmath model. Hence, the general form of the CBD can
be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the BL with @xmath , eq. ( C.1 ) is rewritten as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.5)
     @xmath      (C.6)
     @xmath      (C.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

These equations have a ferromagnetic solution for @xmath , the explicit
form of which is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.8)
     @xmath      (C.9)
     @xmath      (C.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and have another solution @xmath for @xmath , which can be regarded as
the RS spin-glass solution.

Equations ( C.3 ) and ( C.4 ) means

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the value of @xmath or @xmath for the case of @xmath is determined
depending on the value of @xmath . Equation ( C.11 ) indicates that the
assessment of eq. ( 4.94 ) is analogous to an analysis of a random-walk
which is bounded by absorbing walls. We denote by @xmath the probability
that @xmath never vanishes during the walk from @xmath to @xmath and the
value of @xmath is kept to unity. This indicates that the critical
condition at zero temperature becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

To evaluate the surviving probability @xmath , let us formulate this
random-walk problem. Since we are now considering the case that the
ferromagnetic bias exists, which is different from appendix B.4 , we
should in principle distinguish the following seven states of the walker
at the @xmath -step:

 @xmath  :  

    The walker has already vanished.

 @xmath  :  

    The walker survives under the conditions @xmath and @xmath .

 @xmath  :  

    The walker survives under the conditions @xmath and @xmath .

 @xmath  :  

    The walker survives under the conditions @xmath and @xmath .

These seven states, however, can be reduced to four states by
considering the relation @xmath which can be derived by the same
discussions as in appendix B.4 . As a result, the state @xmath and
@xmath are reduced to @xmath and @xmath , respectively. On the other
hand, when @xmath the sign of @xmath does not change with probability
@xmath or change with probability @xmath , which leads to the following
equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.13)
     @xmath      (C.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath represents the conditional probability for @xmath under the
condition @xmath , which is the same notation as appendix B.4 . Under
the assumption that the initial perturbation is completely random, we
find that @xmath equals to @xmath for @xmath . Because of this symmetry,
we need not to distinguish the states @xmath and hereafter write as
@xmath . Considering the above discussions and using the relation ( C.11
), we can write the transition matrix @xmath of the walker as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the transition probability from @xmath to @xmath .
When @xmath and @xmath , the probability flow from @xmath to @xmath
exists with the weight @xmath while there is no such flow when @xmath
and @xmath . This is the consequence from the above considerations. This
matrix has four eigenvalues @xmath and @xmath . The eigenvector of the
largest eigenvalue @xmath corresponds to the state @xmath or the
vanishing state. Hence, the surviving probability @xmath is given by
@xmath , where @xmath is the state of the walker at the @xmath step. For
large @xmath , the relevant state is of the second-largest eigenvalue
@xmath and @xmath , which leads to the critical condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath , this condition is easily examined by using eqs. ( C.8 )-(
C.10 ) and ( C.15 ). The resultant transition point is @xmath , which
well agrees with the results given in the main text.