In this thesis, we review and examine the replica method from several
viewpoints. The replica method is a mathematical technique to calculate
general moments of stochastic variables. This method provides a
systematic way to evaluate physical quantities and becomes one of the
most important tools in the theory of spin glasses and in the related
discipline including information processing tasks.

In spite of the effectiveness of the replica method, it is known that
several problems exist in the procedures of the method itself. The
replica symmetry breaking is the central topic of those problems and is
the main issue of this thesis. To elucidate this point, we first review
the recent progress about the replica symmetry breaking including its
physical and mathematical descriptions in detail.

Second, we accept the recent descriptions of the replica symmetry
breaking and investigate the Ising perceptron, which is a model of a
neuron, by intensively utilizing those descriptions, to examine the
consequence of the replica symmetry breaking. Our result is consistent
to the replica symmetry breaking description, but shows that the replica
method cannot correctly describe the phase-space structure of this
system. This is because the phase space of this system constitutes an
exceptional structure which violates the usual assumption of the replica
method, but it is also explained that this problem is not directly
related to the replica symmetry breaking itself.

Next, without employing the replica symmetry breaking, we investigate
the zeros of the averaged @xmath th moment of the partition function
with respect to the complex replica number @xmath for the purpose of
investigating the analyticity breaking of the generating function, which
is related to the replica symmetry breaking, appearing in the replica
procedures. For this purpose, we employ the @xmath model on some tree
systems and ladders. Our result implies that the zeros actually signal a
certain kind of analyticity breaking, but is irrelevant to any replica
symmetry breaking.

To investigate the origin of the irrelevance of zeros of the @xmath th
moment to the replica symmetry breaking, we finally study the partition
function zeros with respect to the external field and temperature for
the tree systems. The result shows that the two dimensional part of the
zeros density continuously touches the real axis in a certain range of
the objective parameters. This result implies that the invisibility of
the replica symmetry breaking by the previous formulation is not due to
the peculiarity of the tree systems but due to the problem of the
formulation itself. Another interesting implication of the result is
that it leads to the instability of the system against deviations with
respect to the external field and temperature in the spin-glass phase.
This is the first direct evidence that the system shows singular
behavior in the spin-glass phase.

The above results reveal several aspects and problems of the replica
method and contribute to underpinning this method and the mean-field
theory of spin glasses, which consequently inspire future study and
understanding of spin glasses and the related topics.
