##### Abstract

[afrikaans] ’n Konstruktiewe metode word ontwikkel wat swaartekragduale
van kwantummeganiese modelle bou met die oog op die ondersoek van die yk
/ swaartekrag dualiteit. Die konstruksie word sover moontlik
vereenvoudig en spesifiek word kwantummeganiese modelle beskou in plaas
van kwantumveldeteorieë. Die vereenvoudigings laat ’n sistematiese
ontwikkeling van die metode toe wat dus direkte toegang tot die
kwantummeganika / swaartekrag woordeboek verleen.
Die metode bestaan uit twee dele. Eers word ’n geometrie saamgestel
vanaf ’n familie van kwantumtoestande wat die simmetrieë van die
toestande as isometrieë behou. Daarna word ’n aksie gedefinieer wat deur
hierdie metriek stasionêr gelaat word. Indien die kwantumtoestande nie
normaliseerbaar is nie moet hul op ’n gepaste wyse geregulariseer word.
Die regularisasieparameters word dan as koordinate beskou. Dit gee dan
aanleiding tot die idee van ’n “bulk” waar die toestande normaliseerbaar
is en ’n “rand” waar hulle nie is nie. Asimptotiese anti-de Sitter
geometrieë volg op natuurlike wyse vanaf nie-normaliseerbare toestande,
maar die geometrie kan egter baie meer algemeen wees as dit.
Tyd-ontwikkelde toestande is die eerste onderwerp. ’n Sinvolle
regulariseringsmetode is bloot om tyd kompleks te maak wat dan die
radiale koordinaat as ’n energieskaal giet. Die duale beeld van hierdie
twee-dimensionele toestande is ’n model van dilaton-swaartekrag waar die
dilaton die interpretasie van ’n kwantumoperatorverwagtingswaarde dra.
As ’n voorbeeld hiervan - die duale beeld van toestande wat ontwikkel
onder ’n @xmath Hamiltoniaan is dilaton-swaartekrag op @xmath . Hierdie
beeld strook met bestaande restultate uit the @xmath literatuur. Hierdie
bestaande resultate word herondersoek en toevoegings word gemaak
daaartoe met behulp van die sistematiese kwantummeganika /
dilatonswaartekrag woordeboek. As nog ’n voorbeeld word dit aangetoon
dat die duale beeld van toestande wat tyd-ontwikkel onder ’n @xmath
Hamiltoniaan ’n model van diltatonswaartekrag op @xmath is.
Die hoër-dimensionele ondersoek word, ter wille van eenvoudigheid,
beperk tot toestande wat oor volle Schrödinger simmetrie beskik met en
sonder dinamiese massa. Die tyd- en ruimtelike koordinate word kompleks
gemaak om die toestande te regulariseer en simmetrieë te behou.
Woordeboeke word saamgestel vir beide gevalle. Dit word aangetoon dat
submetrieke van hierdie metrieke in die @xmath en @xmath literatuur
bestudeer word.

\faculty

Faculty of Science Hendrik Jacobus Rust van Zyl \degree PhDDoctor of
Philosophy in Science \supervisor Prof.  F.G.  Scholtz \cosupervisor Dr.
 J.N.  Kriel \setdate 122015 \TitlePage

\DeclarationDate \DeclarationPage

## Acknowledgements

This thesis would have not been possible without the academic, financial
and emotional support of many people and institutions. I mention them
here though I am sure that I will forget a few through the course of my
typing. To those I forget I wish to ensure you that I reflect on this
four year journey constantly and that my gratitude swells when you enter
my thoughts.
First and foremost I would like to thank my supervisors Prof Scholtz and
Dr Kriel: your guidance of not only this project but of my thinking as a
physicist has been of immeasurable value. I often remark in jest that
postgraduate studies is, among others, a continuous exercise in
humility. However, the gentle way in which you have helped me onto the
right path, despite my many mistakes, is something that will always stay
with me.
I would also like to my lecturers and teachers over the years for the
remarkable way in which you gave color and intrigue to the field of
physics. It is largely because of this that I pursued further studies in
the field. This is a decision that I am very grateful to have made.
Special mention in this regard should be made of Mr Hoffman, my high
school physics teacher, who was instrumental in me pursuing a career in
science and Prof Geyer who encouraged my pursuit of theoretical physics
especially. I must also mention the extraordinary lengths that Prof
Müller-Nedebock went through at the end of 2010 and 2011. His assistance
and support over that time fills me with immense gratitude and it stands
as one of the most formative times in my life.
The undertaking of my studies would not have been possible without the
financial contributions of the Wilhelm Frank trust, the National
Institute for Theoretical Physics and the Institute of Theoretical
Physics at Stellenbosch University. This is true not only of my PhD but
also the many years preceding it. My sincere gratitude for all the
support you have provided.
The interactions with the students and staff at the Department of
Physics contributed greatly to the undertaking and conclusion of this
thesis. This is true in the academic sense where I could discuss
problems I encountered in my own project, learn great things from the
projects others are undertaking and, most importantly, know that there
are others who understand the successes and challenges of postgraduate
research so very well. It is also true in simply a social sense. I
consider my years at the Physics Department to be a great privilege
because of the wonderful people I have met there. Thank you to all -
lecturers, support staff and students - that help shape the fantastic
work environment there.
Lastly, the journey from the start of this project to its finish and the
draft of this thesis is an immense one. As time progressed this fact
revealed itself with ever increasing authority. The people who helped me
deal with the many struggles contained therein are countless but I would
like to mention a few. To my family and especially my parents and
brothers: your support over this time cannot be summed up in words. The
way you helped me adjust to life back home during the final stretch of
the thesis and showered me with love and support is possibly the kindest
act that I have ever encountered. That last bit of time we spent
together before my transition into the real world is something I will
always cherish. To Chantel, the love of my life, you have known me since
the very first steps of this journey and the happiest thought I have is
that we will continue to walk this unpredictable path of life together.
To Chris, Hendre, Jandre and Sheree - know that your support and
friendship helped carry me through all of this. I am very fortunate to
know people on whose door I can knock at any time of day or night. For
this I am truly grateful. May we continue to write paragraphs in the
chapters of each others lives for many years to come.

## List of Symbols and Abbreviations

As a guide to the reader to both avoid confusion and to interpret the
equations in the text accordingly we provide here a list of
abbreviations and commonly used symbols that appear throughout the text.
The reader may note that some symbols are very closely related - in
these circumstances the context determines the appropriate
interpretation. Care has been taken to avoid that similar symbols with
different meanings appear in the same context.

### Abbreviations

-   [label=,topsep=0pt,parsep=0pt,partopsep=0pt,labelwidth=5cm,align=left,itemindent=-0.5cm]

-    @xmath Anti-de Sitter as in anti-de Sitter space

-    @xmath @xmath space in @xmath dimensions

-    @xmath Conformal Field Theory

-    @xmath @xmath in @xmath dimensions

-    @xmath Non-relativistic Conformal Field Theory

-    @xmath Super Yang-Mills as in supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory

-    BCH Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff as in the BCH formula

-    CQM Conformal Quantum Mechanics

-    BTZ Bañados-Teitelboim-Zanelli as in the BTZ black hole

### Commonly Used Symbols

#### Geometry and Gravity

-   [label=,topsep=0pt,parsep=0pt,partopsep=0pt,labelwidth=5cm,align=left,itemindent=-0.5cm]

-    @xmath metric tensor

-    @xmath fixed metric, typically flat space

-    @xmath anti-symmetric two-form, symplectic form in special cases

-    @xmath scalar curvature

-    @xmath Ricci tensor

-    @xmath Riemann (curvature) tensor

-    @xmath Weyl tensor

-    @xmath Kronecker delta

-    @xmath energy-momentum tensor

-    @xmath matter content

-    @xmath dilaton field

#### Operators and Representations

-   [label=,topsep=0pt,parsep=0pt,partopsep=0pt,labelwidth=5cm,align=left,itemindent=-0.5cm]

-    @xmath momentum operator; subscript indicates the component

-    @xmath position operator; the subscript indicates the component

-    @xmath dilitation or scaling operator

-    @xmath special conformal operator; subscript indicates the
    component

-    @xmath rotation operator in the @xmath plane

-    @xmath an arbitrary ( @xmath ) operator

-    @xmath a ( @xmath ) operator of scaling dimension @xmath

-    @xmath a primary ( @xmath ) operator of scaling dimension @xmath

-    @xmath an arbitrary (quantum mechanical) operator

-    @xmath normalised expectation value of @xmath

-    @xmath an arbitrary normalised expectation value

-    @xmath a unitary operator, typically in the context of
    transformations

-    @xmath unitary representation of the group element @xmath

-    @xmath an arbitary representation of the group element @xmath

-    @xmath commonly used representation labels

-    @xmath commutator of two operators

#### States and Operators

-   [label=,topsep=0pt,parsep=0pt,partopsep=0pt,labelwidth=5cm,align=left,itemindent=-0.5cm]

-    @xmath a state vector, not necessarily normalised or
    non-normalisable

-    @xmath a normalised state vector

-    @xmath normalised expectation value

#### Field Theory

-   [label=,topsep=0pt,parsep=0pt,partopsep=0pt,labelwidth=5cm,align=left,itemindent=-0.5cm]

-    @xmath action

-    @xmath Lagrangian

-    @xmath field

-    @xmath , @xmath field of scaling dimension @xmath

-    @xmath gauge field

-    @xmath partition function

-    @xmath coupling constants

#### Derivatives and Vector Fields

-   [label=,topsep=0pt,parsep=0pt,partopsep=0pt,labelwidth=5cm,align=left,itemindent=-0.5cm]

-    @xmath partial derivative with respect to @xmath

-    @xmath functional derivative with respect to @xmath

-    @xmath covariant derivative with respect to the @xmath ’th
    coordinate, @xmath

-    @xmath Laplace operator, Laplacian

-    @xmath vector field

#### Variables

-   [label=,topsep=0pt,parsep=0pt,partopsep=0pt,labelwidth=5cm,align=left,itemindent=-0.5cm]

-    @xmath complex variables

-    @xmath conjugate complex variables

-    @xmath some examples of real variables

As a final convention: when we end a series expansion with the symbol
@xmath we mean that the next-leading term may be of order @xmath .

###### Contents

-    \thechapter Introduction
-    \thechapter Overview of the @xmath Correspondence
    -    1 Global Symmetries
        -    1.1 The Conformal Algebra (in @xmath Dimensions)
        -    1.2 @xmath Correlation Functions
        -    1.3 @xmath Space
        -    1.4 The @xmath Conformal Group
    -    2 Correlation Functions From Generating Functionals
    -    3 Local / Gauge Symmetries
        -    3.1 The Maldacena Correspondence
    -    4 Summary
-    \thechapter Constructing Metrics From Quantum States
    -    5 Dynamical Symmetries
        -    5.1 The Schrödinger Equation as a Specific Example of
            Dynamical Symmetries
        -    5.2 The Dynamical Symmetries of the Free Particle
    -    6 The Construction of our Metric and Anti-symmetric Two-Form
        -    6.0.1 A Quick Example
        -    6.1 Dynamical Symmetries and Isometries
        -    6.2 Family of States Generated by Group Elements
    -    7 The Geometric Reformulation of Quantum Mechanics
    -    8 A Brief Look at Other Possible Constructions
        -    8.1 Left- and Right Multiplication Symmetries
            -    8.1.1 Metrics on Group Manifolds
            -    8.1.2 Density Matrix as a Symmetry Filter
        -    8.2 Bures Metric
    -    9 Summary
-    \thechapter Geometry of Time-Evolved States
    -    10 Regularised States
    -    11 The Physical Content of the Metrics
        -    11.1 Non-normalisable Reference State and @xmath
    -    12 Unsourced Metrics for @xmath
    -    13 The Meaning of Time Translation
    -    14 Conformal Quantum Mechanics
        -    14.1 The Global Symmetries
        -    14.2 The Effect of a General Coordinate Transformation
        -    14.3 The Conformal Symmetry of CQM
    -    15 Coherent States
        -    15.1 @xmath Coherent States
        -    15.2 @xmath and Glauber Coherent States
    -    16 A Comment on a Result From the @xmath Literature
    -    17 Summary
-    \thechapter Gravitational Duals in Two Dimensions
    -    18 Proceeding to a Gravitational Dual
        -    18.1 A Quick Example of the Expectation Value / Killing
            Vector Relation
        -    18.2 Lemmas Pertaining to Dynamical Symmetries
        -    18.3 Calculations Utilising Symmetries
    -    19 Equations of Motion
        -    19.1 Two Dimensional Equations of Motion
        -    19.2 Equations of Motion for Constant Scalar Curvature
        -    19.3 What Then is the Procedure?
    -    20 Dilaton Gravity
    -    21 Some Relevant @xmath Results from the Literature
        -    21.1 The Central Charge Calculation
            -    21.1.1 The Positivity Condition of the Dilaton
            -    21.1.2 The Transformations and Energy-Momentum Tensor
        -    21.2 The Inner Boundary Contribution to the Central Charge
        -    21.3 An Issue of Normalisation
    -    22 The Dilaton Gravity Dual for the @xmath Model of CQM
        -    22.1 The @xmath Symmetry Generators
        -    22.2 Extending Beyond the Generators of Symmetry of @xmath
        -    22.3 Extending to the Conformal Transformations
            -    22.3.1 The Unconstrained Solutions
            -    22.3.2 The Asymptotic (Outer Boundary) Contribution to
                the Central Charge
            -    22.3.3 The Inner Boundary Contribution to the Central
                Charge
            -    22.3.4 Massive Scalar Field Action
            -    22.3.5 A More Direct Approach from CQM
        -    22.4 The Duals of the @xmath Quantum Models
    -    23 The dual of the Glauber Coherent States
    -    24 Summary
-    \thechapter A Look at Higher Dimensional Models
    -    25 The Equations of Motion
        -    25.1 Massive Scalar Field
    -    26 The @xmath Models
        -    26.1 Examining the Laplacian
        -    26.2 Eigenfunctions of the Laplacian
        -    26.3 Eigenfunctions Expressed as Operator Expectation
            Values
        -    26.4 The Structure of the Laplacian in Terms of the @xmath
            Algebra
    -    27 Notable Submanifolds
        -    27.1 Complexified Time
        -    27.2 Momentum Regularisation
    -    28 Discussion
-    \thechapter Free Particle Metrics with Dynamical Mass
    -    29 The Conformal Galilei Algebra
        -    29.1 Representation in Terms of Quantum Mechanical
            Operators
    -    30 The Dynamical Mass Tensor Product States
    -    31 The Gravitational Dual of the Dynamical Mass Free Particle
        -    31.1 The Argument for Considering Submanifolds
    -    32 Restricting the Analysis to a Submanifold of the Kähler
        Manifold
        -    32.1 The Maximally Symmetric Submanifold
        -    32.2 The @xmath -Symmetric Metrics
        -    32.3 The @xmath Symmetric Metrics
        -    32.4 Discussion of the Submanifold Metrics
    -    33 Dictionary on the Submanifold?
    -    34 Discussion
-    \thechapter Conclusion and Outlook
-    \thechapter The Geometric Quantities of Relevance
-    \thechapter Field Equations for Einstein- and Dilaton Gravity
    -    A Einstein Gravity
    -    B Dilaton Gravity Field Equations
-    \thechapter Algebras That Feature in This Thesis
-    \thechapter Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff Formula
    -    C BCH formula for the Heisenberg Group
    -    D BCH formula for @xmath
-    \thechapter The Subalgebras of the Complex Conformal Algebra
    -    E Relating the Wave Equations
    -    F The Conformal Algebra
    -    G Classification in Terms of Scaling Properties
    -    H Representation as Differential Operators

## Chapter \thechapter Introduction

Since the publication of the famous Maldacena conjecture [ 1 ] the study
of the @xmath correspondence (or more generally the gauge/gravity
duality) has grown into a substantial field of research. Indeed, this
has lead to the paper [ 1 ] becoming one of the most cited works in
history. Though not the first work that probed the equivalence of
gravitational theories and gauge theories (see e.g. [ 2 ] ), the
conjecture provided the first explicit example of the so-called
gauge/gravity duality. The duality is a conjectured correspondence
between certain gauge theories and theories of gravity i.e. the physical
information contained in each is equivalent, only packaged differently.
If a physical quantity in the one theory can be calculated in some
domain of the theory’s parameters then the value for a physical quantity
of the dual theory can be extracted from it. In order to apply such a
procedure one requires the dictionary i.e. how the physical quantities
of the one theory are related to the physical quantities of the other.
The seminal works in the development of the dictionary [ 3 ] , [ 4 ]
still form the cornerstone of it [ 5 ] , [ 6 ] .
The gauge/gravity duality is significant on a conceptual level [ 5 ] .
If understood properly it holds the promise of reformulating theories of
quantum gravity in terms of their dual gauge theories. This would be of
great benefit since even the most well-studied model of quantum gravity,
string theory, can only be formulated consistently as a perturbative
theory [ 5 ] . Reformulating it in terms of its gauge theory dual would
thus allow one to go beyond the perturbative expansion and formulate it
consistently for all parameters.
This only explains part of the great interest that was sparked by the
Maldacena paper [ 1 ] . The conjecture goes further to claim that, at
least in some cases, the gauge/gravity duality is a strong/weak duality.
This means the dual theory is solvable in a region of parameter space
where the original theory is not i.e. the dual theory is weakly coupled
when the original theory is strongly coupled. It thus provides one of
the few (if, in some cases, not the only) tool to study gauge theories
at strong coupling. This remarkable feature of the conjecture lies at
the core of its power and has been applied in problems varying from the
quark-gluon plasma [ 7 ] to holographic superconductors [ 8 ] and
condensed matter physics [ 9 ] , [ 10 ] .
As we will illustrate with reference to the Maldacena conjecture [ 1 ] ,
symmetries play a key role in the formulation and application of the
gauge/gravity duality. The intuitive reasoning for this is reasonably
clear. Critical points of a quantum model cannot be treated
perturbatively due to a vanishing energy gap which implies a strongly
coupled problem [ 9 ] . However, the vanishing gap also implies a high
degree of symmetry at the critical point. If the treatment of the
quantum model is thus rearranged around the symmetries then the problem
may possibly become simpler.
This idea that the treatment of a problem can be made simpler by
rearranging it has at least one rigorous example. It is known that gauge
theories permit a @xmath expansion in the large @xmath limit where
@xmath is the dimension of the gauge group [ 11 ] , [ 12 ] . This
simplification is, at first glance, counter-intuitive. One would expect
that a gauge theory becomes more complicated as the dimension of the
fundamental representation increases. The results [ 11 ] , [ 12 ] shows
the opposite is true as long as the theory is repackaged or rearranged
appropriately. In particular the large @xmath expansion is a topological
rearrangement of Feynman diagrams. It is also interesting to note that
this sidesteps the issues of a perturbative expansion in the coupling
constant precisely because the expansion parameter in this topological
series, @xmath , is independent of the coupling constant.
Though a very powerful and widely used calculational tool the
gauge/gravity duality remains largely unproven. This is due, in no small
part, to the theories involved in the duality being difficult to work
with in their own right. The applications of the duality are numerous
and consequently proving the duality is of great importance. As one may
expect this is not a simple task and it is a sensible strategy to target
smaller goals aimed at an eventual proof. In this regard we note, as
least as far as this writer’s knowledge of the literature is concerned,
that there is a lack of fully systematic procedures that can construct
the appropriate gravitational dual from a given quantum model.
In this thesis we undertake what can be viewed as a first step to
realising this goal of a systematic procedure. Specifically we will
investigate how gravitational duals can be constructed from quantum
mechanical models in a systematic way. Such a procedure holds the great
benefit of granting us direct access to a quantum mechanics / gravity
dictionary. This would allow us to address pertinent questions. Under
what circumstances does a quantum mechanical model permit a dual
description? Is the dual description a unique theory? Can we find
evidence that repackaging a quantum mechanical theory in a dual
description is useful? Of course, it is likely that numerous systematic
constructions can be made. A question that we will be dealing with
regularly in this thesis is whether the construction we choose
reproduces existing results in the literature. If so then the systematic
procedure may allow us to progress beyond these existing results in a
natural way.
It should be emphasised that our focus in this thesis will be on quantum
mechanical models and not field theories. The most notable difference is
that we do not consider models with gauge symmetry so that only the
global symmetries will feature in our construction. At first glance this
may appear to be an oversimplification as the large @xmath expansion [
11 ] , [ 12 ] ( @xmath is the dimension of the gauge group) is no longer
applicable. Nonetheless, this simplification will allow the construction
of simple gravitational duals and, when we focus on the simplest quantum
models, we will find very good agreement with existing works in the
@xmath literature. The construction we will employ must be seen as a toy
model of holography, but one that may hopefully be extended to the more
intricate setting of quantum field theory in future.
We will start with a discussion of the gauge/gravity duality with
specific reference to the famous Maldacena conjecture [ 1 ] in chapter
\thechapter . Our discussion will be basic and only highlight the
aspects of the conjecture that will be relevant to this thesis and some
proposed future generalisations.
In chapter \thechapter we will introduce the construction that takes as
input a family of quantum states and produces as output a metric and
anti-symmetric two-form that encodes the symmetries of the states as
isometries. We will motivate why this metric, and not some other
geometric construction, is a sensible first choice for a systematic
procedure. In a natushell it is a relatively simple construction that
respects the symmetries of the quantum model. One of the first features
that will be appealing with this construction is that, if the family of
quantum states is non-normalisable, we have to include additional
parameters that regularise the states. These additional parameters will
have the natural interpretation of “bulk” coordinates. The quantum
states then live on the “boundary” of this manifold. Both of these
features fit well with the conventional gauge/gravity duality.
We will proceed to apply the construction to the simplest family of
quantum states in chapter \thechapter , time-evolved states. These are
the states generated by some time-evolution of a reference state. If the
reference state is non-normalisable, the Hamiltonian is time-independent
and we regularise the states by complexifying time then the geometry is
asymptotically @xmath . The geometries can be much more general than
this, however. We will show how de Sitter and flat geometries result
from the appropriate coherent states. A general feature of the
geometries is that states with the same set of dynamical symmetries
produce metrics that are the same up to coordinate transformation. This
will imply, for example, that the duals of the free particle and
harmonic oscillator states are geometrically equivalent, a rather
counterintuitive result that we will discuss in further detail. At this
point, without any gravitational content, we will have acquired enough
results to extend one of the existing results in the @xmath literature [
13 ] .
Chapter \thechapter contains the most well-developed of our results. We
proceed from the two-dimensional families of states to a gravitational
dual description. By using properties of the geometric reformulation of
quantum mechanics [ 14 ] we are able to write down equations of motion
for the expectation values of quantum mechanical operators. We show
that, in general, these equations of motion can be matched with the
on-shell field equations of a model of dilaton gravity. Depending on the
manifold symmetries and the expectation value being solved for, an
appropriate energy momentum tensor may have to be included.
As a specific example we examine the dilaton gravity duals of the @xmath
class of Hamiltonians. We find very good agreement with the work of [ 15
] - [ 19 ] and find interpretations for the dilaton black hole mass in
terms of the @xmath operators. With our machinery we are able to
reproduce these results very naturally. We draw particular attention to
the calculation of the @xmath central charge from the dilaton gravity
description which, in our construction, can be related directly to
conformal transformation which are in turn related to the unconstrained
field equation solutions. This picture of the calculation makes matters
very clear. We will, furthermore, be able to extend these existing
results beyond the expectation values of symmetry generators. We will
also briefly explore the dual descriptions of states that lead to a de
Sitter geometry. The results are not as well-developed as the @xmath
class of Hamiltonians, but interesting nonetheless.
Our attention will then move to the higher dimensional families of
states. In chapter \thechapter we add spatial translations to the
time-evolved states and examine their dual descriptions. The generators
of dynamical symmetry of the simplest model, the free particle, are
generated by the so-called Schrödinger algebra. Even for this simple
case we encounter several difficulties in putting together the
dictionary. Firstly, the metrics we find are no longer conformally flat.
The non-zero Weyl tensor complicates the equations of motion. We show
how this can be remedied by only considering the trace of the equations
of motion thereby exchanging the equations we do not consider for
boundary conditions. A second difficulty is more problematic. In the
regularisation scheme we employ in the chapter, the manifolds are also
not Einstein, even for the free particle, so that the expectation values
require quite a bit of calculational maneuvering to recover. The scheme
is presented at the end of chapter \thechapter but further work is
needed to understand it fully.
We proceed to centrally extend the Schrödinger algebra and consider this
central extension (the mass) as a dynamical variable in chapter
\thechapter . This will allow us to write down a simple dictionary for
the @xmath -dimensional Schrödinger algebra Hamiltonians dual to a
massive scalar field action on an appropriately chosen background.
These results do not have analogues in the @xmath literature, however.
The most obvious departure from the conventional approach is that we
have too many dimensions added in the bulk. We show that when we
restrict ourselves to only a submanifold then we again recover a number
of geometries studied in the literature [ 20 ] , [ 21 ] . Unfortunately
what we lose by focussing on the submanifold is the developed dictionary
itself since we rely throughout on the fact that the family of quantum
states is parametrised by complex coordinates in order to put it
together. The states that live on the submanifold do not, in general,
possess this property. We propose that one may possibly use the existing
dictionary to extract the submanifold dictionary. The chapter concludes
with speculations as to how this may be done.
What we hope to achieve in the chapters that follow is twofold. First,
we showcase how a systematic procedure to build gravitational duals from
quantum mechanical models is possible. Even if our construction is only
applicable to the simple models we study in this thesis we hope that it
shows that the development of a systematic procedure for building duals
is an attainable goal. Secondly, we intend to show that the construction
we have chosen is, at least for the problems we study, an applicable and
beneficial one. The evidence for this will be the many works in
literature we may add clarity to and extend. This should serve as good
motivation to investigate the generalisations of this construction in
future.

## Chapter \thechapter Overview of the @xmath Correspondence

The duality first formulated by Maldacena [ 1 ] , that of type @xmath
string theory on @xmath dual to @xmath Super Yang-Mills ( @xmath ) with
an @xmath gauge group on the boundary, remains the most famous example
of the gauge/gravity duality, [ 3 ] , [ 4 ] , [ 5 ] , [ 6 ] , [ 7 ] , [
22 ] . Indeed, this duality is responsible for the conjecture’s
historical name, the @xmath correspondence. The historical name
originates from the type @xmath string theory living on anti-de Sitter
space (the @xmath part) and from the @xmath theory being a conformal
field theory (the @xmath part). In this chapter we will define all the
concepts mentioned in this paragraph concretely, all in due course. Good
reviews on the gauge/gravity duality and its applications can be found
in [ 5 ] , [ 6 ] , [ 7 ] , [ 22 ] and [ 23 ] . A good discussion can
also be found in [ 24 ] . These examples cover a very small fraction of
the available literature on the @xmath correspondence but will be
sufficient for our purposes in this thesis.
The conjectured correspondence is remarkable first and foremost since
both of these theories (string theory and Super Yang-Mills) are
difficult to work with in their own right. Consequently it is also a
very hard (and still an unaccomplished) task to prove the conjecture in
full, even for this well-studied example [ 5 ] . This famous example is
exceptionally well understood and it thus still serves as a means to lay
out the holographic dictionary in a clear way. We will proceed to do
exactly that in this chapter. The purpose of this exercise is to
illuminate the status of the construction that will be made in this
thesis as a toy model of holography. This will allow us, firstly, to
show which aspects of dualities may be understood and learned from by
means of this toy model and secondly to identify its limitations. These
limitations are important to take note of especially for future
generalisations.
It is important to emphasise that the power of the construction we will
employ lies not in its ability to capture all aspects of dualities
(consequently its status as a toy model). Rather the power of the
construction lies in its systematic nature. Many familiar features of
the gauge/gravity duality arise naturally in this toy model and, we
believe, to a sufficient extent to warrant future attempts to generalise
the construction.
The aim of this chapter is to partition the correspondence, with
specific reference to the Maldacena conjecture [ 1 ] , into what will
become aspects included in the toy model and aspects not included in the
toy model. We will then develop our construction in the course of the
ensuing chapters with this background knowledge and context in mind.

### 1 Global Symmetries

One of the key motivations for the @xmath correspondence is the
coincidence of the isometries of @xmath and the symmetries of @xmath
where @xmath refers to the spacetime dimension [ 5 ] . Indeed, it is
hard to imagine that two physical models can be equivalent if they do
not share the same symmetries. This matching of symmetries can thus
easily be seen to be a necessary condition for duals. The coincidence of
symmetries is even more significant. Indeed, a “trick” may be employed
to generate conformally invariant partition functions starting from
gravity actions defined on @xmath [ 5 ] . A (consistent) theory of
gravity defined on @xmath thus carries a consistently defined conformal
field theory on its boundary. It is not clear though whether all @xmath
s can be generated in this way [ 5 ] .
It is important for the purpose of the discussion we now undertake that
we distinguish between global symmetries and local symmetries. We first
discuss the global symmetries as these will be of particular relevance
later. By global symmetry we mean that the action remains invariant if
we perform the same transformation at every point. This is typically
associated with a unitary operator @xmath where @xmath is the generator
and the parameter @xmath does not have coordinate dependence. Local
symmetries, where the coefficient can have coordinate dependence, play a
different role in the conjecture.
In the Maldacena conjecture [ 1 ] the global symmetry corresponds to the
@xmath @xmath part. This means that the field theory is superconformal
with four supercharges (for supersymmetry). For the gravitational theory
(the type @xmath string theory) the symmetries are manifest as the
isometries of @xmath . We will now examine these global symmetries on
both sides of the Maldacena conjecture more closely.

#### 1.1 The Conformal Algebra (in @xmath Dimensions)

As the name suggests conformal field theory ( @xmath ) is a quantum
field theory that is invariant under conformal group transformations.
The @xmath -dimensional conformal group, @xmath i.e. @xmath , can be
defined as the transformations that leave the @xmath -dimensional flat
metric in arbitrary signature,

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

invariant up to a local scale factor i.e. a conformal factor [ 5 ] .
Note that the integer @xmath is related to the signature of the metric.
By @xmath we mean the Kronecker delta function. Throughout this
discussion we refer to the coordinates of the conformal field theory as
@xmath . In @xmath dimensions (we will discuss the @xmath case
separately) these are @xmath Lorentz transformations, @xmath
translations, @xmath special conformal transformations and one
dilatation or scaling. The corresponding generators are @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath respectively, given by [ 26 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----

where @xmath . The lowering and raising of indices is done by
contracting with the flat metric @xmath ( 1 ) and its inverse @xmath
respectively. It can be verified that the transformations ( 2 ) leave
the metric @xmath invariant up to a local scale factor i.e. if the
coordinates transform as @xmath then

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

One can define the algebra purely in terms of their commutation
relations and the coordinate forms ( 2 ) may be recovered as a specific
representation. The @xmath -dimensional conformal algebra (for @xmath )
is the set of @xmath operators that satisfy the following commutation
relations (see Appendix \thechapter for a summary of all the algebras
that appear in this thesis)

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----

For @xmath , the conformal transformations leave the free, massless
Klein Gordon equation in flat space form invariant [ 42 ] i.e.

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (5)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath so that the wave function may pick up a phase @xmath where
@xmath is an arbitrary function of @xmath . This provides another useful
way to visualise these symmetries.

#### 1.2 @xmath Correlation Functions

The requirement of conformal symmetry for a field theory places
significant restrictions on the form of the correlation functions [ 25 ]
, [ 26 ]

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (6)
  -- -------- -- -----

where

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (7)
  -- -------- -- -----

and @xmath refers to the conformal field theory vacuum. The operator
@xmath has spatial dependence. By @xmath we mean @xmath for the case of
conformal field theory but we make the distinction to allow
generalisations (of the time evolution operator). A basis for the
enveloping conformal algebra are those operators of definite scaling
dimension, @xmath , which we define by [ 5 ]

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (8)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath is the scaling dimension. We may simplify this even further
by only considering the primary operators defined by [ 5 ]

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (9)
  -- -------- -- -----

This is precisely because the commutator of @xmath with @xmath increases
scaling dimension while the commutator with @xmath decrease scaling
dimension. The primary operators ( 9 ) can thus be viewed as the lowest
tiers of the ladder of scaling dimension operators and one can ladder up
by means of differentiation with respect to @xmath and @xmath from ( 7
). The operators obtained by this differentiation process are known as
descendants [ 5 ] .
The desired quantities from our calculations are thus the 2- and 3-point
correlation functions of primaries which take a very specific form [ 27
] , [ 28 ] for @xmath s due to the very restrictive symmetry
requirements, namely

  -- -- -- -------- -------- ------
           @xmath            (10)
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- ------

where the coefficients @xmath are dependent on the model under
consideration. The symbol @xmath again refers to the Kronecker delta
function. The coefficients, @xmath , of three-point functions completely
determine the theory since higher point functions are determined by
these [ 29 ] . This is by virtue of the operator product expansion [ 29
] where the product of two primary operators at different points may be
expressed as the sum of primary operators (and descendants). This allows
one to reduce higher point functions to a function of the two- and
three-point functions.
The @xmath dictionary provides a prescription for calculating these
correlation functions on the gravity side of the duality. We will
present this shortly, but for now the important point is that the global
symmetries of the conformal field theory determine the form of the two-
and three-point functions ( 10 ).

#### 1.3 @xmath Space

On the other side of the @xmath correspondence we have a theory of
gravity defined on @xmath . By this we mean that fields and matters
fields may introduce fluctations around @xmath . We assume, though, that
these fluctuations tend to zero towards the boundary of the space. This
allows for a dynamic geometry. One of the main motivations for
considering an @xmath background is that, as mentioned, the @xmath
-dimensional conformal symmetry can be matched exactly to the isometries
of @xmath -dimensional @xmath geometry (on the boundary) [ 5 ] . This
high degree of symmetry constrains the possible physical models greatly
so that this matching is significant. We will now discuss this matching
of symmetries explicitly.
First it is necessarily to point out that the requirement for a
transformation to be an isometry of a metric is different to the
requirement for it to be a symmetry of some scalar function.
Specifically, a transformation is an isometry if

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (11)
  -- -------- -- ------

i.e. the metric in the new coordinates has the same functional
dependence on these new coordinates as the metric in the old coordinates
had on the old coordinates.
It is important to highlight the difference between conformal symmetries
and isometries, see ( 3 ) compared to ( 11 ). Conformal symmetry allows
the transformation up to a conformal factor whereas isometries require
this conformal factor to be @xmath . Consequently the isometries is a
subset of the conformal symmetries. Indeed, the largest number of
continuous isometries that a @xmath -dimensional metric can possess is
@xmath while the conformal group for @xmath consists of @xmath
continuous conformal symmetries. The conformal group is defined in terms
of conformal symmetries of a metric ( 3 ) but in the correspondence we
require it to be true isometries of a metric. In the @xmath
correspondence the @xmath side of the duality must thus be (at least)
one dimension higher than the @xmath side in order to capture all the
@xmath symmetries as isometries.
The metrics that contain their full compliment of continuous isometries
are called maximally symmetric. Indeed, this condition is so highly
restrictive on the metric that there are only three possible candidates
- de Sitter space, flat space and anti-de Sitter space [ 5 ] (for a
given signature). These three metrics can be distinguished by the sign
of their scalar curvature which is positive, zero and negative
respectively (see Appendix \thechapter for definitions of the geometric
quantities used in this thesis). However, though these metrics share the
same number of isometries, the explicit form of these isometries are
different.
It is only anti-de Sitter space which contains all the appropriate
isometries in the sense that they match the symmetries ( 2 ) of the
conformal group [ 5 ] . This exact matching can be done on the conformal
boundary of @xmath . A convenient form for the @xmath metric is the
so-called Poincaré patch given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (12)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath has @xmath components and for which the scalar curvature,
@xmath , is constant. Note that while the @xmath metric ( 12 ) always
possesses @xmath isometries, it is only on the @xmath boundary that the
explicit coordinate form of these isometries corresponds exactly to the
@xmath -dimensional conformal group [ 5 ] . The metric ( 12 ) is in
Euclidean signature. We will be working in Euclidean signature
throughout this thesis.

#### 1.4 The @xmath Conformal Group

As promised we need to discuss the conformal group for dimension @xmath
separately. We borrow greatly from [ 25 ] , [ 26 ] in this section. We
discuss the case where @xmath explicitly, but the case @xmath is treated
in very similar fashion.
As before the conformal group is defined in terms of the transformations
that leave the flat space metric ( 1 ) invariant up to a conformal
factor. We consider the Euclidean signature flat space metric and
transform to complex coordinates @xmath , @xmath . We then have

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (13)
  -- -------- -- ------

Consider an arbitrary coordinate transformation @xmath and the
corresponding @xmath . The metric is transformed to

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (14)
  -- -------- -- ------

so that it is clear that this arbitrary coordinate transformation is a
conformal transformation of the metric. The conformal group in two
dimensions is thus infinite dimensional. By an almost identical argument
one can show that the conformal group in one dimension is also infinite
dimensional.
A subset of the transformations @xmath are of special interest namely

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (15)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath are complex numbers that satisfy @xmath . These
transformations are called the “global conformal transformations” and
correspond exactly to @xmath . This is what we would have gotten if we
simply substituted @xmath in @xmath . These transformations ( 15 ) are
of special interest because they are the only transformations of the
form @xmath that are globally defined invertible mappings. What this
means is that there are no essential singularities and that the complex
plane is mapped onto itself. The consequence of this is that the
transformations @xmath that are not of the form ( 15 ) must be thought
of as being performed only locally i.e. infinitesimally.
Consider then the infinitesimal version of the transformations i.e.
@xmath where @xmath is small. Note that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
correspond to the global conformal transformations ( 15 ). We may expand
the arbitrary function @xmath in a power series and we find that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (16)
  -- -------- -- ------

The differential operators @xmath (and the corresponding @xmath ) are
the generators and satisfy the commutation relations

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (17)
  -- -------- -- ------

The algebra ( 17 ) is two copies of the Witt algebra. In one dimension
the conformal symmetry generators form only one copy of the Witt
algebra.
The Witt algebra permits a central extension to the Virasoro algebra
which satisfies

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (18)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is referred to as the central charge and @xmath is the
@xmath ’th Virasoro algebra element. Note that the elements @xmath close
on an @xmath algebra, regardless of center. The centerless, @xmath ,
Virasoro algebra is the Witt algebra.
The central charge features most prominently when the energy momentum
tensor is considered. The energy momentum tensor is equal to the
variation of the field theory action by the inverse metric

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (19)
  -- -------- -- ------

The appropriate way to now extract the central charge is to elevate the
fields to operators, normal order the energy momentum tensor and apply
the operator product expansion to the product of the energy momentum
tensor with itself. The generic form of this expansion for @xmath ’s is
[ 25 ]

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (20)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the model-dependent central charge and @xmath .
We take note of an important consequences of ( 20 ) and the conformal
Ward identity [ 25 ] applied to the energy momentum tensor

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (21)
  -- -------- -- ------

The expression ( 21 ) calculates the change of @xmath under a shift
@xmath . The contour integral picks up the residues of the integrand.
Substituting ( 20 ) into ( 21 ) yields

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (22)
  -- -------- -- ------

The finite version of the transformation ( 22 ), where @xmath is given
by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the Schwarzian derivative

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (24)
  -- -------- -- ------

We will use the transformation property ( 23 ) in section 14 to identify
a central charge of a one-dimensional conformal field theory.

### 2 Correlation Functions From Generating Functionals

Now that we have discussed the symmetries in some detail we turn our
attention to how correlation functions are calculated in the field
theory and, through the use of the dictionary, in the gravitational
dual.
We specify the coordinates of the @xmath as @xmath which is matched with
the boundary of @xmath . The gauge/gravity dictionary provides a very
particular prescription [ 3 ] , [ 5 ] , [ 6 ] , [ 30 ] for calculating
correlation functions ( 10 ) in which the generating functional

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (25)
  -- -------- -- ------

features prominently. The correlation functions ( 10 ) can be found by
taking appropriate functional derivatives of the generating functional (
25 ) with respect to the sources @xmath and afterwards setting the
sources to zero. The operators @xmath are primary operators, as
discussed in section 1.2 . The generating functional ( 25 ) thus
represents the single quantity one needs to compute in order to find the
quantities of interest, the correlation functions.
Now, the correspondence states that, for an appropriately chosen theory
of quantum gravity with fields @xmath , one can relate the partition
functions of the @xmath and the theory of gravity. The theory of gravity
is in one dimension higher and we indicate this extra dimension by
@xmath i.e. the fields have argument @xmath . The correspondence is now

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (26)
  -- -------- -- ------

By @xmath we mean the boundary values of the fields @xmath act as the
sources of the partition function ( 25 ). This can be best visualised if
we write the quantum gravity partition function (if it may be written as
such) as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (27)
  -- -------- -- ------

The partition function now only depends on the boundary values of the
fields and the asymptotic behaviour of the metric. The boundary
condition for the metric must be such that, on the boundary, the
appropriate symmetries are encoded. For @xmath ’s this is the
requirement that the theory of gravity is defined on @xmath .
The claim is thus that, for the appropriate action, differentiating with
respect to the boundary values of the fields will generate correlation
functions so that the correlation functions of the quantum theory may be
calculated fully on the gravitational side of the duality. Two of the
key aspects that need answering is whether such a gravitational dual
exists for every quantum model and how one would go about finding this
dual in a systematic way.
One may ask furthermore which field boundary values do you associate
with which generating functional sources i.e. which fields are
associated with which operators? For this a set of quantum numbers (like
scaling dimension, as discussed, or spin) are required which labels the
different operators. The dictionary states that the appropriate field
shares the same set of quantum numbers with its associated operator [ 3
] , [ 6 ] .
Equation ( 26 ) is the formal expression of the correspondence. Two
simplifications are customary and are relevant for our analysis ahead.
Firstly, a saddle point approximation for the metric yields an action of
the form

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (28)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the metric is fixed on @xmath . This is then a model of
semi-classical gravity. If the metric can only fluctuate slightly then
this field theory (on a fixed background) is a good approximation to the
partition function ( 27 ) [ 5 ] , but is a simplification we will have
to motivate later. Note that the metric is no longer dynamic so that,
for instance, we don’t take into account the backreaction. A second
simplification is also useful [ 5 ] namely to make a saddle point
approximation in the fields also. Varying the action with respect to the
fields yields a differential equation for the fields @xmath of which the
solutions are @xmath i.e.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (29)
  -- -------- -- ------

The correspondence then becomes

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (30)
  -- -------- -- ------

where we mean @xmath to be a sum over all the possible solutions of ( 29
). In this notation it is slightly more hidden, but the generating
functional is still determined by the boundary values for the fields
(only now their classical solutions).

### 3 Local / Gauge Symmetries

The discussion of the previous sections may be viewed as the most basic
outline of the correspondence and we have not yet in any way specified
how the gravitational theory may be chosen. In order to discuss further
aspects of the correspondence we have to consider more specifics of
conformal field theories.
In the Maldacena correspondence [ 1 ] there is, in addition to the
conformal global symmetry, also the @xmath gauge symmetry on the @xmath
side of the duality. This is a matter we have not addressed yet
precisely because gauge symmetry will not be a feature of our ensuing
construction. This aspect is, however, very important both as evidence
for the duality as well as for the role played by the gauge group
dimension @xmath in defining the strong and weak coupling regimes.
Future generalisations of our construction that include these local
symmetries are thus very important.
A local transformation, when represented as a unitary operator means
@xmath where @xmath is the generator ² ² 2 We assume that the operator
@xmath is well-defined as it illustrates the gauge transformations more
clearly. If not, then our notation means the infinitesimal version of
these transformations. . Note that, unlike a global symmetry, the
coefficient @xmath is now a function of the coordinates. To best
illustrate this difference consider the following action density

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (31)
  -- -------- -- ------

with matrix valued fields @xmath . Global transformations, where @xmath
and @xmath leave @xmath invariant. Local transformations, on the other
hand, are affected by the derivative and @xmath will thus not retain its
form. In order to allow local transformations one needs to augment
@xmath and consider

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (32)
  -- -------- -- ------

Local transformations can now be included as a symmetry if the @xmath ’s
transform as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (33)
  -- -------- -- ------

A distinguishing property of the global and local transformations thus
is that global transformations affect the quantum states or fields only
while the local transformations affect the states but also the gauge.
This observation fits well with our construction that will be made in
chapter \thechapter - the geometry is constructed from the quantum
states and thus can only take note of the global symmetries.
It is useful (and quite typical) to consider these theories in the
fundamental representation i.e. the @xmath matrix representation of the
gauge group @xmath . In vector valued theories, such as higher spin [ 31
] , the fields @xmath then represent @xmath -index vectors and the inner
product @xmath is simply the dot product while in matrix-valued theories
(such as @xmath ) the fields are @xmath matrices with the trace inner
product. The usefulness of this representation is that the @xmath
-dependence of the inner product of fields becomes explicit.
It was shown by t’Hooft [ 11 ] and Witten [ 12 ] that gauge theories
permit a @xmath expansion for the (many-point) correlators, with each
term in this expansion corresponding to a class of diagrams that have a
specific topological character. The Feynman diagrams of the leading
order terms, for instance, are planar i.e. they can be drawn without
crossings on the surface of a sphere. The next leading order term can be
drawn on a 1-torus (a torus with a single hole), the next on a 2-torus
et cetera. These results are remarkable since one may intuitively expect
that increasing @xmath adds complexity to the problem - somehow the
converse is true and the theory can be rearranged so that it is in fact
simpler in this large @xmath expansion.
This classification scheme and particularly its topological character,
is reminiscent of Feynman diagrams for string theory and thus a hint
that these gauge theories may be described by string theories [ 5 ] .
The expansion parameter @xmath of the topological series is crucial to
the convergence properties of this series. For the Maldacena case of
Super Yang-Mills, for instance, the limit needs to be taken in a very
specific way [ 1 ] . The t’Hooft limit is @xmath and @xmath while
keeping @xmath constant. The constant @xmath is called the t’Hooft
coupling and @xmath is the Yang-Mills coupling. This limit permits the
large @xmath topological expansion of the gauge theory.

#### 3.1 The Maldacena Correspondence

In [ 1 ] the relevant parameters on the side of the of the @xmath @xmath
are the dimension of the gauge group @xmath and the Yang-Mills coupling
@xmath . On the gravity side the relevant constants are the string
coupling, @xmath and the string length @xmath . The other parameters,
such as the @xmath radius, @xmath , forms part of the geometry as
already discussed.
The Maldacena conjecture relates these quantities explicitly [ 5 ] , [ 6
]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

or alternatively, using the relation between the string scale, Planck
scale and the coupling
@xmath , we find

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (35)
  -- -------- -- ------

These conjectured relations between the two theories provide a powerful
insight. Firstly, the conformal field theory can be solved
perturbatively if the t’Hooft coupling, @xmath is small. Conversely the
string length is much larger than the length scale of the @xmath space
from eq. ( 34 ). The string theory on the @xmath background is
consequently hard to analyse. Conversely, if @xmath is large we have
that the @xmath radius is large compared to the Planck scale from eq. (
35 ). This implies that quantum effects will play a small role in the
string theory so that we may consider a model of semi-classical gravity.
Note that this holds for any value of the string coupling @xmath so that
we have not specified the t’Hooft coupling.
In other words, the strongly coupled string theory may be described by a
weakly coupled field theory and the field theory for large @xmath may be
described by semi-classical gravity. This is a so-called strong/weak
duality and it promotes the duality to a powerful tool to calculate
physical quantities in the strongly coupled regime.
For our purposes we take note of the fact that there exists a limit in
which the gauge theory can be accurately described by a semi-classical
model of gravity. In the analysis ahead we will be working with
semi-classical gravity since it is the simplest case.

### 4 Summary

There are many aspects of holography that have been omitted and may be
considered in future generalisations. The aim of this chapter was simply
to illuminate some essential aspects of the foundation of the
gauge/gravity duality. The role of symmetries as the core of the
correspondence was highlighted along with intuitive arguments for how a
quantum theory may be repackaged as a theory of gravitation.
The dictionary of the Maldacena correspondence [ 1 ] was stated and
particular note must be taken of the role of the boundary values of
fields acting as sources. It should be noted that the dictionary we will
construct in the chapters that follow will not attach this
interpretation to the fields of the gravitational model. For our
purposes there is a simpler choice that can be made (and one that
relates remarkably well to existing work in the literature). We will
point out exactly where this choice of interpretation is made in the
procedure so that one may in future investigate other possibilities.
The simplification from conformal field theory to quantum mechanics will
come at a price - we will not be working with gauge theories and will
thus apparently lack a large @xmath expansion. We acknowledge that
incorporating gauge symmetry is a layer of complexity that warrants an
extensive look in future.
We will show, in the chapters ahead, that this simplification does yield
great value in that it is possible to build dual descriptions of quantum
mechanical models systematically and explicitly. This will allow us to
investigate the dictionary for the dual theories in a very direct way
and we will show how many existing results, especially of the @xmath
correspondence, come about very naturally from this systematic
machinery.

## Chapter \thechapter Constructing Metrics From Quantum States

We will be constructing geometries from quantum mechanical models as a
first step to finding a systematic, constructive and efficient way to
repackage these quantum models as gravitational theories. We choose this
geometric perspective for several reasons. The matching of (global)
symmetries between gauge theories and theories of gravity is one of the
main motivations for conjecturing the existence of gauge/gravity
dualities. In numerous works examining candidate duals for quantum
mechanical models [ 13 ] , [ 20 ] , [ 21 ] , [ 33 ] , [ 34 ] a metric
possessing the appropriate isometries is taken as a starting point for
investigations. If the symmetries of the two models match, and the sets
of symmetries are large (and thus restrictive) enough, then, at least in
this sense, a significant part of the dual matching is done. Not only
can a procedure be devised that guarantees that the appropriate
symmetries of a quantum model are encoded as isometries of a geometric
structure but this procedure can be systematic and explicit.
As a study of the literature will point out [ 14 ] , [ 32 ] , [ 35 ] , [
36 ] , [ 37 ] , [ 38 ] , [ 39 ] , [ 40 ] , there are, in fact, many ways
to construct geometries from quantum models. It is thus of critical
importance that a sensible choice of geometry is made. In [ 14 ] it was
shown that appropriate geometric structures allow a given quantum
mechanical model to be reformulated entirely in terms of these
structures. This aspect has to be treated with some care - what quantum
mechanical quantities can we calculate from our dual description? Is
knowledge of the geometry sufficient to calculate the quantities of
interest and, if so, how does one do this? If not, what is needed in
addition to the geometry?
In this chapter we will introduce the construction of a metric and
anti-symmetric two-form that we will use throughout this thesis. We will
give some motivations for why this construction is chosen. We elaborate
briefly on other intriguing constructions that can be investigated in
future.

### 5 Dynamical Symmetries

Before we present the construction it is important to clarify what is
meant by a symmetry of a set of quantum mechanical states as these
states are our starting point. The terminology we will be using is that
of dynamical symmetries [ 41 ] , [ 42 ] which can also be found in the
literature under the name of the kinematical invariance group [ 43 ] , [
44 ] . As far as this author can tell these names refer to the same
symmetries.
Throughout this thesis we will use the notation @xmath for normalised
kets and @xmath for kets that aren’t necessarily normalised. Now,
consider a family of states labelled by a set of coordinates @xmath
which may or may not be real. If there exists a unitary transformation,
@xmath whose action on the states can be absorbed as a reparametrisation
and normalisation of the states @xmath i.e.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (36)
  -- -------- -- ------

then the transformation @xmath is what we will call a dynamical symmetry
of the states. The motivation for this terminology will be more apparent
in the next section. Note that if the states are normalised in ( 36 )
then the normalisation factor @xmath will simply be a phase. Since we
will be working with both normalised and unnormalised states we keep it
as a general normalisation factor.
One may ask why start with the symmetries of quantum states and not, for
instance, the symmetries of a Lagrangian or action. The reason for this
will become apparent in section 16 . The transformation properties of
the quantum states under unitary transformations will allow us to speak
to the properties of state overlaps and expectation values. These are,
for this thesis, the quantum mechanical analogue of correlation
functions.

#### 5.1 The Schrödinger Equation as a Specific Example of Dynamical
Symmetries

The dynamical symmetries are often discussed [ 43 ] , [ 44 ] on the
level of the time-dependent Schrödinger equation. We would like to
stress that, though instructive, this is a specific example of the
definition ( 36 ).
The dynamical symmetries may be visualised, if applicable to the problem
under consideration, as the transformations that leave the
time-dependent Schrödinger equation invariant up to a scale factor i.e.
there is a transformation @xmath such that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath with @xmath some scalar function. We have chosen units such
that @xmath and @xmath .
We can recast the symmetries of ( 37 ) into the form of definition ( 36
) by rewriting the wave function in bra-ket notation. The conjugate of
the wave function is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (38)
  -- -------- -- ------

The dynamical symmetries, applying definition ( 36 ), are associated
with unitary transformations @xmath . The dynamical symmetries thus
leave the propagator unchanged up to a normalisation of the states

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (39)
  -- -------- -- ------

but not necessarily the wavefunction.

#### 5.2 The Dynamical Symmetries of the Free Particle

An important and illustrative example of dynamical symmetries is that of
the free particle [ 43 ] . The dynamical symmetry generators of the free
Schrödinger equation in 1+1 dimensions (( 37 ) with @xmath ) closes on
the 1+1 dimensional Schrödinger algebra @xmath . The algebra can be
represented in many different ways - for instance as creation and
annihilation operators [ 45 ] or @xmath matrices [ 46 ] . For the
purposes of this thesis we will represent them in terms of position and
momentum operators

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (40)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

along with position, @xmath , and momentum, @xmath . The operators
@xmath ( 40 ) are in the @xmath irrep of @xmath . See Appendix
\thechapter for more detail. The @xmath algebra closes on the following
set of commutation relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath                        (41)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

and is the semi-direct sum of @xmath (spanned by @xmath ) and the
Heisenberg algebra (spanned by @xmath ). These operators derive their
names from the coordinate transformation induced on the free particle
states, @xmath , namely

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (42)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

which is time translation, space translation, scaling, Galilean boost
and special conformal transformations respectively. These
transformations can be calculated using the BCH formulas outlined in
appendix \thechapter . The special conformal transformation of ( 42 ) is
shown explicitly in ( 379 ).
A comment here is in order. The reader may pick up that the operators (
41 ) do not have an explicit time dependence while the generators of
dynamical symmetry in [ 43 ] do. The time and spatial dependence of the
operators come about when they act on the state @xmath . Their action on
the state can be viewed as a differential operator where @xmath
represents a time-derivative and @xmath represents a spatial derivative.
Of course, the time-dependent operators @xmath are also symmetry
generators of the state @xmath .
We can verify ( 39 ) by explicitly applying the transformations ( 42 )
to the @xmath dimensional free particle propagator

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (43)
  -- -------- -- ------

As a final comment, if we restrict ourselves to the free particle
symmetries that involve time, @xmath from eq. ( 42 ), we explicitly have
the @xmath algebra. In section 1.3 we identified the @xmath group as the
isometry group of @xmath ( 1 ) so that, if the metric we construct
encodes dynamical symmetries as isometries, one may anticipate that the
geometry will be @xmath .

### 6 The Construction of our Metric and Anti-symmetric Two-Form

The construction we will be employing in this thesis is the metric [ 47
] as studied by Provost and Vallee [ 36 ] . This metric is closely
related to the work of [ 14 ] , [ 35 ] which will be the topic of
section 7 . We will show explicitly that this construction can be used
to encode the dynamical symmetries of a family of quantum states as
isometries of the resulting metric ( 36 ). We will specifically be
considering states that are parametrised by continuous coordinates. This
may seem strange at first sight since in quantum mechanics one typically
considers states that are labelled by discrete quantum numbers. The
states of continuous parameters must be viewed as superpositions of
these states of discrete quantum numbers where the superposition
coefficients are continuous.
We begin by defining the metric [ 36 ] which will be used in the ensuing
construction. We define it here for an arbitrary family of states and we
will apply it to specific physical situations later. Let @xmath be a
manifold of normalized states parametrized by a set of real coordinates
@xmath . As mentioned we use @xmath to denote a state proportional to
@xmath which need not be normalized. In the construction we set

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (44)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath are related to the real and imaginary parts of
the inner product

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (45)
  -- -------- -- ------

By @xmath we mean an infinitesimal shift in @xmath . The metric [ 36 ]
is then defined as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (46)
  -- -------- -- ------

which may be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (47)
  -- -------- -- ------

The definitions ( 46 ) and ( 47 ) are completely equivalent. The
subtraction of the @xmath combination in ( 46 ) ensures that the
distance between state vectors that only differ by a phase is zero i.e.
the metric ( 47 ) can be thought of as a “distance” between physical
states. We can thus refer to the metric and anti-symmetric two-form as
being defined on the manifold of rays. In other words state vectors that
differ by a phase factor (or normalisation) are represented by the same
point on the manifold. This can also be seen in ( 47 ) which has an
additional useful property - the metric is no longer sensitive to
whether the states are normalised. Note, importantly, that in the
definition ( 47 ) we have the freedom to use either the normalised or
unnormalised states to calculate the metric.
A similar formula to ( 47 ) exists for the anti-symmetric two-form
@xmath ( 44 ) namely

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (48)
  -- -------- -- ------

##### 6.0.1 A Quick Example

As an example of calculating the metric and anti-symmetric two-form
consider the application of ( 47 ) and ( 48 ) on the free particle
overlap ( 43 ). We have that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (49)
  -- -------- -- ------

If we apply the formulae ( 47 ) and ( 48 ) directly the metric and
two-form will clearly be divergent when we try to set @xmath and @xmath
. A way to rectify this is to complexify the coordinates (we will employ
regularisation schemes throughout when these situations arise). We thus
alter @xmath and the corresponding @xmath on the right hand side of ( 49
). The reason for the different sign is the conjugation involved when
considering bras vs. kets.
These changes yield

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

One can now readily calculate

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (50)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

The remaining derivatives are omitted since they will yield entries that
are zero. From the above expressions we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (51)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

The non-zero entries for the @xmath derivatives do not reflect in the
metric because they are anti-symmetric. They do, however, feature in the
anti-symmetric two-form

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (52)
  -- -------- -- ------

#### 6.1 Dynamical Symmetries and Isometries

The construction is chosen precisely because it encodes the dynamical
symmetries of a family of states as the isometries of a metric. Consider
a unitary transformation @xmath which produces a mapping @xmath on the
manifold @xmath as in ( 36 ). The transformation constitutes a dynamical
symmetry as discussed. In particular, this implies that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (53)
  -- -------- -- ------

Now consider @xmath as a coordinate transformation and let @xmath denote
the new coordinates. Inserting @xmath into eq. ( 47 ) reveals that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (54)
  -- -------- -- ------

and thus

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (55)
  -- -------- -- ------

We conclude that the mapping @xmath is an isometry of the metric.

#### 6.2 Family of States Generated by Group Elements

To get an idea of the physical content of the metric, consider a family
of states generated by the action of a unitary representation of some
group, @xmath , on a reference state @xmath in the Hilbert space [ 48 ]
, [ 49 ] . We are thus considering states of the form

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (56)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the (unitary) representation of the group. The
stationary subgroup, @xmath of the state @xmath is defined as the group
elements that satisfy

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (57)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is some arbitrary function. In other words the stationary
group does not map a physical state of the Hilbert space onto a
different physical state. We define the factor space @xmath as the
equivalence classes of group elements related by right multiplication of
elements of @xmath . Let @xmath and let @xmath be parametrised by a set
of real coordinates @xmath . We then define the states

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (58)
  -- -------- -- ------

The states ( 58 ) are thus precisely generalised coherent states [ 48 ]
, [ 49 ] . Note that in section 5.1 when we discussed the dynamical
symmetries of the Schrödinger equation we defined the states @xmath in
terms of unitary transformations of the state @xmath . The state @xmath
is thus the chosen reference state (in the language of coherent states).
The generators feature in the expression @xmath where the @xmath ’s are
the generators of the group and the @xmath ’s are coordinate dependent
coefficients. If we use the states ( 58 ) and calculate the metric ( 47
) we find

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (59)
  -- -------- -- ------

so that the metric is formed from the expectation values of products of
algebra elements w.r.t. the normalised state @xmath [ 36 ] . Note that
combinations of algebra elements that have @xmath as an eigenvector
correspond to zero distance entries. This is precisely why, to produce
sensible metrics, we need to restrict ourselves to the factor space ( 58
). Note that, due to ( 57 ), a choice of reference state with a larger
stationary group will lead to a metric of lower dimension.
As a last, but very important remark, note that we can only produce
sensible metrics ( 59 ) if the family of states is normalisable. If it
is not normalisable then it will be essential to regularise the
reference state i.e. we require a family of states @xmath , parametrised
by real coordinates @xmath , so that @xmath for some domain of @xmath
and @xmath . This regularisation will almost certainly break (some of)
the symmetries of the family of states but these are recovered on the
@xmath boundary, where the original family of states are defined. We
interpret these regularisation parameters as bulk coordinates so that we
have a clear “bulk” and “boundary” region. For the examples that we will
be considering it is possible to choose the regularisation in such a way
that all the symmetries are retained as isometries in the bulk.

### 7 The Geometric Reformulation of Quantum Mechanics

Thus far we have identified the construction ( 47 ) which encodes the
dynamical symmetries of a set of quantum states as isometries of a
metric, whilst being a relatively straightforward calculation. These
features make the construction an appealing first step towards building
dual descriptions. We will now point out that this metric and
anti-symmetric two-form ( 47 ) is related to the geometric reformulation
of quantum mechanics of Ashtekar and Schilling [ 14 ] , [ 35 ] .
First, some context is necessary. This geometric reformulation of
quantum mechanics starts from an interesting premise: can quantum
mechanics be formulated entirely in terms of measurable quantities? In
other words, can quantum mechanics be formulated entirely in terms of
the projective Hilbert space? The result to the ensuing analysis is a
geometric reformulation of quantum mechanics. For our purposes the
precise form of, for instance, the postulates of quantum mechanics in
this reformulation are unimportant (these can all be found in [ 14 ] , [
35 ] ).
We will here only give a brief summary of the aspects that will be
important for our purposes. We borrow their notation almost identically.
Their conventions for symplectic geometry is that the Hamiltonian vector
field @xmath , generated by the function @xmath satisfies @xmath , where
@xmath is the symplectic form.
The starting point of the reformulation [ 14 ] is to take a complex
Hilbert space and decompose it into its real and imaginary parts. In
terms of the inner product of two arbitrary states in the Hilbert space
@xmath this is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (60)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

The properties of the inner product imply that @xmath is positive
definite and that @xmath is a symplectic form. Now one interprets
multiplication by @xmath as a complex structure @xmath and splits the
complex Hilbert space into two real parts, connected by @xmath . This
implies the relation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (61)
  -- -------- -- ------

so that the Hilbert space has the structure of a Kähler space [ 14 ] .
One may associate with each quantum observable @xmath the vector field

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (62)
  -- -------- -- ------

which is called the Schrödinger vector field. We can also calculate the
expectation value function

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (63)
  -- -------- -- ------

One can now readily prove that, if @xmath is any tangent vector at
@xmath , then

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (64)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

after using ( 61 ). This implies that the Schrödinger vector field ( 62
) determined by the observable @xmath is exactly the Hamiltonian vector
field @xmath generated by the expectation value of @xmath [ 35 ] . In
index notation this is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (65)
  -- -------- -- ------

which clearly relates the expectation value and a corresponding vector
field on the manifold.
This relation between the (normalised) expectation values of operators
and the corresponding vector fields on the manifold will be crucial to
the dictionary we develop from chapter \thechapter onwards. We will thus
provide the proof relevant to the construction ( 47 ) explicitly. We
will make one generalisation namely that we will calculate the vector
field associated with a, in general, non-hermitian operator. We start
with the inner product

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (66)
  -- -------- -- ------

which is the inner product of the components orthogonal to @xmath of two
tangent vectors at @xmath . What is important to note is that the metric
and anti-symmetric two-form of ( 47 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (67)
  -- -------- -- ------

We have defined @xmath and @xmath in accordance with ( 60 ). A number of
properties of @xmath and @xmath are important for our purposes. First we
have that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (68)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is proportional to @xmath . Secondly we can show that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (69)
  -- -------- -- ------

if @xmath is an hermitian operator. Finally we have the property ( 61 )
which means

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (70)
  -- -------- -- ------

We express this, as discussed, as a linear mapping @xmath that acts as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (71)
  -- -------- -- ------

which implies that @xmath and @xmath . With the properties ( 68 )-( 71 )
we can now relate the expectation value of an operator to a vector
field.
Consider an operator @xmath that has the effect on the family of states
of

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (72)
  -- -------- -- ------

of which an example are the generators of dynamical symmetries ( 36 ).
However, we do not assume that @xmath is hermitian and the
transformation may be defined only locally. We would like to relate the
vector field @xmath or @xmath , to the expectation value of @xmath . We
first split @xmath up into its hermitian and anti-hermitian parts i.e.
@xmath where @xmath and @xmath are hermitian. From ( 72 ) and ( 68 ) we
have that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (73)
  -- -------- -- ------

We can also expand the left-hand side as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (74)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

In the first line we used the linearity of @xmath , in the second line
property ( 71 ), in the third line property ( 70 ) and in the final line
property ( 69 ). Combining ( 73 ) and ( 74 ) we now find

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (75)
  -- -------- -- ------

which relates the vector field to the (normalised) expectation value
explicitly. The equation ( 75 ) will be indispensable in the development
of the dictionary from chapter \thechapter onwards.

### 8 A Brief Look at Other Possible Constructions

Before we proceed to construct the metrics and anti-symmetric two-forms
for specific quantum mechanical models we take note of other possible
metrics that may be used. The discussion will also provide some insight
into why we have chosen our particular construction.

#### 8.1 Left- and Right Multiplication Symmetries

To lead into such a discussion we introduce the idea of left- and right
multiplication symmetries. The dynamical symmetries of quantum states
are so-called left multiplication symmetries, as can be seen in ( 58 ).
The transformations follow from the left multiplication by a unitary
operator on a group element (which then acts on some reference state
from the Hilbert space).
One can also define right multiplication symmetries where the
transformation is induced by right multiplication by a unitary operator.
Given some group element @xmath left multiplication symmetries are
defined via left multiplication by some unitary operator @xmath and
right multiplication symmetries by right multiplication of that group
element @xmath . The transformations induced by left and right
multiplication symmetries are usually different, except in special
circumstances, and thus represent different symmetries.
With the dynamical symmetries, due to the presence of the reference
state @xmath , (at least some and in the cases we will investigate all
of) the right multiplication symmetries are removed. Group elements,
upon right multiplication, that have the reference state @xmath as an
eigenvector perform only trivial transformations and are factored out.
Of the remaining right multiplication transformations only the ones that
cannot be reproduced by some left multiplication are considered. For the
cases we will consider that set is empty and the quantum states do not
possess right multiplication symmetries.
We may wish, for some reason, to construct a metric that encodes both
left and right multiplication symmetries. These metrics are called
bi-invariant [ 52 ] since they are both left- and right-invariant. The
geometry would encode the full set of symmetries of the underlying
group. Intuitively it is hard to imagine that there is then enough
freedom to encode the dynamics of a given quantum mechanical model and
we thus will not use these for the purposes of building duals.
Nonetheless, these metrics provide us with some instructive examples and
we will indicate how they may be augmented to encode information of the
dynamics.

##### 8.1.1 Metrics on Group Manifolds

Suppose we have a group @xmath with a finite number of generators in
some representation @xmath where @xmath which may or may not be a
unitary representation. The metric on the group manifold is defined as [
52 ]

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (76)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath indicates a derivative with respect to @xmath . This metric
contains both left multiplication isometries and right multiplication
isometries. The left multiplication isometries follow almost immediately
since if @xmath then

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (77)
  -- -------- -- ------

which implies that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (78)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

This implies that indeed

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (79)
  -- -------- -- ------

The proof for the right multiplication isometries follow similarly once
the cyclic property of the trace is employed. It is important to note
that all the coordinates that are transformed by the group
multiplication have to be included on the geometric manifold in order
for the transformations to be encoded as isometries. If only a subset of
the coordinates is used then all symmetries that transform the fixed
coordinates are not included as isometries. An example of this will
follow in the next section.
Instead of referring to “a” metric on the group manifold we referred to
the metric ( 76 ) as “the” metric on the group manifold. This is because
all metrics that have the dimension of the number of generators and
possesses all left and right isometries must be proportional. The number
of isometries pins down the form of the metric up to a constant factor
and coordinate transformation.
As two examples, instructive for later purposes, we consider the metrics
of @xmath and @xmath in a @xmath matrix representation. A general @xmath
group element can be written as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (80)
  -- -------- -- ------

By now appying the definition of the metric ( 76 ) and ensuring a
positive signature we find the metric

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (81)
  -- -------- -- ------

which is a parametrisation of a @xmath -dimensional de Sitter metric
with scalar curvature @xmath . A similar calculation for a general
@xmath group element

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (82)
  -- -------- -- ------

yields the metric

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (83)
  -- -------- -- ------

which is the @xmath metric with scalar curvature @xmath . These results
are as one would anticipate. These are three-parameter groups which thus
yields six symmetries, three left-multiplication and three right
multiplication symmetries. The resulting three-dimensional metric will
thus be maximally symmetric. The compact group yields a de Sitter metric
and the non-compact group an anti-de Sitter metric.
For these examples we have considered the groups in @xmath matrix
representation. As a final note we discuss the role of the
representation of groups on the level of the metrics. The objects

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (84)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath are group generators and @xmath are scalar functions that
depend on the coordinates. By inserting this result into the definition
of the metric ( 76 ) we find

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (85)
  -- -------- -- ------

Now clearly the coordinate dependency is completely contained in the
tensors @xmath and they are representation independent. The tensor
@xmath , on the other hand, can depend on the specific representation.
In most cases these only differ by a constant factor (and they simply
multiply geometric quantities like the scalar curvature by some
constant) but they may be different when reducible and irreducible
representations are considered.

##### 8.1.2 Density Matrix as a Symmetry Filter

It is possible to augment the group metric ( 76 ) so that we construct
metrics that possess a more restricted symmetry. We introduce the
density matrix @xmath and write

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (86)
  -- -------- -- ------

Clearly the above metric possesses left multiplication symmetry by
default. The right multiplication symmetries, however, are only encoded
as isometries if

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (87)
  -- -------- -- ------

The density matrix thus acts as a filter for right multiplication
symmetries. It is also possible to write down definitions where it is
rather the left multiplication symmetry (or both) which is broken.
If the parameter @xmath is included as a coordinate on the manifold then
a transformation of @xmath is allowed for a symmetry transformation i.e.
the transformation will represent a symmetry if

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (88)
  -- -------- -- ------

Explicitly we then consider the metric

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (89)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is some real constant. On the level of the operators, an
operator @xmath with the property

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (90)
  -- -------- -- ------

with the Hamiltonian will be included as symmetries if @xmath is a
coordinate on the manifold. If it is not included as a coordinate then
only the operators @xmath that truly commute with @xmath will induce
symmetry transformations.
This approach to constructing metrics is not ideal, since we need to
include a large number of coordinates on the manifold. By inserting the
density matrix filter we are breaking all the right multiplication
symmetries except those that satisfy ( 87 ). These metrics will thus
always possess a rather small number of symmetries so that we do not
expect to find simple duals for the simple quantum models. This is why
the construction ( 47 ) is better suited than these metrics constructed
by applying symmetry filters to group manifolds. Nonetheless, some of
the examples we have pointed out are instructive for our later purposes.

#### 8.2 Bures Metric

The density matrix itself permits the definition of a metric. Though we
will not be using this metric in our subsequent construction, the Bures
metric [ 39 ] , [ 40 ] , is stated here for the sake of completeness and
possible future study. Since the geometry is computed directly from
physical information of the quantum mechanical model it is an appealing
construction.
The Bures metric considers how the density matrix changes with an
infinitesimal shift. Suppose we have @xmath where @xmath is some
Hamiltonian and we make an infinitesimal shift

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (91)
  -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (92)
  -- -------- -- ------

Here @xmath refers to the adjoint representation mapping for the algebra
@xmath . The change in the density matrix is then @xmath . In the
definition of the Bures metric we will not be interested in @xmath but
rather the operator @xmath which is defined as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (93)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

Combining ( 92 ) and ( 93 ) yields a formal expression for the operator
@xmath

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (94)
  -- -------- -- ------

The Bures metric is then defined as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (95)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the normalised density matrix.
The explicit calculation of the metric ( 95 ) is not a trivial task and,
though the Bures metric is appealing for its physical content, the
construction we employ will encode the desired symmetries with
significantly less calculational hazard.

### 9 Summary

In chapter \thechapter we noted the central importance of symmetries in
the formulation of the gauge/gravity duality. Our goal in this thesis is
to build duals to quantum mechanical models in a systematic way and we
chose the global symmetries as our point of departure. In this chapter
we presented the construction ( 47 ) that we will be employing
throughout the thesis, highlighted some of its most important features
and argued why it is a more sensible starting point than other ways to
construct metrics from quantum states. The primary reason is that it is
computationally simple but also preserves the symmetry.
The metric is constituted of the expectation values of the products of
algebra elements with respect to the reference state and, in the case of
a non-normalisable reference state, the states have to be appropriately
regularised. This regularisation naturally gives rise to the idea of a
boundary, where the unregularised states live, and the bulk where the
states are states are normalisable. We mentioned, but have not yet
shown, that the regularisation scheme can be chosen in such a way that
the boundary symmetries of this manifold of states are encoded as bulk
isometries. This will be shown in the next chapter when we consider
specific examples.
We showed furthermore that states parametrised by complex coordinates
give rise to a metric and anti-symmetric two-form that is equivalent to
those used in the geometric formulation of quantum mechanics. This
duality between the expectation values of operators and vectors on a
manifold will be of great use to us in chapter \thechapter .

## Chapter \thechapter Geometry of Time-Evolved States

Having introduced the construction that encodes the dynamical symmetries
of quantum states as isometries of a metric, we will now proceed to
apply this to physical models. The construction will produce for us a
geometry which we will later, in chapter \thechapter , link in some way
to a dual theory of gravity.
We will start with the simplest possible class of physical models for
our purposes - quantum mechanics in @xmath dimensions. However, there is
possibly some care that needs to be taken. The one- and two-dimensional
conformal group is of a very different character from its counterparts
in higher dimensions and needs to be treated carefully in the @xmath
dictionary. One would thus also expect that the treatment of the lower
dimensional examples to be different in our construction.
Fortunately our approach here will generalise rather simply to the
higher dimensional cases since the geometry is only sensitive to the
global symmetries. The infinite dimensional conformal symmetry, a
novelty of the one- and two-dimensional conformal group, will not
feature as metric isometries.

### 10 Regularised States

Consider a family of quantum states generated by the time translation of
some reference state, @xmath , in the Hilbert space

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (96)
  -- -------- -- ------

with some time evolution operator. As a shorthand notation we will refer
to the time evolution of these states simply as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (97)
  -- -------- -- ------

The symmetry transformations of ( 96 ), if there are any, are unitary
actions on the state as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (98)
  -- -------- -- ------

and have the effect of parametrising time and changing the normalisation
of the state ( 36 ). Suppose now the reference state @xmath is
non-normalisable (a position eigenstate for example). As discussed in
section 6.2 , in order to define a sensible metric we have to regularise
the reference state by some means. We therefore consider the states

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (99)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is some operator bounded from below that does not have
@xmath as an eigenstate. We will make the assumption that the states (
99 ) are now normalisable. For all the examples we will consider in this
thesis this assumption will hold.
We will interpret the parameter @xmath to be a coordinate on the now
two-dimensional manifold of states. The reason for this is simply that,
for the examples we will consider and appropriate choices of @xmath ,
this will allow us to retain the symmetries of the original states
@xmath ( 96 ) as isometries in the bulk ( @xmath ).
Note that the quantum states of our model ( 96 ) are defined on the
@xmath boundary of this two-dimensional manifold of states ( 99 ) and
that the added dimension, @xmath , has the interpretation of an energy
scale. This coincides well with the conventional @xmath picture where
the @xmath radial coordinate is associated with an energy scale [ 6 ]
and the quantum theory lives on the boundary of the dual theory.

### 11 The Physical Content of the Metrics

For the purposes of this discussion we will be adding the additional
dimension, @xmath , regardless of whether the reference state is
normalisable or not. We will show in section ( 15 ) why this is a
beneficial choice (and, of course, essential for non-normalisable
reference states). For the purposes of our construction we thus define
the states as in eq. ( 99 ), where we may now specify the reference
state, the time evolution and the regularisation.
We will assume that the time-evolution operator satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (100)
  -- -------- -- -------

i.e. that @xmath splits into a time-independent part and time-dependent
part where @xmath is a time-dependent coupling. Note that the time
evolution ( 100 ) is a kind of interaction picture where the states
evolve backwards in time. Applying the metric formula ( 47 ) now yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (101)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath is the normalised regularised reference state.
As was also shown more generally in equation ( 59 ), the information
contained in the metric is essentially variances of the different
generators.
An interesting case is when @xmath i.e. the Hamiltonian is
time-independent and the regularisation is just the Hamiltonian itself.
We will refer to these cases as unsourced and the resulting metrics as
unsourced metrics. Inserting these choices into the more general metric
( 101 ) then yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (102)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where we have defined @xmath as the conformal factor of the metric. The
scalar curvature can be expressed exclusively in terms of this conformal
factor

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (103)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is true for any choice of @xmath . Note that since the states used
are of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (104)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the coordinate @xmath it is clear that the manifold of states is
Kähler [ 53 ] , [ 54 ] . The Kähler structure gives rise to many useful
features. For our future purposes two are worthwhile to note. First,
there exists a quantity called the Kähler potential and explicit
expressions for the curvature tensors can be given in terms of the
Kähler potential. The Kähler potential is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (105)
  -- -------- -- -------

Second, there exists a compatible symplectic structure. The metric may
be calculated by taking derivatives of the Kähler potential

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (106)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that the kets ( 104 ) are holomorphic in @xmath while the bras are
anti-holomorphic. This feature implies that not necessary to impose the
condition that the coordinates of the bra’s and kets be set equal (like
in ( 47 )). This is because the complex coordinates relate the primed
coordinates to @xmath and the unprimed coordinates to @xmath while
@xmath . It follows that the conformal factor in eq. ( 102 ) can be
expressed in terms of @xmath .

#### 11.1 Non-normalisable Reference State and @xmath

If, in addition to our choice of @xmath , the reference state @xmath is
also non-normalisable the overlap of the states @xmath is singular at
@xmath . For the cases we will be considering later this is not an
essential singularity and there exists some exponent @xmath so that we
may expand the overlap of ( 99 ) in the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (107)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath ’s are arbitrary expansion coefficients. The metric can
then be calculated to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (108)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath ’s are @xmath -dependent expansion coefficients. The
metric can be recognised as an asymptotically @xmath ( @xmath ) metric [
30 ] . This is because, near the @xmath boundary, the metric looks like
@xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (109)
  -- -------- -- -------

For a non-normalisable reference state @xmath an @xmath -geometry thus
arises quite generally from a family of states of the form ( 99 ). This
is even true for a large number of cases where @xmath and depends on the
regularisation chosen relative to the time evolution operator. Examples
of this will follow later. This very natural emergence of an @xmath
geometry is a comforting and insightful result for the purpose of our
toy model of @xmath .
If, however, the reference state @xmath is normalisable it appears that
not much can be said in general. The possible geometry is not restricted
to asymptotically @xmath and may be asymptotically @xmath or
asymptotically flat. Some examples will feature in section 15 .

### 12 Unsourced Metrics for @xmath

Having examined some general properties we now turn our attention to
specific examples of interest. We start with arguably the simplest
quantum mechanical model, the free particle ( 42 ). We will work with a
more general class of Hamiltonians that contain the free particle as a
special case, namely where the Hamiltonian is an algebra element of
@xmath . The algebra is given in eq. ( 40 ), in terms of position and
momentum operators, and is restated here, with a slight generalisation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (110)
  -- -------- -- -------

We have generalised the free particle Hamiltonian @xmath to the scale
symmetric Hamiltonian @xmath by including the term proportional to
@xmath . The purpose of these generalisations will reveal itself
shortly. The representation ( 110 ) is the @xmath irrep of @xmath and
the Casimir is given by @xmath . A second basis for this algebra will
also be relevant, the Cartan-Weyl basis

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (111)
  -- -------- -- -------

The @xmath algebra was prominent in section ( 5.2 ) where we identified
it as the dynamical symmetry generators of the free Schrödinger equation
that transform time ( 42 ).
We will consider the family of states

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (112)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the eigenstate of @xmath that is also annilated by
@xmath ( 111 ). See Appendix \thechapter . We call the reference state
@xmath because it holds that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (113)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since both the reference state @xmath and @xmath are non-normalisable we
will not claim that these states are, in fact, the same.
The free particle Hamiltonian can be recovered from ( 112 ) when @xmath
and the coupling constant, @xmath . The choices for the parameters
@xmath order the @xmath operators ( 112 ) into three different
categories [ 41 ] , [ 55 ] . For this purpose we define the parameter

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (114)
  -- -------- -- -------

The @xmath case corresponds to compact operators with discrete spectra
and normalisable eigenvalues. These transformations are classified as
elliptic.
The @xmath operators generate parabolic transformations, with continuous
spectra and non-normalisable eigenstates. Finally, if @xmath the
operators generate hyperbolic transformations and the spectrum is not
bounded from below. This makes the regularisation ( @xmath with @xmath )
unsuitable in ( 99 ) and we will thus not be considering Hamiltonians,
and thus unsourced metrics, of this type. For all intents and purposes
the parabolic transformations can be thought of as the scale symmetric
Hamiltonian, @xmath , and the elliptic transformations as harmonic
oscillators, @xmath with @xmath . This is because Hamiltonians with the
same value for @xmath can be shown to be unitarily equivalent i.e. we
can find a unitary transformation that transforms any Hamiltonian with
positive @xmath or zero @xmath into the harmonic oscillator and free
particle respectively.
It is thus sufficient to only work with the harmonic oscillator and
@xmath . One may proceed to calculate the overlap for the harmonic
oscillator states ( 104 ) which is done in 369 using the @xmath BCH
formulas. Note that the scale symmetric Hamiltonian case is recoverable
as the @xmath limit. We find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (115)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the representation label given by @xmath (see Appendix
\thechapter ). From the overlap ( 115 ) one may derive the metric and
anti-symmetric two-form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (116)
  -- -------- -- -------

which we will refer to as the harmonic oscillator metric. The free
particle metric, recovered in the @xmath limit, is precisely the @xmath
metric in Euclidean signature in the Poincare patch coordinates

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (117)
  -- -------- -- -------

with scalar curvature @xmath . This result is comforting since the
intuition is that the free particle should produce (something as close
as possible to) a purely @xmath metric. The result is also to be
expected - the non-normalisable nature of the reference state @xmath
already demands an @xmath metric ( 108 ) but we know further that the
free particle states contain three dynamical symmetries, namely time
translation, scaling and special conformal transformations. The two
dimensional metric ( 117 ) is thus maximally symmetric and therefore
@xmath . Note that the scalar curvature is determined by the
representation of @xmath labeled by @xmath . We note that this is in
accordance with the prediction of [ 32 ] though their metric is
constructed differently.
Considering now the harmonic oscillator metric ( 116 ), one may proceed
to analyse it and one finds that it too is @xmath with scalar curvature
@xmath . This may be verified by noting that the metric is maximally
symmetric. For a two dimensional this means that there should exist
three Killing vectors which satisfy Killing’s equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (118)
  -- -------- -- -------

Explicitly, the Killing vectors are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (119)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

so that the metric possesses three isometries and is maximally
symmetric. Note that @xmath generates time translation as it should. The
family of metrics ( 116 ), parametrised by @xmath , are equivalent
(related by coordinate transformation). Thus, the metrics we produce
from the free particle states, which possess scale symmetry, and the
harmonic oscillator states, which don’t, are both @xmath .

### 13 The Meaning of Time Translation

The fact that we produce an @xmath geometry from states that do not
possess scale symmetry seems to suggest that our construction is somehow
badly defined. It must be remembered, however, that the isometries of
the metric are the dynamical symmetries which are of physical
significance. The equivalence of the two metrics is a result of the fact
that the generators of dynamical symmetry for the free particle and
harmonic oscillator are the same, namely @xmath . This result was proved
by Niederer [ 43 ] , [ 44 ] . In fact, the generators of dynamical
symmetry are identical (namely @xmath ) even when position is included
as a degree of freedom. The metrics will thus be the same up to
coordinate change even if we include position. The geometries are thus
inescapably equivalent.
The question one may rightly ask is, if these (clearly) different
quantum mechanical models possess the same generators of dynamical
symmetry, in what way are they different? The answer lies in what
exactly is meant by time translation in the two models. Consider the
states of the form ( 112 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (120)
  -- -------- -- -------

The generators of dynamical symmetry is @xmath for valid (elliptic or
parabolic) choices of @xmath . These states differ by the choice of the
operator @xmath that is the generator of time translation. The states (
120 ) have the same set of dynamical symmetry generators, but they
differ in the sense that a specific symmetry (time translation) is
associated with a different element of the @xmath algebra.
This choice of the generator of time translation can only constitute a
reparametrisation of the group i.e. a different choice of coordinates.
Indeed, the transformation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (121)
  -- -------- -- -------

maps the free particle propagator (with @xmath and @xmath ) onto the
harmonic oscillator propagator (with @xmath and @xmath ), up to a change
in phase. From ( 121 ) it is clear that, though @xmath does not
introduce a scale into the curvature it does introduce a scale into the
coordinate patch related to the periodicity in time.

### 14 Conformal Quantum Mechanics

The @xmath Hamiltonian states we have discussed thus far possess @xmath
symmetry i.e. the global symmetries of the one-dimensional conformal
group discussed in section 1.4 . In this section we will now introduce
the model of conformal quantum mechanics (CQM) [ 41 ] where we can give
physical meaning to the full conformal group. We will show the relation
between this model of conformal quantum mechanics and the @xmath
Hamiltonian states explicitly. In this discussion we will once again see
that the free particle and harmonic oscillator are related by a
transformation of the time-coordinate. We will, in fact, see that the
free particle is related to models with (even a) time-dependent
quadratic source in the same way.

#### 14.1 The Global Symmetries

The action we will be considering is that of the one-dimensional field
theory

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (122)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the dot indicates a time derivative. This is the most general
scale-invariant theory in one dimension with at most double derivatives.
It is studied in detail in [ 41 ] . Note that the Lagrangian corresponds
precisely to that of the scale symmetric Hamiltonian ( 110 ). The model
has three global symmetries compactly stated as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (123)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . These transformations can be split into time translation,
where @xmath , dilatation where @xmath and a special conformal
transformation where @xmath . These transformations are generated by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (124)
  -- -------- -- -------

which close on the @xmath algebra since

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (125)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can recover the @xmath model of CQM by varying the action ( 122 ) and
quantizing the on-shell conserved quantities associated with the
symmetries. The field equation of the action ( 122 ) is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (126)
  -- -------- -- -------

One can find the on-shell energy by finding a function which has as
derivative a function proportional to the field equation ( 126 ). One
finds that the quantity @xmath is such that @xmath so that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (127)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is nothing other than the statement that the total energy be
conserved and is a consequence of time translation symmetry. The other
conserved quantities can be derived as in [ 41 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (128)
  -- -------- -- -------

Quantising these on-shell conserved quantities via @xmath i.e.
associating @xmath with the operator @xmath and @xmath with @xmath one
finds the quantum mechanical operators

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (129)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

These are the @xmath generators with some time dependence. The
time-dependence is such that the operators are time-independent in the
Heisenberg picture. The time-evolution is determined, of course, by the
generator of time translational symmetry, @xmath . The quantum states
are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (130)
  -- -------- -- -------

after regularisation by @xmath . We have already considered this @xmath
model of CQM in section 12 .

#### 14.2 The Effect of a General Coordinate Transformation

Consider a general transformation @xmath and @xmath which transforms the
action ( 122 ) to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (131)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath . The final integral only contributes a surface term. A
general coordinate transformation thus maps the action ( 122 ) onto one
of the same form plus a time-dependent quadratic source term i.e.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (132)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (133)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The global symmetry transformations satisfy the condition @xmath so that
no quadratic source term emerges and the action remains invariant. All
transformations that are not global symmetries do give rise to this
quadratic source term. A special example of this is the transformation
that maps, up to a phase, the free particle propagator to the harmonic
oscillator propagator (eq. ( 121 ) with @xmath ). This gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (134)
  -- -------- -- -------

so that the quadratic coupling term is constant. The Lagrangian thus
corresponds to that of the harmonic oscillator. By now varying the
action one finds the field equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (135)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the conserved energy @xmath . Quantising the field now will clearly
yield the harmonic oscillator Hamiltonian. The conserved charges can be
calculated as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (136)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

so that one again finds that these are the time-dependent generators of
@xmath . The time-evolution is now the harmonic oscillator so that the
quantum states are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (137)
  -- -------- -- -------

For a general transformation @xmath the conserved charges are again
these that yield the @xmath generators after cononical quantisation, but
now with time evolution operator @xmath . Quantising this yields nothing
else than a sourced Hamiltonian put together from the @xmath algebra
elements, @xmath i.e. the states

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (138)
  -- -------- -- -------

This model is related to the free particle and harmonic oscillator by a
reparametrisation of time and thus there are three conserved charges. On
the level of the quantum states this means that the quantum states will
again possess three symmetries and the resulting geometry should be
@xmath .

#### 14.3 The Conformal Symmetry of CQM

One may recover the Witt algebra ( 17 ) from the general infinitesimal
transformation @xmath . We did this explicitly for the two-dimensional
conformal group in section 1.4 and the argument here is identical. One
identifies the generators

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (139)
  -- -------- -- -------

which close on the centerless Virasoro algebra ( 18 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (140)
  -- -------- -- -------

The generators @xmath where @xmath do not induce symmetries of the
action ( 122 ) and instead induce a time-dependent coupling to a
quadratic source. The model ( 122 ) will possess full conformal symmetry
if it has the freedom to change the time-dependent coupling @xmath ( 132
) ³ ³ 3 Note that this is reminiscent of a gauge degree of freedom. The
global symmetries of the model affect the states only while there are
additional local symmetries of the model that not only affect the states
but the gauge as well. We do not claim, however, that this
time-dependent coupling is in fact a gauge degree freedom though the
similarities are intriguing .
We note lastly the transformation of the time-dependent coupling @xmath
under a general coordinate transformation of the action ( 132 ), @xmath
. The coupling will get two contributions. The first comes from the term

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (141)
  -- -------- -- -------

The second part comes from the transformation of the kinetic term which
will add a quadratic source term defined in ( 133 ). Putting these two
contributions together yield

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (142)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is precisely the transformation property of an energy momentum
tensor ( 23 ) with central charge @xmath .

### 15 Coherent States

Another useful way of thinking about the @xmath family of states is
simply as coherent states [ 48 ] , [ 49 ] . Indeed, the procedure of
extending the boundary @xmath Hamiltonian states into the bulk gives us
simply a different parametrisation of @xmath coherent states. This is
precisely why all the @xmath models end up with equivalent geometries.
We presented a general procedure for constructing coherent states in
section 6.2 . The result is that given a Hilbert space and a group
@xmath , with generators @xmath , acting on this Hilbert space one
chooses a reference state in the Hilbert space, @xmath , and calculates
the stationary subgroup @xmath as defined in ( 57 ). The coherent state
is then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (143)
  -- -------- -- -------

The states @xmath are generalised coherent states and allow a resolution
of the identity operator as [ 48 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (144)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the invariant measure. This is because the operator (
144 ) can be shown to commute with all elements of @xmath . The rough
outline for the proof is as follows. Acting with a group element on the
left of the operator ( 144 ) and on the right with its conjugate leads
to a different parametrisation of the states ( 143 ). This different
parametrisation can be absorbed in the integral ( @xmath ) and
consequently the operator ( 144 ) commutes with all group elements. If
working with an irreducible representation then by Schur’s lemma [ 48 ]
the operator ( 144 ) must thus be proportional to the identity. The
coherent states thus form an overcomplete basis for the Hilbert space.
We mentioned in section 6.2 that a reference state with a larger
stationary subgroup produces coherent states that are parametrised by
fewer coordinates. This in turn leads to a metric of fewer dimensions.
We will illustrate these beneficial choices of reference states by
example.

#### 15.1 @xmath Coherent States

For the @xmath group such a convenient choice of reference state is the
state @xmath such that (see Appendix \thechapter )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (145)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath labels the representation. A general @xmath group element
can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (146)
  -- -------- -- -------

by using the BCH formula [ 50 ] , [ 51 ] . Thus, using the properties of
the reference state @xmath , we have the coherent states

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (147)
  -- -------- -- -------

It can be shown that the regularised time-evolved states ( 99 ) for the
@xmath -Hamiltonians are nothing other than a different parametrisation
of the states ( 147 ). Specifically we can reparametrise the coherent
states ( 147 ) as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (148)
  -- -------- -- -------

The condition that @xmath is equivalent to the condition that @xmath .
From this vantage point of coherent states one can clearly see why
Hamiltonians linear in @xmath algebra elements will produce equivalent
geometries. For any @xmath group element the BCH formulas imply that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (149)
  -- -------- -- -------

The geometry one will thus generate is exactly the geometry of the
@xmath coherent state up to the coordinate transformation @xmath .

#### 15.2 @xmath and Glauber Coherent States

Examples of interesting geometries other than @xmath can be recovered by
simply considering different coherent states. In particular it is also
possible to produce @xmath and flat space metrics from the appropriate
coherent states. The @xmath coherent states produce a de Sitter metric.
The group manifold of @xmath was also de Sitter ( 81 ). Note, however,
that the group manifold ( 76 ) had both left- and right multiplication
symmetries while the dynamical symmetries are only the left
multiplication symmetries. The @xmath algebra is given by ( 351 ), and
the coherent states (which may be derived by a similar argument as in
the previous section) by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (150)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the lowest eigenvector of @xmath i.e. @xmath and @xmath
. We are considering this specific irreducible representation of @xmath
labelled by @xmath . One can find an operator @xmath such that the
coherent states can then be parametrised as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (151)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is thus possible to recast the @xmath coherent states in a similar
form to the @xmath coherent states i.e. as generated by a Hamiltonian
with complexified time acting on some reference state. The situation in
the case of @xmath is different since the reference states @xmath and
@xmath are normalisable. The states thus don’t require a regularisation
parameter (such as complex time) in order to produce sensible metrics.
Nonetheless it is a beneficial choice to work with complex coordinates
anyway since this allows us to view the states as coherent states and
exploit their many useful properties [ 48 ] .
One may proceed to calculate the metric and anti-symmetric two-form from
the @xmath coherent states ( 150 ) and one finds

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (152)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is the metric for the 2-sphere. It is a maximally symmetric
manifold with Killing vectors

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (153)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

positive scalar curvature @xmath and indeed the Euclidean signature
version of @xmath .
The scalar curvature scales like @xmath and approaches zero in the
@xmath limit.
The coherent states ( 150 ) tend to the Glauber coherent states in this
limit, as can be seen from a Holstein-Primakoff expansion ( 352 ). The
Glauber coherent states are expressed in terms of bosonic creation and
annihilation operators ( 350 ) as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (154)
  -- -------- -- -------

The metric of these Glauber coherent states is the flat space metric in
two dimensions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (155)
  -- -------- -- -------

Considering the flat space metric the Killing vectors are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (156)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

### 16 A Comment on a Result From the @xmath Literature

Having concluded our discussion of the geometries of the two-dimensional
manifold of states we are in a position to comment on and extend a
result from the @xmath literature. In [ 13 ] the authors show that the
appropriate form for the @xmath - and @xmath -point functions ( 10 ) can
be found by considering the quantum mechanics of a particle on a
half-line subject to an inverse square potential term.
Their analysis begins on the @xmath side of the duality where the
isometries of @xmath , generated by the @xmath algebra elements, are
identified. States @xmath are introduced, defined in terms of their
transformations with respect to these generators

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (157)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the lowest eigenvalue of @xmath ( 110 ) - we call this
@xmath in Appendix \thechapter . Using symmetry arguments the authors
then show that the states ( 157 ) produce the appropriate forms for the
@xmath - and @xmath -point functions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (158)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a primary of dimension @xmath . This is despite two
puzzles pointed out by the authors. Firstly, the states @xmath are not
normalizable and secondly there exists no conformally invariant state in
the Hilbert space. They conclude that the @xmath lowest eigenstate,
@xmath is the averaging state and that there exists an operator, @xmath
such that @xmath produces the appropriate states @xmath . Neither the
averaging state @xmath nor the operator @xmath transforms appropriately,
however. By this it is meant that the averaging states does not
transform like the @xmath vacuum and the operator @xmath does not
transform like a primary operator. Remarkably their “defects” (as the
authors call them) seem to cancel in order to produce the appropriate
correlation functions ( 158 ).
Their construction is noteworthy in that a quantum model is constructed
from @xmath in a systematic way and that this model exhibits some of the
desired properties of @xmath . Their discussion also points out very
important differences between quantum mechanics and field theory that we
need to be mindful of as we progress with our construction. Their
analysis can be unpacked from our current construction in a natural way
that also addresses their puzzles directly and we are, in fact, in a
position to extend some of their results.
The states @xmath that they define are nothing other than the free
particle states we have discussed in section 12 . Indeed, the
transformation properties of ( 157 ) can be shown explicitly using the
states and @xmath symmetry generators. We know, by construction, that
@xmath is the appropriate geometry to associate with these states. The
absence of gravity in their analysis is also clear. As we have pointed
out, our construction in this chapter is, for the most part, simply a
different view on the work of [ 14 ] so that all the information of the
quantum states can be extracted from the geometry alone. It is possible
to repackage this further as a theory of gravity but when one is
interested in the expectation values the symmetries and geometry is
sufficient.
The non-normalisable nature of the states is something that we have
already addressed. Indeed, it is precisely this that gives rise to an
anti-de Sitter geometry and the bulk coordinate of @xmath is a
regularisation parameter. In the bulk these states are normalisable and
the regularisation scheme is such that the boundary symmetries are
retained as bulk isometries.
The key observation to understand why one still produces the appropriate
two- and three-point functions despite these differences is that the
symmetry transformations for operators and quantum states come about
differently. For vacuum to vacuum correlators in field theory this
distinction does not arise since under a unitary transformation the
field theory vacuum transforms trivially so that it is only the
operators that transform. The quantum state and operators transform as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (159)
  -- -------- -- -------

respectively. This ensures that we can induce symmetry transformations
by inserting the identity in the form of the corresponding unitary
operators. This, along with sufficient symmetry to restrict their form,
is precisely why the appropriate form for the two- and three-point
functions are reproduced.
One matter that needs to be taken note of is that the correlators of
this quantum mechanical problem ( 158 ) can only be resolved up to a
normalisation. This is, in fact, a direct consequence of the fact that
symmetry transformations may change the normalisation of the state. Once
the condition of normalisability has been relaxed the form of the
correlation functions ( 158 ) are completely determined by the dynamical
symmetry.
Our systematic construction adds to the analysis [ 13 ] in several ways.
Firstly, it provides the explicit mapping from quantum mechanical state
to geometry. This gives, for instance, the physical interpretation of
the @xmath radius as the representation label. The mapping used to go
from the geometry to the quantum symmetry generators is to identify the
algebra of the Killing vectors. This is used in [ 13 ] , but we will
extend this in the next chapter by showing this property for general
states of complex coordinates. Secondly, our construction has
illuminated the physical significance of coordinates and that,
geometrically, the @xmath states are all equivalent. This implies that
the analysis of [ 13 ] can be applied also, after coordinate
transformation, to the harmonic oscillator (and indeed to any of the
@xmath Hamiltonians). Lastly, and possibly most importantly, our
construction can be generalised to, not only other quantum models, but
to a description that includes the CQM local symmetries as well. The
role and existence of gravitational duals can be investigated
systematically.

### 17 Summary

This concludes our discussion of the two-dimensional metrics. We take
particular note of the Kähler structure that arises for the unsourced
metrics considered in section 12 . This will allow us to utilise the
link between the expectation values of operators and vector fields on
the manifold, see section ( 7 ).
The fact that we can decipher the results and puzzles of existing work
in the @xmath literature [ 13 ] in such a natural way indicates that our
construction, at least the procedure that goes from quantum state to
geometry, is sensible. We will, in chapter \thechapter , add another
step to the procedure that takes the quantum states and this metric and
matches these to a dual gravitational theory. The main advantage is that
our approach is systematic so that no guesswork is required to put
together the appropriate dual.
Our task will now be to repackage the geometric information, by some
means, into a gravitational dual description of these quantum mechanical
models.

## Chapter \thechapter Gravitational Duals in Two Dimensions

In this chapter we will now, finally, present a systematic way of
constructing gravitational duals of quantum mechanical models. Our work
up to this point has identified a construction ( 47 ) that maps a given
set of quantum states to a metric. Importantly the dynamical symmetries
are encoded as isometries of the metric. This property, along with its
relatively simple straightforward computation, was the single most
important property that set this construction apart from others that
were discussed in chapter \thechapter .
Our next task is to incorporate this metric in some way as an ingredient
in a theory of gravity. The theory should be chosen, of course, in such
a way that it represents a dual description of the original quantum
mechanical model. As was the case with the possible ways to construct
metrics from quantum mechanical models, it is unavoidable that many
possible choices for a dual theory exist. We will again provide some
intuitive arguments for why the choice we will make in this chapter is a
sensible one and show, when we consider the two-dimensional manifold of
states, that this choice is in agreement with existing works in the
@xmath literature. Our work here will recover these existing results in
a natural way and the systematic approach will provide direct access to
the quantum mechanics / gravity dictionary. This will allow us to extend
these existing results in several ways.

### 18 Proceeding to a Gravitational Dual

Let us begin this chapter with a summary of what we have discussed thus
far. The construction ( 47 ) takes as input a family of quantum states
(possessing some symmetries) and gives as output a metric (with
corresponding isometries), @xmath and an anti-symmetric two-form @xmath
( 48 ) from this family of states.
A case that is of special importance is when the family of states are
parametrised by @xmath complex coordinates @xmath . This is typical of
coherent states but can be more general. In this special case the metric
and anti-symmetric two-form are closely related, most easily seen by
considering them with one co-variant and one contra-variant index. In
general for these states one finds

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (160)
  -- -------- -- -------

and, consequently [ 53 ] , that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (161)
  -- -------- -- -------

By @xmath we mean the covariant derivative, see Appendix \thechapter .
Note that the indices of @xmath transform like a tensor (the indices are
raised and lowered by the metric). However, @xmath is not the inverse of
@xmath but rather

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (162)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that in these complex coordinates the anti-symmetric two-form is
now a symplectic form.
In section 7 we showed explicitly how vector fields can be related to
operators. If an operator @xmath is hermitian then the vector fields are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (163)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the vector field and @xmath , the normalised expectation
value of the operator @xmath . In the present context the dynamical
symmetries are generated by hermitian operators so that the first vector
field in ( 163 ) will be applicable. Note that the vector field
associated with the operator @xmath and @xmath where @xmath is a
constant is the same. This freedom will prove useful later. As a
specific example of ( 163 ) consider the Killing vectors which satisfy
Killing’s equations ( 118 ) and are related, via ( 163 ), to the
normalised expectation values of symmetry generators. In general, the
vector fields ( 163 ) satisfy the relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (164)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we will refer to the tensor @xmath as the flow parameters. The
flow parameters can be viewed as an indication of how far the vector
field deviates from a Killing vector. For conformal Killing vectors,
which transform the metric up to a conformal factor, the flow parameters
are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (165)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is an arbitrary function of the coordinates.
The mapping ( 47 ) from quantum states to metric encodes all the
symmetries of the quantum states as isometries of the metric. The
Killing vectors of the metric are thus related to the normalised
expectation values of symmetry generators of the original quantum states
in a simple way. This relation is of critical importance. The Killing
vectors, vector fields on the manifold - a “geometric concept” - is
directly related to the normalised expectation value of a generator of
symmetry - an operator, a quantum observable. Similarly the expectation
value of an arbitrary operator on the quantum side may be related to a
corresponding vector field on the geometric side of the construction (
164 ). In this way there exists a duality between the quantum mechanical
operators and the vector fields.
Note that we have not even begun to bring any sort of gravitational
theory into the discussion. The relation between the quantum mechanical
expectation values and vector fields on the manifold relate the quantum
mechanics to purely geometric quantities. As is clear from the work of [
14 ] , a dual geometric description of quantum mechanical models can be
constructed along these lines.
Our interest, due to the @xmath correspondence, is to find a dual
gravitational theory to a given quantum mechanical model. We will, for
the purposes of this thesis, think of gravitational theories in terms of
an action formulation. Consider, then, an action that is a functional of
a metric and some set of fields @xmath . A simple way in which our
metric can be linked to a classical theory of gravity is to interpret it
as the metric that yields a stationary value for the action i.e.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (166)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the values for the fields that, along with our metric,
solve the equations of motion of the classical gravitational model.
Since the metric is tied to the gravitational theory by means of the
stationary action we can expect that our dual theories will likely be
built around the semi-classical approximations of gravity models. As a
first attempt to constructing duals this is a workable simplification.
If this first attempt gives sensible results then we can ask the
question how one may interpret the fluctuations around the stationary
action. We leave this topic for future work.
Of course, the simplest subset of these gravitational theories is where
no fields are present so that the action is a functional of only the
metric. We will not be considering actions of this type for two reasons.
Firstly, in the @xmath correspondence the fields that feature in the
theory of gravity play a vital role since their boundary values are the
sources of the generating functional ( 26 ). Any gravitational dual that
would hope to be comparable to existing literature must thus contain
fields. Secondly, for the two-dimensional manifolds - our starting point
- the Einstein equations are trivial. We will speak more to this in
section 20 .
We will be looking to construct a dual theory where the gravitational
action is a functional of both the metric and fields. The immediate
question is then - what interpretation can we attach to the fields? As
mentioned in section 2 , the conventional interpretation of the fields
is that their boundary values are the sources of the generating
functional. However, our metric ( 47 ) is constructed from the overlap
of states which carries no knowledge of the sources. In order to proceed
with this interpretation and analyse it systematically we will probably
have to develop a rather sophisticated algorithm. It should be possible
to investigate this - a topic for future research. The interpretation we
will propose for this thesis is a much more direct and simple one and it
will allow us to generate some interesting results.
It is worthwhile to recall that the quantities of interest are the
correlation functions ( 6 ) i.e. the expectation values of arbitrary
strings of observables. The simplest, most direct way that we can
extract these expectation values is to interpret the fields that solve
the equations of motion ( 166 ) as these same expectation values. This
may be a beneficial choice as well. We know already from our discussion
in section 7 that the expectation values of operators are related to
vector fields on the manifold. The equations of motions that expectation
values of the generators of symmetry should solve are thus likely to be
of a simple form, since these should be related to the Killing equation
( 118 ).
We will show in the chapters ahead how, despite being at odds with the
conventional interpretation in @xmath , this interpretation of the
fields in the gravitational model will allow us to calculate the
expectation values of arbitrary string of symmetry generators, at least
for the simplest quantum models. Also, intriguingly, we will reproduce
several existing results of the @xmath literature which seemingly
indicate that these are sensible choices.
Now that we have selected the criteria for our dual gravitational model
( 166 ) we can proceed to find one that fits them. Before we do this we
will first discuss a general way in which the symmetries of the quantum
states can be used to calculate the expectation values of arbitrary
strings of symmetry generators. This procedure will again highlight the
key role played by symmetries.

#### 18.1 A Quick Example of the Expectation Value / Killing Vector
Relation

The relation between the expectation values of symmetry generators and
Killing vectors may be verified for the metrics ( 116 ) of the @xmath
family of states and the corresponding Killing vectors ( 119 ) by using
the normalised expectation values

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (167)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

for the harmonic oscillator states. Applying eq. ( 163 ) to the
expectation values ( 167 ) yields the Killing vectors ( 119 ). Note
that, as it should, the vector fields are related to the expectation
values even though they are not written in complex coordinates. The
choice of coordinates does not affect these relations.

#### 18.2 Lemmas Pertaining to Dynamical Symmetries

We will now show how many physical quantities can be calculated using
only the expectation values of symmetry generators and symmetry
transformations. First we will derive results for an arbitrary set of
real coordinates, @xmath and then show some noteworthy features
particular to the complex coordinates.
We note the following general feature. Given a generator of symmetry
@xmath and its corresponding Killing vector @xmath we note that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (168)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is an arbitrary bra independent of the coordinates and
@xmath a normalisation factor associated with the dynamical symmetry (
36 ).
The consequence of ( 168 ) is that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (169)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath is an arbitrary operator. From this we derive (from the
leading order in @xmath ) that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (170)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the complex coordinates @xmath we can exploit another property. It
can be shown that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (171)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the derivatives @xmath are with respect to the holomorphic
coordinates only and @xmath . This procedure thus inserts an operator
into the existing expectation value. Note that we require the
expectation value of an operator as a starting point for this insertion
procedure. The derivation of the result is almost identical to ( 170 ).
From the overlap ( 171 ) one may calculate the overlap @xmath by
algebraic means if the overlap @xmath is also known. A more general
expression than eq. ( 171 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (172)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is hermitian and @xmath is an arbitrary operator. The two
lemmas ( 170 ) and ( 171 ) now allow one to generate an arbitrary string
of symmetry generators @xmath inside the expectation value. It is
crucial, for this procedure to work that the states can be parametrised
by complex coordinates and that the normalised expectation values of the
symmetry generators are known.

#### 18.3 Calculations Utilising Symmetries

The results of ( 170 ) and ( 171 ) indicate that, by using only the
expectation values of symmetry generators and complex coordinates as a
starting point, the expectation value of an arbitrary string of symmetry
generators can be calculated. The symmetry transformations can be
calculated by solving the Killing equations ( 118 ) and the normalised
expectation values can be calculated from their relation to the Killing
vectors ( 163 ). Of course, the larger the symmetry group the more
expectation values can be calculated in this way. For coherent states of
some group we can calculate any string of operators from the enveloping
algebra using only these quantities.
Two comments are in order here. Firstly, it is clear that if our
interest is limited to the expectation values of symmetry generators
there is no need to consider a gravitational dual since the geometry
will suffice. The Killing vectors capture the symmetries and the
expectation values of the corresponding symmetry generators may be
calculated from these ( 163 ). As shown in section 18.2 , these
quantities are all that are required to calculate an arbitrary string of
symmetry generators, when dealing with complex coordinate states. In
terms of the goal of constructing a gravitational dual this is a
promising feature since it guarantees that these same quantities of
interest can be extracted from the gravitational dual. However, it also
muddles the motivation for seeking a gravitational dual in the first
place - why bother if the geometry is already sufficient to calculate
the quantities of interest?
It needs to be remembered that the results we have derived thus far
depend on the fact that we have states parametrised by complex
coordinates. Certainly, there are many interesting choices of
normalisable states that do not have this feature and, indeed, we will
encounter examples in chapter \thechapter . The choice of complex
coordinates is beneficial since it has very useful properties and will
allow us to construct gravitational duals more simply. It thus serves as
a useful benchmark before less favourable examples are considered. In
addition it is likely that there may be quantities of interest that are
not expectation values e.g. the central charge.

### 19 Equations of Motion

Our aim is to proceed from the relation between the expectation values
of operators and vector fields on the manifold ( 163 ) to a
gravitational dual. As mentioned, our strategy is to identify an action
where the metric and expectation values of operators leave the action
integral stationary. In order to gain some insight into how such an
action may be chosen we will now proceed to write down equations of
motion for the expectation values of operators. Once we have these
equations of motion our second step will be to match these to the field
equations of a theory of gravity. The discussion presented here will
make no assumptions of the dimension of the manifold but we will
specialise to the two-dimensional case in section 19.1 and proceed with
that in the remainder of this chapter. We will return to the
higher-dimensional case in chapters \thechapter and \thechapter . Again,
we emphasise that we assume that the quantum states may be parametrised
by a set of complex coordinates.
A general vector field on the manifold satisfies ( 164 ), restated here
for convenience,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (173)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are what we refer to as the flow parameters. Two notable
examples are the Killing vectors which have @xmath and conformal Killing
vectors with @xmath ( 165 ). Furthermore, like any vector field, they
also satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (174)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Riemann curvature tensor. Combining cyclic
permutations of ( 174 ) and using ( 173 ) leads to [ 56 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (175)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the tensor @xmath is defined in the second expression. The vector
fields, as discussed, are related to the normalised expectation values
of operators ( 163 ). We label the arbitrary expectation value by @xmath
, which then satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (176)
  -- -------- -- -------

after using the property that @xmath and @xmath have zero covariant
derivative ( 161 ). Eq. ( 176 ) can be thought of as an equation of
motion for the scalar @xmath . On the left hand side we have a third
order differential operator while on the right hand side we have a first
order differential operator.
In order to link these equations of motion to the equations of motion of
a theory of gravity we would like them to have at most second order
derivatives. We should then be able to find a theory of gravity that
yield, as the field equation solution, the expectation value of some
operator. It is worthwhile to note an alternative, namely that we may
consider the equation ( 176 ) as a second order differential equation
for the vector @xmath . It should be possible to find a gravitational
action, which is a functional of a metric and vector fields, that
matches these equations of motion as the field equations of the action.
This is a possible avenue of future study. For our purposes a second
order differential equation for the scalar fields @xmath will be
convenient especially in two dimensions. This will allow us to give
elegant interpretations for the expectation values of symmetry
generators and conformal symmetry generators in the context of a
gravitational dual.

#### 19.1 Two Dimensional Equations of Motion

Extracting simple and elegant equations of motion with at most second
order derivative from ( 176 ) is not always possible. In order to
simplify matters we will focus our attention on the two-dimensional
manifolds. In two dimensions we can find exact second order expressions
for these equations of motion owing to the special form for the Riemann
curvature tensor (see Appendix \thechapter )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (177)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the scalar curvature. One may use the identity ( 177 )
in ( 176 ) to find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (178)
  -- -------- -- -------

We may further use the property ( 162 ) to rewrite ( 176 ) as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (179)
  -- -------- -- -------

This then implies that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (180)
  -- -------- -- -------

which in turn implies that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (181)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a constant. Note that the tensor @xmath has been defined
in the last step of ( 180 ). The undetermined term proportional to the
metric is a consequence of the fact that the metric has zero covariant
derivative and that the expression is symmetric (so that a term
proportional to the symplectic form is not applicable). We will show
later how the tensor @xmath may be interpreted as an energy momentum
tensor in a gravitational model. We will, however, not be calculating it
explicitly here for any scalar curvature and flow parameter. Note that
if the scalar curvature is constant and @xmath is the expectation value
of a generator of symmetry then @xmath .
Not all of the three equations in ( 181 ) are independent [ 57 ] . We
may extract two independent equations as follows. The first comes from a
contraction of indices in ( 181 ). This yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (182)
  -- -------- -- -------

The second can be extracted by multiplying ( 181 ) by @xmath and
contracting the index @xmath with one of the existing indices

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (183)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The potential @xmath is defined in the last line. To be more specific,
the quantity @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (184)
  -- -------- -- -------

while the field equation is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (185)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that @xmath where @xmath is a constant will satisfy the same field
equation. In the discussions of the gravity models from section 20
onwards we will give a physical interpretation to the potential @xmath .
It is customary to normalise the potential appropriately (see e.g. [ 57
] ) i.e. @xmath but we will only do this later. The discussion up to
that point will be independent of this normalisation.

#### 19.2 Equations of Motion for Constant Scalar Curvature

We may simplify the equations of motion even further in the case of a
constant, non-zero scalar curvature since we have the freedom to add a
constant to the scalar @xmath , as mentioned. By now adjusting @xmath we
can get rid of the constant @xmath in ( 181 ) i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (186)
  -- -------- -- -------

Furthermore, for the constant scalar curvature case, if @xmath is the
expectation value of a conformal symmetry generator ( 173 ), we can
again derive simple equations of motion. We start from ( 179 ) and
contract indices so that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (187)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Here we have again shifted the scalar @xmath to get rid of the arbitrary
constant @xmath . The function @xmath that appears in ( 187 ) is defined
in ( 165 ) and features here because we are considering conformal
transformations.
We note finally that the field equations are a condition on the second
order covariant derivative of the expectation values @xmath . The @xmath
’s will be the solutions of the equations of motion of the gravitational
model. In the gravity model we have to give as input the appropriate
energy momentum tensor @xmath in order to ensure that we will get the
desired @xmath ’s as the solutions. The discussion here shows that,
equivalently, we can specify the values of @xmath ( 183 ) and @xmath (
182 ) instead of the value for @xmath .

#### 19.3 What Then is the Procedure?

Before we proceed to specific examples of the duality we will summarise
our steps from a quantum model to gravitational dual carefully. We start
from a family of quantum states, which for simplicity we assume to be
parametrisable in terms of complex coordinates. The quantities we are
interested in on this quantum mechanical side are the expectation values
of arbitrary strings of observables. On the quantum mechanical side
these can be calculated using, for instance, commutation relations of
the operators.
Our focus for this thesis is rather on how these quantities can be
calculated in a dual gravitational description. In this regard we showed
that the expectation values of operators can be thought of as the
solutions to field equations characterised by a metric and an energy
momentum tensor. In other words, you give as input an energy momentum
tensor and some boundary conditions and the output is the desired
expectation value. The components of the energy momentum tensor, in two
dimensions, cannot all be chosen arbitrary. Indeed, we only have the
freedom to specify two of them. From these we extracted two scalar
quantities from two different contractions of the energy momentum tensor
- the trace of the energy momentum tensor and the potential @xmath . If
you give as input the trace and @xmath , one can write down the field
equations which have as solution the desired expectation value.
The expectation value of an operator can thus be calculated either
directly from the commutation relations (on the quantum side) or by
solving the appropriate field equations (on the gravity side). The
natural question to ask is how the energy-momentum tensor is to be
chosen? To this we can only provide an answer in the simplest cases e.g.
where the scalar curvature is constant and one is interested in the
expectation value of a generator of symmetry. For this reason the method
we show here should not be thought of as a calculation tool but a proof
of concept - that such a repackaging of a quantum mechanical into a
gravitational theory is possible. If we have the quantum expectation
values we can calculate the appropriate energy momentum tensor and vice
versa.
What we have not shown, up to this point, is that the equations of
motion ( 181 ) belong to a proper theory of gravity. We will address
this point now.

### 20 Dilaton Gravity

When we discussed (qualitatively) possible gravitational duals in
section 18 we mentioned briefly that Einstein gravity (general
relativity) in two dimensions is not a sensible choice. This is due to
the fact that any metric in two dimensions is Einstein (see Appendix
\thechapter ) so that the field equations are always trivial and
physical quantities such as the energy momentum tensor cannot be
imprinted on the metric. We have to consider an alternative model of
gravity as a gravitational dual for two dimensional quantum states ⁴ ⁴ 4
Even in higher dimensions an action that is a functional of both the
metric and fields remains useful since we can attach a direct quantum
mechanical interpretation to these fields. .
Such an alternative model of gravity in two dimensions is dilaton
gravity. The dilaton is a field in these models that has the physical
interpretation of the volume of compactified dimensions (which is
allowed to fluctuate). The presence of a dilaton field is a quite
general consequence when a higher dimensional model of gravity is
compactified to give an equivalent lower dimensional one [ 58 ] , [ 59 ]
.
This choice of gravitational model is made for two main reasons.
Firstly, it is a relatively simple choice of a gravitational model and
indeed, the Jackiw-Teitelboim (JT) model which is only linear in the
dilaton field, is arguably the simplest model of gravity one can
consider beyond Einstein gravity. Secondly, it is precisely this model
of Jackiw-Teitelboim gravity that has been studied in the context of the
@xmath correspondence [ 15 ] - [ 19 ] . With this choice of
gravitational model we can hopefully relate our construction to these
existing results. For this reason we will discuss the main results of
these works before we proceed to analyse the dilaton gravity duals
ourselves.
We will first define the model of dilaton gravity and show that its
field equations may be matched to the equations of motion we have
derived ( 181 ). It is a well-studied fact that [ 60 ] a generic dilaton
model with at most second order derivatives can be transformed by
appropriate redefinitions of the fields and metric into the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (188)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath is the dilaton. We will, however, be referring
to the field @xmath as the dilaton for conciseness. @xmath is a
functional of both the dilaton and matter content @xmath . The dilaton
can be coupled to both the metric and the matter content, (see e.g. [ 61
] ).
Several sets of field equations can be derived from this model depending
on which degrees of freedom are considered dynamic and which static. See
Appendix \thechapter for some of the detailed derivations. For instance,
varying with respect to the dilaton, @xmath , yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (189)
  -- -------- -- -------

Varying the action ( 188 ) with respect to the inverse metric yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (190)
  -- -------- -- -------

We single out the quantity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (191)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is an energy momentum tensor. The field equations can be rewritten
after multiplying by @xmath and summing over the indices

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (192)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The equation ( 192 ) is written in this form so that it may be compared
easily with the left hand side of ( 181 ). By comparing ( 192 ) and (
181 ) it is clear that we could make a choice for the function @xmath
that will ensure that the dilaton gravity field equations match the
equations of motion of the expectation values of operators.
Specifically, we can make a choice for @xmath linear in the dilaton i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (193)
  -- -------- -- -------

which determines the geometry independent of the dilaton ( 189 ) i.e.
@xmath . We use the symbol @xmath to emphasise that @xmath . @xmath is
some functional of the matter content. Note that, as before, of the
three field equations ( 192 ) only two are independent. The energy
momentum tensor @xmath therefore only contains two independent entries.
For this purpose we use the trace of the energy momentum tensor and the
potential ( 184 ) @xmath . The energy momentum tensor can be
reconstructed from these two quantities.
Having now identified dilaton gravity as fitting all our requirements we
can proceed with building the quantum mechanics / dilaton gravity dual
in two dimensions. Before we proceed with this we take note of some
important works from the @xmath literature. These will guide our
discussions and place our findings into context.

### 21 Some Relevant @xmath Results from the Literature

Dilaton gravity, and specifically the Jackiw-Teiltelboim model [ 63 ] ,
has been studied in a series of works ( [ 15 ] , [ 17 ] , [ 18 ] , [ 16
] , [ 19 ] ) centered around the @xmath correspondence. One of the
motivations behind these works is to calculate the entropy of a
two-dimensional dilaton gravity black hole by using its @xmath dual.
Though this calculation can be carried out without the @xmath dictionary
it serves to show that quantities in @xmath dilaton gravity can be
calculated from the dual quantum theory. Since the conformal group in
one and two dimensions is infinite dimensional the @xmath and @xmath e-
and higher-point correlation functions are more restricted [ 25 ] .
These low dimensional examples, where the field theory is comparatively
simple, thus provide a good opportunity to study low-dimensional gravity
by using its dual theory.
The development of these works is a progressively more refined
calculation of the conformal algebra central charge culminating in [ 19
] with the correct value for the black hole entropy. In this final work
it was identified that the on-shell equations for the asymptotic
fluctuations of the dilaton and metric can be matched with the equations
of motion for a scale invariant system coupled to a time-dependent
quadratic source. This is the model of CQM discussed in section 14 .
We sketch their calculations and arguments here for the sake of
completeness and to later relate it to our framework. To relate it more
explicitly we use a choice of coordinates more akin to those used in
this thesis. The model of gravity under consideration is the JT-model of
dilaton gravity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (194)
  -- -------- -- -------

Varying with respect to the dilaton and inverse metric yields the field
equations which are of the form ( 189 ) and ( 190 ). The on-shell
geometry is thus locally @xmath . However, the dilaton must also be
taken into account in the geometry. In particular the dilaton allows the
definition of the potential @xmath ( 183 ). The presence of the dilaton
now gives rise to three inequivalent solutions of the field equations.
These are labelled @xmath , @xmath and @xmath where the subscript is the
sign of @xmath . The reason these solutions are inequivalent is because,
firstly, @xmath is unaffected by coordinate transformations. Secondly,
one may rescale the dilaton @xmath which yields @xmath so that a (real)
rescaling can change the magnitude but not the sign of @xmath . Complex
rescalings are not allowed since the dilaton is a real scalar function.
There is thus no legitimate transformation that can map between these
three different solutions.
Dilaton gravity in two dimensions permits the definition of a
two-dimensional black hole, if @xmath is positive [ 62 ] . The black
hole does not give rise to a curvature singularity but has the same
causal structure as a conventional black hole [ 63 ] , [ 62 ] . The
potential @xmath we have defined is a normalisation factor away from the
black hole mass @xmath . For our current analysis this normalisation is
not important but we will show how it may be calculated in section
21.1.1 .
The thermodynamic black hole entropy is given by [ 19 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (195)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the authors of [ 15 ] - [ 19 ] set out to calculate this entropy
from the boundary @xmath of the JT-model. This is done by using the
Cardy-Verlinde formula [ 64 ] which requires the central charge of the
@xmath . This calculation is a two-dimensional analogue of the counting
of quantum states used to calculate the entropy of the
Bañados-Teitelboim-Zanelli (BTZ) black hole in the @xmath correspondence
[ 65 ] . The BTZ black hole is a solution to the Einstein-Hilbert
equations in three dimensions that may be interpreted as a black hole.
Though there is no curvature singularity the causal structure of
spacetime is like that of a black hole. Associated with this black hole
is a temperature and entropy.
With the two-dimensional correspondence there is a novelty namely that
@xmath has two boundaries that needs to be taken into account and not
just the asymptotic boundary. Both of these boundaries give a
contribution to the central charge and are handled separately.

#### 21.1 The Central Charge Calculation

To extract the central charge of the boundary @xmath from the dilaton
gravity one requires two ingredients. First, one requires a quantity
from the gravitational theory that can be related to the energy momentum
tensor of the @xmath . Second, one requires a set of allowed
transformations of time on the boundary. The central charge may then be
calculated by varying the energy momentum tensor with these
transformations, like in ( 22 ).

##### 21.1.1 The Positivity Condition of the Dilaton

One technical detail that needs adressing before we do this is the
requirement of the positivity of the dilaton - the dilaton is by
definition a strictly positive function. We have built up the dictionary
by choosing the interpretation for the field equation solution, the
dilaton, as the expectation values of an operator. This can seemingly
cause issues. Even if the operators are hermitian their expectation
values are not strictly positive. This is not a major detriment to our
calculations since we can calculate the expectation value in the region
where it is strictly positive and simply extend the solution to the
other regions afterwards.
In terms of interpreting the expectation values as dilaton gravity
objects their positivity is an important requirement, however. One of
the main features of this positivity condition is that the potential
@xmath ( 197 ) can be normalised in such a way that it has the
interpretation of the mass of the black hole. The normalisation constant
can be found by applying Birkhoff’s theorem [ 15 ] which states that
there always exists a choice of coordinates @xmath such that the metric
and dilaton can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (196)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the manifold is restricted to @xmath . The normalisation constant
@xmath is positive owing to the positivity of the dilaton. This
normalisation of the dilaton is used to normalise the potential
appropriately and we define

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (197)
  -- -------- -- -------

The quantity @xmath ( 197 ) now has the interpretation of an energy [ 62
] which is the mass of a black hole [ 15 ] - [ 19 ] . If the dilaton is
not strictly positive then we may induce a sign flip in ( 197 ).
We classified the three inequivalent solutions of the vacuum @xmath
-model as @xmath , @xmath where the subscript indicates the sign of the
potential @xmath . The convention is rather to use the mass @xmath to do
this classification. @xmath transforms linearly with the dilaton
normalisation @xmath but again a sign change cannot be made since the
dilaton normalisation must be positive.

##### 21.1.2 The Transformations and Energy-Momentum Tensor

In order to calculate the central charge we require two ingredients - a
set of allowed transformations and an energy momentum tensor. We first
identify the transformations. These are identified by examining the
asymptotic symmetries of the model. The asymptotic form of the @xmath
metric is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (198)
  -- -------- -- -------

The asymptotic form of the dilaton is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (199)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that the asymptotic form of the metric and dilaton contain five
independent functions of time, three for the metric and two for the
dilaton. The on-shell equations of motion provide two restrictions for
the five arbitrary functions in the asymptotic limit, namely

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (200)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (201)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

In addition the function @xmath does not affect the analysis. This can
be understood intuitively since a coordinate change can always eliminate
the off-diagonal entry of the two-dimensional metric. Due to this and
the two restrictions ( 200 ), ( 201 ) there are only two independent
functions of time (out of the original five) that prove relevant.
The allowed transformations are now the ones that preserve the
asymptotic forms of the metric ( 198 ) and dilaton ( 199 ) namely

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (202)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath and @xmath are arbitrary functions of @xmath and
represent the so-called “pure gauge” diffeomorphisms [ 15 ] . The
explicit transformation of the dilaton induced by these transformations
are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (203)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

By @xmath we mean the change in the function when we change @xmath . The
diagonal entries of the metric are transformed (using @xmath ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (204)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (205)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Note that the diffeomorphism associated with @xmath is absent from these
near-boundary variations. This is indicative of the fact that only two
independent functions of time are relevant (out of the original three in
( 202 )).
The quantity in dilaton gravity that is related to the @xmath energy
momentum tensor is found as follows. In the Hamilton analysis of dilaton
gravity one needs to add a boundary term to the action in order to find
consistent field equations [ 15 ] . The variation of the boundary term
@xmath is calculated first and is given in terms of the variation of the
dilaton ( 203 ) and the metric ( 204 ) and ( 205 ). From this the
authors calculate the boundary term to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (206)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . The function @xmath is the leading order of the dilaton (
199 ). Note from eq. ( 206 ) that @xmath . The quantity @xmath
transforms as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (207)
  -- -------- -- -------

i.e. like the energy momentum tensor of a @xmath ( 22 ) with central
charge @xmath . This is the asymptotic boundary contribution to the
total central charge.
For our purposes the details of this calculation are not crucial.
Indeed, in this thesis we will not be recalculating the central charge
at all. What is important is that there are two ingredients to the
analysis. Firstly, a set of allowed transformations (that retain the
asymptotic form of the dilaton and metric) and secondly, a specific
quantity, the boundary term ( 207 ), from which the central charge is
extracted via the expression ( 207 ). We will show, using our
construction, that one arrives at the transformations ( 202 ) in a very
natural way. In addition our construction will set up the problem in
such a way that the boundary term is of a very simple form.

#### 21.2 The Inner Boundary Contribution to the Central Charge

The contribution of the inner boundary, @xmath to the central charge [
19 ] is calculated differently than that of the outer boundary. We
borrow the notation [ 19 ] directly since we will provide the explicit
transformations and motivations later. In [ 19 ] its contribution is
attributed to entanglement of states on the @xmath boundary and comes
about due to the fact that the vacuum and black hole solutions, on the
boundary, are related simply by a reparametrisation of time @xmath . The
contribution of the time-reparametrisation to the central charge needs
to be subtracted from the full contribution. The finite form of the
transformation ( 207 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (208)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Schwarzian derivative. The explicit transformation
@xmath between the vacuum and black hole solution is substituted in (
208 ). The authors of [ 19 ] now state that by “fixing the
diffeomorphisms on shell” one can always have @xmath . For the vacuum
@xmath is zero while for the black hole @xmath is a constant.
Substituting everything yields @xmath .
Taking both the inner and outer boundary contributions into account
yields the value for the central charge compatible with the black hole
entropy [ 19 ] , @xmath .
The observation that the diffeomorphisms can always be fixed so that
@xmath is an important one for our analysis in section 22.3.2 . Our
construction will set up the problem in such a way that the boundary
term is always proportional to @xmath i.e. in the words of [ 19 ] the
“diffeomorphisms on shell always remain fixed”. We contend that this not
only allows for a less technical calculation of the central charge but
also keeps the quantum mechanics / dilaton gravity dictionary neat and
simple.

#### 21.3 An Issue of Normalisation

In our ensuing construction the reader will note the absence of an
explicit dilaton normalisation, @xmath as in ( 196 ). This is certainly
not a trivial omission - the central charge of the boundary @xmath
depends on these constants. Our analysis in section 22.3.2 should thus
be viewed as a qualitative one. We again emphasise that we do not aim to
reproduce the calculations of [ 15 ] - [ 19 ] here. Rather, we aim to
show that, by following our construction, all the required ingredients
to perform the calculation come about in a very natural way.
We hope to have this technical issue addressed when we present the
analysis in a future publication.

### 22 The Dilaton Gravity Dual for the @xmath Model of CQM

After this brief detour in the @xmath literature we may now finally
analyse the quantum mechanics / dilaton gravity dictionary in our
construction. It is worthwhile to recall exactly how we got to this
point. A family of states are used to form a manifold of states and a
metric is defined ( 47 ) on this manifold. When the states are
parametrised by complex coordinates the metric, and more specifically
the symmetries of the metric, can be used to calculate the expectation
value of an arbitrary string of symmetry generators. Thus, in principle,
a theory of gravity that only produced the metric would be sufficient.
However, the fields in the @xmath correspondence play a vital role and,
furthermore, in two dimensions the Einstein tensor is trivial so that
one is forced to consider alternate models of gravity. The crucial
choice we had to make was what interpretation we attach to the fields.
Motivated by the work of [ 14 ] we made a very direct choice - the
fields are the expectation values of operators. Though this choice is
simple, it will be sufficient and match several existing works from the
@xmath literature. By examining the equations of motion of the
expectation values of operators we proposed that a model of dilaton
gravity ( 188 ) can be used as a gravitational dual in two dimensions.
For simplicity we consider the dilaton models where the functional
@xmath is of the form ( 193 ). To complete the dictionary we need to
find the appropriate matter content to include in the action to source a
specific expectation value. The calculation of a desired expectation
value can then be completed on the gravity side of the duality. As input
one gives the appropriate matter content and the field equation solution
is then the expectation value.
As a first example we will now examine the case where the family of
quantum states used to calculate the metric are the @xmath Hamiltonian
states. As we have already shown in section 12 , the scalar curvature
for the @xmath family of states is @xmath with scalar curvature @xmath
where @xmath is the representation label. The dual dilaton gravity
action is thus

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (209)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath must be chosen so as to produce the appropriate energy
momentum tensor and is only a functional of matter. Our task is now to
find the matter content that would source a desired expectation value.

#### 22.1 The @xmath Symmetry Generators

In the section 19 we have shown that the field equations are
significantly simpler when one considers the generators of symmetry.
Indeed, since the scalar curvature is also constant for the @xmath
Hamiltonians the energy momentum tensor that sources the expectation
values of the symmetry generators @xmath is zero. We thus set @xmath in
( 209 ). The field equations correspond exactly to those studied in [ 15
] - [ 19 ] namely

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (210)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (211)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

or equivalently

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (212)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (213)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (214)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

There are three linearly independent solutions of the field equations
corresponding to the expectation values of @xmath and @xmath . This is a
coordinate independent result but can be verified for the free particle
metric ( 117 ) and the expectation values ( 167 ), which we restate here
for convenience

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (215)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (216)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

As discussed in section 21 , the @xmath -model gives three globally
distinct solutions characterised by the sign of the potential @xmath (
183 ), @xmath and @xmath . The natural question to ask is whether there
is a relation between the three linearly independent dilaton solutions
and the sign of the potential. To gain clarity on this we examine the
general @xmath symmetry generator, @xmath , (the expectation values are
found in ( 167 )) and substitute this into ( 183 ) to find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (217)
  -- -------- -- -------

The potential is constant, as it should be since the symmetry generator
solves the on-shell field equations. Note that it is proportional to the
value of @xmath that classifies the @xmath as elliptic, parabolic or
hyperbolic ( 114 ). The quantity @xmath thus indicates which @xmath
element expectation value, up to unitary transformation, is the solution
of the field equations. The expectation values of the elliptic operators
are thus the dilaton solutions of @xmath , the parabolic operators of
@xmath and the hyperbolic operators the dilaton solutions of @xmath .
Again, this is a coordinate independent result but may be verified for
the harmonic oscillator metric and expectation values.
Note furthermore that @xmath will no longer be constant if @xmath . This
implies that the potential @xmath contains information of both the fact
that the dilaton solves the field equation ( @xmath ) and a boundary
condition for the dilaton. The fact that the on-shell field equations
(with @xmath ) are satisfied tells us that the solution must be a linear
combination of the symmetry generators, @xmath . The value for the
potential then tells us the value of @xmath that this linear combination
must satisfy i.e. the operator must be of the form @xmath . This
specifies the @xmath operator up to a unitary transformation. In order
to select the expectation value of a specific operator with this value
of @xmath we must give boundary conditions.
The dictionary for the @xmath symmetry generators can be summarised as
follows

  SU(1,1) model of CQM                           JT-model of dilaton gravity
  ---------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  Quantum states related by phase (ray)          Point of the manifold of states
  Symmetries of states                           Isometries of the metric
  Hamiltonian                                    Choice of time coordinate
  Representation label, @xmath                   Scalar curvature @xmath
  Operator expectation value                     Solution of Dilaton e.o.m.
  Operator @xmath                                @xmath i.e. @xmath
  @xmath                                         Potential, @xmath
  Specific unitary operator from @xmath family   Boundary condition on the dilaton

The first four entries of this dictionary are simply due to how we
construct the metric from a family of quantum states. The fifth is a
choice that we made - the field equation solutions are precisely the
expectation values of operators. The last three entries tell us what
matter content (and which boundary conditions) must be put into the
dilaton gravity model in order to source a desired generator of
symmetry.
We have already begun to extend the work of [ 15 ] - [ 19 ] by firstly
providing the explicit dictionary between dilaton gravity and quantum
mechanics. This allows us direct access to the dictionary which we have
now started to fill out. The systematic nature of our construction
allows us to go beyond just the generators of symmetry and we can give a
dual interpretation to the dilatons in the case where the matter content
is non-zero. This will, of course, be the expectation values of
operators that are not generators of symmetry.

#### 22.2 Extending Beyond the Generators of Symmetry of @xmath

We will now extend the @xmath dictionary by investigating the explicit
energy momentum tensors that source the expectation values of operators
from the enveloping algebra of @xmath . Before that we make a number of
remarks that will prove useful.
The Killing vectors close on the same commutation relations as their
corresponding operators and, indeed, are nothing other than a
differential operator representation of these operators. These
differential operators act on functions of the coordinates and in
particular they act on the expectation values of operators. It can be
verified that this is a representation since, by using ( 170 ), it can
be shown that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (218)
  -- -------- -- -------

for symmetry generators @xmath and @xmath and an arbitrary operator
@xmath . As an example, the Killing vectors of @xmath satisfy the
commutation relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (219)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

which may be compared to ( 110 ). The Laplacian is a differential
operator, quadratic in derivative, that commutes with all the Killing
vectors and must thus be proportional to a differential operator
representation of the Casimir. In our present case this is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (220)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is proportional to the @xmath Casimir.
We are interested in finding the trace of the energy momentum tensor and
the potential ( 184 ). The trace of the energy momentum tensor features
when one applies the Laplace operator to the dilaton ( 192 ). Thus the
properties of the Casimir can prove useful in determining the
appropriate trace of the energy momentum tensor.
For determining the appropriate value of the potential we do not
currently possess an algorithm. The appropriate value for the potential
will thus have to be calculated (for operators that are not generators
of symmetry) by direct substitution. The trace of the energy momentum
tensor lends itself to symmetry arguments and may be calculated as
follows.
A basis for the enveloping algebra of @xmath are all hermitian operators
that are the product of @xmath @xmath elements @xmath , where @xmath
runs from @xmath upwards. For instance, when @xmath we have @xmath
operators which we may order as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath                        
     @xmath   @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (221)
     @xmath   @xmath               
     @xmath                        
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Note that the operators in ( 221 ) are tabled according to scaling
dimension i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (222)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the scaling dimension. All operators on the same row
have the same scaling dimension. Note further that one may go up in a
column (up to normalisation) by a commutator with @xmath and down by a
commutator with @xmath . This implies that we only need the topmost (or
equivalently the bottommost) operator of every column. We label the
operators of ( 221 ) by @xmath and find for the topmost operator

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (223)
  -- -------- -- -------

and define the rest up to normalisation by @xmath and @xmath . We have
defined the operators in such a way that the value for @xmath can never
exceed @xmath . In terms of the expectation values of @xmath i.e. @xmath
this implies that @xmath and @xmath
Another instructive example is @xmath . For these we find that the
topmost operators are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (224)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that we had to include another index. The set of operators @xmath
constitute a basis for the enveloping algebra of @xmath . The operators
can be simplified furtherby using the commutation relations and indeed
one finds that, for instance @xmath and @xmath . For the purpose of our
further discussion we will only consider the operators in the chain
where @xmath assumes the maximal value and we define

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (225)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we essentially drop the index @xmath . This classification scheme
for the expectation values of operators amounts to the construction of
spherical tensor operators. The expectation values of the operators are
eigenfunctions of @xmath (associated with @xmath while the role played
by the vector fields @xmath and @xmath are that of ladder operators
(associated with @xmath and @xmath ).
The expectation values of the operators will thus be simultaneous
eigenfunctions of the Laplacian ( 220 ) (associated with @xmath ) and we
find that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (226)
  -- -------- -- -------

The relation ( 226 ) is most easily verified using the free particle
metric ( 117 ) and the expectation value

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (227)
  -- -------- -- -------

The two derivatives with respect to @xmath yield the factor @xmath and
the multiplication with the inverse metric restores the appropriate
order in @xmath and yields the factor @xmath . Note also that the
normalisation of the states used is irrelevant and, as per usual, the
result is coordinate independent.
The form of the appropriate potential is more complicated than the trace
of the energy momentum tensor. For this reason we provide only the
appropriate potential to source the expectation values of @xmath and
@xmath . The appropriate potential to source the other expectation
values can be achieved by applying the ladder operators ( 170 ). For
these expectation values we find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (228)
  -- -------- -- -------

The expressions ( 226 ) and ( 228 ), along with boundary conditions for
the dilaton, now allow one to calculate a desired expectation value
purely on the gravitational side of the duality. An arbitrary operator
from the @xmath enveloping algebra is broken up in terms of the basis
@xmath and the appropriate trace and potential put together from ( 226 )
and ( 228 ). The energy momentum tensor is reconstructed from these and
the field equations solved. The dilaton solution of these field
equations is then the desired expectation value.
The dictionary for the @xmath enveloping algebra operators reads

  SU(1,1) model of CQM                          JT-model of dilaton gravity
  --------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  Quantum states related by phase (ray)         Point of the manifold of states
  Symmetries of states                          Isometries of the metric
  Hamiltonian                                   Choice of time coordinate
  Representation label, @xmath                  Scalar curvature @xmath
  Operator expectation value                    Solution of Dilaton e.o.m.
  Operator @xmath                               @xmath
  Operator @xmath                               Potential, @xmath
  Specific unitary operator from solution set   Boundary condition on the dilaton

.

#### 22.3 Extending to the Conformal Transformations

Another interesting set of transformation are the conformal
transformations. For two dimensions we derived the equation of motion (
187 ) for the generators of conformal transformations of the metric.
Note that this is the trace of the dilaton field equations i.e. eq. (
213 ) of the set ( 212 ), ( 213 ), ( 214 ). We are thus requiring that
the fields solve only one of the field equations, not the full set. This
is known as an unconstrained variation (as opposed to a constrained
variation where the fields need to solve the full set of field
equations).

##### 22.3.1 The Unconstrained Solutions

We are now interested in finding fields that solve ( 213 ).
For simplicity of notation we now consider the free particle model and
work with complex coordinates where @xmath and @xmath . As before the
result is coordinate independent and . The solutions of ( 213 ) are any
linear combination of the functions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (229)
  -- -------- -- -------

as well as their complex conjugates. These are the expectation values of
the operators

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (230)
  -- -------- -- -------

The factor of @xmath in ( 229 ) ensures that the hermitian part of the
operator in the expectation value is given by @xmath ⁵ ⁵ 5 This is most
easily verified for @xmath and @xmath . The operator function @xmath is
the gamma function and we have defined @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The
functions ( 229 ) can be derived from the unnormalised overlap @xmath by
acting on it with the differential operator representation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (231)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

It can be verified that the operators @xmath close on the centerless
Virasoro algebra ( 18 ) (i.e. @xmath ) and indeed, the operators ( 230 )
are a representation of the centerless Virasoro algebra in terms of
@xmath algebra elements [ 66 ] .
Near the @xmath boundary we may expand the expectation values ( 229 ) to
find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (232)
  -- -------- -- -------

The operators ( 230 ) are not all hermitian and we need to calculate the
vector fields with a bit more care than previously. We write these in
terms of the expectation values of hermitian and anti-hermitian
operators ( 229 ). This can be done by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (233)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (234)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The vector fields for hermitian and anti-hermitian operators are
calculated as in eq. ( 163 ) and we thus have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (235)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (236)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The fields ( 232 ) and vector fields ( 235 ), ( 236 ) clearly form a
power series expansion. The general form for the expectation values of
the hermitian operators is any linear combination of ( 232 ) and is thus
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (237)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , see eq. ( 232 ). Similarly the most general vector fields
are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (238)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (239)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath , see eqs. ( 235 ), ( 236 ). The @xmath ’s,
@xmath ’s and @xmath ’s are arbitrary expansion coefficients.
Comparing these with the transformations and field solutions of ( 202 )
and ( 199 ) reveal that the vector fields comprise the @xmath and @xmath
part of the transformations. These are precisely the transformations
required to perform the analysis of section 21.1.2 . This is the first
of two ingredients required to perform that analysis. What remains for
us is to find the second ingredient namely the energy momentum tensor on
the gravity side.

##### 22.3.2 The Asymptotic (Outer Boundary) Contribution to the Central
Charge

There is one thing, however, we do need to specify further. Note that
between the field solutions ( 237 ) and vector fields ( 238 ), ( 239 )
we have three functions of time. In the analysis of section 21.1.2 there
are only two independent functions of time that prove relevant.
This is due to the fact that, in that analysis, an additional constraint
is imposed. Here we have only required that the fields satisfy ( 213 )
while the analysis of section 21.1.2 also requires them to satisfy ( 214
). At first glance this seems fundamentally different to what we have
done. In the analysis of section 21.1.2 the constrained field equations
are imposed while our very starting point was that the conformal
transformations satisfy the unconstrained field equations ⁶ ⁶ 6 We note
that this imposing of the constrained field equations is discussed as a
weakness in [ 67 ] . . Up to this “missing” constraint we recover
exactly the transformations used in the analysis. It thus seems that one
may recover these transformations in at least two ways - either allow
the metric and dilaton to fluctuate asymptotically and impose the
constrained variation or work with an identically @xmath metric but
impose only the unconstrained variation.
What to do then about the extra function of time that we find in our
analysis? The main insight is that in requiring that the fields solve
the equation ( 213 ) we are requiring that the trace of the energy
momentum tensor is fixed. We do not place any restriction on the
potential @xmath in the bulk. What we may specify is a boundary
condition for the potential. In [ 17 ] two possible boundary conditions
are discussed and we will discuss the effects of both.
The first boundary condition is the one that will reproduce the analysis
of section 21.1.2 namely @xmath . This means that, though we do not
require ( 214 ) to hold in the bulk we do require it to hold near the
boundary. Since the analysis is carried out near the boundary we thus
have the same allowed transformations and constraints as in section
21.1.2 .
Importantly we derived these transformations without changing the metric
from @xmath to asymptotically @xmath . We are thus working in an @xmath
background. For the @xmath metric the boundary term @xmath is simply
given by [ 62 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (240)
  -- -------- -- -------

By expanding around the zero mass solution @xmath we find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (241)
  -- -------- -- -------

The potential is thus of the appropriate form to be interpreted as an
energy momentum tensor [ 67 ] . As mentioned in section 21.3 the precise
normalisation still needs to be clarified. We have merely recast the
arguments of section 21.1.2 in a different set of coordinates so that we
should get exactly the same contribution to the central charge from this
calculation.

##### 22.3.3 The Inner Boundary Contribution to the Central Charge

The insight that the implication of the unconstrained variation is a
fluctuating potential term is of great value to clarify why the
contribution of the inner boundary needs to be taken into account along
with the contribution of the outer boundary. We can simply argue this in
terms of the set of transformations that we allow.
The key is the boundary condition. By imposing the condition @xmath we
are not excluding the possibility that a transformation may be included
that changes the potential from positive (indicative of a black hole) to
zero (which is indicative of the vacuum). We know from our discussion of
conformal quantum mechanics ( 122 ) that such transformations do form
part of the conformal group. Indeed, it is the transformation that maps
the scale-invariant Hamiltonian to the harmonic oscillator.
This situation is clearly unacceptable since the vacuum solutions and
black hole solutions are mixed. We must thus factor out the
transformation that maps the black hole solutions onto the vacuum
solutions. This is the step ( 208 ).
We could have achieved the same feat if we started off by working with
the second boundary condition proposed in [ 17 ] , namely that @xmath .
Indeed, in [ 17 ] they work with this boundary condition and find the
correct expression for the central charge without taking the inner and
outer boundary into account. The authors argue that the gravitational
content with these two boundary conditions are different. For our
purposes this is not a significant issue - we are merely interested in
understanding how the CQM central charge may be described in the dual.
Indeed, the unconstrained variation does not yield the metric as part of
the field equation solutions ( 212 ) and is thus not, in a strict sense,
a theory of gravity. Our aim is to show that the central charge can be
incorporated in a dual description - a feat that can be achieved using
both boundary conditions.
We conclude by again emphasising that what we have presented in this
section are not new results in the @xmath context but rather show that
the construction we have made allow these existing results to be derived
in a simple and elegant way. The explicit realisation of the dictionary
also serves to add insights to the work of [ 15 ] - [ 19 ] and allows
for future generalisations of these works in a very natural way.

##### 22.3.4 Massive Scalar Field Action

We will now show how the unconstrained variation can be contained neatly
as the variation of an action.
We showed in section 20 that the constrained variation can be achieved
by varying the dilaton action ( 188 ) with respect to the fields and the
inverse metric.
Consider first the quadratic dilaton action

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (242)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is some minimally coupled matter (independent of the
metric). It can be chosen so that the constrained field equations of (
242 ) are equivalent to those of the JT-model. We will only be
interested in the unconstrained variation so that @xmath plays no role.
When we consider the metric as fixed as @xmath with scalar curvature
@xmath in ( 242 ) we find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (243)
  -- -------- -- -------

This can be identified as the scalar field action. The variation with
respect to the dilaton now yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (244)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is precisely the unconstrained variation. For the action quadratic
in the fields we can thus give a very clear physical distinction between
the constrained and unconstrained variation. The constrained variation
comes from a model of dilaton gravity where we may vary the action with
respect to the metric and dilaton. The unconstrained variation is where
we fix the background metric and only vary with respect to the field.
The solutions of this unconstrained variation yields the expectation
values of the Virasoro elements related to the conformal
transformations.
We note that the conformal symmetry of the massive scalar field in
@xmath was studied in [ 68 ] .

##### 22.3.5 A More Direct Approach from CQM

In [ 19 ] it is pointed out that the field equations of the asymptotic
metric and dilaton corresponds to that of a scale-invariant quantum
mechanical model coupled to a time-dependent quadratic source. This is
nothing other than the model of conformal quantum mechanics. In this
section we will tackle our central charge analysis from another angle
that will make the connection between conformal quantum mechanics and
dilaton gravity even more explicit.
To find the quantum states from the CQM action we quantised the fields
from which we found the generator of time translations. The time-evolved
states were then defined accordingly. After regularising the
time-evolved states we may construct the metric from ( 47 ). The
symmetries of the states are imprinted as isometries of the metric. The
conformal quantum mechanics action possesses full conformal symmetry if
one allows the time-dependent coupling to change. On the level of the
time-evolved states this is equivalent to the statement that the
Hamiltonian should be allowed the freedom to change.
Thus consider the quantum states

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (245)
  -- -------- -- -------

The symmetries of these states are generated by the @xmath elements
@xmath and @xmath . The form of these states can be identified as that
of the sourced quantum states we defined in ( 99 ).
The metric may be calculated from ( 47 ) to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (246)
  -- -------- -- -------

which has constant scalar curvature @xmath and is another
parametrisation of @xmath . The dynamics of the quantum system is
imprinted very clearly on the metric. The manifold is still Kähler, but
now written in a form where the transformation to the holomorphic and
anti-holomorphic coordinates are not clear. The dictionary we have
developed in this chapter thus still holds. The form of ( 246 ) is
reminiscent of the form of the asymptotic @xmath metrics ( 198 ) but
with more limited freedom. This freedom will be all we require, however.
The general solution of the field equation is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (247)
  -- -------- -- -------

The unconstrained variation yields the constraint

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (248)
  -- -------- -- -------

while the constrained variation yields the additional constraint

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (249)
  -- -------- -- -------

The potential, @xmath , if the dilaton solves the constrained field
equations is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (250)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is constant. The constrained field equations yield the expectation
values of the three generators of symmetry as solutions.
The potential, when only the unconstrained field equation ( 248 ) is
imposed, is given by (in an expansion around @xmath )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (251)
  -- -------- -- -------

In ( 251 ) the difference between the constrained and unconstrained
variation is clear. The constrained variation yields a constant value
for @xmath while the unconstrained variation allows for asymptotic
correction terms. In [ 19 ] the authors identify the asymptotic
corrections with the kinetic energy of the conformal quantum mechanical
model. We showed in section ( 14 ), our discussion of conformal quantum
mechanics, that the time-dependent coupling (after conformal
transformation) is due to the kinetic term.
The transformation properties of the dilaton gravity potential @xmath
can thus clearly be used to extract the central charge. The
interpretation of a changing coupling term, @xmath in @xmath is thus
that the potential of dilaton gravity, related to the black hole mass,
is allowed to fluctuate asymptotically.
We thus present the following additions to the dictionary for conformal
quantum mechanics and dilaton gravity

  Conformal Quantum Mechanics   JT-model of dilaton gravity
  ----------------------------- -----------------------------------------
  Local Symmetries              Conformal transformations of the metric
  Expectation values of         Dilaton solutions
  conformal generators          in unconstraind variation
  Changing @xmath               Asymptotic fluctuations in @xmath

#### 22.4 The Duals of the @xmath Quantum Models

We next examine the @xmath Hamiltonian systems. As we showed ( 152 ) we
find that the scalar curvature is also constant as it was for the @xmath
models. The only adjustment we need to make is the sign of the scalar
curvature so that we now consider a @xmath background as opposed to an
@xmath background. Two dimensional de Sitter geometries have been
considered in the context of dualities before, most notably in the
@xmath correspondence [ 69 ] , [ 70 ] . The field equation ( 187 ) holds
for the conformal transformations of any two-dimensional metric so that
the conformal transformations of @xmath can be handled on similar
footing to @xmath .
The @xmath and @xmath algebras are related by an appropriate
complexification of the generators. It should thus be possible to
perform an analysis that is very similar to the @xmath analysis we
carried out in the previous section (which may be compared to [ 69 ] , [
70 ] ). This will not be done here and is a possible avenue for future
study.
Our interest here is simply to recover the expectation values of
operators from the @xmath enveloping algebra by means of a dual
description and we will show now that this can be done. The @xmath
coherent states are given in ( 150 ). The dilaton model

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (252)
  -- -------- -- -------

yields, up to a coordinate transformation, the metric ( 152 ) as the
on-shell solution. The dilatons that solve the on-shell field equation
are the expectation values of the symmetry generators

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (253)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with respect to the @xmath coherent states. The trace of the energy
momentum tensor is @xmath . Again these expectation values are related
to the Killing vectors ( 153 ) by the symplectic structure ( 163 ). The
potential associated with the operators @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (254)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is constant, as it should be for a generator of symmetry.
Furthermore, it is always positive, unlike for the @xmath duals, so that
we do not get geometries that are different globally. As before
operators that share the same mass are related by a unitary
transformation.
It is worthwhile to reflect on the difference between this case and that
found in [ 69 ] where three globally different solutions are in fact
found. We suspect that this is due to considering the representation of
@xmath related to the infinite dimensional @xmath representation by a
complexification of operators. The consequence of this is that
additional factors of @xmath are introduced. If we allow the coefficient
@xmath and @xmath to assume complex values then the sign of @xmath can
be altered. The dilaton solutions are then rather the expectation values
of non-hermitian operators. The precise link between these two analyses
warrant further investigation.
For our current purposes we only wish to calculate the expectation
values of @xmath algebra elements and for this the use of ( 254 ) is
sufficient. One can proceed to find the appropriate energy momentum
tensors for the enveloping algebra from this point in similar fashion to
before. The Laplacian is, as before, a representation of the Casimir and
we may classify the expectation values of @xmath eveloping algebra
operators in terms of their eigenvalues with respect to the differential
operator representation of the Casimir and @xmath . The procedure is
analogous to that performed in section 22.2 . One finds that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (255)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (256)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

This allows one to calculate the expectation value of any element of the
eveloping algebra of @xmath in the dual dilaton gravity description. As
before this is done by including the appropriate energy momentum tensor.

### 23 The dual of the Glauber Coherent States

The metric constructed from the Glauber coherent states ( 155 ) is flat.
This presents a very unique situation since the trick we employed to get
rid of the constant @xmath in ( 181 ) is no longer applicable. Indeed,
it can be verified that the expectation values

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (257)
  -- -------- -- -------

satisfy the equations of the previous sections @xmath with @xmath and
that the mass is given by the product @xmath . However, the expectation
value of the third generator of symmetry

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (258)
  -- -------- -- -------

rather satisfies the equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (259)
  -- -------- -- -------

so that @xmath in ( 181 ). The mass associated with this equation and
solution is zero. It is thus not possible to capture all the generators
of symmetry into a single action and distinguish them up to the choice
of mass. For the operators ( 257 ) the action

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (260)
  -- -------- -- -------

works but for the number operator expectation value ( 258 ) we need a
different action of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (261)
  -- -------- -- -------

Due to the fact that we cannot eliminate the constant @xmath in ( 181 )
we cannot find an action of which the field equations are solved by the
expectation values of the algebra elements simultaneously. The
expectation values of the algebra elements is thus better served by
considering it as a large @xmath limit of the @xmath algebra elements.
This indicates that for a neat and sensible dictionary a non-zero
curvature of the manifold is essential.

### 24 Summary

In this chapter we investigated @xmath gravity duals. We managed to
develop a systematic dictionary between quantum mechanical models and a
JT-model of dilaton gravity. We investigated the details of this
dictionary for the Glauber coherent states, the @xmath Hamiltonians and,
in particular, the @xmath quantum models. We were able to show how
numerous existing results in the @xmath literature come about in a very
natural way from our construction. We were also able to expand upon some
of their results and identified several avenues of possible future
investigation.
These results comprise the core results of this thesis. They should not
be viewed as a calculational procedure but rather a proof of concept. It
shows that quantum mechanical systems can be repackaged as gravity
duals, at least in two dimensions, and that this can be done
systematically. The number of existing results from the @xmath
literature that are reproduced in a natural way from our construction
seems to indicate that the construction repackages these quantum
mechanical systems in an appropriate way. Furthermore, the systematic
construction gives us direct and full access to the quantum mechanics /
dilaton gravity dictionary. This provides a significant level of clarity
to the @xmath correspondence.
In the remaining chapters we will investigate the higher dimensional
manifolds, the difficulties that arise when one wishes to build
gravitational duals and proposed solutions to these difficulties. We
will again see existing results from the literature come about in a very
natural way but our investigations will not be as well-developed as they
have been in this chapter.

## Chapter \thechapter A Look at Higher Dimensional Models

Our focus thus far has been on the two-dimensional manifolds of states.
The reason for this is clear - it is the simplest example of our
construction. Our focus has, in particular, been on time-evolved states
where the time-coordinate is complexified. Existing results of the
@xmath correspondence were shown to follow from the construction in a
natural way and we were also able to extend these results. We further
showed that more general dual gravitational models, that do not have an
@xmath geometry, can be constructed in a systematic way, starting from
an appropriate choice of quantum states.
We will now turn to higher dimensional models. The most natural
extension to higher dimensions is to include a position label for the
states. As before, in order to utilise results the geometric formulation
of quantum mechanics of Ashtekar and Schilling, discussed in section 7 ,
we will consider states labelled by complex coordinates. This will
present a difficulty since, unlike in two dimensions, the Kähler
manifolds in higher dimensions are not maximally symmetric. This will
lead to additional terms in the equations of motion for the expectation
values of operators.
Our study will thus almost immediately specialise to the simplest higher
dimensional models, those that have full Schrödinger group symmetry
(such as the free particle and harmonic oscillator). Though this is a
significant simplification it serves as a starting point to
understanding the higher dimensional duals.
We will motivate, after analysis of these models, why a central
extension of the Schrödinger algebra is a beneficial procedure. In
chapter \thechapter we will analyse the metrics that are produced from
states where this central extension is considered as a dynamic quantity.

### 25 The Equations of Motion

We assume that the family of states are parametrised by @xmath complex
parameters i.e. @xmath . Note that the dimension of the state manifolds
is @xmath . We have already derived the equations of motion for the
expectation value, @xmath of an arbitrary operator in section 19 , but
restate it here for convenience

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (262)
  -- -------- -- -------

In two dimensions we were able to use the simple form for the Riemann
curvature tensor ( 177 ) to derive, from ( 262 ), simple equations of
motion with at most second order derivatives. In the higher dimensional
case the Riemann tensor is more complicated (see Appendix \thechapter )
which adds additional terms to the equations. For @xmath , we have that
[ 71 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (263)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath is the Weyl tensor. The Weyl tensor encodes information on
the conformal properties of the metric in that the Weyl tensor is zero
if and only if the metric is conformally flat [ 71 ] . This more
complicated form for the Riemann tensor makes the higher-dimensional
analysis more intricate. In this thesis we will try to simplify the
equations as much as possible.
As a first simplification we note that the contraction of the Weyl
tensor under any two indices is zero so that we first consider only the
trace of the field equations ( 262 ). We then arrive at

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (264)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that if we are working with an Einstein manifold i.e. @xmath this
simplifies to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (265)
  -- -------- -- -------

and, if in addition the scalar curvature is constant, we find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (266)
  -- -------- -- -------

The trace of the field equations, at least for an Einstein metric of
constant scalar curvature, is of the simple form ( 266 ). We will see in
section 26 that even for the free particle states the resulting metric
is not Einstein. Indeed, we will only produce metrics that are Einstein
(in more than two dimensions) in chapter \thechapter .
If the metric is not Einstein then the trace of the field equations are
more complicated. We express the Ricci tensor as @xmath where @xmath = 0
and take the trace of ( 264 ) to find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (267)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

If the second term of ( 267 ) is zero then we recover ( 266 ). If not
then our equations of motion will look quite different. If, in addition
we are not sourcing the expectation value of a symmetry generator then
this will add an additional term in ( 267 ). Note that the second term
has contributions from a scalar curvature that is not constant and a
Ricci tensor that is not Einstein. The best situation we can hope for is
that we can contain the deviation from ( 266 ) in a single scalar
function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (268)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath gets contributions if the scalar curvature is not constant,
the manifold is not Einstein and the expectation value being sourced is
not a generator of symmetry.
The trace of the field equations ( 264 ) thus only assumes the form of
an eigenvalue problem for the expectation values of symmetry generators
( 266 ) if both the scalar curvature is constant and the metric is
Einstein. If we were to consider the full set of field equations ( 264 )
we would have to account for a non-zero Weyl tensor as well. In this
thesis we will not study the latter so that the analysis of the full set
of field equations is a possible avenue of future investigation. Note,
importantly, that since we are only considering the one field equation
we will need to specify additional boundary conditions in order to
source the appropriate expectation value. We will speak to this more in
section 31 .

#### 25.1 Massive Scalar Field

Before we proceed to look at a specific higher dimensional example we
will show how the field equation ( 266 ) may result from the variation
of an action. We have already introduced this action in section 22.3.4
but we restate it here for higher dimensions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (269)
  -- -------- -- -------

The action ( 269 ) is defined on a fixed background. The field equation
is found by varying with respect to the field @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (270)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is exactly of the form ( 268 ) if @xmath and @xmath .
Along with the field equation we will have to specify boundary
conditions. This is best illustrated by example e.g. in section 31 .

### 26 The @xmath Models

The Schrödinger algebra for two dimensions (time and one spatial
dimension) is given in ( 41 ) and the extension to higher dimensions is
straightforward (see Appendix \thechapter ). Instead of a single
position operator @xmath and momentum operator @xmath we have @xmath
i.e. @xmath and @xmath related by rotation. These then satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (271)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the sake of illustration we restrict ourselves to a concrete example
namely the free particle states

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (272)
  -- -------- -- -------

though, as discussed in the context of the @xmath metrics, any
Hamiltonian from the @xmath algebra, such as the harmonic oscillator,
will yield states that are related by a coordinate transformation and
normalisation to the states ( 272 ). Note the definition of the
coordinates @xmath and @xmath in ( 272 ). We will work with @xmath
coordinates and @xmath coordinates interchangeably. Note that we have
@xmath complex coordinates. The overlap of these states ( 272 ) is given
by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (273)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is simply the complexified and unnormalised free particle
propagator. The integer @xmath refers to the number of spatial
dimensions. From the overlap ( 273 ) the metric may be calculated to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (274)
  -- -------- -- -------

The scalar curvature is constant, @xmath but the manifold is not
Einstein. Specifically there are only two non-zero entries for the Ricci
tensor

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (275)
  -- -------- -- -------

The equations of motion for the expectation values of symmetry
generators are thus not of the form ( 266 ) so that these expectation
values cannot be found as eigenfunctions of the Laplacian.

#### 26.1 Examining the Laplacian

In section 22.2 we were able to derive the trace of the energy momentum
tensor by observing that the Laplacian is a differential operator
representation of the @xmath Casimir. This was because the Killing
vectors formed a vector field representation of the @xmath algebra
elements and all the Killing vectors commute with the Laplacian.
The situation for the @xmath algebra is slightly different. A dynamical
symmetry ( 36 ) only implies a non-zero Killing vector if it is not
simply a change of phase for the family of states. The commutator of
@xmath and @xmath ( 271 ) will simply change the phase of the wave
function. While the operators @xmath and @xmath thus satisfy ( 271 )
their corresponding vector fields satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (276)
  -- -------- -- -------

This implies that the Killing vectors no longer close on the Schrödinger
algebra. As an example, the Laplacian in four dimensions is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (277)
  -- -------- -- -------

and commutes with all the Killing vectors, @xmath but is not the
Schrödinger algebra Casimir (see e.g. [ 72 ] ) in differential operator
form. The procedure of section 22.2 , where we classified the
expectation values of operators of the enveloping algebra by their
eigenvalues with the Casimir and scaling operator, will thus not work
here.
One of the natural questions to ask is whether the eigenfunctions of the
Laplacian can still be interpreted as the expectation values of
operators from the enveloping algebra of @xmath . To begin answering
this question we first state the expectation values of the generators of
symmetry explicitly

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (278)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Note that the @xmath generators are all of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (279)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath for @xmath and @xmath respectively. On
the @xmath submanifold the expectation values, metric and Ricci tensor
thus look identical to the two-dimensional @xmath case. This may be
understood intuitively since the underlying algebra, the Schrödinger
algebra, is the semi-direct sum of @xmath and @xmath Heisenberg algebras
(related by rotation) i.e. some combination of an @xmath and @xmath flat
space geometries. The @xmath submanifold is precisely the @xmath
submanifold.
Based on this one might venture a guess that a subset of the
eigenfunctions of the Laplacian are the expectation values of operators
restricted to the @xmath submanifold. This turns out to be the case and,
for the operators @xmath (defined in section 22.2 ) we find the relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (280)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . In addition to this the expectation value of the position
and momentum operators are eigenfunctions of the Laplacian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (281)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### 26.2 Eigenfunctions of the Laplacian

Of course, the expressions ( 280 ) are not expectation values with
respect to the @xmath basis. Using the relations ( 278 ), ( 279 ) and (
280 ) we may deduce that the expectation value

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (282)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is an eigenfunction of the Laplacian. This can be written
in a much more suggestive form following eq. ( 172 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (283)
  -- -------- -- -------

which suggest that the vector fields @xmath may be used in some ladder
operator scheme to find the eigenfunctions of the Laplacian. Indeed,
this turns out to be case.
The eigenfunctions of the Laplacian ( 277 ), @xmath may be labelled by
three indices @xmath and @xmath . The explicit meaning of these indices
will become clear shortly. The starting point of the laddering scheme is
one of the @xmath expectation values of momentum. One can then ladder up
in @xmath by means of @xmath immediately or first apply @xmath and then
ladder up in @xmath by means of @xmath i.e.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (284)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

At this point the explicit forms of these functions may be useful for
the sake of following the argument

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (285)
  -- -------- -- -------

The expressions ( 285 ) may be used to verify the statements we make. We
prefer to write the expressions with ( 284 ) since these expressions do
not make use of a choice of coordinates. The eigenfunctions ( 284 ) are
the lowest tiers in terms of laddering in the index @xmath since @xmath
. We may ladder up in the index @xmath by means of @xmath i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (286)
  -- -------- -- -------

so that the index @xmath is related to the eigenvalue with respect to
@xmath . The index @xmath is related to the eigenvalue with respect to
the Laplacian. Explicitly, most easily verified for the functions ( 284
), one has

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (287)
     @xmath      (288)
  -- -------- -- -------

The index @xmath thus divides the eigenfunctions into two classes, those
with eigenvalues ( 287 ) if @xmath is non-zero and ( 288 ) if @xmath .
Note that the functions with non-zero @xmath are related simply by
rotation.

#### 26.3 Eigenfunctions Expressed as Operator Expectation Values

The expressions ( 284 ) and ( 286 ) now express the eigenfunctions of
the Laplacian as some combination of expectation values of operators
with respect to the states @xmath . A few examples of these are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (289)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Though the eigenfunctions of the Laplacian are not interpretable
directly as the expectation values of operators (instead they are
combinations of products of expectation values), they may be used to
calculate a specific expectation value of an operators.

#### 26.4 The Structure of the Laplacian in Terms of the @xmath Algebra

We suspect that these results may be better understood if the Laplacian
can be recast in terms of the @xmath operators. Unfortunately, our
studies thus far have not revealed how this may be done and this is an
avenue of future investigations.
What we find intriguing is the fact that the eigenfunctions form two
classes - those that are generated by a series of ladder operators on
@xmath and on @xmath ( 284 ). The eigenvalues for these two classes are
different, but the difference between eigenvalues is the same.
This is reminiscent of selecting the even or odd sector in the @xmath
representation i.e. the @xmath or @xmath representation. More
explicitly, the @xmath operators ( 111 ) may be represented in terms of
creation and annihilation operators

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (290)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . The coherent states for @xmath will be of the form @xmath
for two choices of @xmath namely the eigenstates @xmath , @xmath of
@xmath i.e. @xmath and @xmath . The coherent states will then be a
combination of the even states @xmath or the odd states @xmath . The
operators that relate the even and odd sectors are @xmath and @xmath .
The states we are considering ( 272 ) are the result of the Schrödiger
group acting on the reference state @xmath . The Schrödinger group, in
turn, can be viewed as the semi-direct sum of @xmath and @xmath
Heisenberg groups (see appendix \thechapter ) related by rotation. In a
certain sense we are thus mixing the @xmath and @xmath representations.
If we only restrict ourselves to (a specific combination of) the
operators with even powers of @xmath and @xmath we get the expressions (
288 ) while odd powers yield ( 287 ). These are the expressions we would
expect if we simply calculated the eigenvalues for the @xmath enveloping
algebra elements in the two different representations, see section 22.2
.
These statements can only be made rigorous once the Laplacian is recast
in terms of @xmath algebra elements. We hope to do this in future.

### 27 Notable Submanifolds

In chapter \thechapter we will seek to put together a dual description
that is simpler than that of section 26 . One may anticipate what we
will do when it is observed that the Laplacian is not a differential
operator representation of the Schrödinger algebra Casimir.
The reason the Laplacian is not a representation of the Schrödinger
algebra Casimir is because the Killing vectors do not close on the
@xmath algebra which in turn is the consequence of the commutator
between @xmath and @xmath only changing the phase of the states. In
order for it to be represented as a non-zero Killing vector we will have
to ensure that it represents a non-trivial transformation of the states.
Before we continue to do this we briefly highlight some of the
interesting manifolds that result if not all of the coordinates of the
states ( 272 ) are complexified. We will introduce only a single complex
coordinate. Of course, this will spoil the relation between the Killing
vectors and the expectation values of operators. In order to develop a
dictionary for these manifolds a lot more work will be required, a
discussion undertaken in section 33 . Nonetheless, these metrics are
interesting because they are studied in the literature and illustrate
some properties of the construction we have not yet encountered.

#### 27.1 Complexified Time

Consider the regularisation scheme where we only complexify time i.e.
@xmath in ( 272 ). This breaks all symmetries generated by @xmath and
@xmath in the bulk ( @xmath ) and produces the metric

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (291)
  -- -------- -- -------

After the transformation @xmath this becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (292)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is the metric studied in [ 73 ] when considering Lifshitz-like
fixed points. A Lifshitz-like fixed point is a scale invariant fixed
point where space and time scale as @xmath and @xmath . In [ 73 ] the
authors focus on the case @xmath . This scale invariance is reflected in
the metric as an isometry. Note that the states on the boundary @xmath
are still the states ( 272 ). This illustrates that the bulk for a dual
theory is not unique and, in particular, depends on the regularisation
scheme chosen.

#### 27.2 Momentum Regularisation

We may regularise the states in another way, by means of the absolute
value of momentum. We consider the states

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (293)
  -- -------- -- -------

There are other schemes that use functions of powers of @xmath but the
scheme ( 293 ) is chosen so that rotational symmetry remains unbroken.
However, as with ( 291 ) the symmetries generated by @xmath and @xmath
are broken. For @xmath , for example, this yields the metric

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (294)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is clearly a different metric to ( 291 ). Even though the
symmetries we retain in the bulk are the same and the states on the
boundary of the manifold of states are identical the bulk geometry is
different. This illustrates that the regularisation scheme we choose has
a significant effect on the geometry.
Note that the interpretation of the radial coordinate is also different.
In ( 291 ) it has the interpretation of an energy scale while in ( 294 )
it has the dimension of length. There is thus not a general
interpretation of the radial coordinate.

### 28 Discussion

In this chapter we sought to extend the two-dimensional gravitational
duals of chapter \thechapter to higher dimensions. As one may expect the
equations of motion become significantly more complicated in higher
dimension. The Riemann curvature has contributions from the scalar
curvature, the Ricci tensor and the Weyl tensor. These cannot be avoided
altogether since no Kähler manifold in four dimensions or higher is
maximally symmetric.
In order to simplify matters we focused solely on the trace of the field
equations. The Weyl tensor is zero under any contraction of indices so
that the trace of the equations of motion are not affected by the Weyl
tensor. The trace of the equations yield a Laplacian. We took note of
the fact that, if the manifold is Einstein with constant scalar
curvature, the expectation values of symmetry generators are
eigenfunctions of the Laplacian.
We then proceeded to analyse a specific example - states with
Schrödinger symmetry which is the natural extension of the @xmath states
to higher dimensions. The resulting manifold is, however, not Einstein
and the Laplacian is not a representation of the Schrödinger algebra
Casimir. We managed to develop a scheme by which the expectation values
of operators may be extracted from the eigenfunctions but further work
is needed to understand this structure properly.
In the next chapter we will seek to restore the status of the Laplacian
as a representation of the Casimir. This will allow us to interpret its
eigenfunctions as the expectation values of operators so that the
dictionary of chapter \thechapter may be extended to higher dimensions
more simply.

## Chapter \thechapter Free Particle Metrics with Dynamical Mass

In this chapter we will proceed to centrally extend the Schrödinger
algebra in order to construct dual gravitational theories that are as
simple as possible for the Schrödinger Hamiltonian models. Specifically
we hope that this will restore the Laplacian to a differential operator
representation of the Casimir. The dictionary we will be able to develop
should then be closely related to that of chapter \thechapter .
We note that metrics containing the Schrödinger symmetry have received
interest before. In [ 20 ] , [ 21 ] the authors aim to generalize the
@xmath correspondence to the case of non-relativistic field theories, or
@xmath . As is the usual case for dual descriptions the symmetries play
a crucial role. The symmetry generators they consider, that of @xmath ,
close on the conformal Galilei algebra [ 20 ] of which the Schrödinger
algebra of chapter \thechapter is an example. The conformal Galilei
group will thus be our starting point in this chapter.
This chapter can be divided into three parts. In the first we will show
how considering the mass (the central extension of the conformal Galilei
group) as a dynamical variable will allow for the definition of a set of
quantum states that have a simple gravitational dual. Specifically we
will find that the expectation values of symmetry generators may be
sourced by a traceless energy momentum tensor, precisely the desired
result. We will conclude this part with a dictionary applicable to the
complex free particle states in higher dimensions.
In the second we will show how metrics studied in the @xmath
correspondence literature [ 20 ] , [ 21 ] may be derived using our
construction. This can be done by either an appropriate choice of
quantum states or viewing the metrics as defined on submanifolds of a
Kähler manifold. This will supplement their works by identifying the
explicit quantum states that constitute the quantum theory of the
duality. These observations, along with the systematic nature of the
construction, holds the promise of future generalisations to these
studies.
These submanifolds will in general not be Kähler themselves and thus the
duality between the expectation values of operators and Killing vectors
breaks down. In the last section we will speculate as to how a
dictionary for the submanifolds may be developed. We would like to warn
the reader beforehand that the discussion contained therein will be
qualitative at best. Therein we wish only to convey some of our ideas on
how one may progress beyond the work done in this thesis.

### 29 The Conformal Galilei Algebra

We start by defining the @xmath dimensional conformal Galilei algebra
(see Appendix \thechapter ) which consists of @xmath rotations, @xmath
translations, @xmath Galilean boosts, dilatations and the rest mass.
These are generated by @xmath , @xmath + @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath which satisfy the (non-zero) commutation relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (295)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the so-called dynamical exponent and the (Latin) indices
run from @xmath . The operator @xmath represents the central extension
of the algebra and we will refer to it as the mass operator or mass for
short. This is the @xmath -dimensional conformal Galilei algebra with
dynamical exponent @xmath , @xmath [ 74 ] . The dynamical exponent
characterises the different scaling behavior of time and spatial
coordinates. The tensor @xmath is the flat space metric and we
immediately specialise to Euclidean signature i.e. @xmath . When @xmath
there is also a special conformal generator @xmath which satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (296)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the algebra is the @xmath dimensional Schrödinger algebra @xmath [
75 ] . In this chapter we will show how metrics that encode the @xmath
transformations as isometries may be constructed from appropriately
chosen quantum states via ( 47 ). We will also provide a second
perspective namely that they may be viewed as the metric of a
submanifold of the Kähler manifold.

#### 29.1 Representation in Terms of Quantum Mechanical Operators

The operator @xmath is the central extension of the algebra which is a
first step to restoring the status of the Laplacian as the Casimir. The
central extension by itself is not sufficient, however. This is because
the central extension still commutes with all elements of the
Schrödinger algebra (see ( 295 )) so that the transformation it induces
on the quantum states is still only a phase shift. In order for it to
induce a non-trivial transformation we will consider the mass, @xmath ,
as a dynamical variable and introduce a new operator @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (297)
  -- -------- -- -------

We will refer to @xmath as the conjugate mass. The inclusion of @xmath
also allows us to represent the elements of algebra ( 295 ) in terms of
@xmath , @xmath and position and momentum operators (we were able to do
this previously for @xmath but not for general @xmath ).
The momentum operators are simply the @xmath ’s and the position
operators can be recovered as @xmath . The operators @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath can be represented in terms of momentum, @xmath , and position,
@xmath , operators as @xmath , @xmath and @xmath respectively. Note that
these representations are independent of the dynamical exponent and thus
hold for any one of the @xmath algebras. The dilatation operator @xmath
on the other hand does depend on the dynamical exponent and may be
represented as @xmath . Clearly we recover the representations in terms
of position and momentum ( 40 ) for the Schrödinger algebra when @xmath
.
The sets of operators @xmath and @xmath are such that operators from
different sets commute with each other and may thus be combined in a
tensor product structure in a simple way. This will be done shortly.

### 30 The Dynamical Mass Tensor Product States

We will now construct the quantum states that incorporate the dynamical
mass. The aim here is for the operator @xmath to induce a non-trivial
transformation on the quantum states so that its action induces a
coordinate transformation on the resulting metric.
We note that this procedure of considering the mass as a dynamical
variable corresponds to the prescription of Giulini [ 76 ] to introduce
the Bargmann superselection rule in quantum mechanics. Good discussions
on the requirement for and the role played by the superselection rule
can be found in [ 76 ] , [ 77 ] , [ 78 ] . Note, however, that the
states we have worked with in the previous chapters are mathematically
consistent and physically relevant and one may consider quantum
mechanics with or without the superselection rule imposed.
We will, in order to keep close contact with the physics, work with the
representation of the operators in terms of @xmath . See Appendix
\thechapter for the examination of the relevant algebras in terms of
abstract elements. The commutation relations, stated explicitly here for
convenience, involving the conjugate mass are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (298)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

These are useful to take note of for computational purpose but we will
not be adding @xmath directly to the algebra ( 295 ). We will rather add
the product of @xmath with some ( 295 ) elements to the algebra. We will
show this algebra shortly. As mentioned we will be considering the
tensor product space of position-momentum and mass-conjugate mass. The
identity operator may be resolved in terms of these eigenvectors and
specifically

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (299)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and, for example, @xmath . It may also be verified
that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (300)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that, like position and momentum are related by Fourier transform,
mass and conjugate mass are also related by a Fourier transform. This
transformation between the mass and conjugate mass is used in [ 34 ] , [
42 ] to calculate the correlation functions for non-relativistic
conformal field theories. The non-relativistic overlaps can be found by
considering the dynamical mass overlap and then simply restricting to
constant mass.
By introducing the conjugate mass operator and building the tensor
product Hilbert space we are enlarging the set of possible symmetry
generators. This is reasonably evident from the additional commutation
relations we have to accommodate ( 298 ). The conjugate mass extends the
@xmath algebra to one where the root diagram reads as in Fig. ( 1 ). The
conformal Galilei algebras may be recovered as subdiagrams of this root
diagram. We will show later how the additional symmetries may be
filtered out by an appropriate redefinition of the metric or
equivalently, by considering an appropriate submanifold of the Kähler
manifold.

The operators in the root diagram satisfy

  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------
           @xmath            (301)
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------

and is a real form of the complex conformal algebra in @xmath
dimensions, @xmath . Taking the mass as dynamical effectively adds
another position label and completes conformal symmetry, from there the
change from @xmath dimensions to @xmath dimensions. See Appendix
\thechapter where the analysis is done explicitly.
The explicit expressions of @xmath and @xmath are not only suppressed
for the purpose of conciseness but also to emphasise that if @xmath
satisfies the appropriate commutation relations with the subalgebra,
@xmath , then both @xmath and @xmath as defined above will satisfy their
required commutation relations.
We again generate the appropriate quantum states, with the whole group
as symmetries, by acting with a general group element on a reference
state. The states obtained by using the reference state

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (302)
  -- -------- -- -------

are an extension of the states used in ( 272 ) and is, as such, an
eigenstate of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and in addition an
eigenstate of @xmath . For the choices @xmath it is an eigenstate of
@xmath and, finally, for @xmath it is also an eigenstate of @xmath and
consequently of @xmath . The reference state @xmath is thus the “best”
choice of reference state, see coherent states in section 15 . In order
to avoid difficulties with the prefactor @xmath we will also add a
factor that restricts to the positive eigenvalues of @xmath . We thus
consider the states

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (303)
  -- -------- -- -------

These possess full conformal symmetry, as generated by the elements of
Fig. ( 1 ), which contains the @xmath symmetry as a subset. See Appendix
\thechapter for an explicit representation of the operator action on
these states in terms of differential operators in the coordinates
@xmath .
The overlap of the states ( 303 ) may be calculated by inserting the
momentum-mass identity states ( 299 ). Two things should be noted. First
the propagator is only well-defined for @xmath so that we need to add an
infinitesimal complex number to time @xmath and take the @xmath limit
afterwards. Also, even though we are restricted to the positive
eigenvalues of @xmath i.e. @xmath there is a singularity at @xmath = 0.
The appropriate way to deal with the mass-integration is to integrate
from a small, non-zero mass @xmath and take the limit where @xmath
afterwards. We thus find

  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------
           @xmath            (304)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath is the incomplete gamma function with power @xmath and
lower bound @xmath [ 79 ] . The limit process from the second last line
to the last line needs to be handled with a little care. Note that the
last step no longer possesses the property that @xmath . This is due to
the @xmath limit. Since we are integrating over all positive values of
the mass and the time-scale is connected to the inverse mass this limit
thus renders the @xmath limit inaccessible. For our construction and the
discussion of symmetries the final expression for the overlap ( 304 )
will be used throughout.
The form of the overlap is reminiscent of the 2-point functions for
conformal fields [ 27 ] , [ 28 ] and is, in fact, related to the 2-point
functions by a complex coordinate transformations. Indeed, as pointed
out, this is due to the fact that the symmetry generators of ( 304 ) and
the symmetry generators of the 2-point functions both constitute real
forms of the complex algebra @xmath .
As expected, the overlaps ( 304 ) diverge when we put @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . The states ( 303 ) are thus non-normalisable and need to be
regularised.

### 31 The Gravitational Dual of the Dynamical Mass Free Particle

We are now in a position to investigate possible dual gravitational
descriptions of the Schrödinger algebra Hamiltonians with dynamical
mass. We will here work with the free particle but, as before, another
choice of Hamiltonian (from the conformal Galilei algebra) will only
entail a coordinate transformation. We can recover regularised states
from ( 303 ) by complexifying all the coordinates

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (305)
  -- -------- -- -------

We may derive the Kähler potential by simply complexifying the
coordinates in the overlap ( 304 ) and taking its logarithm. The
inclusion of complex time, @xmath , in fact makes the integrals in the
derivation of ( 304 ) more well-behaved and the calculation carries
through without alteration. As an example we give here the metric for
@xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (306)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The higher dimensional manifolds look very similar with the @xmath ’s
and @xmath ’s replaced by the appropriate vectors (and dot products
added). It may be verified that these manifolds (for any @xmath ) are
Einstein and the scalar curvature is constant @xmath .
This implies that the expectation values of symmetry generators satisfy
( 266 ) i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (307)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Killing vectors, which are the vector fields related to these
expectation value ( 163 ) close on the algebra of Fig. ( 1 ). The
Laplacian commutes will all the Killing vectors and is a second order
differential operator. It must thus be a differential operator
representation of the Casimir.
We are only considering the trace of the field equations in ( 307 ).
Though the metric ( 306 ) is Einstein with constant scalar curvature it
is not conformally flat and thus the Weyl tensor is still non-zero. As
explained we may consider this one field equation ( 307 ) if we add more
boundary conditions. We will do this explicitly for this example.
The expectation values of the symmetry generators are not the only
solutions of ( 307 ), however. This is a consequence of the fact that we
are only considering the trace of the field equations. We have to
specify additional boundary conditions in order for the field equation
solution to be that of the desired expectation value.
The symmetry generator expectation values may be distinguished from the
other solutions by verifying that their vector fields indeed solve the
Killing equation. This is our first boundary condition. The symmetry
generators may then be distinguished from each other (up to unitary
transformation) by their eigenvalue w.r.t. the vector field of @xmath
and @xmath . The eigenvalues classify the symmetry generators such as in
the diagram ( 1 ). This constitutes the second boundary condition. The
choice of coordinates and identification of @xmath and @xmath constitute
the final boundary conditions.
For this very fortuitous example of the free particle we may thus
identify the expectation values of the symmetry generators by these
additional boundary conditions (the Killing vector requirement and the
eigenvalues with respect to the Cartan subalgebra). From these we may
apply the procedure of section 18.2 to calculate the expectation value
of an arbitrary string of symmetry generators.
The equation ( 307 ) can be obtained as the field equation of a massive
scalar field defined on the background ( 306 ). The discussion is
contained in section 25.1 . The dictionary thus reads as

  --------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  @xmath Hamiltonian                            Massive scalar field
  with dynamical mass                           on the background ( 306 )
  Quantum state                                 Point on the manifold of states
  Symmetries of states                          Isometries of the metric
  Hamiltonian                                   Choice of coordinates
  Representation label, @xmath                  Scalar curvature @xmath
  Operator expectation value                    Field equation solution
  Operator @xmath @xmath                        Vacuum solution vector
                                                fields satisfy Killing’s equation
  Eigenvalues w.r.t.                            Eigenvalues w.r.t.
  Cartan subalgebra                             vector fields @xmath and @xmath
  Specific unitary operator from solution set   Boundary condition on the dilaton
  --------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------

#### 31.1 The Argument for Considering Submanifolds

Though the emergence of the massive scalar field ( 25.1 ) as the dual to
conformally symmetric states is reminiscent of calculations performed in
@xmath (see e.g. [ 30 ] ) it is important to emphasise that the geometry
( 306 ) is not an @xmath geometry. Specifically, the geometry is not
conformally flat line @xmath . The dictionary we have developed here is
thus rather different from the conventional.
What distinguishes the construction we have made here further from the
more conventional @xmath is the fact that we have added an extra
dimension for every real coordinate of the quantum states ( 303 ). In
conventional @xmath only a single dimension is added namely the @xmath
radial coordinate. Even in works where non-relativistic field theories
are analysed [ 20 ] , [ 21 ] , only two additional coordinates are
added. The number of extra dimensions we have to add, in the context of
existing literature, is certainly an oddity. Note that this was not the
case for the two-dimensional manifolds studied in chapter \thechapter
(where we only needed to add a single complex coordinate).
One may suspect that, if we regularise the states differently (where we
do not require so many complex coordinates to be added) then we might
produce the geometries that are relevant in the literature. Certainly,
this will spoil the crucial link between the expectation values of
operators and vector fields ( 163 ) which has formed the foundation of
our dictionary. This is definitely a big price to pay if our only gain
is to reproduce metrics that are relevant in the literature.
We believe that a dictionary could possibly be developed between these
states, no longer parametrised by complex coordinates, and models of
gravity. Indeed, it is possible that the dictionary for the complex
coordinates states, that we have started to develop in this thesis,
could be used in order to do this. This is the topic of section 33 .
Before that we will show that many of the metrics that are studied in
gauge/gravity dualities in the literature may be recovered from our
construction. These metrics will be closely related to the Kähler
manifolds we have studied up to this point in the sense that they may be
identified as submanifolds.

### 32 Restricting the Analysis to a Submanifold of the Kähler Manifold

Throughout our investigations we have considered states parametrised by
complex coordinates. Even if our starting family of states was not, like
the time-evolved states, we regularised these states in such a way that
they were. There were two major motivations for doing this. Firstly this
allowed us to utilise the many features of the geometric reformulation
of quantum mechanics of [ 14 ] which formed the foundation of the
dictionaries presented. For the cases we considered this also ensured
that the states were properly regularised.
Secondly, possibly even more importantly, the regularisation scheme
ensured that the symmetries of the quantum states were all encoded as
bulk isometries. The central role of symmetries in the dualities is thus
respected. If we want a metric to reflect a certain set of symmetries we
start with a family of states with the desired symmetry and construct
the metric from it. Fixing a coordinate i.e. considering a submanifold
typically excludes symmetries. Thus, though we were certainly at rights
to consider submanifolds previously, the symmetries that remained were
not of interest to us.
This is not the case for the dynamical mass manifold ( 306 ) - it
contains maximally symmetric submanifolds. The metric ( 306 ) has full
@xmath symmetry and the submanifold @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath i.e. one complexified position and the rest real, has
@xmath symmetry. Since the submanifold is @xmath -dimensional it is
maximally symmetric.
In the sections that follow we will show some of the interesting
submanifolds of ( 306 ) that are studied in the literature. In deriving
them we will present two perspectives. First we will show how the
metrics of the submanifolds may be constructed explicitly from quantum
states. This will identify the dual quantum states (and thus
specifically the boundary states) of these existing works explicitly.
Second we will derive these metrics by restricting the Kähler manifold
to a submanifold. We believe that this second perspective is key to
furthering the higher dimensional dictionaries in a systematic way, our
topic of discussion in section 33 .

#### 32.1 The Maximally Symmetric Submanifold

To emphasise its importance and its role as the radial coordinate on the
submanifolds we now relabel @xmath . We first consider the maximally
symmetric submanifold. The submanifold metric may be constructed from
the states

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (308)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and the components of @xmath run from @xmath to @xmath .
These states only have one additional coordinate (compared to ( 303 ))
for regularisation and possess the full set of symmetries generated by
the operators in the root diagram, Fig. ( 1 ) dimension @xmath i.e.
@xmath . The overlap of these states can be calculated, in identical
fashion to ( 304 ), as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (309)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using the overlap ( 309 ) we find the metric

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (310)
  -- -------- -- -------

As mentioned, this @xmath -dimensional metric possess @xmath isometries
so that it is maximally symmetric. This, together with its negative
scalar curvature, implies that this manifold is @xmath .
The calculation from ( 308 ) is a direct calculation of the metric ( 310
) from the family of quantum states. It is useful to think from another
perspective namely that the metric ( 310 ) is the metric of a
submanifold of the Kähler manifold ( 306 ). It is the @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath submanifold of ( 306 ).

#### 32.2 The @xmath-Symmetric Metrics

The symmetry of ( 310 ) is conformal. If we are interested in metrics
that only possess a smaller set of symmetry, e.g. only the Schrödinger
symmetry, we have to restrict the dynamical symmetry in some way. We
define

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (311)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we do not consider @xmath as a coordinate. It is thus only a
parameter and fulfils the role of a symmetry filter, similar to the role
played by the density matrix in section 8.1.2 . The rationale for doing
this is that only the @xmath operators of Fig ( 1 ) commute with @xmath
, see Fig. ( 1 ). The factor of @xmath thus breaks all the undesired
conformal symmetries. The overlap can be calculated using the steps in (
304 ) and is given by

  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------
           @xmath            (312)
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------

which produces the metric

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (313)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is, up to rescaling of the coordinates and a change of signature,
precisely the metric studied by [ 20 ] and [ 21 ] for @xmath . The
procedure we have employed here is pretty much identical to that of [ 21
] namely to start from something with full conformal symmetry and break
it in an appropriate way to only retain the Schrödinger symmetry. In
their study the symmetries are broken on the level of the metric while
here we provide the analogous procedure on the level of the quantum
states.
The resulting metric ( 313 ) is, of course, already known so that it
does not present a new result itself. What we have managed to do with
the construction is to provide an explicit and systematic procedure to
construct these metrics from the quantum states of the free particle.
This strengthens the dictionary developed by these works and allows us
to test aspects of this dictionary very directly. As an example of this
we provide our own perspective on the apparent two additional dimensions
which is a novelty of this @xmath correspondence.
As is stated in [ 20 ] the additional dimension @xmath is the conjugate
mass. Unlike the conventional wisdom of @xmath the regularisation
parameter @xmath is not associated with an energy scale but rather with
a length scale. The reason for the two additional dimensions (when
comparing the @xmath -dimensional manifold to the @xmath algebra) is
also very clear - the Schrödinger algebra in @xmath dimensions needs to
be viewed, in this construction, as a subalgebra of the @xmath
dimensional conformal algebra after introducing the conjugate mass. To
the conformal algebra one may add, in line with the standard wisdom, one
additional dimension to regularise the metric in the bulk. These two
steps then comprise the apparent two dimensions one needs to add to the
non-relativistic theory.
We may once more view the metric ( 313 ) as being constructed directly
from the quantum states ( 311 ) or simply as the metric on a submanifold
of the Kähler manifold ( 306 ). Here it is the @xmath slice of the
Kähler manifold ( 306 ).

#### 32.3 The @xmath Symmetric Metrics

The @xmath conformal Galilei algebra ( 295 ) is another subalgebra of
the complex conformal algebra. An important difference to the @xmath
algebra is that the special conformal generator, @xmath , is not
included. We may again alter the states appropriately in order to filter
out only the conformal Galilei symmetry as dynamical symmetry. From the
states ( 311 ) we have to filter out the special conformal symmetry
generated by @xmath .
In order to break the special conformal symmetry of ( 311 ) it is useful
to understand exactly why the states still possess special conformal
symmetry. The factor @xmath in ( 311 ) commutes will all the position,
momentum and rotation operators and with @xmath . The operators @xmath
and @xmath are thus the only Schrödinger algebra generators that induce
non-trivial transformations on @xmath . If we thus change the factor
@xmath to @xmath we could thus break the @xmath (scaling) and @xmath
(special conformal) symmetry. We must pick @xmath in such a way that it
breaks the special conformal symmetry but retains the scaling symmetry.
We thus make the ansatz for the states

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (314)
  -- -------- -- -------

Following the step of ( 304 ) this leads to the overlap

  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------
           @xmath            (315)
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------

and then the metric

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (316)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is the metric studied by [ 20 ] for arbitrary @xmath and is
symmetric under the @xmath transformations.
Once more the metric ( 316 ) may be viewed as the metric of a
submanifold of the Kähler manifold ( 306 ), but one where the slice is
now dependent on the @xmath radial coordinate. Specifically we have to
consider the @xmath @xmath submanifold.

#### 32.4 Discussion of the Submanifold Metrics

In the works [ 20 ] , [ 21 ] , [ 34 ] the metrics are taken as the
starting point to their analysis which involves the calculation of the
correlation functions. Their calculations invariably involve considering
the massive scalar field on the background of interest and applying the
conventional @xmath dictionary i.e. that the functional derivative with
respect to the boundary value of the fields yields the correlation
functions.
In the dictionaries we have developed for the families of states with
complex coordinates this is, of course, not the interpretation we have
attached to the fields. In our dictionaries the fields are interpretable
directly as the expectation values of operators. It thus seems that in
order to recast the works [ 20 ] , [ 21 ] , [ 34 ] in the mould of a
systematic set of tools we will have to undertake the study of a whole
new dictionary.
Nonetheless, the fact that we could derive the metrics ( 310 ), ( 313 )
and ( 316 ) systematically, starting from a family of quantum states
achieves two things. Firstly, it supplements these works by identifying
the quantum states on the boundary explicitly and makes clear the
interpretations of the coordinates and the scalar curvature.
Secondly, it hints that a systematic construction of these dual systems
may, in fact be possible. This will certainly require a lot of
additional work, but we believe that this can be done. In the final
section of this chapter we will discuss a possible strategy for doing
this that utilises the existing dictionaries for the complex coordinate
states. We warn the reader that this is simply speculation and must not
be viewed as a rigorous discussion.

### 33 Dictionary on the Submanifold?

The two perspectives on the metrics we have constructed in this chapter
is to either construct them explicitly from the quantum states or
consider the metric as the metric of a submanifold of a Kähler metric.
It can be summarised in diagrammatic form as follows

[]

The important observation is that we have an existing dictionary for the
complex coordinate states and the Kähler geometry. As discussed, the
expectation values of operators are intricately linked to vector fields
on the manifold in this case. This formed the basis of the dictionaries
we developed.
The submanifold is not necessarily Kähler so that this very useful
relation no longer holds. However, it is useful to recall what
quantities we are interested in. Our goal is to calculate the
expectation value of an arbitrary string of operators. Suppose then we
are given a family of states @xmath that can be obtained from a family
of states of complex coordinates @xmath by fixing some its coordinates.
Suppose further that we wish to calculate the expectation values of some
string of operators @xmath .
We cannot at this point say anything regarding the equations of motion
for @xmath . What we have derived are the equations of motion for @xmath
in section 25 . Though there is certainly some work still needed to deal
with the full set of equations of motion (which entails understanding
the role played by the Weyl tensor) this should be possible for these
complex coordinates.
What one will have to do, in order to write down the appropriate
equations of motion for @xmath , is to take the equations of motion for
@xmath and restrict these to the submanifold. One should then be able to
recover the appropriate equations of motion for @xmath from these and
then try to match them up to an appropriate theory of gravity. This is
certainly an avenue of future research that begs pursuing after which,
hopefully, one may start to develop systematic dictionaries for the dual
of quantum systems and theories of gravity where the metric is given by
( 313 ), for instance.

### 34 Discussion

Our investigations in this chapter has met with partial success. By
considering the central extension of the Schrödinger algebra (the mass)
as a dynamical variable we were able to sidestep some of the
difficulties we encountered in chapter \thechapter for the higher
dimensional duals. The field equations were simple enough that we could
package them in a simple dictionary involving the massive scalar field.
One stumbling block that remains is that the manifolds are not
conformally flat which adds terms to the equations of motion. This can
be remedied by only considering one field equation - the trace of the
field equations - which has no contribution from the Weyl tensor. The
discarded field equations have to be substituted with boundary
conditions.
The dictionary departs from the conventional gauge/gravity duality in
that the bulk dimensions are numerous and not just one or two. We
identified that submanifolds of these Kähler manifolds are precisely the
manifolds investigated in the literature [ 20 ] , [ 21 ] in the context
of the @xmath and we also identified an @xmath submanifold. Our
construction thus recovers the metrics and supplements these existing
works by identifying the dual quantum mechanical states explicitly.
However, because the properties we discussed in section 7 are no longer
applicable on these submanifolds, we could not, as yet, develop a
systematic, working dictionary.
We concluded the chapter with a speculative discussion of how one may
proceed to develop such a dictionary. Two ingredients for this
development will prove essential - firstly understanding how the
equations of motion may be restricted to a submanifold and secondly,
understanding not just the trace of the equations of motion but the full
set. The reason for this is simple - the Weyl tensor contributions on
the submanifold may be significantly less complex. The full set of field
equations may thus be tractable on the submanifold, though they are not
on the Kähler manifold. We hope to address these questions in future.

## Chapter \thechapter Conclusion and Outlook

In this thesis we managed to develop a systematic procedure to repackage
a given quantum mechanical model as a semi-classical theory of gravity.
The most important part of this construction was the identification of a
metric - a way to build a geometry from a given family of quantum
states. The construction we chose was relatively easy to work with but
also ensured that the dynamical symmetries are encoded as isometries of
the metric and anti-symmetric two-form.
Many aspects of this construction, before theories of gravity even enter
the discussion, are intriguing for the purposes of the @xmath
correspondence. For non-normalisable reference states it is necessary to
regularise the quantum states by some means. This gives rise, naturally,
to the idea of a bulk, where the states are normalisable, and a boundary
where the original non-normalisable states are defined. In the case of
time-evolved states (with complexified time), an asymptotically anti-de
Sitter geometry results very generally. In addition, the @xmath radial
coordinate has the interpretation of an energy scale.
We showed that in the case of normalisable reference states the
resulting metric can be much more general. In particular the @xmath
coherent states and Glauber coherent states resulted in de Sitter and
flat space metrics respectively. Though these geometries were not
studied in the same detail as the @xmath examples they are, especially
in two dimensions, a topic of future research that may yield interesting
results in the context of, for instance, the @xmath correspondence.
The procedure from the geometry to the dual gravitational description is
not as clear cut precisely because there are several ways in which to do
this. One essentially has to make the first few entries in the quantum
mechanics / theory of gravity dictionary - a choice that determines the
dictionary one will develop subsequently. The investigation of choices
other than the one we made can well lead to other interesting
dictionaries. For the sake of simplicity we proposed that metric and
expectation values of operators should be associated with the metric and
fields that solve the field equations of some model of gravity. After
using some results from section 7 we managed to write down a set of
equations of motion for the expectation values of operators (with
respect to complex coordinate states). The gravitational action should
thus be chosen so that its field equations are the same as these
equations of motion.
Though this was a simple choice, it met with success for especially the
two-dimensional manifolds. When we focused on the @xmath Hamiltonian
models, which all produce an @xmath geometry, we were able to provide
clarity to and extend the @xmath correspondence proposed in [ 13 ] . We
could identify the quantum states of the @xmath dual explicitly, provide
the mapping between quantum state and geometry (and vice versa) and
clarify some of the puzzles they discuss in their work. Specifically, we
could explain why the appropriate form of the @xmath - and @xmath -point
correlation functions are produced despite the quantum states being
non-normalisable and despite the absence of a conformally invariant
state in the Hilbert space. We showed that this is simply a consequence
of the dynamical symmetries.
We went beyond this correspondence of [ 13 ] , which is roughly a dual
between the geometry of @xmath and @xmath and thus devoid of
gravitational content, and identified the model of dilaton gravity as
our appropriate gravitational dual. As it turns out, this model features
prominently in the context of the @xmath correspondence [ 15 ] - [ 19 ]
. Since our construction is systematic and explicit we have direct
access to the quantum mechanics / dilaton gravity dictionary. This
enabled us to fill in some details of these existing works pertaining to
the interpretation of the dilaton, the interpretation of the dilaton
black hole mass, the explicit quantum mechanical model on the boundary
and the scalar curvature. Also, we were able to extend to the dual
description of operators that are not generators of symmetry. Of
significance is how natural the analysis follows from our construction.
This holds the promise of generalisations to models that do not possess
so many symmetries.
We concluded with an explicit dictionary between conformal quantum
mechanics and @xmath JT-model dilaton gravity. We showed that the
correct expression for the entropy of the dilaton gravity black hole can
be recovered by simply considering the conformal transformations of the
model. Our analysis here is still qualitative in that we need address
issues pertaining to the appropriate normalisation of the dilaton.
We also briefly looked at the @xmath Hamiltonians which are dual to
theories on de Sitter space. We showed here that the values of operators
can be recovered in the dual gravitational description in an almost
identical way to the @xmath calculation. The Glauber coherent states,
which produce a flat space geometry, were also considered. We commented
that the Glauber coherent states are thus best served as a large @xmath
limit of the @xmath coherent states.
Our attention moved, in the last two chapters, to the higher dimensional
duals. Our results here are less developed than the two-dimensional
examples we explored previously. The procedure and considerations for
constructing a dual in higher dimensions are identical to the
two-dimensional case. A calculational difficulty is that the Riemann
curvature tensor (which determines the equations of motion) for Kähler
manifolds always has a non-zero Weyl tensor. This adds terms into the
equations of motion that we do not yet know how to handle generally. The
treatment of these terms is, of course, an important avenue of future
study. We thus made a sensible simplification as a first step - we
consider only the trace of the equations of motion and consign the
information of the other equations of motion to additional boundary
conditions. We identified the massive scalar field as a model that
produces the appropriate field equation.
The natural generalisation of the @xmath coherent states to the
higher-dimensional case is to add position. This extension to the
higher-dimensional case caused a problem. The Killing vectors do not
close on the Schrödinger algebra because one of the operators of the
algebra only generates phase shifts of the quantum states. Its
associated Killing vector is thus zero. Despite this we managed to
develop a scheme for calculating the expectation values of operators.
Understanding the algebraic content of the Laplace operator will give
great insight into this matter. This we postpone to future study.
The situation is a lot more favourable if one considers the central
extension of the Schrödinger algebra (the mass) as dynamical. This
allows us to enlarge the Schrödinger algebra to a real form of the
complex conformal algebra. The Killing vectors are now a differential
operator representation of the algebra and the analysis can be done more
simply.
Unlike its two-dimensional counterpart these higher dimensional duals do
not resemble many similar works in the literature. The primary reasons
for this are that an @xmath geometry cannot be achieved and that there
are more than one additional dimensions. The lack of comparable examples
in the literature is precisely why this case is not investigated to the
same level of detail as its two-dimensional counterpart. For this case
we did provide a simple dictionary.
At first glance it may appear as if this construction for the higher
dimensions, though possessing a sensible and systematic dictionary,
departs from the traditional @xmath approach too much to provide insight
therein. However, we showed explicitly that several important metrics,
often the starting point of analysis e.g. [ 20 ] , [ 21 ] , [ 34 ] , are
easily identifiable submanifolds of the Kähler manifold. We thus
supplemented their study by identifying the quantum states on the
boundary explicitly, providing the explicit origins of the extra
dimensions and an interpretation for the scalar curvature. In terms of
the question of establishing a gravitional dual (as opposed to just
calculating the metrics) we currently have no answer. Since we lose the
Kähler structure on the submanifold we also lose the dictionary we have
developed throughout the rest of the thesis. We proposed that it is
possible that one may utilise the Kähler dictionary to learn from the
dictionary on the submanifold. Developing this submanifold dictionary
is, in the opinion of the writer, the most pressing question that
emerges from the investigation in this thesis.
As was mentioned in the introductory section of this thesis, the power
of the construction does not lie in its ability to mimic all the aspects
of the gauge/gravity duality but rather in its systematic nature. It is
the hope of this author that this work and its future generalisations
can create a systematic framework in which some examples of the
gauge/gravity duality may be investigated directly.

## Chapter \thechapter The Geometric Quantities of Relevance

In this thesis we will construct a metric and anti-symmetric two-form
from a family of quantum states and match these to a semi-classical
theory of gravity in some way. The curvature properties of these
metrics, as one would expect, play a key role and we define all the
quantities used in the thesis in this appendix. A good reference for the
formulas provided here is [ 71 ] .
Whenever tensor indices are used a chosen geometry is implicitly
defined. The metric tensor @xmath is used to raise and lower indices of
tensors e.g.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (317)
  -- -------- -- -------

where, also throughout the thesis, the Einstein summation convention is
used i.e. repeated indices are summed over. We have illustrated it in (
317 ) for a vector but it is true of any tensor index. The covariant
derivative of a vector field @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (318)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the Christoffel symbols of the second type defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (319)
  -- -------- -- -------

The covariant derivative has the interpretation of how a given vector
field changes as its transported around the manifold. The Christoffel
symbol part ( 318 ) indicates that it may also change orientation if the
geometry is curved. Note that, by definition, we have that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (320)
  -- -------- -- -------

i.e. the metric tensor is compatible with the covariant derivative.
Indeed, technically, metric compatibility or incompatibility defines the
covariant derivative and not the other way around. Throughout the thesis
we use the compatible definition of the covariant derivative.
The Riemann curvature tensor, @xmath , is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (321)
  -- -------- -- -------

and has the interpretation of by how much the orientation of a vector is
going to differ if one moves it from point A to point B, infinitesimally
close to one another, along two different paths. The curvature tensor (
321 ) contains all curvature information of the manifold. It can be
shown that the curvature tensor possesses the following symmetries

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (322)
  -- -------- -- -------

Consequently there is only one unique, non-trivial contraction of the
Riemann tensor

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (323)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is the Ricci tensor. It certainly contains less curvature
information than the Riemann tensor but contains sufficient information
for some physical applications such as in the Einstein field equations.
The scalar curvature is defined as the trace of the Ricci tensor

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (324)
  -- -------- -- -------

while an Einstein manifold has the property that the Ricci tensor is
proportional to the metric i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (325)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the dimension of the manifold. Note that this does not
imply that the scalar curvature is necessarily constant.
It can be shown that all two-dimensional ( @xmath ) metrics are Einstein
( 325 ) while all three-dimensional metrics satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (326)
  -- -------- -- -------

These identities make the @xmath - and @xmath -dimensional case quite
novel. For higher dimensions one has that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (327)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath is the Weyl tensor, which contains information pertaining
the conformal properties of the metric. If the metric is conformally
flat i.e. @xmath then the Weyl tensor is zero. Two- and
three-dimensional metrics are thus always conformally flat while the
two-dimensional metrics are in addition Einstein metrics. These
simplifications will prove useful in the analysis in the thesis.

## Chapter \thechapter Field Equations for Einstein- and Dilaton Gravity

## Appendix A Einstein Gravity

See the works [ 56 ] , [ 80 ] and [ 81 ] for good discussions on
Einstein gravity i.e. general relativity. In this thesis we will be
primarilly interest in the action derivation of the field equations. We
start with the Einstein-Hilbert action (with cosmological constant
included)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (328)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the determinant of the metric, @xmath is the scalar
curvature, @xmath the cosmological constant and @xmath the matter
content. The field equations can be derived from ( 328 ) by varying the
action with respect to the inverse metric i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (329)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the factor of @xmath is for convenience. Note that we have are
taking a functional derivative. In order to avoid confusion we make the
following remark. The functional derivative act on functionals such as
the action. Whenever we write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (330)
  -- -------- -- -------

we mean

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (331)
  -- -------- -- -------

In other words, the functional derivative on a function introduces a
delta function which is integrated out. Typically when a term is begin
integrated over we use the notation for functional derivatives but if
not we use the notation of partial derivative.
Returning to the field equations of ( 329 ) we first require

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (332)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

In order to present the derivation as cleanly as possible we temporarily
substitute the variation of the metric as @xmath . By now using
properties of the determinant we have that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (333)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where we have used the fact that @xmath since it is merely a relabeling.
By now combining ( 332 ) and ( 333 ) we find that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (334)
  -- -------- -- -------

This result is the same for any signature of the metric. We have derived
it here for @xmath but an almost identical derivation can be done for
@xmath . Using this we now define the energy momentum tensor @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (335)
  -- -------- -- -------

The last bit we need to complete the field equations (from ( 329 )) is
the partial derivative of the scalar curvature

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (336)
  -- -------- -- -------

which we will be handling slightly differently. The Ricci scalar is
given by tracing over indices of the Riemann tensor which in turn is
given in terms of the Christoffel symbols

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (337)
  -- -------- -- -------

By applying the chain rule we calculate @xmath . We will show that the
contribution of this term is merely a surface term so we will not
calculate this explicitly. Instead it will suffice to calculate @xmath
where @xmath is defined as the variation of the Christoffel symbol (and
is assumed to be small). We begin with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (338)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

from which it follows that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (339)
  -- -------- -- -------

The metric is compatible with the covariant derivative ( 320 ). This
should hold before as well as after the variation i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (340)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is assumed to be small and the covariant derivatives are
varied as @xmath . The variation is assumed small so that we can derive,
up to first order

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (341)
  -- -------- -- -------

from which we can derive two identities

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (342)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

By combining these

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (343)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

By inserting the explicit expressions ( 334 ), ( 335 ), ( 336 ), ( 343 )
into ( 329 ) we find that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (344)
  -- -------- -- -------

The integral over the divergence of a vector, by Stokes’ theorem, can
yield at most a boundary term so that the integral does not contribute
to the field equations. The remainder of ( 344 ) is the Einstein field
equations with cosmological constant.

## Appendix B Dilaton Gravity Field Equations

Another model of gravity that will be of interest is dilaton gravity [
60 ] . In these models we have included additional fields into the
action which can change the field equations significantly. We will be
interested in actions of the following form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (345)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the field equations resulting from varying with respect to the
metric we can apply the results above almost imediately

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (346)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The integral term is now no longer a simple divergence of a vector
precisely because of the presence of the dilaton. This means we cannot
apply Stokes’ theorem and it does not simply contribute a boundary term.
Examining the integral more carefully yields

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

which will produce a number of delta functions in the integral. The
metric variations @xmath are contravariant and the gamma functions are
thus added. Integrating by parts will keep the double derivatives
unchanged but will switch the sign of the single derivatives. This will
correspond to a covariant derivative. This then implies that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (347)
  -- -------- -- -------

so that we find the field equations also found in [ 57 ] after combining
( 346 ) and ( 347 ).
Of particular interest for the @xmath models is the Jackiw-Teitelboim
model which has @xmath and @xmath and, due to two dimensions, @xmath
which yields the field equations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (348)
  -- -------- -- -------

## Chapter \thechapter Algebras That Feature in This Thesis

In this appendix we summarise the various algebras that feature in the
thesis. We start with the Heisenberg algebra spanned by the operators
@xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (349)
  -- -------- -- -------

The algebra can also be represented in terms of creation and
annihilation operators @xmath and @xmath which satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (350)
  -- -------- -- -------

Two of the special unitary groups will also be of importance. The @xmath
algebra reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (351)
  -- -------- -- -------

and may be expressed in terms of creation and annihilation operators as
[ 82 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (352)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the related to the representation label, the lowest
eigenvalue of @xmath . In the @xmath limit it is clear that @xmath and
@xmath .
The @xmath algebra reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (353)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Cartan-Weyl basis for the @xmath algebra is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (354)
  -- -------- -- -------

The @xmath and Heisenberg algebras may be combined to form the
Schrödinger algebra. This algebra derives its name from the generators
of dynamical symmetry for the free Schrödinger equation [ 43 ] and is
the semi-direct sum of the @xmath algebra ( 353 ) and @xmath copies of
the Heisenberg algebra ( 349 ) (related by rotation operators @xmath ).
The commutation relations are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath                        (355)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the flat space metric in arbitrary signature. In this
thesis Euclidean signature is used i.e. @xmath .
The conformal Galilei algebra, @xmath , is a generalisation of the
Schrödinger algebra where one has included a dynamical exponent @xmath .
The algebra is also centrally extended and reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (356)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the central extension. The dynamical exponent @xmath
characterises the different scaling behavior of time and position
captured by the different scaling for @xmath and @xmath .
The final algebra that is of importance is the conformal algebra given
by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (357)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

In Appendix \thechapter it is shown that the conformal Gaililei algebra
is a subalgebra of the conformal algebra of one dimension higher.

## Chapter \thechapter Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff Formula

In this thesis the calculation of quantum state overlaps and
transformation induced by a unitary transformation is critical. For this
purpose the Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff formula [ 50 ] , [ 51 ] is used
extensively. In a nutshell the formula is used to split an arbitrary
group element as the product of a desired set of “basis” group elements.
In this appendix we show two examples of this formula that features in
this thesis.

## Appendix C BCH formula for the Heisenberg Group

The most well-known example of the BCH formula is its application to the
Heisenberg group. The relevant algebra is given in ( 349 ) and ( 350 ).
Consider the following Heisenberg algebra group element

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (358)
  -- -------- -- -------

This group element may be split as the product of the exponent of a
creation operator and the exponent of an annihilation operator as
follows

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (359)
  -- -------- -- -------

following ( 350 ). This expansion is possible precisely because @xmath .
The expansion ( 359 ) is particularly useful when the the group element
( 358 ) acts on the state @xmath annihilated by @xmath . In this case

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (360)
  -- -------- -- -------

so that the @xmath part of the expansion induces no transformation of
@xmath . Another useful example is if a Heisenberg group element acts on
the state @xmath which is such that @xmath . We then have that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (361)
  -- -------- -- -------

## Appendix D BCH formula for @xmath

As a second example we consider the @xmath formulae for the @xmath
group. A simple way to derive the formula is to consider the @xmath
matrix representation of @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (362)
  -- -------- -- -------

It can be verified that the matrices ( 362 ) satisfies the correct
commutation relations ( 354 ). The BCH formula is representation
independent so that, even though we are considering a simple @xmath
matrix representation, the formula is valid for any representation.
Given a general matrix element of @xmath in the @xmath matrix
representation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (363)
  -- -------- -- -------

it may be broken up as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (364)
              @xmath   @xmath      (365)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

@xmath is a subgroup of @xmath so that the above formulas holds for
@xmath elements also. As an application of the above we calculate the
overlap of the harmonic oscillator states

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (366)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the state such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (367)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the representation label. The overlap of the states (
366 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (368)
  -- -------- -- -------

The @xmath element wedged between the states @xmath and @xmath may be
split up using ( 364 ). The @xmath matrix representation of ( 368 ) is
given by

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Now, after applying ( 364 ) we will have that @xmath and @xmath . Only
the @xmath factor contributes to the overlap. We thus find that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (369)
  -- -------- -- -------

We may also break the element ( 363 ) as

  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------
           @xmath            (371)
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------

with the restrictions @xmath and @xmath respectively.
The formula ( 371 ) is particularly useful when the @xmath element acts
on the state

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (372)
  -- -------- -- -------

Two properties of the state @xmath are useful

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (373)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the representation label. These may be derived using the
BCH formulas and the properties ( 367 ). One then has that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (374)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (375)
  -- -------- -- -------

after using ( 361 ).
As an application of the above we now present a procedure for
calculating the transformation induced by an arbitrary @xmath group
element on the free particle state

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (376)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that, in the terminology of the @xmath discussion, @xmath .
Consider a general @xmath group element @xmath acting on the state ( 376
). Split the term @xmath according to ( 371 ). This yields a term of the
form @xmath . The action of @xmath on @xmath can then be calculated
using ( 374 ) and ( 375 ). This will always yield a term of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (377)
  -- -------- -- -------

from which the induced transformation can be read off. As an explicit
example consider the special conformal transformation generated by
@xmath on the free particle state. We start by factorising

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (378)
  -- -------- -- -------

according to ( 371 ). By acting with the last two operators on the state
@xmath we have from ( 374 ) and ( 375 ) that

  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------
           @xmath            (379)
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------

which is the expression that appears in ( 42 ) when we set @xmath .

## Chapter \thechapter The Subalgebras of the Complex Conformal Algebra

In this appendix we will show in particular how the @xmath and @xmath
algebras may be viewed as real forms of the complex conformal group in
@xmath dimensions @xmath . The discussion herein borrows greatly from [
42 ] .

## Appendix E Relating the Wave Equations

This connection between the complex conformal group and conformal
Galilei group can already be seen on the level of the relevant wave
equations (for @xmath ), the free Schrödinger equation and the free
Klein-Gordon equation. We start with the free particle Schrödinger
equation in @xmath dimensions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (380)
  -- -------- -- -------

and apply the prescription by Giulini [ 76 ] which is to treat the mass
as a dynamical variable. This can be achieved on the level of the
wavefunction by performing a Fourier transform. We define the new
function @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (381)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the function in ( 380 ) but now has the subscript @xmath
to remind us of its explicit dependence on mass. The free Schrödinger
equation now becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (382)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The full set of dynamical symmetry generators of equation ( 382 ) is a
real subalgebra (which contains the @xmath algebra) of the complex
conformal algebra in @xmath dimensions, @xmath [ 42 ] . This can already
by anticipated by performing the complex coordinate transformation
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath on ( 382 ). This implies that @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath . The equation ( 382 ) now becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (383)
  -- -------- -- -------

which can be identified as the free Klein-Gordon equation in Euclidean
flat space, the symmetry generators of which form the conformal algebra.
Though this matching of the wavefunction is instructive, we will start
our analysis with the @xmath algebra in its abstract form and show the
subalgebra structure explicitly.

## Appendix F The Conformal Algebra

The @xmath -dimensional conformal algebra consists of @xmath
translations, @xmath Lorentz transformations, @xmath rotations and one
dilitation/scaling. These are generated by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath respectively and satisfy the commutation relations ( 4 ).

## Appendix G Classification in Terms of Scaling Properties

We will now proceed to classify the elements of the complex conformal
algebra in terms of scaling behaviour and show that the @xmath algebra
can be identified as a subset of a real form of this complex algebra. We
select and complexify one of the rotation operators which, without loss
of generality, we choose as @xmath .
We may now classify the elements of @xmath in terms of their scaling
with the operators @xmath and @xmath . We define @xmath via @xmath and
@xmath . Clearly any combination of momenta will have @xmath , rotations
@xmath and boosts @xmath (see ( 4 )). One can furthermore verify that
any operator combination @xmath will have @xmath , while any combination
of @xmath will have @xmath . We thus propose the root diagram of Fig. (
2 ).

Two things are important to realise when interpreting the figure. First,
the coefficients in front of the operators @xmath may still be complex.
We will shortly be focussing on a specific real form of the complex
algebra, though one is different than the real form ( 4 ). Secondly, the
operators satisfy the properties

  -- -- -- -------
           (384)
  -- -- -- -------

The first can be checked by calculating the scaling behaviour with
@xmath amd @xmath . We may thus, after selecting a real form of the
complex algebra, build an algebra out of any subset of the diagram that
is closed under the horizontal, vertical and diagonal shifts that are
included. Many of these are discussed in [ 42 ] . The ones that we will
point out explicitly are @xmath , @xmath and the extended Schrödinger
algebra @xmath .
Following [ 42 ] , we specialise to the real form of @xmath packaged in
Fig ( 3 )

and @xmath . The coefficients are chosen so that they precisely satisfy
the property @xmath .
We may identify the @xmath algebra studied by [ 20 ] as a sub-diagram
with the necessary properties. We find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (385)
  -- -------- -- -------

Furthermore the operator @xmath when we are considering the algebra in
the @xmath case. This can be checked explicitly by using the commutation
relations ( 4 ). From the diagram it can also be seen clearly why, in
the case @xmath , there isn’t a special conformal generator. The
operator @xmath cannot be included in that case since, always, @xmath .
This is only the appropriate commutation relation, @xmath if @xmath . We
can still close the elements under commutation if we allow any linear
combination of @xmath and @xmath . However, this then refers to a
different algebra, named @xmath by [ 42 ] .

## Appendix H Representation as Differential Operators

To aid both the discussion and the calculation of commutation
relationships in the thesis we now state the coordinate realisations
(for both the wave equation ( 382 ) and the states ( 303 )) of the
operators in the above table explicitly. The @xmath coordinates of the
conformal algebra are indicated by @xmath while the coordinates of the
Schrödinger group with dynamical mass are @xmath and @xmath coordinates
@xmath . First, the conformal algebra in position representation, in
Euclidean flat space, acting on a state with scaling dimension @xmath ,
can be represented as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (386)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

It can be verified that these differential operators satisfy the
commutation relationships ( 4 ). As already indicated when comparing the
free Schrödinger equation with dynamical mass ( 382 ) and the free
Klein-Gordon equation ( 383 ) we will be performing the following
coordinate transformation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (387)
  -- -------- -- -------

which then also implies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (388)
  -- -------- -- -------

Also note that @xmath . Expressed in terms of these coordinates one may
thus find for the conformal generators ( 386 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (389)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Linear combinations of these operators fill the table we have put
together above and all thus form symmetries of the state @xmath ( 381 ).
Explicitly, the ones that may be put together to form the @xmath group
are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (390)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is only included if @xmath .