The Loop-Tree Duality (LTD) is a novel perturbative method in QFT that
establishes a relation between loop–level and tree–level scattering
amplitudes. This is achieved by directly applying the Residue Theorem to
the loop-energy-integration. The result is a sum over all possible
single cuts of the Feynman diagram in consideration integrated over a
modified phase-space. These single-cut integrals, called Dual
contributions, are in fact tree-level objects and thus give rise to the
opportunity of bringing loop– and tree–contributions together, treating
them simultaneously in a common Monte Carlo event generator. Initially
introduced for one–loop scalar integrals, the applicability of the LTD
has been expanded ever since. In this thesis, we show how to deal with
Feynman graphs beyond simple poles by taking advantage of Integration By
Parts (IBP) relations. Furthermore, we investigate the cancellation of
singularities among Dual contributions as well as between real and
virtual corrections. For the first time, a numerical implementation of
the LTD was done in the form of a computer program that calculates
one–loop scattering diagrams. We present details on the contour
deformation employed alongside the results for scalar integrals up to
the pentagon- and tensor integrals up to the hexagon-level.

\nobibliography

*

\setstretch

1.3

\univname

[1.5cm] Doctoral Thesis

[0.5cm]

[0.4cm] \ttitle

[0.4cm]

[1.5cm]

Author:

\authornames

Supervisor:

\supname

[2cm]

3026 Programa Oficial de Doctorado en Física

[0.3cm] \deptname

\groupname

[2.5cm]

June 2015

[4cm]

I certify that I have read this dissertation and that, in my opinion it
is fully adequate in scope and quality as a dissertation for the degree
Doctor of Philosophy. Germán Rodrigo (Supervisor)

Author:

Supervisor:

Co-Supervisors:

Sebastian Buchta

Germán Rodrigo

Stefano Catani

Grigorios Chachamis

[3cm]

\Declaration

I, \authornames , declare that this thesis titled, ’ \ttitle ’ and the
work presented in it are my own. I confirm that:

-   This work is original and was done wholly or mainly while in
    candidature for a research degree at this University.

-   Where any part of this thesis has previously been submitted for a
    degree or any other qualification at this University or any other
    institution, this has been clearly stated.

-   Where I have consulted the published work of others, this is always
    clearly attributed.

-   Where I have quoted from the work of others, the source is always
    given. With the exception of such quotations, this thesis is
    entirely my own work.

-   I have acknowledged all main sources of help.

-   Where the thesis is based on work done by myself jointly with
    others, I have made clear exactly what was done by others and what I
    have contributed myself.

Signed:

Date:

This thesis is based on the author’s work conducted at the IFIC
(Instituto de Física Corpuscular, Universitat de València, Consejo
Superior de Investigaciones Científicas). Parts of it have already been
published in articles and proceedings earlier.

Articles

-   

-   

-   

Proceedings

-   

-   

-   

\addtotoc

Abstract

\resumen

La Dualidad Loop-Árbol (LTD) representa un nuevo método perturbativo en
Teoria Cuántica de Campos que establece una relación entre amplitudes de
dispersión virtuales y de árbol. Se logra hacer esto por aplicación
directa del Teorema de los Residuos a la integratión de la componente de
energía. El resultado es la suma de todos los cortes simples posibles
del diagrama de Feynman considerado integrada sobre un espacio fásico
modificado. Estas integrales de corte simple, denominadas Contribuciones
Duales, de hecho son objetos de tipo árbol y por lo tanto dan lugar a la
oportunidad de combinar las contribuciones virtuales y de árbol con el
motivo de tratarlas simultáneamente en un generador de eventos de Monte
Carlo. A pesar de ser introducido inicialmente para integrales escalares
de un loop, la practicabilidad de la LTD fue extendida tremendamente. En
esta tesis demonstramos como aplicar la LTD a diagramas con polos de
multiplicidad elevada utilizando relaciones de Integración Por Partes
(IBP). Además, examinamos la cancelación de singularidades entre
Contribuciones Duales tanto como entre correcciones reales y virtuales.
Por primera vez una implementación numérica de la LTD fue realizada en
forma de un programa de ordenador que calcula diagramas de dispersión.
Presentamos detalles sobre la deformación de contorno empleada y los
resultados de integrales escalares hasta el nivel de pentágono y de
integrales tensoriales hasta el nivel de hexágono.

\setstretch

1.3
