##### Contents

-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 Observations of 21 cm line radiation
    -    1.2 21 cm line
    -    1.3 Neutrino mass and its properties
    -    1.4 Purposes and organization of this thesis
    -    1.5 Basic variables and constants
-    2 Brightness temperature of 21 cm radiation
    -    2.1 Brightness temperature and transfer equation
        -    2.1.1 Brightness temperature
        -    2.1.2 Transfer equation
        -    2.1.3 Emission and absorption coefficients in a two level
            system
        -    2.1.4 Spin temperature
        -    2.1.5 The solution of the transfer equations
    -    2.2 Optical depth and line profile
        -    2.2.1 Optical depth
        -    2.2.2 Line profile
    -    2.3 Observed brightness temperature
-    3 Spin temperature
    -    3.1 Time evolution of the spin temperature
        -    3.1.1 The evolution equation of spin temperature
        -    3.1.2 Spin temperature in thermal equilibrium
    -    3.2 Global history of the spin temperature
        -    3.2.1 Before the star formation @xmath : The dark age
        -    3.2.2 After star formation @xmath : The cosmic dawn and the
            epoch of reionization
-    4 Fluctuation and power spectrum of the 21 cm radiation
    -    4.1 Fluctuation of brightness temperature
        -    4.1.1 Fluctuation of brightness temperature
        -    4.1.2 In the case of @xmath
    -    4.2 Power spectrum of 21 cm line radiation
        -    4.2.1 Power spectrum of 21 cm line radiation
        -    4.2.2 Power spectrum of ionization fraction
-    5 Density fluctuations and neutrino properties
    -    5.1 Density fluctuations
        -    5.1.1 Equations of density fluctuations
        -    5.1.2 Equations of matter fluctuations
    -    5.2 Free-streaming behavior of neutrinos
        -    5.2.1 Free-streaming length
        -    5.2.2 Large scale behavior of neutrinos
        -    5.2.3 Small scale behavior of neutrinos
    -    5.3 Peculiar velocity
    -    5.4 Other effects due to neutrino properties
    -    5.5 Influence of lepton asymmetry of the Universe
        -    5.5.1 Background
        -    5.5.2 Perturbation equation
-    6 Fisher information matrix
    -    6.1 Fisher information analysis
        -    6.1.1 Definition of statistical quantities
        -    6.1.2 Variance-covariance matrix
        -    6.1.3 Unbiased estimator
        -    6.1.4 Fisher information matrix
        -    6.1.5 Cram @xmath r-Rao bound
    -    6.2 Fisher information matrix for Gaussian likelihood
-    7 Fisher information matrix of 21 cm line observation
    -    7.1 Visibility
        -    7.1.1 Definition of visibility
        -    7.1.2 Visibility for a narrow radio source
        -    7.1.3 Visibility of 21cm line observations
    -    7.2 Fisher information matrix of 21 cm line observations
        -    7.2.1 Sample variance
        -    7.2.2 Detector Noise
        -    7.2.3 Contribution of residual foregrounds
        -    7.2.4 Total variance-covariance matrix @xmath
        -    7.2.5 Relation between @xmath and @xmath
        -    7.2.6 Fisher matrix of 21 cm line observations
    -    7.3 Specifications of the experiments
-    8 Fisher information matrix of cosmic microwave background (CMB)
    -    8.1 CMB and neutrino properties
    -    8.2 Fisher information matrix of CMB
    -    8.3 Residual foregrounds
    -    8.4 Specifications of the experiments
        -    8.4.1 Analysis of the neutrino mass and the mass hierarchy
        -    8.4.2 Analysis of the lepton asymmetry
-    9 Fisher information matrix of baryon acoustic oscillation (BAO)
    observations
    -    9.1 Fisher matrix of BAO
    -    9.2 Specification of the BAO observation
-    10 Forecasts for the neutrino mass
    -    10.1 Future constraints
    -    10.2 Constraints on @xmath and @xmath
    -    10.3 Constraints on the neutrino mass hierarchy
-    11 Forecasts for the lepton asymmetry
    -    11.1 Cases without extra radiation
    -    11.2 Cases with extra radiation
-    12 Summary
-    A Hyperfine splitting of neutral hydrogen atom
-    B Einstein coefficients
-    C Non-relativistic limit of @xmath
    -    C.1 Expressions for the coefficients @xmath
    -    C.2 Non-relativistic limit of @xmath and @xmath for any @xmath
-    D BBN relation

## Chapter 1 Introduction

### 1.1 Observations of 21 cm line radiation

Observations of the high redshift Universe ( @xmath ) with the 21 cm
line of neutral hydrogen attracts attention because it opens a new
window to the early phases of the cosmological structure formations.
After recombination ( @xmath ), because the Universe is neutral, and
there had not existed any luminous objects yet, this era is called “the
cosmic dark age”. After the dark age, first luminous objects formed at
around @xmath , and this epoch is called “the cosmic dawn” or just “the
late time of the dark age”. Finally, X-rays are emitted from the
remnants of the luminous objects, which ionizes inter-galactic medium
(IGM). This epoch is called “the epoch of reionization (EOR)”. So far,
it has been a big challenge to observe such past epochs. However, there
are a large amount of neutral hydrogen gas in these epochs, and we can
observe the high redshift Universe by using the 21 cm line which are
emitted from the gas (Fig. 1.1 ). This is the reason why the observation
of the 21 cm line attracts attention quite recently.

Using the observation of the 21 cm line, we can not only study how the
Universe was ionized but also obtain information about the density
fluctuations of matter because the distribution of neutral hydrogen
traces that of cold dark matter (CDM). Therefore, we can use the
observation of the 21 cm line like those of CMB or Galaxy surveys, and
constrain cosmological parameters such as the density parameter for the
energy density of CDM @xmath or of dark energy @xmath . Besides, the
observation of the 21 cm line has some advantages. First, the
observation enables us to survey very past eras and wide redshift ranges
(21 cm tomography). Secondly, in such high redshift eras, the non-linear
growth of the fluctuation is smaller than that in later epochs.
Therefore, theoretical uncertainties of the predictions for the 21cm
line observation are much smaller than those for galaxy surveys.

### 1.2 21 cm line

The 21 cm line of neutral hydrogen atom is emitted by transition between
the hyperfine levels of the 1S ground state, and the hyperfine structure
is induced by an interaction of magnetic moments between proton and
electron (see Appendix A ). The energy difference of the hyperfine
structure is @xmath eV, and this energy corresponds to the frequency
@xmath GHz (the wave length is @xmath cm). Therefore this spectral line
is called the 21 cm line (see Fig. 1.2 ).

### 1.3 Neutrino mass and its properties

Due to the discovery of non-zero neutrino masses by Super-Kamiokande
through neutrino oscillation experiments in 1998, the standard model of
particle physics was forced to be modified so as to theoretically
include the neutrino masses.

So far only the mass-squared differences of neutrino species have been
measured by neutrino oscillation experiments, which are reported to be
@xmath [ 1 ] and @xmath [ 2 ] . However, absolute values and their
hierarchical structure (normal or inverted) have not been obtained yet
although information on them is indispensable to build new particle
physics models.

In particle physics, some new ideas and new future experiments have been
proposed to measure the absolute values and/or determine the hierarchy
of neutrino masses, e.g., through tritium beta decay in KATRIN
experiment [ 3 ] , neutrinoless double-beta decay [ 4 ] , atmospheric
neutrinos in the proposed iron calorimeter at INO [ 5 , 6 ] and the
upgrade of the IceCube detector (PINGU) [ 7 ] , and long-baseline
oscillation experiments, e.g., NO @xmath A [ 8 ] , J-PARC to Korea
(T2KK) [ 9 , 10 ] or Oki island (T2KO) [ 11 ] , and CERN to
Super-Kamiokande with high energy (5 GeV) neutrino beam [ 12 ] .

On the other hand, such non-zero neutrino masses affect cosmology
significantly through suppression of growth of density fluctuation
because relativistic neutrinos have large large thermal velocity and
erase their own density fluctuations up to horizon scales due to their
free streaming behavior. By measuring power spectra of density
fluctuations, we can constrain the total neutrino mass @xmath [ 13 , 17
, 14 , 18 , 28 , 15 , 20 , 24 , 23 , 29 , 21 , 22 , 25 , 26 , 27 , 16 ,
19 , 30 ] and the effective number of neutrino species @xmath [ 13 , 17
, 14 , 15 , 20 , 31 , 32 , 21 , 16 , 30 ] through observations of cosmic
microwave background (CMB) anisotropies and large-scale structure (LSS).
The robust upper bound on @xmath obtained so far is @xmath eV (95 @xmath
C.L.) by the CMB observation by Planck (see Ref. [ 30 ] ). For forecasts
for future CMB observations, see also Refs. [ 33 , 34 , 35 , 36 ] .

Moreover, by observing the power spectrum of cosmological 21 cm line
radiation fluctuation, we will be able to obtain useful information on
the neutrino masses [ 37 , 38 , 39 , 40 , 41 , 42 ] . That is because
the 21 cm line radiation is emitted (1) long after the recombination (at
a redshift @xmath ) and (2) before an onset of the LSS formation. The
former condition (1) gives us information on smaller neutrino mass (
@xmath eV), and the latter condition (2) means we can treat only a
linear regime of the matter perturbation, which can be analytically
calculated unlike the LSS case.

In actual analyses, it is essential that we combine data of the 21 cm
line with those of CMB because the constrained cosmological parameter
space is complementary to each other. For example, the former is quite
sensitive to the dark energy density, but the latter is relatively
insensitive to it. On the other hand, the former has only a mild
sensitivity to the normalization of matter perturbation, but the latter
has an obvious sensitivity to it by definition. In pioneering work by [
39 ] , the authors tried to make a forecast for constraint on the
neutrino mass hierarchy by combining Planck with future 21 cm line
observations in case of relatively degenerate neutrino masses @xmath eV.

Additionally, there is another issue related to the neutrino properties,
it is the lepton asymmetry of the Universe. The issue of the asymmetry
of matter and antimatter in the Universe is one of the important subject
in cosmology and particle physics. The baryon asymmetry is now
accurately determined by using the combination of cosmological
observations such as cosmic microwave background (CMB), big bang
nucleosynthesis (BBN), large scale structure, type Ia supernovae and so
on. It is represented in term of the baryon-photon ratio @xmath , where
@xmath and @xmath are the number densities of baryon, anti-baryon and
photon, respectively. On the other hand, the asymmetry in the leptonic
sector is not well determined and only a weak constraint on the neutrino
degeneracy parameter @xmath is obtained ^(#1) ^(#1) #1 So far
constraints on @xmath have been obtained by BBN (e.g., see [ 43 , 44 ]
and Fig. D.1 in Appendix D ), which is sometimes combined with CMB
and/or some other observations (e.g., see Refs. [ 45 , 46 , 47 ] ). .
Although the lepton asymmetry is expected to be the same order as the
baryon asymmetry due to the spharelon effect, in some models, it can be
much larger than the baryonic asymmetry [ 48 , 49 , 50 , 51 , 52 ] .
Furthermore, if the lepton asymmetry is large, it may significantly
affect some aspects of the evolution of the Universe: QCD phase
transition [ 53 ] , large-scale cosmological magnetic field [ 54 ] ,
density fluctuations if primordial fluctuation is generated via the
curvaton mechanism [ 55 , 56 , 57 ] and so on.

Thus, it would be worth investigating to what extent the lepton
asymmetry can be probed beyond the accuracy of current cosmological
observations. Since the signals from the 21 cm line can cover a wide
redshift range, they can be complementary to other observations such as
CMB. In addition, the effects of the lepton asymmetry mainly appear on
small scales, which can be well measured by 21 cm line observations.
Thus such a survey would provide useful information.

### 1.4 Purposes and organization of this thesis

In this thesis, we focus on future observations of both the 21 cm line
radiation coming from the epoch of the reionization ( @xmath ) and the
CMB polarization produced by a gravitational lensing, in order to study
their sensitivities to the neutrino properties such as the total
neutrino mass, the neutrino mass hierarchy, the effective number of
neutrino species (extra radiation component), and the lepton asymmetry
of our Universe. As 21 cm line observation, we particularly focus on
future experiments such as the Square Kilometer Array (SKA) (Fig. 1.3 )
[ 58 ] and Omniscope [ 60 , 59 ] .

This thesis is organized as follows. In Chapter 2 , 3 and 4 , we review
the brightness temperature of the 21 cm radiation, the spin temperature
(excitation temperature of the hyperfine splitting), and the power
spectrum of the 21 cm radiation, respectively. In Chapter 5 , we briefly
explain the growth of the density fluctuations and some effects due to
neutrino properties. In Chapter 6 , 7 , 8 and 9 , we summarize our
analytical methods (Fisher information analysis), and review Fisher
matrices of each experiment (21 cm line, CMB and BAO (baryon acoustic
oscillation), respectively). In Chapter 10 , and 11 , we present our
results as forecasts for specific observations, paying particular
attention to how the 21 cm observations will help to measure neutrino
parameters.

### 1.5 Basic variables and constants

Here, we present a summary table of basic symbols in this thesis.

  -------- ---------------------------------------------------------------
  Symbol   Definition
  @xmath   Scale factor.
  @xmath   Einstein A coefficient (spontaneous decay rate).
  @xmath   Einstein A coefficient of the hyperfine splitting.
  @xmath   Einstein B coefficient (stimulated emission).
  @xmath   Einstein B coefficient (absorption).
  @xmath   Light speed.
  @xmath   Energy fraction of neutrino to matter, @xmath ,
           where @xmath includes both of neutrino and anti-neutrino.
  @xmath   Degree of freedom of the upper state.
  @xmath   Degree of freedom of the lower state.
  @xmath   Degree of freedom of the spin singlet state.
  @xmath   Degree of freedom of the spin triplet state.
  @xmath   Metric tensor.
  @xmath   Hubble parameter, @xmath , where @xmath is the cosmic time.
  @xmath   Conformal Hubble parameter, @xmath .
  @xmath   Present value of the Hubble parameter.
  @xmath   Dimensionless Hubble parameter, @xmath .
  @xmath   Planck constant.
  @xmath   Reduced Planck constant, @xmath .
  @xmath   Specific intensity.
  @xmath   Specific intensity of black body.
           Wave number vector (Fourier dual of the comoving coordinate).
  @xmath   Absolute value of , @xmath .
  @xmath   Boltzmann constant.
  @xmath   Electron mass.
  @xmath   Hydrogen mass.
  -------- ---------------------------------------------------------------

  Symbol   Definition
  -------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  @xmath   Neutrino mass.
  @xmath   Total neutrino mass, @xmath ,
           where @xmath is each mass eigenstate.
  @xmath   Effective number of neutrino species.
  @xmath   Difference between the effective number of neutrino species.
           and the standard value, @xmath .
  @xmath   Pressure.
  @xmath   Power spectrum of @xmath (21 cm line power spectrum).
  @xmath   Power spectrum of matter density fluctuation.
  @xmath   Temperature.
  @xmath   Brightness temperature.
  @xmath   Proper time of a radiation source.
  @xmath   Spin temperature.
  @xmath   CMB temperature.
  @xmath   @xmath .
  @xmath   Primordial @xmath He mass fraction.
  @xmath   Neutral fraction
           (the ratio of neutral hydrogen atoms and total protons).
  @xmath   Ionization fraction, @xmath .
  @xmath   Redshift, @xmath .
  @xmath   Fine structure constant.
  @xmath   Density fluctuation.
  @xmath   Fluctuation of @xmath .
  @xmath   Density fluctuation of baryons.
  @xmath   Density fluctuation of cold dark matter.
  @xmath   Dirac delta function.
  @xmath   Density fluctuation of hydrogen.
  @xmath   Density fluctuation of neutral fraction.
  @xmath   Density fluctuation of neutrinos.
  @xmath   Difference between the 21 cm line brightness temperature
           and CMB temperature, @xmath .
  @xmath   observed @xmath .
  @xmath   Conformal time.
  @xmath   Wave length.
  @xmath   Wave length of 21 cm line.
  @xmath   Cosine of the angle of a wave vector between a line of sight direction.
  @xmath   Chemical potential of each neutrino flavor @xmath .
  @xmath   Frequency.
  @xmath   Frequency of 21 cm line at a rest frame.
  @xmath   Transition frequency between the upper and lower state.
  @xmath   Degeneracy parameter.

  Symbol   Definition
  -------- ------------------------------------------------------------------
  @xmath   Degeneracy parameter of each neutrino flavor, @xmath .
  @xmath   Energy density.
  @xmath   Energy density of baryons.
  @xmath   Energy density of cold dark matter.
  @xmath   Energy density of matter, @xmath .
  @xmath   Energy density of neutrinos.
           In the section 5.5 and the appendix C ,
           @xmath includes only the energy density of neutrino.
           In the other chapters and sections, it includes both of neutrino
           and anti-neutrino.
  @xmath   Optical depth.
  @xmath   Perturbation of gravitational potential,
           where is the comoving coordinate.
  @xmath   Perturbation of spatial curvature,
           where is the comoving coordinate.
  @xmath   Density parameter of baryons at present.
  @xmath   Density parameter of matter at present.
  @xmath   Density parameter of dark energy at present.
  @xmath   Density parameter of neutrino at present.

## Chapter 2 Brightness temperature of 21 cm radiation [61, 63, 62]

In this chapter, we review basic physical quantities about the
cosmological 21 cm line observation. For further details, we refer the
readers to Refs. [ 61 , 62 ] .

### 2.1 Brightness temperature and transfer equation [64, 65]

#### 2.1.1 Brightness temperature

Brightness temperature @xmath means intensity of radiation, and it is
defined by specific intensity of black body in the Rayleigh-Jeans
approximation ( @xmath ). In the approximation, the specific intensity
of black body @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

By using the specific intensity of black body @xmath , the brightness
temperature @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is intensity of radiation (specific intensity : emitted
energy per unit area, unit time, unit frequency and unit solid angle).

When the Rayleigh-Jeans approximation is not applicable, the specific
intensity of black body @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore, we can define the equivalent brightness temperature @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

From now on, we do not distinguish @xmath from @xmath , and express them
as just @xmath .

#### 2.1.2 Transfer equation

The flux intensity obeys the transfer equation,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the cosmic time , @xmath is the emission coefficient,
which represents the contribution of spontaneous emission, @xmath is the
absorption coefficient, which represents the contribution of absorption
and stimulated emission (it is interpreted as negative absorption), is
the comoving coordinate, and is the unit vector which points to the
direction of radiation.

Here, we define the optical depth @xmath as,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the physical length. This quantity @xmath represents the
degree of diffusion of radiation. By using a transformation of @xmath ,
the transfer equation becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and we can rewrite this equation as the following equation relevant to
the brightness temperature @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

By solving this equation, we can get the solution of brightness
temperature @xmath .

#### 2.1.3 Emission and absorption coefficients in a two level system

In this subsection, we discuss a two-level system because the hyperfine
structure is described by such a system. In the two-level system, the
emission and absorption coefficients are expressed by the Einstein A and
B coefficients, which represent the probability of a transition between
two energy levels. The A coefficient corresponds to the spontaneous
emission, and the B coefficient corresponds to the absorption and the
stimulated emission, respectively.

##### A coefficient : @xmath

The Einstein coefficient @xmath represents the probability of a
transition between two energy levels per unit time. The unit is inverse
of time.

##### B coefficients : @xmath, @xmath

The probability of absorption and stimulated emission are proportional
to the intensity of incoming radiation. Therefore, we introduce the
average intensity @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a line profile, and by using @xmath , we define the
Einstein B coefficients as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

#####

These coefficients are related to the variation of intensity, and the
relations are expressed as

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (2.11a)
     @xmath      (2.11b)
     @xmath      (2.11c)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here, @xmath and @xmath are the number density of atom in the lower
state and the upper state, respectively, @xmath and @xmath are the line
profiles of emission and absorption, respectively. Therefore, the
equation of intensity @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
                 @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the transition frequency between the upper and lower
states. In comparison between ( 2.6 ) and ( 2.12 ), we can express the
emission and absorption coefficients as

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (2.13a)
     @xmath      (2.13b)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In this situation, @xmath and @xmath do not depend on the direction of
radiation . From now on, we assume that the line profiles of emission
and absorption are same function ( @xmath ) for simplicity.

#### 2.1.4 Spin temperature

We introduce the spin temperature @xmath , which is the excitation
temperature of hyperfine structure (the detail is shown in the Chapter 3
),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the degree of freedom of the upper and lower
states, respectively. According to the following relation (the detail is
shown in the Appendix B )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.15a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.15b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

we can express @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.16)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Therefore, the source term of Eq.( 2.9 ) (the second term on the right
hand side) can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.17)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the last line, we use the approximation of @xmath . This
approximation is valid in observations of 21 cm line because @xmath and
generally @xmath (the detail is shown in the Chapter 3 ).

#### 2.1.5 The solution of the transfer equations

By using Eq.( 2.17 ), we can rewrite Eq.( 2.9 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The solution of Eq.( 2.18 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

By using approximation of @xmath , we can rewrite Eq.( 2.19 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the difference between the brightness temperature @xmath and
the incoming radiation @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.21)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here, the brightness temperature of incoming radiation @xmath is that of
CMB radiation @xmath . By the comoving coordinate @xmath (0) at the
incident point and the conformal time @xmath at the point, the
temperature of incoming radiation @xmath can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

From now on, by the comoving coordinate @xmath (0) and the conformal
time @xmath , we express the spin temperature and @xmath to be @xmath
and @xmath , respectively.

Because the observed brightness temperature is redshifted (the frequency
and the temperature of CMB rise @xmath -fold), the difference of
observed brightness temperature @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.23)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the case of @xmath , @xmath is expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

From Eq.( 2.24 ), when the spin temperature @xmath is higher than the
CMB temperature @xmath , the observed radiation becomes an emission line
( @xmath ). By contrast, when @xmath is lower than @xmath , the observed
radiation becomes absorption line ( @xmath ). From now on, the
“difference of the brightness temperature @xmath ” is called just the
“brightness temperature”.

### 2.2 Optical depth and line profile

#### 2.2.1 Optical depth

In this section, we estimate the optical depth @xmath , which appears in
Eq.( 2.24 ). The optical depth is defined by Eq.( 2.7 ) to be,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

By using Eqs.( 2.16 ), ( 2.25 ) and the approximation of @xmath , the
absorption coefficient @xmath is expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.26)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Therefore, the optical depth is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 2.2.2 Line profile

In this subsection, we estimate the line profile @xmath in Eq.( 2.27 ).
The line profile is normalized as follows,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can consider that @xmath has non-zero value between only @xmath which
is the frequency region near the transition frequency @xmath (Fig. 2.1
), and the line profile can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The frequency width @xmath is caused by the Doppler effect of radiation.
Therefore, by using the velocity width of a hydrogen gas region
(radiation source) along line of sight (LOS) @xmath , @xmath is written
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the physical size of the gas region, @xmath is the
derivative of @xmath with respect to the direction of LOS @xmath , and
@xmath is the scale factor at the time when the background radiation
enters the gas region. The gradient of velocity @xmath has main two
contributions: one comes from the expansion of the Universe, the other
comes from the peculiar motion of the gas region.

##### Expansion of the Universe

The velocity width due to the expansion of the Universe is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.32)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Because @xmath is the derivative of velocity with respect to the
physical distance @xmath , it represents the Hubble parameter.
Therefore, Eq.( 2.32 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Hubble parameter at the redshift z.

##### Peculiar motion

The velocity width due to the peculiar motion @xmath of a radiation
source along LOS is expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

#####

The net velocity width @xmath is given by the sum of the above two
contributions, and it is written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.35)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Therefore, by using Eqs.( 2.29 ), ( 2.30 ) and ( 2.35 ), the value of
the line profile at @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.36)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the last line of Eq.( 2.36 ), we use @xmath and consider that the
velocity of the peculiar motion is much smaller than that of the
cosmological expansion. By using this estimated line profile, we can
obtain the optical depth at @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.37)
                                         
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                         
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We consider that the size of the gas region is much smaller than Mpc
scale, and average variations of physical quantities up to the gas size.
In this case, the number density (of lower state) and the spin
temperature can be expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Therefore, the third line of Eq.( 2.37 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

By using Eq.( 2.38 ), we can estimate the optical depth of 21 cm line
for diffuse inter galactic medium (IGM) at

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

### 2.3 Observed brightness temperature

In this section, we estimate the brightness temperature of the 21 cm
line observation by using the optical depth which is estimated in the
previous section. From now on, we use @xmath as the location of a gas
region, instead of @xmath (0). By assuming that the optical depth is
sufficiently small, i.e. @xmath ^(#1) ^(#1) #1 This assumption is valid
at almost all eras related to the 21 cm line observation ( @xmath ). We
can estimate the optical depth at @xmath . From Figs. 3.1 - 3.3 and in
the next chapter, we find that @xmath is valid in the redshift range. ,
and substituting Eq.( 2.39 ) into Eq.( 2.24 ), the brightness
temperature can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.40)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Next, we rewrite the number density of the lower state @xmath in the
Eq.( 2.40 ) by using the number density of protons @xmath . The ground
state of neutral hydrogen splits into the upper (spin triplet @xmath :
@xmath ) and the lower (spin singlet @xmath : @xmath ) state. Therefore,
by using the approximation in which neutral hydrogen atoms of the lower
and upper state exist in @xmath , respectively, the number density of
the lower state @xmath is expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number density of neutral hydrogen atoms. Here, we
introduce the neutral fraction @xmath , which means the ratio of neutral
hydrogen atoms and total protons, and express the number density of
neutral hydrogen as @xmath , where @xmath is the number density of total
protons. By using this relation, @xmath can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

By using Eq.( 2.42 ), the observed brightness temperature ( 2.40 ) is
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.43)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where, instead of the index @xmath , we use @xmath (i.e. @xmath , @xmath
@xmath @xmath , @xmath ) to emphasis that those quantities are related
to the 21 cm line. Additionally, the spatial average of the brightness
temperature @xmath at the redshift @xmath is expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath mean the spatial averaged quantities.

The brightness temperature of 21 cm line @xmath can be estimated at

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

From this equation, we find that the brightness temperature of 21 cm
line is about several mK at @xmath . When we estimate @xmath , we use
the following relations and quantities: The Friedmann equation in the
matter dominated era,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

the relation between mass abundance of hydrogens and baryons,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is the energy density of baryons and hydrogens
respectively, @xmath is the helium mass fraction, and @xmath is the mass
of hydrogen; the transition frequency of the hyperfine splitting,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

the Einstein coefficient of the splitting,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

## Chapter 3 Spin temperature [61, 63]

In this chapter, we review the evolution of spin temperature at the dark
age, the cosmic dawn and the epoch of reionization.

### 3.1 Time evolution of the spin temperature

#### 3.1.1 The evolution equation of spin temperature

By Eq.( 2.14 ) in the Chapter 1 , the spin temperature @xmath is defined
as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath K, and subscripts @xmath and @xmath mean the quantities
related to the spin 0 (lower) and spin 1 (upper) states, respectively.
This spin temperature is the excitation temperature of the hyperfine
splitting of neutral hydrogen. The excitation temperature is defined by
viewing the distribution of the upper and lower states to be the
Boltzmann distribution.

By differentiating Eq.( 3.2 ) with respect to the time, we can obtain
the following evolution equation of spin temperature,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath is the proper time of a radiation source. From this
equation, we find that the spin temperature depends on the time
evolution of number densities @xmath and @xmath . Therefore, transition
processes between the upper and lower states influences the evolution of
spin temperature, and such processes are the following:

1.  Collisions (Spin flip due to hydrogen-hydrogen (H-H),
    electron-hydrogen (e-H) and proton-hydrogen (p-H) collisions)

2.  Transition due to absorption and emission of background photons
    (CMB)

3.  Transition due to Lyman @xmath photons through other energy states

4.  Time variation of neutral fraction @xmath

##### 1. Collisions (H-H, e-H and p-H)

The time evolutions of the number densities due to collisions obey the
following equations,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the reaction ratios of excitation and
deexcitation due to the collisions (H-H, e-H and p-H), respectively.

##### 2. Absorption and emission of background photons (CMB)

By the definition of the Einstein coefficients, the time variations of
the number densities due to absorption and emission of CMB photons of
@xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the specific intensity of CMB at @xmath . Here, we only
consider the CMB photons as background radiation. In practice, photons
due to the transition of the hyperfine splitting also contributes to the
background radiation [ 66 ] . However, that effect is smaller than that
of the CMB photons. Therefore, we neglect such contribution in the
background radiation.

##### 3. Transition due to Lyman @xmath photons through other energy
states

The time evolutions of the number densities due to Ly @xmath photons
obey the following equations,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the reaction ratios of excitation and
deexcitation due to absorption or emission of Ly @xmath photons,
respectively. This transition occurs through the 2P state of neutral
hydrogen (the spin state changes when the 1S ground state is excited to
the 2P state and subsequently deexcited to the 1S state). This coupling
of spin temperature and Ly @xmath radiation is called the
Wouthuysen-Field effect (or coupling) ^(#1) ^(#1) #1 “Wouthuysen” is
pronounced as roughly “Vowt-how-sen” [ 61 ] . [ 67 , 68 ] .

##### 4. Time variation of neutral fraction @xmath [66]

This effect comes from the own time variation of neutral hydrogen number
density ( @xmath ). The time evolution of @xmath due to the variation of
neutral fraction @xmath obeys the following equation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

According to the degree of statistical freedom ( @xmath ), we can
consider that the variation affects @xmath and @xmath in the proportion
of 1:3. Therefore, the contributions due to the variation can be written
as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we consider that the states of all neutral hydrogen atoms are the
ground states (i.e. @xmath ).

#####

According to the above contributions, the derivatives of the number
densities @xmath and @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.13)
                                         
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                         
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.14)
                                         
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                         
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

By using Eqs.( 3.13 ) and ( 3.14 ), we can rewrite the evolution
equation of spin temperature Eq.( 3.3 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.15)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here, we introduce the following temperatures related to the reaction
ratios of collision ( @xmath :gas temperature) and Ly @xmath ( @xmath
:color temperature),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.16a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.16b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

@xmath and @xmath correspond to temperatures in thermal equilibrium
between the upper and lower state through only collisions or Ly @xmath
process, respectively,

  -- -------- -- -------- -- ---------
                             
     @xmath      @xmath      (3.17a)
     @xmath      @xmath      (3.17b)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- ---------

By using @xmath and the definition of spin temperature Eq.( 3.2 ), we
can rewrite the first line of Eq.( 3.15 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.18)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where, in the third line, we assume that @xmath , @xmath and expand
@xmath up to the first order ^(#2) ^(#2) #2 @xmath are generally higher
than the present CMB temperature ( @xmath ), and @xmath K. Therefore, we
can assume that @xmath . Additionally, @xmath is also valid because
@xmath takes values close to any of @xmath , @xmath or @xmath . . In the
same way, by using the color temperature @xmath , the second line of
Eq.( 3.15 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we also use the similar assumption which is @xmath , @xmath .
Next, the third line of Eq. ( 3.15 ) is expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
                 
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, by using the following relations of the Einstein coefficients
Eqs.( 2.15a ) and ( 2.15b ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and the specific intensity of black body Eq.( 2.3 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we can rewrite the coefficient of Eq.( 3.20 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.21)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Additionally, by using the following relation,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.22)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and Eqs.( 3.21 ), Eq.( 3.20 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
                 
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (3.23)
                 
  -- -------- -- --------

where, in the fourth line, we also use the similar assumption which is
@xmath , @xmath , and expand @xmath up to the first order. Finally, by
using @xmath and expand @xmath up to the first order, the fourth line of
Eq.( 3.15 ) is expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.24)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Therefore, by using Eqs.( 3.18 ), ( 3.19 ), ( 3.23 ) and ( 3.24 ), we
can rewrite the evolution equation of spin temperature Eq.( 3.15 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.25)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 3.1.2 Spin temperature in thermal equilibrium [68]

The time variation term of neutral fraction can be neglected through the
most of the epochs related to the 21 cm line observation. In addition,
when each process is in thermal equilibrium (time scales of each
interaction are sufficiently shorter than that of the Hubble expansion),
the time derivative of spin temperature also can be neglected. In this
situation, by Eq.( 3.25 ), the spin temperature @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, we define the coupling coefficients,

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (3.28a)
     @xmath      (3.28b)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By using these coupling coefficients, the spin temperature @xmath can be
expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
                 
  -- -------- -- --------

In this way, the spin temperature in thermal equilibrium is determined
by the temperatures of CMB @xmath , gas @xmath and Ly @xmath @xmath (in
other words, @xmath is a weighted average of them, and the weights are
@xmath ). According to the Eq.( 3.29 ), we find that the spin
temperature takes values close to the temperature related to the
transition process which has the strongest coupling.

### 3.2 Global history of spin temperature [61]

In this section, we briefly explain the global history of spin
temperature.

#### 3.2.1 Before the star formation @xmath : The dark age

In the very high redshifted era @xmath , baryons and CMB photons are
combined through the Compton scattering ^(#3) ^(#3) #3 This Compton
scattering is due to free electrons which do not form atoms at the
recombination era. . Therefore, the CMB @xmath and the gas temperature
@xmath are @xmath (Fig. 3.1 ), and the spin temperature is also @xmath .
By the reasons stated above, signals of 21 cm line do not exist in this
era ^(#4) ^(#4) #4 However, in a recent work [ 69 ] , the authors
indicate the possible presence of the signals in this era. .

After that and before the star formation ( @xmath ), the Compton
scattering becomes not effective, and it can be neglected at about
@xmath . Therefore, the gas temperature @xmath decreases adiabatically,
and the spin temperature becomes @xmath through the collisions. Next,
around @xmath , the value of spin temperature starts to approach that of
CMB temperature @xmath because the density of baryons becomes smaller
and the transition process due to collisions becomes not effective in
comparison with transition due to CMB photons. In this era, signals of
21 cm line can be detected. Finally, around @xmath , the spin
temperature becomes @xmath , and the signals disappear around the
redshift.

Although signals of 21 cm line exist in theses eras, the signals (
@xmath ) can not pass through the ionosphere of the Earth. Furthermore,
in the frequency range ( @xmath ), the galactic foregrounds are very
strong. Therefore, detection of the high redshifted signals is
significantly difficult (we need to use a lunar or space-based
observatory, e.g. the lunar radio array, which is a planned array at the
Moon in the future [ 70 ] ).

#### 3.2.2 After star formation @xmath : The cosmic dawn and the epoch
of reionization

After the star formation, the transition due to Ly @xmath photons which
come from stars becomes effective. Therefore, the spin temperature
@xmath takes values close to @xmath because of the Wouthuysen-Field
effect [ 61 , 67 ] . Although the gas and Ly @xmath temperatures are
generally different, there are a lot of situations in which these
temperature take same values. When a large amount of neutral hydrogen
gas exists and the optical depth is large, Ly @xmath photons are
scattered with the gas many times. In that case, the distribution of the
photons is close to that of black body with @xmath around the frequency
of Ly @xmath . Therefore, the Ly @xmath temperature becomes @xmath , and
as a consequence @xmath in the Cosmic dawn. (Figs. 3.2 and 3.3 ).

After that, since the X-ray which comes form remnants of luminous
objects heats the IGM in the epoch of reionization, the gas temperature
becomes @xmath and @xmath around @xmath . In this situation, the power
spectrum of 21 cm line becomes a relatively simple form (the detail is
shown in the Chapter 4 ). Therefore, this era has the much advantage to
determine the cosmological parameters. However, the evolution of spin
temperature strongly depends on the detail of the star formation, and
there are some uncertainties due to astrophysics.

## Chapter 4 Fluctuation and power spectrum of the 21 cm radiation [61,
63, 37]

In this chapter, we introduce the fluctuation of 21 cm line brightness
temperature @xmath and its power spectrum.

### 4.1 Fluctuation of brightness temperature

#### 4.1.1 Fluctuation of brightness temperature

The brightness temperature of 21 cm line @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the spatial average of the brightness temperature. By
Eqs.( 2.44 ) and ( LABEL:eq:obsbrightness4 ), the brightness temperature
is expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.2)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Here, we introduce the following fluctuations of each physical quantity,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath means each quantity and @xmath is its spatial average.
Additionally, we treat the contribution due to the peculiar velocity in
Eq.( 2.43 ) as a perturbation,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

By using the fluctuations of each quantity, the brightness temperature
Eq.( 2.43 ) is expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.5)
                                         
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                         
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

From now on, we treat the fluctuations of the number density of hydrogen
( @xmath proton) @xmath , the CMB temperature @xmath and the
contribution of peculiar velocity @xmath as small perturbations, and
neglect more than the second order terms of them. However, there are
several situations in which the fluctuation of neutral fraction @xmath
becomes @xmath , e.g. at the late stage of the epoch of reionization.
Additionally, the spin temperature depends on the neutral fraction
through the collisional transition process because the process depends
on the amount of neutral hydrogen. Therefore, when @xmath becomes @xmath
, the fluctuation of spin temperature @xmath has the potential to become
@xmath . According to these reasons, Eq.( 4.5 ) is expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.6)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where the terms in @xmath are second order contributions as a
consequence of considering that @xmath and @xmath may become @xmath . By
using Eqs.( 4.1 ) and ( 4.6 ), @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.7)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

#### 4.1.2 In the case of @xmath

If the spin temperature is higher than the CMB one, the fluctuation of
21 cm line brightness temperature becomes a simpler form because we can
neglect the dependences of @xmath and @xmath in it. As we saw in the the
Chapter 3 , after the star formation, around @xmath , the condition
@xmath is valid. Because the dependences on @xmath and @xmath do not
exist in the brightness temperature under this condition, we can also
neglect their fluctuations @xmath and @xmath . In this case, Eq.( 4.7 )
reduces to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.8)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Since the fluctuation of the neutral fraction is also sufficiently small
@xmath except for the end of the epoch of reionization, we can also
neglect the terms in @xmath in the Eq.( 4.8 ). Therefore, the brightness
temperature becomes the following simple form,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Since we can use the above simple form as the 21 cm line fluctuations,
we mainly focus on the epoch of reionization (around @xmath ) in this
thesis.

### 4.2 Power spectrum of 21 cm line radiation

#### 4.2.1 Power spectrum of 21 cm line radiation

In this section, we introduce the power spectrum of 21 cm line
radiation. By using the fluctuation of 21 cm line brightness
temperature, the power spectrum of 21 cm line @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath means ensemble average, @xmath is the Dirac delta function
and @xmath means the Fourier component of the quantity. Here, we define
the Fourier and the inverse Fourier transformation as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.11a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.11b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The power spectrum of 21 cm line has dependences on not only the
absolute value of a wave vector @xmath but also the angle between and a
LOS direction. The dependence comes from the peculiar motion of a
radiation source along the LOS. Therefore, we use as the argument of
@xmath . The power spectrum of 21 cm line generally has a very
complicated form. However, under the conditions of @xmath and @xmath ,
which are considered in the section 4.1.2 , the spectrum reduces to a
relatively simple form. In particular, under the condition of @xmath ,
we can neglect the second order terms of the fluctuations. In this case,
the fluctuation of 21 cm line can be expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

By substituting Eq.( 4.12 ) into Eq.( 4.10 ), the power spectrum of 21
cm line @xmath can be given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.13)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.14)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we define the power spectra @xmath of fluctuations @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

By introducing the following notation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can rewrite Eq.( 4.14 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.17)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we use that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath have only the dependence on
the absolute value of .

Next, we introduce the cosine of the angle between a LOS direction and a
wave vector,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
                 
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

and the following growth factor, which is defined by the growing mode
@xmath of a density fluctuation ^(#1) ^(#1) #1 The growth factor @xmath
is generally @xmath (1), e.g. in the matter dominated Universe, @xmath
because of @xmath . ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

By using @xmath , @xmath and density fluctuation of baryons @xmath , we
can rewrite the contribution of peculiar velocity @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The detail of this relation is shown in the Chapter 5 . By using this
relation, the power spectrum of 21 cm line is expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.21)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the Eq.( 4.21 ), it is important that the term of @xmath only depends
on the power spectrum of baryons, which almost traces the matter power
spectrum in large scales. Therefore, in principle, we can get the
information of matter fluctuations from the 21 cm line power spectrum
even if we can not understand the behavior of fluctuations of neutral
fraction @xmath .

#### 4.2.2 Power spectrum of ionization fraction

Since the epoch of reionization is the matter dominated era, the growth
factor becomes @xmath . Furthermore, in large scales, we can assume that
fluctuations of hydrogen ( @xmath baryons) trace those of matters (
@xmath and @xmath ). Therefore, the power spectrum can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we use the following notations,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.23a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.23b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.23c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.24a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.24b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.24c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Here, instead of the power spectra of neutral fraction @xmath ( @xmath
), we use those of ionization fraction @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The
ionization fraction spectra are defined in the same manner as Eq. ( 4.15
) for its fluctuation @xmath .

@xmath and @xmath can be neglected as long as we consider eras when the
IGM is completely neutral. However, after the reionization starts, these
two spectra significantly contribute to the 21 cm line power spectrum.
Although a rigorous evaluation of these power spectra may need some
numerical simulations, we adopt the treatment given in Ref. [ 72 ] ,
where it is assumed that @xmath and @xmath have specific forms which
match simulations of radiative transfer in Refs. [ 73 , 74 ] . The
explicit forms of the power spectra are parametrized to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.25a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.25b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are parameters which
characterize the amplitudes and the shapes of the spectra. @xmath and
@xmath represent the effective size of ionized bubbles. In our analysis,
we adopt the values listed in Table 4.1 as the fiducial values of these
parameters.

## Chapter 5 Density fluctuations and neutrino properties [76, 75]

In this chapter, we start discussing influences of neutrinos on the
growth of density fluctuations. Note that we use Planck units ( @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath ), and metric signature is @xmath , in this chapter.

### 5.1 Density fluctuations [75, 77]

#### 5.1.1 Equations of density fluctuations

In this section, we review the treatment of density fluctuations in
first order. Here, we assume the homogeneous and isotropic Universe, and
neglect the spatial curvature. Besides, we only consider the scalar
component.

In the conformal Newtonian gauge, the perturbed Friedmann-Lema @xmath
tre-Robertson-Walker metric is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a comoving coordinate and we use conformal time @xmath (
@xmath is the cosmic time). The energy momentum tensor is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the traceless ( @xmath ) anisotropic stress tensor,
which is treated as a perturbation, @xmath is the pressure, @xmath is
the energy density, @xmath is the four velocity, @xmath is the metric
tensor, the Greece induces are @xmath , and roman induces are @xmath .
Here, the velocity of fluid is expressed as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and we also treat this @xmath as a perturbation. The four velocity is
written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

By using the condition of @xmath , we find the following relation,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

In addition, the four velocity Eq.( 5.4 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore, the components of the energy momentum tensor in first order
are given as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.7a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.7b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.7c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.7d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

By writing the perturbations of @xmath , @xmath to be @xmath and its
spatial averages to be @xmath , @xmath , the total energy momentum
tensor is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.8a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.8b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.8c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.8d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we define the following density fluctuation,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

From now on, we use this density fluctuation as the perturbation of
energy density.

By using Eqs.( 5.1 ), ( 5.8d ) and the Einstein equation, we can get the
following equations of these perturbations,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.10a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.10b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.10c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.10d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where index @xmath means each fluid component, and @xmath means the
Fourier component (the Fourier transformation is given by Eq.( 4.11a )),
@xmath means the derivative with respect to the conformal time @xmath
and @xmath is the comoving Hubble parameter @xmath ( @xmath is the
physical Hubble parameter @xmath ). Additionally, we define the
following quantities,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.11a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.11b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

By using Eq.( 5.10a ) and ( 5.10b ), we can obtain the equation about
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

According to the conservation of energy and momentum @xmath (where
@xmath means a conformal derivative with respect to @xmath ), we get the
following equations,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.13a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , and we use the equation of state @xmath . Note that these
equations are not independent of the Einstein equation.

#### 5.1.2 Equations of matter fluctuations

Below we consider matter fluctuations. We include cold dark matter (c),
baryons (b), non-relativistic neutrino ( @xmath ) as the matter (we show
the behavior of neutrinos in the next section).

##### Cold Dark Matter (CDM)

Cold dark matter (CDM) is a component of non-relativistic particles and
does not interact (or weakly) with the other particles except for the
gravity, and we can neglect the pressure. Therefore, we can treat it as
a perfect fluid. By Eq.( LABEL:eq:energymom2 ) and the conservation law
of energy and momentum about CDM, the evolution equations of CDM
fluctuations @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.14a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.14b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where we set @xmath .

##### Baryons

Since baryons are strongly combined with electrons through the Coulomb
interaction, we treat them as mixed fluid here. After electrons and
positrons annihilate each other, baryons behave as a non-relativistic
fluid. Therefore, we can neglect their pressure and anisotropic stress.
According to the transportation of the energy and the momentum through
the scattering, we can get the following equations of fluctuations of
baryons,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.15a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.15b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the third term of the left hand side of Eq.( 5.15b ) means the
interaction between baryons and photons, @xmath means quantities of
photons, @xmath is the scale factor, @xmath is the number density of
electrons, and @xmath is the cross section of the Thomson scattering.

#####

Below, we consider epochs related to the observation of 21 cm line
@xmath @xmath @xmath . Since the interaction between baryons and photons
is decoupled in these epochs, we neglect the term related to the
interaction in Eq.( 5.15b ). Therefore, the equations of fluctuations of
baryons reduce to those of CDM. Furthermore, we can neglect the
anisotropic stress of non-relativistic matters, and get the relation
@xmath from Eq.( 5.10d ). Because the Universe is dominated by the
matter in these epochs, the energy density of radiation components
@xmath in Eq.( 5.12 ) can be neglected in comparison with those of
matter components @xmath , where @xmath includes the energy density of
neutrino and anti-neutrino. Besides, we consider only sub-horizon scale
( @xmath ) here, and can neglect the terms related to @xmath in the
right hand side of Eq.( 5.12 ). According to these conditions, we obtain
the following equations of the fluctuations,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.16a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.16c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.16e)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

### 5.2 Free-streaming behavior of neutrinos [75, 78]

#### 5.2.1 Free-streaming length

Neutrinos are very light collisionless particles. Therefore, they have
free motion (the free-streaming) due to their large thermal velocity
@xmath , and a typical scale of the motion is about @xmath . The scale
is called the free-streaming length @xmath . Here, we can define it as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.17a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.17b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

This definition is similar to the Jeans-length.

When neutrinos are relativistic particles ( @xmath , where @xmath is the
neutrino mass, @xmath is the temperature of the neutrinos.), their
velocity is almost light speed. Therefore, the free-streaming scale is
same as the Hubble horizon scale. However, after the neutrinos become
non-relativistic particles ( @xmath ), the thermal velocity becomes
smaller and we can estimate it at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we use the relation between the present temperature of the
neutrinos @xmath and the CMB temperature @xmath , @xmath . When the
Universe is dominated by matters and dark energy, the free-free steaming
length and the corresponding wave number are expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.19a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.19b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the present density parameter of the matters, @xmath is
that of the cosmological constant, and @xmath is the dimensionless
Hubble parameter @xmath .

When we consider the matter dominated Universe, the free-streaming
length behaves like @xmath . However, the “comoving” free-streaming
length behaves like @xmath because the time dependence of the scale
factor is @xmath . According to the transition temperature @xmath , we
obtain the following relation,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Therefore, by using Eq.( 5.19b ), the minimum wave number @xmath (the
maximum free streaming length) is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because of the free-streaming behavior, the fluctuation of neutrinos is
erased in scales which are smaller than the free-streaming length.
Therefore, the energy density of neutrinos does not contribute to the
gravitational growth of the other matter fluctuations in such scales. In
contrast, the free-streaming behavior is neglected in scales which are
larger than the free-streaming length. In particular, in the scales of
@xmath , the fluctuation of neutrinos have never been affected by the
free-streaming behavior. Therefore, the neutrinos contributes to the
growth of the density fluctuations like CDM in such a large scale.

#### 5.2.2 Large scale behavior of neutrinos

First, we consider scales which are larger than the free-streaming
length of neutrinos ( @xmath ). Since we can treat the neutrinos same as
CDM in this case, the equations of CDM, baryons and neutrinos are same
ones. Therefore, we can express these fluctuations as @xmath and @xmath
. By writing these fluctuations as @xmath , the equations of these
fluctuations are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.22a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.22b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.22c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

By using Eqs.( 5.22a ) and ( 5.22b ), we can obtain the following second
order derivative equation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the sub-horizon scale, the main contribution of the source term in
the left hand side is @xmath . By substituting Eq.( 5.22c ) into Eq.(
5.23 ) and using the Friedmann equation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we assume the matter dominated Universe @xmath . When we consider
sub-horizon scale @xmath , Eq.( 5.25 ) is approximated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can get the same equation if we neglect the terms @xmath and @xmath
in Eq.( 5.23 ). By Eq.( 5.26 ), the equation of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

By the translation of variables from @xmath to the scale factor @xmath ,
the differential of @xmath is written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the left hand side of Eq.( 5.27 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.29)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

By differentiating the following Friedmann equation with respect to the
scale factor @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.30)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

we can obtain the following relation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, by differentiating Eq.( 5.31 ) @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

we can write the right hand side of Eq.( 5.27 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

By using Eqs.( 5.29 ) and ( 5.33 ), Eq ( 5.27 ) is expressed to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Additionally, the factor of the second term of Eq.( 5.34 ) is rewritten
as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.35)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Therefore, Eq. ( 5.34 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The solution of this equation can be derived analytically and it is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the arbitrary function with respect to
@xmath (or @xmath ). The first and second terms mean the growing and
decaying solutions, respectively. When the Universe is dominated by
matter, by using Eq.( 5.30 ), this solution reduces to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.38)
                                         
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

From now on, we express the growing and decaying solutions as @xmath and
@xmath , respectively. In Eq.( 5.38 ), we find that the growing solution
(first term) behaves like @xmath . In contrast the decaying solution
(second term) behaves like @xmath .

#### 5.2.3 Small scale behavior of neutrinos

Here, we consider scales which are smaller than the free-streaming
length ( @xmath ). In this case, the fluctuation of neutrinos does not
grow, but those of CDM and baryons can do. According to this, these
fluctuations become @xmath . Since the energy density of neutrinos is
@xmath , the product of the energy density and the density fluctuation
also becomes @xmath . Therefore, the source term of the left hand side
of Eq.( 5.16e ) reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because baryons and CDM obey the same equation, these are @xmath and we
can express them as @xmath below.

Here, we define the ratio of the energy density of non-relativistic
neutrino to that of matter as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

By using this, we can rewrite Eq.( 5.39 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.41)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

According to them, we can obtain the following equations of the density
fluctuation,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.42a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.42b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.42c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

By using these equations, we can get the following second order
differential equation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the terms of @xmath and @xmath can be neglected in the same way as
the case of @xmath . Furthermore, by using Eq.( 5.29 ) and translating
the variable from @xmath to @xmath , Eq.( 5.43 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

When the Universe are dominated by the matter @xmath , the second term
of Eq.( 5.44 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, we can obtain the following equation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

To solve Eq.( 5.46 ) we substitute @xmath into Eq.( 5.46 ), and obtain
the following equation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

The solution of this equation is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

By using a approximation of @xmath , this solution reduce to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.49a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.49b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Finally, the growing @xmath and decaying modes @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.50a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.50b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

From these solutions, we find that the growth of fluctuations including
the free-streaming effect is suppressed in comparison with the growth
not including the effect (Eq.( 5.38 )). This suppression is an influence
due to massive neutrinos.

### 5.3 Peculiar velocity [79]

When we estimate the power spectrum of 21 cm line (Eq.( 4.21 )), we use
the following relation ^(#1) ^(#1) #1 Instead of @xmath , we use @xmath
as the density fluctuation of baryons. .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.52)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In this section,we derive this relation.

By Eq.( 5.42a ), the peculiar velocity of the matter @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.53)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we assume @xmath and neglect the terms of @xmath and @xmath in the
same manner as the previous sections. First of all, we rewrite this
equation as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.54)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

By using an approximation of @xmath (neglecting the decaying mode), the
growing mode is expressed as @xmath . Therefore, Eq.( 5.54 ) is
rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.55)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we define the growth factor @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

This quantity is generally @xmath . For example, when the Universe is
dominated by matter, @xmath and @xmath . According to the above
discussion, the Fourier component of the three velocity @xmath can be
written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

By using inverse Fourier transformation, the quantity becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

This three velocity of matter represents the peculiar velocity @xmath of
neutral hydrogen gas because we assume @xmath here.

Next, we estimate the line of sight component @xmath of @xmath . The
inner product between Eq.( 5.58 ) and a unit vector @xmath which points
to the LOS direction is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.59)
                                         
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we define @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

This quantity is the cosine between a wave number vector and the
direction of LOS @xmath . By differentiating Eq.( 5.59 ) with respect to
the LOS direction @xmath , where @xmath is the vector of the LOS
component of , we can obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.61)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, we assume that the focusing region, whose position is , is not
apart form the position of @xmath . In this case, the argument of the
exponential part of Eq.( 5.61 ) can be approximated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, Eq.( 5.61 ) can be expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.63)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath is the Fourier transformed quantity of Eq.( 5.63 ), we can
obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, the derivative of the peculiar velocity is proportional to the
density fluctuation in the Fourier space. The fluctuation @xmath depends
on the direction through @xmath , and induces an anisotropic distortion
in the density fluctuation. This effect is called the “redshift space
distortion”.

### 5.4 Other effects due to neutrino properties

In comparison with the standard @xmath CDM models where three massless
active neutrinos are assumed, we can introduce two more freedoms. A
first additional freedom is the effective number of neutrino species
@xmath , and it represents generations of relativistic neutrinos before
the matter-radiation equality epoch. @xmath can include other
relativistic components, and may not be equal to three. A second
additional freedom is the neutrino mass hierarchy. The difference of the
neutrino mass hierarchy affects both the free-streaming scales and the
expansion rate of the Universe [ 80 ] . In terms of 21 cm line
observation, the minimum cutoff of wave number is given by @xmath (see
the Section 7.3 in the Chapter 7 ). However, the wave number
corresponding to the neutrino free-streaming scale is @xmath .
Therefore, the main feature due to the difference of the mass hierarchy
comes from the impact on the cosmic expansion rate when we focus on the
21 cm line observations. In this thesis, we separately study the
following two cases:

##### (A) Effective number of neutrino species

In this analysis, we add the effective number of neutrino species @xmath
to the fiducial parameter set, and the fiducial value of this parameter
is @xmath . This parameter represents three species of massive neutrinos
and an extra relativistic component.

##### (B) Neutrino mass hierarchy

The normal and inverted mass hierarchies mean @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. In a cosmological context, many different
parameterizations of the mass hierarchy have been proposed [ 81 , 82 ,
83 , 84 ] . In our analysis, we adopt @xmath [ 84 ] as an additional
parameter to discriminate the true neutrino mass hierarchy from the
other. @xmath becomes positive for the normal hierarchy, and negative
for the inverted hierarchy. Besides, the difference between @xmath of
these two hierarchies becomes larger as the total mass @xmath becomes
smaller. Therefore, @xmath is particularly useful for distinguishing the
mass hierarchy. In Fig 10.6 (in the Chapter 10 ), we plot behaviors of
@xmath as a function of @xmath .

Note that there is a lowest value of @xmath which depends on the mass
hierarchy by the neutrino oscillation experiments. The lowest value is
@xmath 0.1 eV for the inverted hierarchy or @xmath 0.06 eV for the
normal hierarchy. Therefore, if we obtain a clear constraint like @xmath
0.10 eV, we can determine that the mass hierarchy is obviously normal
without any ambiguities. However, we can discriminate the mass hierarchy
even when the mass hierarchy is larger than @xmath eV if we use @xmath ,
as will be shown later.

### 5.5 Influence of lepton asymmetry of the Universe

In this section, we briefly explain influence of the non-zero lepton
number asymmetry in the Universe, or non-zero chemical potential for
neutrinos. When there are non-zero chemical potentials for neutrinos,
they affect their energy density and pressure, which influence the
background evolution. The existence of non-zero chemical potential also
modifies the perturbation equation of neutrinos. Below we describe the
changes of the background and perturbation parts.

#### 5.5.1 Background

The distribution function for neutrino species @xmath and its
anti-particle @xmath with @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is momentum of @xmath , @xmath is the temperature of
neutrinos and related to that at the present epoch @xmath as @xmath with
@xmath being the scale factor. @xmath is the degeneracy parameter which
is defined as @xmath , where @xmath is the chemical potential for @xmath
, In the following, we omit the subscript @xmath for simplicity and give
the formulas for one neutrino species including its mass @xmath .

The effects of the lepton asymmetry on the background evolution appear
as the changes in its energy density and pressure. The energy density
and pressure of a neutrino species are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath               (5.66)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.67)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the energy densities of neutrino and
anti-neutrino respectively, and @xmath and @xmath are the pressure of
neutrino and anti-neutrino respectively. By using the comoving momentum
@xmath , the above integral can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath               (5.68)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.69)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have defined @xmath and @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

Although generally the above integrals should be performed numerically,
some useful approximation can be adopted, in relativistic and
non-relativistic limits, in particular, when @xmath . Below we give
explicit formulas for each case.

##### Relativistic limit [85]

When @xmath , by expanding the integrand in Eqs. ( 5.66 ) and ( 5.67 )
up to the second order in @xmath , the energy density and pressure can
be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.71)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.72)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

These integrals can be performed exactly and we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath               (5.73)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.74)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

##### Non-relativistic limit [85]

When @xmath , we can expand Eq. ( 5.66 ) around @xmath and @xmath ^(#2)
^(#2) #2 In a non-relativistic limit for any @xmath values, the exact
solutions of @xmath and @xmath are expressed by using polylogarithm. The
formulas are given in Appendix C.2 . as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.75)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath are the coefficients for the expansion of @xmath around
@xmath . We note that the terms with odd power for @xmath do not appear.
Explicit formulas for @xmath are given in Appendix C.1 . Having the
expressions for @xmath , we can analytically perform the integral of the
form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

By taking into account the terms up to the 10th order in @xmath , we
obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath means the Riemann zeta function. Similar calculations also
hold for the pressure, and we have, up to the 10th order in @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.78)
                                @xmath   
                                         
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We have checked that above formulas are accurate as @xmath for @xmath to
obtain @xmath and @xmath with non-zero @xmath .

#### 5.5.2 Perturbation equation

Here, we discuss the perturbation equation for massive neutrinos
including the chemical potential. By perturbing the phase-space
distribution function @xmath as [ 86 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the conformal time, @xmath and @xmath are the background
distribution functions, and @xmath represents its perturbation. The
perturbed Boltzmann equation for @xmath for the Fourier mode in the
synchronous gauge is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath represents the derivative with respect to the conformal
time, @xmath represents the Fourier component of the quantity (except
for @xmath ), @xmath and @xmath are metric perturbations [ 86 ] , and
@xmath is the direction of the momentum .

We expand @xmath with the Legendre polynomial as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the direction of . The evolution equations for each
multiple moment in the synchronous gauge take the following forms:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.85)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The dependence on the chemical potential appears in the factor @xmath ,
which can be written as [ 87 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

By making the modifications given above as well as those for the
background quantities to CAMB [ 88 , 89 ] , we calculate power spectra
of 21cm and CMB fluctuations and make a Fisher information analysis (the
details of the analysis are shown in the next chapter).

## Chapter 6 Fisher information matrix [91, 63]

In this chapter, we introduce the Fisher information matrix, which is a
analysis method used to estimate sensitivities of experiments to
constraints on theoretical parameters. In this thesis, we use the
analysis in order to estimate sensitivities of 21 cm line, CMB and BAO
observations.

### 6.1 Fisher information analysis

#### 6.1.1 Definition of statistical quantities

First of all, we define statistical quantities used in this chapter. We
express a data vector which is obtained by an observation as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

We regard the vector as stochastic variables, and they obey the
following probability density function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

is a vector consisting of theoretical parameters in a model ( @xmath
represents the number of the parameters). The probability density
function @xmath ) is a normalized as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

By the probability density function, we express the average value of a
quantity as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### 6.1.2 Variance-covariance matrix

We introduce the following covariance matrix @xmath for @xmath and
@xmath @xmath ^(#1) ^(#1) #1 and are row vectors, and @xmath means a
transposed vector or a matrix. , which are @xmath or @xmath dimension
stochastic variables, respectively,

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
                             
     @xmath   @xmath         (6.6a)
     @xmath   @xmath         (6.6b)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

where this covariance matrix is a @xmath -by- @xmath matrix. If @xmath ,
the matrix reduces to the following variance-covariance matrix

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
                             
     @xmath   @xmath         (6.7a)
     @xmath   @xmath         
                             
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

By definition, the matrix is a @xmath symmetric matrix @xmath , and it
reduces to the variance of when @xmath . Therefore, the matrix means the
extension of variance to a multi-dimensional space. Because the matrix
is a semi-positive definite matrix, the following relation is valid for
any vector @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### 6.1.3 Unbiased estimator

When an expectation value @xmath of an estimator @xmath estimated from a
sample satisfies the following relation,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is called an unbiased estimator of @xmath . In the Fisher
information analysis, we estimate the minimum variance limit of
theoretical parameters by using the unbiased estimator ^(#2) ^(#2) #2
Generally, values of parameters estimated from a sample are different
from values of population’s parameters. For example, we consider that we
take samples @xmath which obey a population. The population has an
average value @xmath and a variance @xmath . For @xmath , we calculate
the expectation value of the following estimators. Average of the
population

@xmath

Since the expectation value of this quantity is @xmath , this estimator
is an unbiased estimator. Variance

@xmath

The expectation value of this estimator is @xmath , this value is
different from the variance of the population @xmath . Therefore, it is
not an unbiased estimator. An unbiased estimator of the variance is the
following “unbiased variance”

@xmath

.

#### 6.1.4 Fisher information matrix

Thus far, we regard @xmath as a probability density of an observed data
, and the theoretical parameters are fixed. However, we can also regard
@xmath as a function of when we fix the data . In this case, @xmath
means a quantity which has some information of the theoretical
parameters. From this standpoint, we rewrite @xmath as @xmath , and it
is called the likelihood function. By the likelihood function, we can
define the Fisher information matrix (or just Fisher matrix) as

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (6.10a)
                 
     @xmath      (6.10b)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For this Fisher information matrix, we can derive the Cram @xmath r-Rao
bound, which makes a connection between the minimum variances of
theoretical parameters and the Fisher matrix.

#### 6.1.5 Cram@xmathr-Rao bound

Between the variance-covariance matrix of unbiased estimators @xmath and
the Fisher matrix @xmath , the following inequality holds ^(#3) ^(#3) #3
Here, @xmath means a diagonal component of the matrix. ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we see below, this inequality is derived by the Cram @xmath r-Rao
bound.

First of all, by differentiating the definition of unbiased estimator
Eq.( 6.9 ) with respect to a theoretical parameter @xmath , we obtain
the following relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Additionally, by differentiating the normalization condition of @xmath
(Eq.( 6.4 )) with respect to @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking difference between Eq.( 6.12 ) and @xmath Eq.( 6.13 ), we can
obtain the following relation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, Eq.( 6.13 ) means

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.15)
  -- -- -- --------

Therefore, the expectation value of @xmath is zero. By using Eq.( 6.15 )
and the definition of unbiased estimator @xmath , the Eq.( 6.14 ) is
rewritten as the following covariance matrix between @xmath and @xmath

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.16)
  -- -- -- --------

where this covariance matrix is a @xmath matrix ( @xmath means the
number of the theoretical parameters).

Next, we introduce the following vector consisting of and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the variance-covariance matrix of the vector @xmath is written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath                     (6.18)
                                         
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where each block is @xmath matrix. By using Eq.( 6.16 ) and the
definition of the Fisher matrix Eq.( 6.10b ), we can express the
variance-covariance matrix @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a @xmath identity matrix. Because the @xmath is a
semi-positive definite matrix, the following inequality holds for any
vector ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, we introduce any two vectors @xmath , and express the vector as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this expression, the inequality Eq.( 6.20 ) can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because the Fisher matrix is symmetric matrix, the inequality Eq.( 6.22
) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we use that the Fisher matrix has an inverse matrix ^(#4) ^(#4) #4
@xmath reduces to the following variance-covariance matrix of @xmath ,

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

Therefore, @xmath is a semi-positive-definite matrix and has an inverse
matrix. .

Since @xmath is a semi-positive definite matrix, the left hand side of (
6.23 ) take the minimum value when

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, we can obtain the following inequality,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

this inequality is called the Cram @xmath r-Rao bound (or inequality).
When we choose @xmath , where @xmath is an unit vector pointing in the
@xmath th direction, the Cram @xmath r-Rao bound reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath represents the variance of the estimated theoretical
parameter @xmath . This inequality means the limit of the minimum
variance of @xmath . When the equality holds, the unbiased estimator is
called an unbiased efficient estimator. As stated above, we can estimate
the minimum variance of theoretical parameters by calculating the
inverse of the Fisher information matrix.

### 6.2 Fisher information matrix for Gaussian likelihood

When we estimate the sensitivity of observations of 21 cm line, CMB and
BAO, we assume that the likelihood function is the multi-dimension
Gaussian distribution function,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.27a)
              @xmath   @xmath      (6.27b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.27c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In this section, we calculate the Fisher matrix of the Gaussian
likelihood. When we choose the Gaussian likelihood, the theoretical
parameters are related to the likelihood through the expectation value
and the variance-covariance matrix @xmath .

First of all, we can express its log likelihood @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

By using @xmath and the following cyclic behavior of trace @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

the log likelihood Eq.( 6.28 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Next, we differentiate Eq.( 6.30 ) with respect to the parameter @xmath
^(#5) ^(#5) #5 Here, derivatives with respect to the parameter @xmath
are written as @xmath . . By using @xmath and @xmath , the derivative is
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.32)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Furthermore, by differentiating Eq.( 6.32 ) with respect to @xmath , we
obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.33)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The Fisher matrix is given by the expectation value of Eq.( 6.33 ).

Since @xmath has already been expectation value, it is only necessary to
calculate the expectation values related to @xmath . The expectation
values of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.35)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.36)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we use @xmath in Eqs.( 6.35 ) and ( 6.36 ) because has already
been the expectation value of . By using the expectation values of
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , we obtain the following expectation value
of Eq.( 6.33 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.37)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

According to the properties of trace @xmath and the symmetric behavior
of the variance-covariance matrix @xmath , the second term of Eq.( 6.37
) reduces to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.38)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Therefore, Eq.( 6.37 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.39)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Since the definition of the Fisher matrix is @xmath , we can obtain the
following Fisher matrix of the Gaussian likelihood,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   (6.40)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In the analysis of this thesis, we use this Fisher matrix formula.

## Chapter 7 Fisher information matrix of 21 cm line observation

In this chapter, we calculate the Fisher matrix of 21 cm line
observations. At first, we introduce visibility, which is the observed
quantity of 21 cm line observations. Next, we treat the visibility as
observed data and calculate the formula of the Fisher matrix.

### 7.1 Visibility[61, 65, 63]

#### 7.1.1 Definition of visibility

In 21 cm line observations, signals are observed by a radio
interferometer. When radio waves arrive at antennae of an
interferometer, voltage is generated and pairs of the antennae output
cross-correlations of the voltages. The cross-correlations are called
visibility.

Here, we consider a pair of antennae @xmath and @xmath (Fig. 7.1 ), and
express generated voltages of each antenna as @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. The generated voltage @xmath of antenna @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the frequency of the radio wave, @xmath is the time at
the Earth, @xmath is as amplitude of the voltage. On the other hand, the
radio wave which has the same phase arrives at the antenna @xmath late.
Therefore, the (geometric) time delay @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where is the baseline vector between the pair of the two antennae, and
is a unit vector pointing to the direction of the radio source. By the
time delay @xmath , the generated voltage of @xmath is expressed as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The pair of the antennae outputs a cross-correlation function @xmath
between @xmath and @xmath . Generally, the cross-correlation function
between some quantities @xmath and @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

By this definition, the cross correlation @xmath of @xmath and @xmath is
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.5)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where the coefficient @xmath is proportional to the power of the radio
wave @xmath ( @xmath the energy per unit time). The power of the radio
wave @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the specific intensity of the radio source, @xmath is
the solid angle and @xmath is the effective area of the antenna. Since
@xmath , we introduce the following quantity,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

We integrate this quantity @xmath which comes from various directions,
and obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.8)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath is the total solid angle of the radio source. By the
integral of the second line of Eq.( 7.8 ), we define the visibility
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

In an observation by an interferometer, we can get the original specific
intensity @xmath by measuring visibilities of various base lines . From
now on, instead of the baseline vector , we introduce the following
vector @xmath , which is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we can rewrite the visibility as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 7.1.2 Visibility for a narrow radio source

By polar coordinate @xmath @xmath , the visibility can be expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.12)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Additionally, by doing the following transformation of the variables,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.13)
     @xmath      (7.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

the visibility is rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.15)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

When the region of a radio source is sufficiently narrow and the source
exists near only the direction @xmath , we can use an approximations of
@xmath and @xmath . In this case, the visibility becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.16)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we can take the integration range as @xmath and @xmath because the
effective area @xmath of an antenna is zero outside of the region where
the radio source exits. Hence, @xmath means a window function. Since
@xmath , we can use the following approximations,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.17a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.17b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

By using these approximations, we can write the visibility as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath means visual angle of the radio source, and
their directions are perpendicular to the LOS. From Eq.( 7.18 ), we find
that the visibility @xmath is the Fourier transformation of the specific
intensity @xmath of the radio source multiplied by the window function
@xmath . Therefore, by using the inverse Fourier transformation, we can
get the original specific intensity from the visibility. Form now on, we
set @xmath and omit @xmath from Eq.( 7.18 ).

By substituting Eq.( 7.18 ) into Eq.( 7.8 ) and integrating it with
respect to the frequency, we can define the following quantity,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.19)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we take the integration range as @xmath by introducing a window
function @xmath , and we use @xmath as the window function of the
specific intensity @xmath .

#### 7.1.3 Visibility of 21cm line observations

Here, we calculate the visibility of 21 cm line observations. We
consider a radio wave which comes from a region near redshift @xmath ,
which is a reference redshift of the radio source. In this case,
observed wave length and frequency are close to @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. By using the comoving angular diameter distance @xmath and
the Hubble parameter, we can make a connection with the coordinate of
Eq.( 7.19 ) @xmath and the comoving coordinate @xmath , where @xmath and
@xmath are the components of the comoving coordinate perpendicular to
the LOS, @xmath is the component along the LOS, and their origin is the
reference redshift position @xmath (see Fig. 7.2 ). The comoving angular
diameter distance @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a comoving size and @xmath is a visual angle. By using
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , the components of the comoving coordinate
@xmath and @xmath are expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the Fig. 7.2 , the @xmath is given by the difference between the
comoving coordinate @xmath and the central redshift @xmath . Therefore,
@xmath is written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.22)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we use that @xmath is approximately close to the reference
redshift @xmath (the region of the radio source is sufficiently narrow).
The following is a summary of the above,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Additionally, by using the relation @xmath , @xmath is rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.24)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we use that the difference between @xmath and @xmath are
sufficiently small. Since the minus sign in the above equation can be
eliminated by the Fourier transformation, we omit it from now on.
Moreover, we define the conversion factor from @xmath to @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Instead of @xmath , by using @xmath and @xmath , Eq.( 7.23 ) is
rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

This relation is the connection with the @xmath and the comoving
coordinate .

Next, we rewrite the variable of Eq.( 7.19 ) by @xmath , and we can omit
the extra factor @xmath because the factor does not affect the following
discussion. In this case, @xmath is expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.27)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Since the formulae related to the 21 cm line is written by using the
brightness temperature, we translate the intensity @xmath into @xmath .
Furthermore, the difference between the brightness temperature and CMB
temperature @xmath is generally used in observations of 21 cm line.
Therefore, we use this quantity from no on. By using the difference of
observed brightness temperature @xmath , the visibility and its
integration @xmath with respect to @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath            
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.29)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

For the brightness temperature @xmath in Eqs.( 7.1.3 ) and ( 7.29 ), the
averaged component term @xmath does not depend on the location.
Therefore, we only need to consider the fluctuation term @xmath in Eqs.(
7.1.3 ) and ( 7.29 ). From now on, we define and use the following
vectors,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
              @xmath   @xmath      (7.30a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.30b)
              @xmath   @xmath      (7.30c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

and we call the coordinate space of @xmath u-space.

### 7.2 Fisher information matrix of 21 cm line observations

In this section, we calculate the Fisher matrix of 21 cm
line.observations. We treat visibilities as observed data, and only
consider their fluctuation component. From now on, @xmath and @xmath
represent only their fluctuation components. Therefore, we can assume
that expected values of the visibilities are given by @xmath @xmath ,
where @xmath is index of baseline vectors, and the visibilities obey the
following multi-dimensional Gaussian likelihood,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the number of the data is determined by the experimental
resolution of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath @xmath ). Below we
calculate the Fisher matrix of the Fourier transformation of the
visibility, i.e. @xmath . The Fisher matrix is calculated through Eq.(
6.2 ), and we need to estimate the variance-covariance matrix @xmath of
@xmath The variance-covariance matrix has the contributions of sample
variance @xmath and detector noise @xmath . Below, we first calculate
the former contribution.

#### 7.2.1 Sample Variance [63, 37]

Here, we calculate the variance-covariance matrix @xmath of 21 cm line
signals, and it is called the sample variance. By the fluctuation
component of Eq.( 7.29 ), the matrix is expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.33)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

By defining the following Fourier transformation,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.34a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

and using their property

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can estimate Eq.( 7.33 ) as follows,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.36)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we define the following power spectrum of 21 cm line,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

and in the final line of Eq.( 7.36 ), we use the diagonal property of
the window function @xmath .

Next, we set the following normalization condition of the window
function,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since this window function has non-zero value in a small region near
@xmath with its volume @xmath , we can express it as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

By using this window function, Eq.( 7.36 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.41)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Because the resolutions of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are @xmath and
@xmath , the sample variance can be given by [ 37 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.42)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

#### 7.2.2 Detector Noise [63, 37]

The detector noise of visibility per a pair of two antennae is give by [
37 , 90 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the observation time of a frequency channel, @xmath is
the frequency resolution, @xmath is the effective area of the antenna,
@xmath is the observed wave length and @xmath is the system temperature.

If a number of pairs of antennae correspond to one baseline vector
@xmath , the detector noise reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number of the antenna pairs. From this formula, the
noise of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.45)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where in the second line we use that the window function @xmath has
non-zero values in a narrow frequency range @xmath , and the number of
the data is @xmath . The frequency band @xmath is called the bandwidth.
By using Eq.( 7.45 ), the variance-covariance matrix of @xmath is
calculated as follows,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.46)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where in the third line we assume that there are no correlations between
the different visibilities @xmath .

Next, we introduce the baseline density @xmath , and the number of the
antenna pairs @xmath can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the resolutions in the u-space, and they are
given by @xmath . Here, @xmath means the total number of the baselines
existing a small region of u-space, and its ranges are from @xmath to
@xmath and from @xmath to @xmath . By using the baseline density, the
variance-covariance matrix of the detector noise Eq.( 7.46 ) is
rewritten as [ 91 , 92 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.48)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This baseline density used here can be calculated from the specific
antenna distribution [ 93 ] . Additionally, the integration of the
baseline density with respect to @xmath becomes the total number of the
antenna pairs

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.49a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.49b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

#### 7.2.3 Contribution of residual foregrounds

Here, we consider the situation of existing some residual foregrounds.
For the 21 cm line observation, we take account of the most dominant
galactic foreground, namely the synchrotron radiation. We assume that
the foreground subtraction can be done down to a given level, and treat
the contribution of the residual foreground as a Gaussian random field.
Then, we introduce the following effective noise including the
contribution of the residual foreground @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

By using this effective noise, we define the variance-covariance matrix
of this effective noise as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath            @xmath            
     @xmath                              
     @xmath            @xmath            (7.51)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we assume that there are no correlations between the detector
noise and the residual foreground. When the value of @xmath is close to
that of @xmath in this frequency band, the second term becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Moreover, the correlation of the residual foreground becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.52)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we use the same calculation of the sample variance, @xmath is the
frequency corresponding to @xmath ( @xmath ), and @xmath is the central
frequency value in this frequency band. Therefore, the second term of
the Eq.( 7.51 ) can be expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.53)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

By substituting Eq.( 7.48 ) into the visibility noise contribution and
Eq.( 7.53 ) into the residual foreground contribution, we can express
the effective noise as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.54)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we assume @xmath . When we include the contribution of the
residual foreground in our analysis, we use this effective noise as the
21cm noise power spectrum. From now on, we introduce a foreground
removal parameter @xmath , which is defined as @xmath , where @xmath
represents the power of the foreground. In our analysis, we assume
@xmath (this value corresponds to @xmath % at the signal).

As long as we use the flat sky approximation, the u space variable
@xmath is related to the multipole @xmath of angular power spectrum,
@xmath . In this thesis, we use the scale dependence of synchrotron
radiation @xmath (Eq.( 8.8 )) as the foreground power @xmath .

#### 7.2.4 Total variance-covariance matrix @xmath

By using the sample @xmath and the noise @xmath variances, the total
variance-covariance matrix @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.55)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

From now on, we define and use the following noise @xmath and total
power spectra @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.57)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

When we include the effects due to the residual foreground in our
analysis, the noise power becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.58)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

#### 7.2.5 Relation between @xmath and @xmath

Here, we derive the relation between @xmath and @xmath , which are
defined by Eqs.( 7.37 ) and ( 4.10 ), respectively. Below we express the
former as @xmath and the latter as @xmath . At first, by Eq.( 7.34 ),
the u-space fluctuation @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.59)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

According to the following relation of Eq.( 7.26 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can transform the variables from to ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.61)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here, if we regard @xmath as a wave number vector ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

the u-space fluctuation @xmath reduces to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.63)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

By Eq.( 4.11a ), we can regard the integral part of Eq.( 7.63 ) as the
k-space fluctuation @xmath . Therefore, we can obtain the following
relation between @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.64)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Next, by the definition of the u-space power spectrum Eq.( 7.37 ),
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

According to Eq.( 7.64 ), the left hand side of Eq.( 7.65 ) is rewritten
as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.66)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Besides, in consideration of Eq.( 7.62 ), we find that the relation
between @xmath and @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

By using this relation, the right hand side of Eq.( 7.65 ) can be
expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.68)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

According to Eqs.( 7.66 ) and ( 7.68 ), we can obtain the following
relation between @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.69)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We perform our analyses in terms of this u-space power spectrum @xmath
since this quantity is directly measurable without any cosmological
assumptions.

#### 7.2.6 Fisher matrix of 21 cm line observations

Here, we derive the Fisher matrix of 21 cm line observations. From Eq.(
6.2 ), the Fisher matrix for the Gaussian likelihood is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.70)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath and @xmath represent indices of theoretical parameters, and
we use @xmath . By substituting Eq.( 7.55 ) into Eq.( 7.70 ), we can
obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.71)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath and @xmath represent the raws and columns of @xmath , and
the numbers are determined by independent modes of observed data with
respect to @xmath . The summation in the last line is the sum of @xmath
over all the independent modes in the u-space.

According to Eq.( 4.21 ), the power spectrum of 21 cm line depends only
on @xmath and @xmath . In other words, the power spectrum is determined
by only @xmath and @xmath . Correspondingly, the power spectrum in the
u-space @xmath also depends only on @xmath and @xmath . In consideration
of this symmetry, we collect up the power spectra @xmath which have a
same value in the u-space. According to the symmetry, we can see that
the power spectra in an annular region in the u-space have same value.
The volume @xmath of such annular region @xmath whose ranges are from
@xmath to @xmath and from @xmath to @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

Besides, we can express the resolution in the u-space as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the survey volume in the @xmath space. Therefore, the
number of the independent modes in the annular region @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.74)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath            (7.75)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the volume of the real space. The survey volume in the
@xmath space is given by @xmath , where @xmath is the bandwidth and FoV
@xmath is the field of view of an interferometer, and the volume of the
real space is also given by @xmath . Additionally, according to the
symmetry @xmath , there is also a symmetry @xmath . In consideration of
these symmetries, we can rewrite the Fisher matrix Eq.( 7.71 ) as [ 37 ]
,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.76)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath means the summation of @xmath in the @xmath plane. Note
that we need to sum over only the region of positive @xmath because we
have already taken account of the symmetry @xmath in Eq.( 7.76 ). On the
other hand, @xmath is originally positive by its definition @xmath .

In our analysis, to be conservative, when we differentiate @xmath with
respect to cosmological parameters, we fix @xmath in Eqs. ( 4.25a
) and ( 4.25b ) so that constraints only come from the @xmath terms in
@xmath . Additionally, we treat the parameters related to @xmath and
@xmath ( @xmath ) in same manner as the other cosmological parameters.
In other words, they are also treated as theoretical parameters @xmath
in our analysis.

### 7.3 Specifications of the experiments

Now in this section, we show the specifications of 21 cm line
observations which are considered in this thesis.

##### Survey range

In our analyses, we consider the redshift range @xmath , which we divide
into 4 bins: @xmath and @xmath . For the wave number, we set its minimum
cut off @xmath to avoid foreground contaminations [ 37 ] , and take its
maximum value @xmath in order not to be affected by nonlinear effect
which becomes important on @xmath . For methods of foreground removals,
see also recent discussions about the independent component analysis
(ICA) algorithm, FastICA [ 94 ] which will be developed in terms of the
ongoing LOFAR observation [ 95 ] .

##### Noise power spectrum

From Eq.( 7.48 ), the noise power spectrum of an interferometer is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, the system temperature @xmath is estimated as @xmath , and it is
dominated by the sky temperature due to synchrotron radiation. Here,
@xmath [K] is the sky temperature, and @xmath [K] is the receiver noise
[ 58 ] . In addition, the effective collecting area is proportional to
the square of the observed wave length @xmath . The number density of
the baseline @xmath depends on an actual realization of antenna
distribution.

To obtain the future cosmological constraints from 21 cm experiments, we
consider SKA (phase1, phase2) [ 58 , 97 ] and Omniscope [ 60 , 59 ] ,
whose specifications are shown in Table 7.1 . In the analysis of the
total neutrino mass, the neutrino number of species and the neutrino
mass hierarchy (in the Chapter 10 ), we only estimate the sensitivity of
SKA. In that of the lepton asymmetry of the Universe (in the Chapter 11
), we take account of both the experiments. In order to calculate the
number density of baseline @xmath , we assume a realization of antenna
distributions for these arrays as follows. For SKA phase1, we take 95%
(866) of the total antennae (stations) distributed with a core region of
radius 3000 m. The distribution has an antenna density profile @xmath (
@xmath : a radius from center of the array) as follows [ 96 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

This distribution agrees with the specification of the SKA phase1
baseline design. We ignore measurements from the sparse distribution of
the remaining 5% of the total antennae that are outside this core
region. For SKA phase2, we assume that it has the 10 times larger total
collecting area than the phase1. Hence, we take its noise power spectrum
to be 1/100 of the phase1. We assume that the other specifications of
SKA phase2 are the same as values of the phase1. For Omniscope , which
is a future square-kilometer collecting area array optimized for 21 cm
tomography, we take all of antennae distributed with a filled nucleus in
the same manner as Ref. [ 72 ] . In addition, we assume an azimuthally
symmetric distribution of the antenna in both arrays.

## Chapter 8 Fisher information matrix of cosmic microwave background
(CMB)

### 8.1 CMB and neutrino properties

In this thesis, we focus on not only the observations of the 21 cm line
but also the CMB observations, especially CMB B-mode polarization
produced by gravitational lensing of the matter fluctuation. Although
the 21 cm line observation is a power probe of the matter power
spectrum, particularly, on small scales, observations of CMB greatly
help to determine other cosmological parameters such as energy densities
of the dark matter, baryons and dark energy.

Besides, CMB power spectra are sensitive to neutrino masses through the
CMB lensing. Future precise CMB experiments are expected to set
stringent constraints on the sum of the neutrino masses and the
effective number of neutrino species [ 36 , 35 ] . Therefore, we propose
to combine the CMB experiments with the 21 cm line observations.

### 8.2 Fisher information matrix of CMB

We evaluate errors of cosmological parameters by using the Fisher matrix
of CMB, which is given by [ 91 ] . The variance-covariance matrix of CMB
is given by

  -- -- -- -------
           (8.1)
  -- -- -- -------

where @xmath is the multipole of angular power spectra of CMB @xmath ,
and @xmath are the following @xmath diagonal matrices,

  -- -- -- -------
           (8.2)
  -- -- -- -------

where @xmath are the CMB power spectra (auto, cross correlations or
deflection angle), and @xmath @xmath are noise power spectra. Therefore,
by using the definition of the Fisher matrix, we can obtain the
following Fisher matrix of CMB,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -- -- -------
           (8.4)
  -- -- -- -------

Here @xmath are the CMB power spectra, @xmath is the deflection angle
spectrum, @xmath is the cross correlation between the deflection angle
and the temperature, @xmath @xmath and @xmath are the noise power
spectra, where @xmath is calculated by a lensing potential [ 98 ] and is
related with the lensed CMB power spectra. The noise power spectra of
CMB @xmath are expressed with a beam size @xmath @xmath and instrumental
sensitivity @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is an observing frequency and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The noise power spectrum of deflection angle @xmath is estimated
assuming lensing reconstruction with the quadratic estimator [ 98 ] ,
which is computed with FUTURCMB [ 99 ] . In this algorithm, @xmath is
estimated from the noise @xmath , and lensed and unlensed power spectra
of CMB temperature, E-mode and B-mode polarizations.

Finally, the Fisher matrix in Eq.( 8.3 ) is modified as follows by
taking the multipole range [ @xmath , @xmath ] and the fraction of the
observed sky @xmath into account,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

### 8.3 Residual foregrounds [100, 101]

We consider synchrotron radiation and dust emission in our galaxy as the
dominant sources of foregrounds. These foregrounds are subtracted from
each sky pixel of CMB map. Here, we assume that foreground subtraction
can be performed at a certain level ( @xmath level in the power spectra
of CMB). We then model the residual foregrounds in the CMB maps. Note
that we only consider the residual foreground of CMB polarization maps
as distinct from temperature. That is because it has already been
precisely measured by WMAP and Planck.

We model the synchrotron @xmath and dust @xmath foregrounds as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath GHz, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath GHz, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is the dust polarization
fraction @xmath . These choices are the values used in the Refs. [ 100 ,
101 ] , and match the parameters of foregrounds observed by WMAP [ 102 ]
, DASI [ 103 ] and IRAS [ 104 ] . We then assume that residual
foregrounds are modeled as follows,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the foreground residual parameter of CMB observations.
We assume @xmath (this value corresponds to 10% in the CMB maps), and
@xmath is the noise power spectrum of the foreground template maps,
which is created by taking map differences and thus are somewhat
affected by the instrumental noise. We assume that this noise power
spectrum of the template maps is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the total frequency channels which are used for the
foregrounds removal, @xmath and @xmath are the highest and lowest
frequency channel included in the foregrounds removal, respectively.
Furthermore, we introduce the following effective noise power spectrum
including the residual foregrounds,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath means the frequency band. When we include the effects due
to the residual foregrounds in our analysis, we use this effective noise
as the CMB noise power spectrum.

By making the modifications given above to FUTURCMB [ 99 ] , we
calculate the estimated errors of the deflection angle of CMB and use
them in our Fisher matrix analysis.

### 8.4 Specifications of the experiments

Now in this section, we show the specifications of the observations of
CMB which are considered in this thesis.

#### 8.4.1 Analysis of the neutrino mass and the mass hierarchy

In the analysis of the total neutrino mass, the number of the neutrino
species, and the mass hierarchy (in the Chapter 10 ), in order to obtain
the future constraints, we consider Planck [ 105 ] , Polarbear -2 and
Simons Array, whose experimental specifications are summarized in Table
8.1 . The latter two experiments are ground-based precise CMB
polarization observations.

For the analysis about Planck and Polarbear -2 or Simons Array, we
combine both the experiments, and assume that a part of the whole sky
@xmath is observed by both the experiments, and the remaining observed
region @xmath is observed only by Planck. Therefore, we evaluate a total
Fisher matrix of CMB @xmath by summing the two Fisher matrices,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Fisher matrix of the region observed by both Planck
and Polarbear -2 (PB-2) or Simons Array (SA), and @xmath is that by
Planck only.

In addition, we calculate noise power spectra @xmath of the CMB
polarization ( @xmath or @xmath ) in @xmath with the following
operation.

  (1)  

    @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.14)
      -- -------- -- --------

  (2)  

    @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.15)
      -- -------- -- --------

Since we assume that the CMB temperature fluctuation observed by
Polarbear -2 or Simons Array is not used for constraints on the
cosmological parameters, the temperature noise power spectrum @xmath is
equal to @xmath . This reason is that the CMB temperature fluctuation
observed by Planck reaches almost cosmic variance limit. Therefore, the
constraints are not strongly improved if we include the CMB temperature
fluctuation observed by Polarbear -2 or Simons Array.

#### 8.4.2 Analysis of the lepton asymmetry

In the analysis of the lepton asymmetry of the Universe (in the Chapter
11 ), to obtain the future constraints, we consider Planck [ 105 ] and
CMBPol [ 100 ] , whose experimental specifications are summarized in
Table 8.2 .

## Chapter 9 Fisher information matrix of baryon acoustic oscillation
(BAO) observations

In this chapter, we briefly review analysis methods about the baryon
acoustic oscillation (BAO). In the early Universe, baryons and photons
are strongly coupled and their fluctuations (Fourier components) of the
mixed fluid oscillate by the pressure of radiation. At the time of the
decouple between them, a characteristic peak feature remains at the
sound horizon. The scale can be used for a standard ruler of distance.
Therefore, we can get the information of the distance and the Hubble
expansion rate by measurements of the BAO scale for matter fluctuations.
In this thesis, we especially consider galaxy survey for the BAO
observation.

### 9.1 Fisher matrix of BAO [106]

In this section, we introduce the Fisher matrix of BAO experiments. The
observables of BAO are the comoving angular diameter distance @xmath and
the Hubble parameter @xmath (and more specifically, @xmath and @xmath
are the observables). For the observables, the Fisher matrix is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the variances of @xmath and @xmath in the
BAO observation respectively, @xmath is the error of the systematics,
and we assume that the observed redshift range is divided into bins,
whose width and central redshift values are @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. Here, @xmath is the index of the redshift bins.

The variances of @xmath and @xmath are determined by the fitting
formulae of BAO presented by [ 107 ] , and they are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is the comoving survey volume and expressed as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the survey solid angle. @xmath is the non-linear
evolution factor, which represents the erasure of baryon oscillation
features by the non-linear evolution of density fluctuations. In our
analysis, we use the following function as @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the redshift at which the improvement in the baryon
oscillation accuracy saturates (for fixed survey volume and number
density). Additionally, in the analysis of the BAO observation, we use
the following parameters,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.8a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.8b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.8c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.8d)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9.8e)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the dimensionless Hubble parameter. According to [ 106 ]
, we assume the following systematic error,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The set of cosmological parameters related to the BAO observation are
only @xmath or @xmath when we assume that the Universe is flat and the
dark energy is the cosmological constant.

### 9.2 Specification of the BAO observation

We estimate the sensitivity of BAO observation only in the analysis of
the neutrino mass, the number of neutrino species and the mass
hierarchy. In the analysis, we focus on the Dark Energy Spectroscopic
Instrument (DESI) [ 109 , 108 ] , which is a future large volume galaxy
survey. The survey redshift range is @xmath (we do not include the Ly-
@xmath forest at @xmath for simplicity) and the sold angle is @xmath .
In our analysis, we divide the redshift range into 18 bins, in other
words @xmath [ 36 ] .

Additionally, in the same manner as [ 36 ] , when we combine BAO with
the other observations, we put 1% prior on the present Hubble parameter
@xmath , which is achievable in the next decade. The Fisher matrix of
the Hubble prior is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the fiducial value of @xmath . If we choose the Hubble
parameter as a dependent parameter, it is necessary to translate the
Fisher matrix into that of the chosen parameter space. Under the
transformation of a parameter space @xmath , the translated Fisher
matrix is give by [ 106 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

By using this formula, under the translation of @xmath @xmath @xmath ,
the Fisher matrix in the new parameter space is written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

## Chapter 10 Forecasts for the neutrino mass

### 10.1 Future constraints

In this chapter, we present our results for projected constraints by the
21cm, CMB and BAO observations on cosmological parameters, paying
particular attention to parameters related to neutrino (the total
neutrino mass, the effective number of neutrino species and the neutrino
mass hierarchy). When we calculate the Fisher matrices, we choose the
following basic set of cosmological parameters: the energy density of
matter @xmath , baryons @xmath and dark energy @xmath , the scalar
spectral index @xmath , the scalar fluctuation amplitude @xmath (the
pivot scale is taken to be @xmath @xmath ), the reionization optical
depth @xmath , the primordial helium 4 mass fraction @xmath and the
total neutrino mass @xmath . Fiducial values of these parameters (except
for @xmath ) are adopted to be @xmath @xmath , which are the best fit
values of the Planck result [ 30 ] .

Here, we numerically evaluate how we can determine the effective number
of neutrino species (in section 10.3 ), and the neutrino mass hierarchy
(in section 10.3 ), by combining the 21 cm line observations (SKA phase1
or phase2) with the CMB experiments (Planck + Polarbear -2 or Simons
Array) and the BAO observation (DESI). In the former analysis, we fix
the neutrino mass hierarchy to be the normal one, and set the fiducial
value of the total neutrino mass @xmath and the effective number of
neutrino species @xmath to be @xmath or @xmath and @xmath . Next, in the
latter analysis, we fix @xmath to be @xmath , and set the fiducial
values of the @xmath and the mass hierarchy parameter @xmath to be
@xmath (normal hierarchy) or @xmath (inverted hierarchy).

To obtain Fisher matrices we use CAMB [ 88 , 89 ] ^(#1) ^(#1) #1 In this
analysis, we use non-linear power spectra for the calculations by
performing a public code HALOFIT [ 88 , 89 ] . for calculations of CMB
anisotropies @xmath and matter power spectra @xmath . In order to
combine the CMB experiments with the 21 cm line and BAO observations, we
calculate the combined Fisher matrix to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this thesis, we do not use information for a possible correlation
between fluctuations of the 21 cm and the CMB.

### 10.2 Constraints on @xmath and @xmath

In Figs. 10.1 - 10.5 , we plot contours of 95% confidence levels (C.L.)
forecasts in @xmath - @xmath plane. The fiducial values of the total
neutrino mass is @xmath eV (Figs. 10.1 , 10.3 and 10.5 ) or @xmath eV
(Figs. 10.2 and 10.4 ). Additionally, sky coverages of Polarbear -2 and
Simons Array are @xmath (Figs. 10.1 , 10.2 and 10.5 ) or @xmath (Figs.
10.3 and 10.4 ).

In the left two panels of Figs. 10.1 - 10.4 , each contour represents a
constraint by CMB only or CMB + BAO (DESI) + Hubble prior, in the right
panels, by Planck only or CMB + BAO (DESI) + Hubble prior + 21cm (SKA).
In these four figures, the upper two panels are results when we assume
that residual foregrounds are completely removed. In contrast, the lower
panels are results when the residual foregrounds are remaining and we
assume that the 220 GHz band of Simons Array are used for the foreground
removal.

From these figures, adding the BAO experiments to the CMB ones, we see
that there is a strong improvement for the sensitivities to @xmath and
@xmath because several parameter degeneracies are broken by those
combinations. Besides, we find that larger sky coverage is more
effective than smaller one. However, it is difficult to detect the
non-zero neutrino mass at 2 @xmath level even by using the combination
of Simons Array and DESI. On the other hand, adding the 21 cm experiment
(SKA phase1) to the CMB experiment, we see that there is a substantial
improvement, and the combination has enough sensitivity to detect the
non-zero neutrino mass in the case of @xmath eV to be fiducial when
there are not residual foregrounds. Of course, CMB + SKA phase2 can
obviously do the same job. In the case with the residual foregrounds,
Planck + Simons Array ( @xmath ) + BAO + SKA phase1 can detect the
non-zero neutrino mass, however Planck + Simons Array ( @xmath ) + BAO +
SKA phase1 does not have enough sensitivity, and only combination with
SKA phase2 can do it.

In the case of @xmath eV to be fiducial (which corresponds to the lowest
value for the normal hierarchy) without the residual foregrounds, only
CMB + BAO + SKA phase2 can detect the non-zero neutrino mass. However,
in the case with the residual foregrounds, even combination with SKA
phase2 can not do it. Hence, we see that stronger foreground removal in
the 21 cm line observation is necessary.

In Fig. 10.5 , we show the two different situations about the
observation of Simons Array. At first, we assume that the 220 GHz band
of Simons Array are used for the foreground removal (solid inner line),
and use this assumption in the analysis of the under panels of Figs.
10.1 - 10.4 . Secondary, we consider that the band is used only
observation of CMB and not used for the foreground removal, which are
done by only Planck. we plot the both results in the Fig. 10.5 . From
this figure, we find that the constraint in the latter situation is
almost the same level as that of Polarbear -2 because the strength of
the residual foregrounds depends only on the Planck sensitivity.
Therefore, we find that it is better to use 220 GHz band of Simon Array
for the foreground removal.

### 10.3 Constraints on the neutrino mass hierarchy

Next, we discuss whether we will be able to determine the neutrino mass
hierarchies by using the future 21 cm line and CMB observations. In Fig.
10.6 , we plot 2 @xmath errors of the parameter @xmath constrained by
both the 21 cm line and the CMB observations in case of the inverted
hierarchy to be fiducial (the left two panels), and the normal hierarchy
to be fiducial (the right two panels). In this figure, the upper two
panels are results when we assume that the residual foregrounds are
completely removed. On the other hand, the lower panels show the results
when the residual foregrounds are remaining and the 220 GHz band of
Simons Array are used for the foreground removal.

It is notable that the difference between @xmath ’s of these two
hierarchies becomes larger as the total mass @xmath becomes smaller.
Therefore, @xmath is quite useful to distinguish a true mass hierarchy
from the other. Allowed parameters on @xmath by neutrino oscillation
experiments are plotted as two bands for the inverted and the normal
hierarchies, respectively. The thin solid lines inside the bands are the
experimental mean values by oscillations.

As is clearly shown in Fig. 10.6 , actually those combinations of the
observations will be able to determine the neutrino mass hierarchy to be
inverted or normal for @xmath eV or @xmath at 95 % C.L., respectively.
Although the determination is possible only at around @xmath , those
results should be reasonable. That is because a precise discrimination
of the mass hierarchy itself may have no meaning if the masses are
highly degenerate, i.e., if @xmath eV @xmath .

Once a clear signature @xmath were determined by observations or
experiments, it should be obvious that the hierarchy must be normal
without any ambiguities. On the other hand, if the hierarchy were
inverted, we could not determine it only by using @xmath . However, it
is remarkable that our method is quite useful because we can
discriminate the hierarchy from the other even if the fiducial values
were @xmath eV for both the normal and inverted cases. This is clearly
shown in Fig 10.6 . In case that a fiducial value of @xmath is taken to
be the lowest values in neutrino oscillation experiments, this figure
indicates that even Simons Array + SKA can discriminate the inverted
(normal) mass hierarchy from the normal (inverted) one.

## Chapter 11 Forecasts for the lepton asymmetry

In this chapter, we discuss future prospects of the determination of the
lepton asymmetry, or the chemical potentials for neutrino [ 85 ] .

In the following analysis, we explore the parameter space which includes
the degeneracy parameter @xmath assuming the universal lepton asymmetry
^(#1) ^(#1) #1 Regardless of the initial value of @xmath (with @xmath )
at the decoupling, the lepton asymmetry would be universal, due to the
large mixing in neutrino mass matrix [ 110 ] . and neutrino mass @xmath
as well as the six standard cosmological parameters ( @xmath ). In
addition to these parameters, in some cases, we also include the
primordial @xmath He mass fraction @xmath and the effective number of
neutrino species for extra (dark) radiation @xmath which gives its
energy density in units of a single massless neutrino species as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

Although the chemical potential @xmath contributes the changes to @xmath
, that is, the effective number of neutrino species for total dark
radiation (neutrinos and extra radiation) as seen from Eqs. ( 5.73 ) and
( 5.5.1 ), @xmath counts for possible other contribution to @xmath .
Furthermore, in BBN theory, @xmath is related to @xmath and @xmath .
Therefore, we make the analysis with/without assuming so-called BBN
relation among these parameters in some analysis. When the BBN relation
is not adopted, we vary @xmath freely or fix it to @xmath .

Regarding fiducial parameters, we often present constraints for several
fiducial values of @xmath and @xmath . On the other hand, fiducial
values of @xmath is fixed to be 0.1 eV and those of other cosmological
parameters are fixed to be ( @xmath ) @xmath , which are the best fit
values from the Planck result [ 30 ] . To obtain Fisher matrices we use
CAMB [ 88 , 89 ] ^(#2) ^(#2) #2 In this analysis, we use linear power
spectra. By performing a public code HALOFIT [ 88 , 89 ] , we have
checked that modifications by including nonlinear effects for evolutions
of the matter power spectrum are much smaller than typical errors in our
analyses and negligible for parameter fittings for calculations of CMB
anisotropies @xmath and matter power spectra @xmath . In order to
combine the CMB experiments with the 21 cm line experiments, we
calculate the combined fisher matrix to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 11.1 Cases without extra radiation

Let us first see the cases without extra radiation. Fig. 11.1 shows
constraints on the @xmath – @xmath plane for mainly the cases where we
fixed @xmath to 0.25 without assuming the BBN relation. On the other
hand, constraints only from CMB observations with the BBN relation
@xmath are also shown as well, for the purpose of comparison. Regarding
fiducial values of @xmath , we adopted @xmath , 0.05 and @xmath here.
Note that @xmath and @xmath roughly correspond to the upper and lower
bounds at 2 @xmath from primordial abundance of the light elements (See
Fig. D.1 in Appendix D and Ref. [ 111 ] ). From the figure, we can
immediately see that 21 cm line observations can be a powerful probes of
the lepton asymmetry of the Universe. Compared with the constraints on
@xmath from Planck alone, the error is improved by a factor around 5
(10) by combining SKA (Omniscope). Even though CMBPol can by itself give
much tighter constraints than Planck, combinations with 21 cm
observations are still able to improve the constraints further by a
factor around 2 (SKA) and 4 (Omniscope). We also note that constraints
on the neutrino masses from CMB observations can be also improved by
combining 21 cm line observations. As an illustrative example,
constraints on cosmological parameters for the cases with fiducial
@xmath are summarized in Table 11.1 .

In Fig. 11.1 , one may notice that the uncertainties in @xmath , which
we denote as @xmath , is dependent on the fiducial value of @xmath .
This is because, in the absence of the BBN relation, there is no
difference between neutrinos and anti-neutrinos in their effects both on
the CMB and 21 cm power spectra. Therefore, these power spectra are even
functions of @xmath , as can be also read from Eqs.( 5.68 )-( 5.69 ) and
( 5.86 ), which respectively govern effects on the background and
perturbation evolutions. In particular for small @xmath , these power
spectra should respond linearly to @xmath . This leads that @xmath is
proportional to the inverse of the fiducial @xmath , while the error
@xmath is almost independent of the fiducial @xmath , which is confirmed
from Table 11.4 , where we summarized constraints on @xmath for various
setups (e.g. without the BBN relation) and fiducial values of @xmath for
cases of @xmath .

Although @xmath is dependent on fiducial @xmath , we can still see that
@xmath , which is roughly the current lower bound from the primordial
light elements, can be detected marginally by CMBPol+SKA and
significantly by CMBPol+Omniscope. This is remarkable as this indicates
that even without assuming the BBN relation, we may be able to obtain a
constraint on @xmath better than one from the primordial light elements.

On the other hand, from the above figure, one may think 21 cm line alone
is powerful enough to give similar constraints on @xmath as those from
CMB+21 cm line. However, this is not true. This can be understood by
seeing that provided a very precise observation of 21 cm line, e.g.,
Omniscope, its combinations with Planck and CMBPol still differ
non-negligibly. This is due to that some cosmological parameters which
degenerate with @xmath when only a 21 cm line observation is adopted can
be determined well by CMB.

Let us next see the cases with the BBN relation @xmath , though we here
still assume @xmath to vanish. In this case, @xmath affects CMB and
21 cm observations also through @xmath in addition to the effects we
have taken into account in the case of fixed @xmath . Regarding effects
of @xmath on the CMB power spectrum, this indirect effect through the
BBN relation is more significant than direct ones. This can be noticed
in Fig. 11.1 , where the contours of constraints from CMB alone can be
squeezed in the direction of @xmath by an order of magnitude with the
BBN relation.

Fig. 11.2 shows the same constraints as in Fig. 11.1 except that the BBN
relation is now taken into account in any combinations of observations.
Compared with the previous figure, improvements brought about by the
combination of 21 cm line observations are not as dramatic as in the
cases without the BBN relation. This indirectly suggests that 21cm line
observations are not as sensitive to @xmath as CMB. However, the
combination with SKA can reduce the size of error in @xmath by a few
times from Planck alone and a similar level of improvement can be
brought about by Omniscope compared to CMBPol alone. We note that with
the BBN relation being assumed, a combination of CMB and 21 cm line
observations can constrain the lepton asymmetry substantially better
than the primordial abundances of light elements.

Different from the cases without the BBN relation, one can notice that
the sizes of errors in @xmath little depend on fiducial @xmath with the
BBN relation. This is because prediction of BBN is sensitive to the sign
of @xmath . Therefore, @xmath responses linearly to @xmath at the lowest
order. In particular, the most significant effect of @xmath on @xmath is
that @xmath changes the ratio of neutron number density to proton one
when BBN starts. Positive (negative) @xmath effectively boosts
(suppresses) @xmath conversion and reduces (increases) @xmath . Such an
effect can break the degeneracy between @xmath and @xmath existing
without the BBN relation.

Constraints on cosmological parameters are summarized in Tables 11.1 ,
11.2 and 11.3 , where we fixed @xmath to 0.25, assumed the BBN relation
and varied @xmath as a free parameter, respectively. In these tables, we
present constraints only for the fiducial @xmath , as we found that
dependencies of errors on the fiducial @xmath is not significant except
for @xmath ; as long as one considers a fiducial @xmath , errors of
cosmological parameters differ by no more than 25%. The only exception
is @xmath which has been shown to depend on fiducial @xmath in the
absence of the BBN relation. In Table 11.4 , we summarize the dependence
of @xmath on fiducial values of @xmath . Except for the cases with the
BBN relation, we see that @xmath scales almost proportionally to the
inverse of fiducial @xmath .

### 11.2 Cases with extra radiation

So far we have been investigating constraints on @xmath in combination
with CMB and 21 cm line observations. Having observed that the
combination of observations can improve constraints on @xmath from only
CMB ones, we extend our analysis to consider cosmological models with
not only non-zero @xmath but also extra (dark) radiation other than
active neutrinos. Throughout this section, we assume that the extra
radiation is massless. In addition, we assume the BBN relation @xmath ,
which allows us to distinguish @xmath and @xmath even if the active
neutrinos are almost massless.

In Fig. 11.3 , we plot 2 @xmath constraints in the @xmath – @xmath plane
from CMB alone as well as combinations of CMB and 21 cm line. Three
different fiducial models @xmath , (0, 0.02) and ( @xmath , 0) are
adopted here. We note that the latter two fiducial models give the
similar effective numbers of neutrino species when neutrinos are
relativistic. We can see that CMB alone cannot constrain @xmath tightly.
Moreover, the sizes of 2 @xmath contours in the @xmath direction are
dependent on fiducial parameters @xmath and @xmath . This dependency
should be suggesting that observations are not enough constraining and
the likelihood surface in the @xmath - @xmath plane deviates from
Gaussian cases to some extent. This may lead that when one explores
constraints in a full parameter space using the Markov chain Monte
Carlo, e.g., CosmoMC [ 112 ] , resulting constraints would be somewhat
less stringent than forecasts based on the Fisher matrix analysis.
However, once we combine 21 cm observations, the constraints on @xmath
greatly improve. Moreover, the size of errors become almost independent
of the fiducial values of @xmath and @xmath by an order of magnitude.
This shows that combinations of CMB and 21 cm line observations will be
promising to disentangle degenerating @xmath and @xmath . In Table 11.5
, we present the 1 @xmath constraints only for @xmath and @xmath . We
note that regarding the constraints on other cosmological parameters,
the inclusion of @xmath does not degrade most of them significantly, or,
by at most 50 %. Only exceptions are the constants on @xmath from Planck
alone and @xmath from Planck+Omniscope and CMBPol+Omniscope, which are
degraded by 2-3 times.

## Chapter 12 Summary

In this thesis, we have studied how we can constrain the total neutrino
mass @xmath , the effective number of neutrino species @xmath , the
neutrino mass hierarchy, and the lepton asymmetry @xmath in the Universe
by using 21 cm line (SKA or Omniscope) and CMB (Planck, Polarbear -2,
Simons Array or CMBPol) observations. It is essential to combine the 21
cm line observation with the precise CMB polarization observation to
break various degeneracies in cosmological parameters when we perform
multiple-parameter fittings.

About the constraints on the @xmath – @xmath plane, we have found that
there is a significant improvement in the sensitivities to @xmath and
@xmath by adding the BAO experiments to the experiments of CMB. However,
for a fiducial value @xmath eV, it is impossible to detect the non-zero
neutrino mass at 2 @xmath level even by using the combination of Simons
Array and DESI. On the other hand, by adding the 21 cm experiments (SKA
phase1) to the CMB experiment, we find that there is a substantial
improvement. By using Planck + Simons Array + BAO(DESI) + SKA phase1, we
can detect the non-zero neutrino mass (but it is necessary to remove the
foregrounds with high degree of accuracy). For a fiducial value @xmath
eV, which corresponds to the lowest value in the normal hierarchy of the
neutrino mass, we need the sensitivity of SKA phase2 in order to detect
the non-zero neutrino mass.

Next, as for the determination of the neutrino mass hierarchy, we have
introduced the parameter @xmath , and studied how to discriminate a true
hierarchy from the other by constraining @xmath . As was clearly shown
in Fig. 10.6 , by adopting the combinations of the Planck + Simons Array
+ BAO(DESI) + SKA phase2, we will be able to determine the hierarchy to
be inverted or normal at 2 @xmath unless the mass structure is
degenerated.

Finally, for the constraints on the lepton asymmetry, when we consider
constraints on @xmath in the absence of extra radiation, we have found
that, even without assuming the BBN relation, by combining the 21 cm
line observations with the CMB observations, we can constrain @xmath
with a better accuracy than the primordial abundances of light elements,
which cannot be achieved by the CMB observation alone. Next, once the
BBN relation has been taken into account, even the sensitivity of the
CMB observations alone to @xmath substantially improves. However the
21 cm line observations can still improve the constraints and be useful
in constraining the lepton asymmetry. In addition, we have also
investigated constraints on @xmath in the presence of some extra
radiation. We have shown that the 21 cm line observations can
substantially improve the constraints on @xmath compared with the case
of the CMB observations alone, and allow us to distinguish between the
lepton asymmetry and extra radiation.

Our results indicate that the 21 cm line and CMB polarization
observations can become a powerful probe of the neutrino properties and
the origin of matter in the Universe.

## Acknowledgments

First of all, I would like to show my greatest appreciation to my
supervisor, Dr. Kazunori Kohri at the Graduate University for Advanced
Studies (SOKENDAI) and at High Energy Accelerator Research Organization
(KEK), whose enormous support and insightful comments were invaluable
during the course of my study, and discussions with him have been
illuminating for me. I have learned and study a lot of things from him
during these five years.

Also my deepest appreciation goes to Prof. Hideo Kodama at the Graduate
University for Advanced Studies (SOKENDAI) and at High Energy
Accelerator Research Organization (KEK), whose comments were innumerably
valuable at all times, and I received generous support from him. I am
also indebted to Dr. Kunihito Ioka at the Graduate University for
Advanced Studies (SOKENDAI) and at High Energy Accelerator Research
Organization (KEK), who provided very useful discussion and sincere
encouragement.

I would also like to thank Prof. Masashi Hazumi at the Graduate
University for Advanced Studies (SOKENDAI) and at High Energy
Accelerator Research Organization (KEK). For the analysis of CMB, he
gives insightful comments and technical help about CMB observation and
treatment of its foregrounds. Besides, I also grateful to Dr. Tomo
Takahashi at Saga University and Dr. Toyokazu Sekiguchi. they give me a
enormous help and provided significant contributions for our work.

Additionally, I am deeply grateful to the members of the KEK Theory
center Cosmophysics Group: Dr. Seiju Ohashi, Dr. Shota Kisaka Dr. Hajime
Takami, Dr. Kentaro Tanabe, Dr. Hirotaka Yoshino. They gave me
constructive comments and warm encouragement.

My junior fellow Eunseong So and other students in Department of
Particle and Nuclear Physics at SOKENDAI provided advice on life as well
as science. I am thankful to all the colleagues at SOKENDAI and KEK, and
secretaries of the KEK Theory center Tamao Shishido and Kieko Iioka.

Financially, I appreciate the support of the Grant-in-Aid for Scientific
research from the Ministry of Education, Science, Sports, and Culture,
Japan, Nos. 25.4260, which made it possible to complete my study.

Finally, I would also like to express my gratitude to my family for
their moral support and warm encouragements.

## Appendix A Hyperfine splitting of neutral hydrogen atom [113]

Here, we show the energy splitting due to the hyperfine structure of
neutral hydrogen atom. This splitting is caused by an interaction
between the magnetic moment of nucleus and that of electron. This
splitting is much smaller than that of the fine structure, which is
caused by the interaction between the spin and orbital angular momentum.
Below we calculate the energy splitting by considering the spin-spin
interaction.

Since a nucleus can be regarded as a magnetic dipole, the magnetic
moment @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the spin, the mass, the electric
charge and the @xmath factor of the nucleus, respectively. The vector
potential due to the magnetic moment is expressed as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the magnetic field due to the potential can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.4)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Therefore, the potential @xmath which is caused by the interaction
between the magnetic field and the spin of the electron @xmath is given
by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.5)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath is the Bohr magnet and @xmath is the mass of the electron.
In the S state, the first order perturbation of the potential is written
as

  -- -- -- -------
           (A.6)
  -- -- -- -------

where @xmath is the wave function of the the S state, and it is
expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

According to the following spherical symmetric property of the S state,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

the potential can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.10)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here, the square of the absolute value of the wave function @xmath at
@xmath is give by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, we can obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath                     (A.12)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the fine structure constant. By using the total spin of
the nucleus (= @xmath ), we can express this potential as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.13)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the case of @xmath , the difference between the upper and lower
states is 1. Therefore, the energy splitting of the hyperfine structure
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

By substituting the @xmath factor of the proton @xmath into this
equation, we obtain the following value of the energy,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.15)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In this case, the transition frequency is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the wave length is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the 21 cm line due to the neutral hydrogen atom.

## Appendix B Einstein coefficients [64, 65]

Here, we show the derivation of the relation between the Einstein A and
B coefficient (Eqs.( 2.15a ) and ( 2.15b )), by considering the
equilibrium between the upper and lower states. By using the definition
of the Einstein coefficients, the time derivatives of the number
densities of the upper @xmath and lower @xmath states are give by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the specific intensity of the incident photon and @xmath
is the transition frequency. Since the number of particles does not vary
in the equilibrium state, the derivatives of the number densities are
zero, i.e. @xmath , @xmath . In this case, by Eqs.( B.1 ) or ( B.2 ), we
can find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Furthermore, the following Boltzmann distribution is valid in thermal
equilibrium,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

By substituting this equation into Eq.( B.3 ), @xmath is expressed as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, the specific intensity of the black body is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

In comparison between Eqs.( B.5 ) and ( B.6 ), we obtain the following
relations between the Einstein coefficients,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
     @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

## Appendix C Non-relativistic limit of @xmath [85]

### c.1 Expressions for the coefficients @xmath

Below we give explicit expressions for the coefficients @xmath , which
are necessary to obtain Eqs. ( 5.5.1 ) and ( 5.78 ).

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.5)
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.6)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

### c.2 Non-relativistic limit of @xmath and @xmath for any @xmath

Below we show the exact solutions for the @xmath and @xmath for any
@xmath in non-relativistic limit by using polylogarithm @xmath , which
is one of special functions.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.7)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

If we expand these formulas around @xmath , they reduce to Eqs. ( 5.5.1
) and ( 5.78 ).

## Appendix D BBN relation [85]

In the early universe with a higher temperature than @xmath MeV, the
inter-converting reactions between neutron and proton through the weak
interaction ( @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ) were sufficiently rapid. In
this case, the neutron to proton ratio obeys its thermal equilibrium
value,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the mass difference @xmath MeV. Here, we explicitly wrote the
degeneracy parameter of @xmath to be @xmath with @xmath being the
chemical potential of @xmath . It is remarkable that the electron’s
chemical potential @xmath must be much smaller than that of @xmath
because of the neutrality of the Universe @xmath with @xmath and @xmath
being the photon temperature and the baryon-to-photon ratio,
respectively. Accordingly @xmath affects the freezeout value of @xmath ,
which can change the light element abundances. In particular, @xmath
depends on @xmath in addition to @xmath (or @xmath ) and @xmath . Thus,
@xmath is related to those three parameters, i.e. @xmath = @xmath ,
which is called ”the BBN relation”.

Since we need quite a precise value of @xmath in the current studies, we
numerically compute @xmath as functions of those three parameters
without adopting known fitting formula (e.g., given in Ref. [ 114 ] ).
In this computation, we have used the most recent data for nuclear
reaction rates [ 115 , 116 , 117 , 118 , 119 ] .

In Fig. D.1 , as a reference, we plotted allowed regions in the @xmath
plane at the 68 @xmath and the 95 @xmath C.L, respectively. Here we set
@xmath . We have adopted the following observational light element
abundances, @xmath (68 @xmath ) [ 120 ] and D/H= @xmath (68 @xmath ) [
121 ] .