Special relativity states that information cannot travel faster than the
speed of light, which means that communication between agents occupying
distinct locations incurs some minimal delay. Alternatively, we can see
it as temporary communication constraints between distinct agents and
such constraints turn out to be useful for cryptographic purposes. In
relativistic cryptography we consider protocols in which interactions
occur at distinct locations at well-defined times and we investigate why
such a setting allows to implement primitives which would not be
possible otherwise.

Relativistic cryptography is closely related to non-communicating
models, which have been extensively studied in theoretical computer
science. Therefore, we start by discussing non-communicating models and
its applications in the context of interactive proofs and cryptography.
We find which non-communicating models might be useful for the purpose
of bit commitment, propose suitable bit commitment protocols and
investigate their limitations. We explain how some non-communicating
models can be justified by special relativity and study what
consequences such a translation brings about. In particular, we present
a framework for analysing security of multiround relativistic protocols.
We show that while the analysis of classical protocols against classical
adversaries is tractable, the case of quantum protocols or quantum
adversaries in a classical protocol constitutes a significantly harder
task.

The second part of the thesis is dedicated to analysing specific
protocols. We start by considering a recently proposed two-round quantum
bit commitment protocol. We start by proving security under the
assumption that idealised devices (single-photon source, perfect
detectors) are available. Then, we propose a fault-tolerant variant of
the protocol which can be implemented using realistic devices
(weak-coherent source, noisy and inefficient detectors) and present a
security analysis which takes into account losses, errors, multiphoton
pulses, etc. We also report on an experimental implementation performed
in collaboration with an experimental group at the University of Geneva.

In the last part we focus on classical schemes. We start by analysing a
known two-round classical protocol and we show that successful cheating
is equivalent to winning a certain non-local game. This is interesting
as it demonstrates that even if the protocol is entirely classical, it
might be advantageous for the adversary to use quantum systems. We also
propose a new, multiround classical bit commitment protocol and prove
its security against classical adversaries. The advantage of the
multiround protocol is that it allows us to increase the commitment time
without changing the locations of the agents. This demonstrates that in
the classical world an arbitrary long commitment can be achieved even if
the agents are restricted to occupy a finite region of space. Moreover,
the protocol is easy to implement and we discuss an experiment performed
in collaboration with the Geneva group.

We conclude with a brief summary of the current state of knowledge on
relativistic cryptography and some interesting open questions that might
lead to a better understanding of the exact power of relativistic
models.
