Due to shorter range communication becoming more prevalent with the
development of multiple-input, multiple-output antennas (MIMO) and
millimeter wave communications, multi-hop, intra-cell communication is
anticipated to play a major role in 5G. This is developed in this
thesis. Our analysis involves a stochastic spatial network model called
a random geometric graph , which we use to model a network of
interconnected devices communicating wirelessly without any separate,
pre-established infrastructure.

Extending recent work on the random connection model by relaxing the
convexity restriction on the bounding geometry @xmath , we study the
asymptotic connectivity of a model of randomly distributed, randomly
linked vertices embedded within an annulus. Vertices, resembling
communicating devices, are linked according to a Rayleigh fading model
of signal attenuation in built-up urban environments. We notice that
vertices near obstructions in the domain have an exceptionally high
betweenness centrality, and highlight the need to quantify this sort of
measure analytically. Following up on this, in a theoretical continuum
limit , where vertex density goes to infinity and the connection range
goes to zero compared with the size of the domain, we approximate
betweenness centrality in a random network with a known special function
called the elliptic integral of the second kind. This provides analytic
support to various delay tolerant networking protocols currently used in
5G scenarios, wireless sensor networks, and intelligent vehicle
networks, which avoid what are often intractably complex algorithmic
computations, even when distributed over many mobile processors.

Due to the obvious break with our model at lower densities, we then
relax the continuum limit, and investigate the expected number of
shortest paths which run between two spatially separated vertices in a
unit disk graph in order to develop an understanding of betweenness
centrality at finite density, which is based on counting shortest paths
in networks. It also develops so called range-free localisation beyond
estimating distances to location-aware anchors via hop counts, instead
using the more sensitive number of geodesic paths. We conclude with the
difficulties of combinatorial enumeration in spatial networks, and
highlight the need to develop probabilistic techniques to deal with the
deep issues of spatial dependence.
