The Sun is a magnetically active star and is the source of the solar
wind, electromagnetic radiation and energetic particles which affect the
heliosphere and the Earthâ€™s atmosphere. The magnetic field of the Sun is
responsible for most of the dynamic activity of the Sun. This thesis
research seeks to understand solar magnetic field generation and the
role that magnetic fields play in the dynamics of the solar atmosphere.
Specifically, this thesis focuses on two themes: in the first part, we
study the origin and behaviour of solar magnetic fields using
magnetohydrodynamic dynamo theory and modelling, and in the second part,
utilizing observations and data analysis we study two major problems in
solar physics, namely, the coronal heating problem and initiation
mechanisms of solar flares.

The magnetic field of the Sun, whose evolution is evident in the 11 year
cycle of sunspots, is created within the Sun through complex
interactions between internal plasma flows and fields. It is widely
believed that magnetic fields of not just the Sun, but all astronomical
bodies are produced by this hydromagnetic dynamo process. To explain the
origin of the solar cycle, Eugene Parker first proposed the idea of flux
recycling between the toroidal (which is in the azimuthal i.e., @xmath
-direction) and poloidal (which is in r- @xmath plane) field components
. Currently, flux transport dynamo models based on the Babcock-Leighton
mechanism for poloidal field generation appears as a promising candidate
for explaining different aspects of the solar cycle. In this scenario,
the toroidal field is produced within the convection zone due to
stretching of the poloidal component by strong differential rotation
while the poloidal field is produced at the solar surface due to decay
and dispersal of tilted bipolar sunspot pairs. Flux transport mechanisms
such as diffusion, meridional flow and turbulent pumping shares the role
of communicator between these two largely separated source layers. In
chapter 1, we describe observations of solar magnetic fields and
development of solar dynamo theory to motivate our work.

An outstanding issue related to the solar cycle is extreme fluctuations,
specifically the occurrence of extended periods of reduced or no
activity, known as grand minima episodes. The origin of such episodes
have eluded a consistent theory. The Maunder minima was such an episode
during 1645-1715 AD when there was almost no sunspots observed on the
Sun. There is also observational evidence of many such episodes in the
past. The crucial fact is that the solar cycle has recovered from these
episodes every time and regained normal activity levels. It is expected
that during grand minima phases, the Babcock-Leighton mechanism would
not be able to produce poloidal field as this mechanism relies on the
presence of sunspots on the solar surface. This leads to the following
fundamental question: How does the solar cycle recover every time from
these episodes? We address this question through diverse means. In
chapter 2 of this thesis, we develop a mathematical, low order time
delay dynamo model (based on delay differential equations) removing all
spatial dependence terms from the magnetic induction equation and mimic
flux transport through the introduction of finite time delays in the
system. By introducing fluctuations in the Babcock-Leighton source term
of this low order dynamo model, we, for the first time explicitly
demonstrate that a solar cycle model based on the Babcock-Leighton
mechanism alone can not recover from a grand minima. We find that an
additional poloidal field generation mechanism effective on weak
magnetic field is necessary for recovery of the sunspot cycle from grand
minima like episodes.

Modeling the Babcock-Leighton mechanism in a correct way to capture the
observed surface dynamics is a challenging task. Two different
approaches, mainly near-surface alpha-coefficient formulation and the
double ring formalism has been followed to model the Babcock-Leighton
mechanism for poloidal field generation. Earlier it has been shown that
the second approach, i.e., the double ring formalism is more successful
in explaining observational results compared to the near-surface
alpha-coefficient formulation. Inspired by this, we develop a 2.5D
kinematic solar dynamo model where we simulate the Babcock-Leighton
mechanism via the double ring algorithm. In chapter 3 of this thesis, we
utilize this state-of-the spatially extended model in a solar like
geometry to validate our findings on entry and exit from Maunder minima
like episodes. We find that stochastic fluctuations in the
Babcock-Leighton mechanism is a possible candidate for triggering entry
into grand minima phases. However, the Babcock-Leighton mechanism alone
is not able to recover the solar cycle from a grand minimum. An
additional mean field @xmath -effect effective on week magnetic field is
necessary for self-consistent recovery. Thus, this result puts the
earlier findings based on a low order time delay model on firmed
grounds. This spatially extended model also allows one to explore
latitudinal asymmetry and hemispheric coupling of the sunspot cycle.
Based on simulations with this model, we find that stochastic
fluctuation in both poloidal field sources makes hemispheric coupling
weak, thus introducing asymmetry in sunspot eruptions in the Northern
and Southern hemispheres. The phase locking between the two hemispheres
is thus impacted resulting in a switching of the parity of the
solutions. Particularly we find that parity shifts in the sunspot cycle
is more likely to occur when solar activity in one hemisphere strongly
dominates over the other hemisphere for a period of time significantly
longer than the sunspot cycle timescale. While direct observations over
the last fifty years have shown that the solar magnetic cycle exhibits
dipolar (odd) parity, our results suggest that the solar cycle has a
significant probability to reside in the quadrapolar (even) parity
state. Our findings may open the pathway for predicting parity flip in
the Sun.

Meridional circulation is an essential ingredient in present day
kinematic solar dynamo models. Earlier studies based on theoretical
considerations and numerical simulations have suggested that a deep
equatorward meridional flow near the base of the solar convection zone
is plausibly essential in explaining the observed equatorward migration
of the sunspot belt. However there is no observational evidence of such
a deep meridional flow as it is difficult to probe such deep layers.
Some recent observational studies, on the other hand, indicate that the
meridional flow could be shallow or more complex than previously
assumed. In chapter 4 of this thesis, we explore whether flux transport
dynamos could function with such a shallow meridional flow and discuss
the consequences that this scenario would have on our traditional
understanding of magnetic field dynamics in the solar interior. We
demonstrate that dynamo models of the solar cycle can produce solar-like
solutions with a shallow meridional flow if the effects of turbulent
pumping of magnetic flux is taken into account.

In the second part of this thesis, we utilize satellite observations to
explore the dynamics of magnetic fields in the solar atmosphere. The
solar corona, the outer atmosphere of the Sun is very hot compared to
the solar surface and can reach millions of degrees. There is
controversy regarding the physical processes that heat the solar outer
atmosphere to such high temperatures. Such high temperatures result in
X-ray emission from the solar corona. In chapter 5, we discuss the
observational techniques and the current theoretical understanding
developed over time, necessary to explain coronal dynamics. In chapter 6
of this thesis, we explore the relationship between coronal X-ray
brightness and sunspot magnetic fields using high resolution
observations from the Solar Optical Telescope and X-Ray Telescope
onboard the Hinode satellite (a joint JAXA-NASA space mission). We find
that the total magnetic flux within active regions sunspot structures is
the primary determinant of solar coronal X-ray luminosity suggesting
that magnetic flux is the fundamental quantity that determines coronal
heating. This result sets important constraints on theories of solar and
stellar coronal heating.

Solar flares are highly energetic eruptions from the Sun that hurl out
magnetize plasma and emit high energy radiation thereby impacting space
weather and space- and some ground-based technologies. Thus predictions
of solar flare is necessary for developing advance warning systems.
Previous studies indicate that the non-potentiality of the magnetic
field is closely related with solar flare productivity. However
traditional measures of magnetic field non-potentiality based on the
force-free parameter have been questioned and studies based on the
force-free parameter have given diverging results. In chapter 7 of this
thesis, a recently developed, flux-tube fitting technique is utilized to
measure the non-potentiality (twist) of solar magnetic fields and test
whether the kink-instability mechanism (following magnetic helicity
conservation) can be a plausible initiation mechanism for solar flares.
We demonstrate that those sunspot magnetic field structures in which the
twist exceeds the threshold for kink instability are more prone to
generate solar flares. This finding may lead to more accurate solar
flare prediction schemes based on the kink instability mechanism.
