# Acknowledgements

I am grateful to Brendan Owens for providing a wealth of patient
guidance throughout the course of my PhD studies. This thesis has
greatly benefitted from the working environment provided by the maths
department of Glasgow and interactions with the many excellent people
therein. Of these, I would particularly like to thank Liam Watson, with
whom I have had many helpful conversations. I also wish to thank Joshua
Greene and acknowledge the influential role of his work, which inspired
and motivated many ideas in this thesis. I would also like to thank the
examining committee, András Juhász and Liam Watson, for their
suggestions. My thanks also go to my parents for many years of support
and to Åsa Lind for putting up with me.

## Declaration

I declare that, except where explicit reference is made to the
contribution of others, this thesis is the result of my own work and has
not been submitted for any other degree at the University of Glasgow or
any other institution.

###### Contents

-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 Unknotting number one
    -    1.2 Almost-alternating diagrams of the unknot
    -    1.3 Alternating surgeries
    -    1.4 Heegaard Floer homology and @xmath -invariants
    -    1.5 The Changemaker Theorem
-    2 Surgeries and sharp manifolds
    -    2.1 A manifold bounding @xmath
    -    2.2 Calculating @xmath -invariants of @xmath
    -    2.3 The Changemaker Theorem
    -    2.4 Sharp cobordisms
    -    2.5 Calculating stable coefficients
-    3 Characterizing slopes for torus knots
    -    3.1 Recovering the Alexander polynomial
    -    3.2 Characterizing slopes
-    4 Lattices
    -    4.1 Changemaker lattices
    -    4.2 Graph lattices
-    5 Alternating diagrams and tangles
    -    5.1 The Goeritz form
    -    5.2 Rational tangles
    -    5.3 Tangles in alternating diagrams
    -    5.4 The Montesinos trick and alternating surgeries
-    6 Unknotting number one
    -    6.1 Marked crossings
    -    6.2 A single marked crossing
    -    6.3 Changing marked crossings
    -    6.4 The main results
-    7 Non-integer surgeries
    -    7.1 The fractional tangle
    -    7.2 Knots in @xmath
    -    7.3 Bounds on alternating surgeries
    -    7.4 Tsukamoto’s theorem

## Chapter 1 Introduction

One of the simplest ways of constructing 3-manifolds is through Dehn
surgery. Given a knot @xmath in @xmath , we perform surgery on it by
cutting out a tubular neighbourhood of @xmath and gluing back in another
solid torus. These gluings are naturally indexed by rational numbers.
The gluing corresponding to @xmath attaches the solid torus so that a
curve representing @xmath bounds a disk, where @xmath is meridian of
@xmath and @xmath a null-homologous longitude of @xmath . For each
@xmath this allows us to define @xmath , the manifold obtained by @xmath
-surgery on @xmath . It is known that any closed orientable 3-manifold
can be obtained by surgery on a link in @xmath , where surgery on a link
means to surger each component separately [ Lic62 , Wal60 ] . However,
it is not hard to provide examples where this link necessarily has more
than one component. For example, @xmath cannot arise by surgery on any
knot in @xmath , as for any @xmath in @xmath , the homology group @xmath
is cyclic of order @xmath . Given a collection of 3-manifolds, @xmath ,
there are two general questions about Dehn surgery one can ask:

1.  which manifolds in @xmath arise by surgery on a knot @xmath in
    @xmath ?

2.  for which @xmath and @xmath do we have @xmath ?

Questions of both these forms have motivated a great deal of research in
low-dimensional topology and, in general, are very challenging. For
example, when @xmath is taken to be the set of lens spaces, which are,
in a certain sense, the simplest 3-manifolds, both these questions have
attracted substantial attention. For non-integer surgeries giving lens
spaces, the Cyclic Surgery Theorem of Culler, Gordon, Luecke and Shalen
answers (2) by showing that @xmath must be a torus knot [ CGLS87 ] . As
the lens space surgeries on torus knots were classified by Moser [ Mos71
] , this also answers @xmath for non-integer lens space surgeries. More
recently the lens spaces arising by integer surgeries on knots in @xmath
were determined by Greene [ Gre13 ] . However, for integer surgeries (2)
remains as a major open problem, known as the Berge conjecture.

#####

Given a link @xmath in @xmath or, more generally, in any 3-manifold, we
can construct the double branched cover @xmath by taking a double cover
of the link complement @xmath so that the cover is non-trivial on the
meridian of each component, and then gluing in solid tori so that each
lifted meridian bounds a disk. This construction can frequently be used
to reformulate knot-theoretic questions in terms of 3-manifolds.

#####

Recall that an alternating link is one that possesses an alternating
diagram, where a diagram is alternating if, following any component of
the diagram round, we meet the crossings in such a way that an
under-crossing is always followed by an over-crossing and vice versa;
that is, the under/over nature of the crossings alternate as we traverse
each component. An example of an alternating diagram is given in Figure
1.1 . The majority of this thesis is spent addressing the above Dehn
surgery questions when @xmath is the set of 3-manifolds obtained by
taking double-branched cover of alternating knots and links.

###### Definition 1.1.

Given a knot @xmath , we say that @xmath is an alternating surgery if it
is the double branched cover of a non-split alternating knot or link.

As the lens spaces arise as the double branched covers of 2-bridge
links, alternating surgeries provide a generalization of lens space
surgeries. We will give a criterion in terms of alternating diagrams
which characterizes precisely when the double branched cover of an
alternating knot or link can arise by non-integer surgery on a knot in
@xmath . This provides an answer to (1) for non-integer alternating
surgeries. This also allows us to construct a class of knots which
realize all possible non-integer alternating surgeries. This class of
knots potentially answers (2) for alternating surgeries. Several of our
results on alternating surgeries are direct generalizations of results
previously known for lens space surgeries.

The study of alternating surgeries also has applications to knot theory.
The most striking of these is the classification of alternating knots
with unknotting number one. We are also able to obtain a new proof for a
theorem of Tsukamoto on the structure of almost-alternating diagrams of
the unknot [ Tsu09 ] . The techniques in use also have applications to
the problem of determining the characterizing slopes of torus knots.

### 1.1 Unknotting number one

Given a knot @xmath , its unknotting number , @xmath , is a classical
knot invariant going back to the work of Tait in the 19th century [
Tai77 ] . It is defined to be the minimal number of crossing changes
required in any diagram of @xmath to obtain the unknot. Upper bounds for
the unknotting number are easy to obtain, since one can take any diagram
and find a sequence of crossing changes giving the unknot. It is far
harder to establish effective lower bounds for the unknotting number, as
it is not generally known which diagrams will exhibit the actual
unknotting number [ Ber94 , Ble84 , Jab98 ] . The quintessential example
which illustrates the difficulty of the unknotting number is the knot
@xmath , show in Figure 1.1 ; its unknotting number was long-believed to
be two, but this remained unproven until the work of Ozsváth and Szabó
in 2005 [ OS05a ] .

One classical lower bound is the signature of a knot as defined by
Trotter [ Tro62 ] , which satisfies @xmath [ Mur65 ] . This is a
particularly useful bound, since it may be computed in a variety of ways
[ Tro62 , GL78 ] . Other bounds and obstructions have been constructed
through the use of various knot-theoretic and topological invariants,
including, among others, the Alexander module [ Lic97 , Theorem 7.10]
and the intersection form of 4-manifolds [ CL86 , Owe08 ] .

The case of unknotting number one has been particularly well-studied.
Recall that a minimal diagram for a knot is one containing the minimal
possible number of crossings. Kohn made the following conjecture
regarding unknotting number one knots and their minimal diagrams [ Koh91
, Conjecture 12] .

###### Kohn’s Conjecture.

If @xmath is a knot with @xmath , then it has an unknotting crossing in
a minimal diagram.

This has been resolved in a number of cases. The two-bridge knots with
unknotting number one were classified by Kanenobu and Murakami [ KM86 ]
, using the Cyclic Surgery Theorem [ CGLS87 ] . For alternating large
algebraic knots, the conjecture was settled by Gordon and Luecke [ GL06
] . Most recently, the conjecture was proved for alternating 3-braid
knots by Greene [ Gre14 ] . The following theorem addresses Kohn’s
conjecture for all alternating knots [ McC13 ] .

###### Theorem 6.1.

For an alternating knot @xmath the following are equivalent:

1.  @xmath has unknotting number one;

2.   The branched double cover @xmath can be obtained by half-integer
    surgery on a knot in @xmath ;

3.  @xmath has an unknotting crossing in every alternating diagram.

Recall that an alternating diagram is said to be reduced if it contains
no nugatory crossings (see Figure 1.2 ). Since the minimal diagrams of
alternating knots are precisely the reduced alternating diagrams [ Kau87
, Mur86 , Thi88 ] , this resolves Kohn’s conjecture for alternating
knots.

###### Remark 1.2.

In general, it is not known if the question of whether a knot has
unknotting number one is decidable. Theorem 6.1 shows that for
alternating knots this is decidable.

In general, Kohn’s Conjecture seems somewhat optimistic. For example,
there are 14-crossing knots with unknotting number one and minimal
diagrams not containing an unknotting crossing [ Sto01 ] . However these
examples are not sufficient to disprove the conjecture, since they still
all possess at least one minimal diagram with an unknotting crossing.

The equivalence between the double branched cover arising by
half-integer surgery and unknotting number one is not true in general.

###### Example 1.3.

Consider the torus knot @xmath for @xmath . Its unknotting number is
given by the formula [ KM93 , Ras10 ] :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So the only torus knot with unknotting number one is @xmath . However,
for odd @xmath , we have @xmath [ Wat10 , Proposition 2] .

### 1.2 Almost-alternating diagrams of the unknot

Theorem 6.1 can be interpreted as follows: showing that understanding
alternating knots with unknotting number one is equivalent to
understanding almost-alternating diagrams of the unknot, where an
almost-alternating diagram is one which is obtained from an alternating
diagram by a single crossing change. A result of Tsukamoto shows that
any reduced almost-alternating diagram of the unknot can be built up
using only certain types of isotopies: flypes , which are illustrated in
Figure 1.3 ; and tongue and twirl moves, which are the inverses of the
untongue and untwirl moves depicted in Figure 1.4 .

The methods in this paper also provide a new proof of this result [
Tsu09 , Corollary 1.1] .

###### Theorem 7.22 (Tsukamoto).

Any reduced almost-alternating diagram of the unknot can be obtained
from @xmath , for some non-zero integer @xmath , by a sequence of
flypes, tongue moves and twirl moves. For each @xmath , @xmath is the
almost-alternating diagram shown in Figure 1.5 .

The proof given in this thesis is of very different flavour to the
original which employed spanning surfaces and geometric arguments,
rather than the machinery of Heegaard Floer homology and the topology of
4-manifolds. Together Theorem 6.1 and Theorem 7.22 may be viewed as a
complete description of alternating knots with unknotting number one.

### 1.3 Alternating surgeries

A rational tangle @xmath is a tangle consisting of two properly embedded
arcs, such that @xmath is diffeomorphic as a pair to the standard
unknotted tangle in @xmath with two arcs (this diffeomorphism is not
required to fix the boundary). Given a knot or link @xmath in @xmath ,
one can obtain a new link by rational tangle replacement , that is by
replacing one rational tangle in @xmath with some other rational tangle.
For example, changing or resolving a crossing are both rational tangle
replacements. As the double branched cover of a rational tangle is a
solid torus, if @xmath is obtained from @xmath by rational tangle
replacement, then the branched double cover @xmath can be obtained by
surgery on some knot in @xmath [ Mon73 ] . This correspondence between
tangle replacement and surgery is sometimes referred to as the
Montesinos trick . We get a criterion for when the double branched cover
of an alternating link can arise by non-integer surgery in terms of
rational tangle replacement in an alternating diagram [ McC15 ] .

###### Theorem 7.1.

Let @xmath be an alternating knot or link. For any @xmath with @xmath ,
the double branched cover @xmath arises as @xmath -surgery on a knot in
@xmath if and only if (1) @xmath possesses an alternating diagram
obtained by rational tangle replacement from an almost-alternating
diagram of the unknot and (2) the corresponding surgery slope is @xmath
.

###### Remark 1.4.

It turns out that if @xmath is an alternating surgery for some @xmath ,
then @xmath is the unknot. Since surgeries on the unknot always satisfy
@xmath for some @xmath , the assumption that @xmath in Theorem 7.1 is
not a serious loss of generality.

Not only does Theorem 7.1 show which double branched covers of
alternating links arise by non-integer surgery on a knot in @xmath , but
the Montesinos trick also allows us to construct knots on which these
alternating surgeries occur.

Let @xmath be an almost-alternating diagram of the unknot. Consider a
small ball @xmath containing the non-alternating crossing. If we take
the double cover of @xmath branched over @xmath , then @xmath lifts to a
solid torus. Since the double branched cover of the unknot is @xmath ,
the core of this solid torus is a knot @xmath in @xmath . Let @xmath be
a diagram obtained by replacing the single crossing in the interior of
@xmath with some other rational tangle. We see that @xmath arises by
surgery on @xmath . As @xmath is almost-alternating, there are tangle
replacements for which the resulting diagram @xmath is alternating,
showing that @xmath admits alternating surgeries.

###### Definition 1.5.

Let @xmath denote the collection of all knots arising in this way:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Theorem 7.1 shows that @xmath accounts for all possible non-integer
alternating surgeries in the following sense.

###### Theorem 7.12.

If @xmath is an alternating surgery for @xmath , then there is @xmath
with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath denotes the Alexander polynomial of @xmath . In fact, the
only known knots with alternating surgeries are those in @xmath . This
raises the following question.

###### Question 1.6.

Suppose that @xmath admits an alternating surgery, is @xmath in @xmath ?

For a given knot, it is also possible to restrict the number of
alternating surgeries that it admits [ McC14a ] .

###### Theorem 7.17.

Let @xmath be a non-trivial knot admitting alternating surgeries. There
is an integer @xmath , which can be calculated from the Alexander
polynomial of @xmath , such that if @xmath is an alternating surgery,
then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since it can be shown that the @xmath in Theorem 7.17 satisfies @xmath ,
we obtain a generalization of a bound on lens space surgeries originally
due to Rasmussen [ Ras04 ] .

###### Corollary 7.18.

Let @xmath be a non-trivial knot. If @xmath is an alternating surgery,
then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 1.4 Heegaard Floer homology and @xmath-invariants

Heegaard Floer homology forms a package of invariants, defined by
Ozsváth and Szabó, which can be associated with any closed oriented
3-manifold @xmath [ OS04d ] . In its simplest form, Heegaard Floer
homology (with coefficients in @xmath ) defines a finite-dimensional
@xmath -vector space @xmath . There are related Heegaard Floer homology
invariants @xmath , @xmath and @xmath associated with @xmath , along
with various exact sequences connecting these invariants.

The Heegaard Floer homology of any 3-manifold @xmath splits as a direct
sum over its @xmath -structures:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

When @xmath is a rational homology sphere each of these summands
satisfies @xmath and, in particular, is non-trivial [ OS04c ] . Since
@xmath is in bijection with @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any rational homology sphere @xmath . When this minimum is realized
we say that @xmath is an @xmath -space .

For rational homology spheres there are also associated numerical
invariants, @xmath , called the @xmath -invariants [ OS03a ] . These
have the property that for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes @xmath with its orientation reversed, and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the conjugate of @xmath .

#### 1.4.1 The knot Floer complex

Given a null-homologous knot @xmath in @xmath , one can also define knot
Floer homology, as developed independently by Rasmussen [ Ras03 ] and by
Ozsváth and Szabó [ OS04b ] . In particular, to any knot in @xmath one
can associate a knot Floer complex, @xmath , which takes the form of a
bifiltered chain complex

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whose chain homotopy type (as a bifiltered complex) is an invariant of
@xmath . This comes equipped with a chain complex isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which maps @xmath isomorphically to @xmath .

The complex @xmath has quotient complexes defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These complexes admit chain maps

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the obvious vertical projection, and @xmath consists of
the composition of a horizontal projection onto @xmath and a chain
homotopy equivalence. When restricted to sufficiently large gradings
@xmath and @xmath induce @xmath -equivariant isomorphisms on homology,
meaning that they are modelled on multiplication by @xmath and @xmath
respectively, for some non-negative integers @xmath and @xmath [ NW15 ]
. These numbers are invariants of the chain homotopy type of @xmath and
hence are invariants of @xmath . The following proposition summarizes
the properties of the @xmath and @xmath that we will use in this thesis.

###### Proposition 1.7 (Ni-Wu, [Nw15]).

For any @xmath the @xmath and @xmath are a sequence of non-negative
integers satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath .

The sequence of @xmath is eventually zero and we will use @xmath to
denote the minimal integer such that @xmath . This always satisfies
@xmath , where @xmath denotes the smooth slice genus of @xmath [ Ras04 ,
Theorem 2.3] .

#### 1.4.2 Dehn surgery and @xmath-invariants

We will primarily be interested in the @xmath -invariants of @xmath ,
the manifold obtained by @xmath -surgery on the knot @xmath . These
@xmath -invariants can be calculated in terms of the integers @xmath and
@xmath arising from @xmath . By using relative @xmath -structures on
@xmath , Ozsváth and Szabó establish identifications [ OS11 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using this identification, Ni and Wu derived a formula for the @xmath
-invariants of @xmath .

###### Proposition 1.8 (Proposition 1.6, [Nw15]).

If @xmath , then for any @xmath the @xmath -invariants of @xmath satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Given the properties of the @xmath and @xmath in Proposition 1.7 , we
see that the formula for the @xmath -invariants in Proposition 1.8 can
be rewritten purely in terms of the @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 1.4.3 @xmath-space knots

A knot @xmath is said to be an @xmath -space knot if @xmath is an @xmath
-space for some @xmath . It turns out that if @xmath is an @xmath -space
knot, then @xmath is an @xmath -space if and only if @xmath . The knot
Floer homology of an @xmath -space knot is known to be determined by its
Alexander polynomial, which can be written in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and the non-zero values of @xmath alternate in sign and
assume values in @xmath with @xmath [ OS04a , OS05b ] . Given an
Alexander polynomial in this form, we define its torsion coefficients by
the formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

When @xmath is an @xmath -space knot, the @xmath appearing in Section
1.4.1 satisfy @xmath for @xmath [ OS11 ] . In particular, this shows
that @xmath .

###### Remark 1.9.

Observe that the torsion coefficients uniquely determine the Alexander
polynomial. For @xmath , @xmath is determined by the relation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since the Alexander polynomial is normalized so that @xmath , this is
also sufficient to determine the coefficient @xmath .

#### 1.4.4 4-manifolds

Other properties of @xmath -invariants arise from their interaction with
4-manifolds. A compact, oriented 4-manifold has an intersection form ,
which is a symmetric bilinear pairing

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that @xmath whenever @xmath or @xmath is a torsion element in
@xmath , so this pairing descends to a pairing on @xmath , which we will
also call @xmath . If @xmath is a disjoint union of rational homology
spheres, then this pairing is non-degenerate. In this case we can
identify @xmath with the dual group @xmath . This gives a @xmath -valued
pairing on @xmath (and also on @xmath ). We will denote the pairings on
both @xmath and @xmath by @xmath .

#####

Let @xmath be a negative-definite smooth 4-manifold @xmath with boundary
@xmath a union of disjoint rational homology spheres. For any @xmath
which restricts to @xmath there is a bound on the @xmath -invariant [
OS03a , Theorem 9.6] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Recall that for any @xmath , the corresponding first Chern class @xmath
is a characteristic covector , meaning that it satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . We will be interested in the special case where @xmath
is sharp, meaning that its intersection form determines the @xmath
-invariants of its boundary.

###### Definition 1.10.

The negative-definite manifold @xmath with @xmath is sharp if for every
@xmath there is some @xmath which restricts to @xmath and attains
equality in ( 1.1 ). That is, @xmath is sharp if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every @xmath .

In this thesis, an integer lattice is taken to mean a free abelian group
with an integer-valued bilinear pairing. As a sharp manifold @xmath is
negative-definite, the pairing @xmath is positive-definite, making the
group @xmath into an integer lattice. We use @xmath to denote this
lattice.

###### Remark 1.11.

Note that if @xmath is sharp, then @xmath is positive-definite, has
boundary @xmath , and satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every @xmath .

### 1.5 The Changemaker Theorem

The results of thesis rest on an obstruction to Dehn surgery obtained by
combining the @xmath -invariants of Heegaard Floer homology with
Donaldson’s Diagonalization Theorem. This obstruction was first
developed by Greene for integer surgeries in his work on the lens space
realization problem [ Gre13 ] and the cabling conjecture [ Gre15 ] , and
for half-integer surgeries in his work on 3-braid knots with unknotting
number one [ Gre14 ] . It was extended, with extra hypotheses, to
general non-integer slopes by Gibbons [ Gib15 ] .

###### Definition 1.12.

We say that a tuple of increasing positive integers @xmath satisfies the
changemaker condition , if for every

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

there is @xmath such that @xmath .

The changemaker has the following equivalent formulation which will
sometimes be useful.

###### Proposition 1.13 (Brown, [Bro61]).

A tuple @xmath of increasing positive integers satisfy the changemaker
condition if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The key definition we will need is that of a changemaker lattice.

###### Definition 1.14.

Let @xmath be given by the continued fraction,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . Let @xmath be vectors satisfying,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Suppose further that there is an orthonormal basis @xmath of @xmath for
such that the following hold:

1.  there is a tuple @xmath satisfying the changemaker condition such
    that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.  @xmath for all @xmath and all @xmath ;

3.  for any @xmath ,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath is the set @xmath ; and

4.  for any @xmath there is @xmath such that @xmath .

Then we say that the orthogonal complement

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a @xmath -changemaker lattice .

Moreover, we say that the @xmath are the changemaker coefficients of
@xmath and that the @xmath satisfying @xmath are the stable coefficients
of @xmath .

###### Remark 1.15.

Note that a @xmath -changemaker lattice is determined up to isomorphism
by its stable coefficients. Given the stable coefficients, the remaining
changemaker coefficients are determined by the requirement that @xmath .
Up to automorphisms of @xmath , the remaining @xmath are determined by
Conditions II and III. Condition IV then determines @xmath .

This allows us to state the changemaker surgery obstruction.

###### Theorem 2.1.

Let @xmath such that @xmath bounds a sharp manifold @xmath for @xmath .
Then the intersection form @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is an integer and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a @xmath -changemaker lattice.

###### Remark 1.16.

Condition IV in Definition 1.14 guarantees that a changemaker lattice
does not include any vectors of norm 1. In almost all applications of
Theorem 2.1 we will know a priori that @xmath contains no elements of
norm 1, and thus be able assume that @xmath .

## Chapter 2 Surgeries and sharp manifolds

The first versions of the changemaker theorem were established by Greene
for integer and half-integer @xmath -space surgeries in his work on the
lens space realization problem [ Gre13 ] , the cabling conjecture [
Gre15 ] and alternating 3-braid knots with unknotting number one [ Gre14
] . These results were generalized by Gibbons who proved a changemaker
theorem that held for surgeries of arbitrary rational slope, and,
because of the developments in the theory of @xmath -invariants due to
Ni and Wu [ NW15 ] , no longer required the surgeries to be @xmath
-space surgeries [ Gib15 ] . Gibbons’s result did, however, have
additional conditions on the @xmath -invariants of the manifold obtained
by surgery. By adapting ideas from Greene’s work [ Gre15 ] , one can
show that these conditions are redundant, giving a changemaker theorem
valid for all positive rational surgeries bounding a sharp 4-manifold [
McC15 ] .

The main purpose of this chapter is to establish the changemaker theorem
in the greatest possible generality.

###### Theorem 2.1.

Let @xmath such that @xmath bounds a sharp manifold @xmath for @xmath .
Then the intersection form @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is an integer and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a @xmath -changemaker lattice such that for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath .

The @xmath appearing in ( 2.1 ) are the integers derived from the knot
Floer complex of @xmath as described in Section 1.4.1 . The relationship
in ( 2.1 ) was first established by Greene for integer surgeries [ Gre15
] and later observed to hold for rational surgeries as well [ McC14b ] .

###### Remark 2.2.

As there are elements of norm @xmath in @xmath , ( 2.1 ) shows that
@xmath for some @xmath . As the @xmath are a non-negative decreasing
sequence, this shows that @xmath for all @xmath . This means that if
@xmath bounds a sharp manifold then knowing @xmath is sufficient to
determine the @xmath for all @xmath .

We will also show that ( 2.1 ) is sufficient to determine the vector
@xmath . It turns out that the stable coefficients of @xmath are
determined by the @xmath , making them invariants of @xmath . In
particular, the stable coefficients are independent of the surgery slope
@xmath . This is the sense in which the stable coefficients are stable.

###### Theorem 2.3.

Let @xmath such that @xmath bounds a sharp manifold @xmath for @xmath .
Then the intersection form @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a @xmath -changemaker lattice and the stable
coefficients are an invariant of @xmath . Therefore, the intersection
form of @xmath is determined by the knot @xmath , the surgery slope
@xmath and @xmath .

If @xmath is a sharp manifold with boundary @xmath , then we can obtain
another sharp manifold by taking a connect sum of @xmath with @xmath .
It follows from Theorem 2.3 that if @xmath , then at the level of
intersection forms this is the only possibility.

###### Corollary 2.4.

Let @xmath be a knot such that for some @xmath , the 3-manifold @xmath
bounds negative-definite sharp manifolds @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath
for @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will also prove the following theorem, which provides further
examples of sharp manifolds to which Theorem 2.1 can be applied [ McC14b
] .

###### Theorem 2.5.

If @xmath bounds a sharp manifold for some @xmath , then @xmath bounds a
sharp manifold for all @xmath .

Owens and Strle show that if @xmath bounds a negative-definite manifold
@xmath , then @xmath bounds a negative-definite manifold for any @xmath
by taking a certain negative-definite cobordism from @xmath to @xmath
and gluing it to @xmath [ OS12 ] . We prove Theorem 2.5 by showing that
if @xmath is sharp, then this construction results in a sharp manifold.

### 2.1 A manifold bounding @xmath

Let @xmath be a knot. For fixed @xmath , with a continued fraction
@xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the @xmath satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

one can construct a 4-manifold @xmath bounding @xmath by attaching
2-handles to @xmath according to the Kirby diagram given in Figure 2.1 .
Since @xmath is constructed by attaching 2-handles to a 0-handle, the
first homology group @xmath is trivial and @xmath is free with a basis
@xmath given by the 2-handles. With respect to this basis, the
intersection form @xmath is given by the matrix:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The conditions on the @xmath given by ( 2.2 ) imply that @xmath is
positive-definite ¹ ¹ 1 For any @xmath , the determinant of the top left
@xmath -minor of @xmath is given by the numerator of the continued
fraction @xmath and hence positive. and hence that the intersection form
on @xmath is positive-definite. The corresponding @xmath -valued pairing
on @xmath is given by the matrix @xmath with respect to the dual basis
@xmath . By considering the long exact sequence of the pair @xmath , we
obtain the short exact sequence:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We may identify @xmath with @xmath via Poincaré duality. With respect to
the bases @xmath and @xmath the resulting map @xmath is given by the
matrix @xmath . This gives an isomorphism

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath is torsion-free, the first Chern class defines an injective
map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the image is the set of characteristic covectors @xmath . This
allows us to identify @xmath with the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will use this identification throughout this chapter.

#####

Using the map in ( 2.3 ), which arises from restriction, allows us to
identify the set @xmath with elements of the quotient

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Given @xmath we will use @xmath to denote its equivalence class modulo
@xmath and the corresponding @xmath -structure on @xmath .

#### 2.1.1 Representatives for @xmath

We will be interested in certain subsets of @xmath . In particular we
wish to find a set of representatives for @xmath in @xmath . Following
Gibbons, we make the following definitions [ Gib15 ] .

###### Definition 2.6.

Given @xmath , we say that it contains a full tank if there is @xmath ,
such that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath . We say that @xmath
is left-full , if there is @xmath , such that @xmath and @xmath for all
@xmath .

Observe that our definition of left-full does not impose any conditions
on @xmath , and that if @xmath , then @xmath contains no left-full
elements.

###### Definition 2.7.

Let @xmath denote the set of elements @xmath satisfying @xmath for all
@xmath , and such that neither @xmath nor @xmath contain any full tanks.
Let @xmath denote the set of elements @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The set @xmath will turn out to form a complete set of representatives
for @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.8.

Write @xmath in the form @xmath , where @xmath . We have @xmath , and
for each @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We prove this by induction on the length of the continued fraction
@xmath . When @xmath , we have @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . In this
case,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which clearly has the required properties. Suppose that @xmath , and let
@xmath denote the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath , we can assume that we have @xmath , and for each @xmath , we
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . For @xmath in the range @xmath , take @xmath . If @xmath
, then @xmath if and only if @xmath , and @xmath is left-full if and
only if @xmath or @xmath and @xmath is left full. Therefore,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath if and only if @xmath and @xmath
contains no full tanks. Equivalently, @xmath if and only if @xmath and
@xmath is not left-full. As above, we see that there are @xmath choices
of @xmath with @xmath and @xmath choices with @xmath and @xmath is
left-full. This shows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as required. It follows that @xmath , as required. ∎

###### Definition 2.9.

We say that @xmath is short if it satisfies @xmath for all @xmath with
@xmath . Here @xmath denotes the norm with respect to the pairing given
by @xmath .

We will show that the set of short elements of @xmath is precisely
@xmath .

The following calculation will be useful in what follows. Take @xmath .
In terms of the basis given by @xmath , the cohomology class @xmath is
given by the @xmath th row of @xmath , and we have

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

###### Definition 2.10.

If @xmath , then we define @xmath to be the push-down of @xmath at
@xmath . Similarly, if @xmath , then we define @xmath to be the push-up
of @xmath at @xmath .

By ( 2.4 ), we see that if @xmath and @xmath are related by a push-up or
push-down, then @xmath . We also have @xmath . Note also that pushing up
or pushing down cannot create a full tank, so @xmath implies @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.11.

For any @xmath , there is @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath
and @xmath is not left-full, then @xmath and @xmath is left-full if and
only if @xmath is left-full.

###### Proof.

Take @xmath . Observe that @xmath if and only if @xmath for all @xmath .
We define a sequence of elements in @xmath as follows. First, set @xmath
. If @xmath we set @xmath , where @xmath satisfies @xmath . Since @xmath
is obtained by a push-up from @xmath , we have @xmath and @xmath for all
@xmath . We will show that this sequence eventually results in an
element of @xmath .

For any @xmath with @xmath we have @xmath for some integers @xmath .
Since the @xmath are linearly independent, it makes sense to define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath is always obtained by adding @xmath to @xmath for some @xmath
, we must have @xmath for all @xmath . In particular, the @xmath form a
sequence of distinct elements in @xmath . As @xmath is finite, the
sequence must terminate with some @xmath satisfying @xmath and @xmath .

Now we verify the other stated properties of @xmath . Suppose that
@xmath is obtained from @xmath by pushing-up at some @xmath . If @xmath
and @xmath is not left-full, then we necessarily have @xmath . Thus
@xmath takes the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular @xmath and @xmath is not left-full. Since we are pushing
up at @xmath , @xmath is left-full if and only if @xmath is left-full.
Thus if @xmath is not left-full and @xmath , then we can prove
inductively that @xmath has the required properties. ∎

This allows us to show that @xmath forms a complete set of
representatives for @xmath and to characterize the short elements of
@xmath .

###### Lemma 2.12.

For every @xmath , there is a unique @xmath with @xmath . Any @xmath is
short if and only if @xmath .

###### Proof.

Consider @xmath . It follows from ( 2.4 ), that if @xmath , then @xmath
. Thus any short element must satisfy @xmath for all @xmath . Now
suppose @xmath contains a full tank, say @xmath , @xmath and @xmath for
all @xmath . Consider @xmath , which can be obtained from @xmath by a
sequence of push-downs. If we write @xmath , then @xmath , showing that
@xmath is not short. Since @xmath , this shows @xmath is not short.
Since @xmath is short if and only if @xmath is short, this shows that
@xmath is short only if @xmath .

We prove the converse by a counting argument. Since every @xmath has a
short representative @xmath , which is necessarily in @xmath , Lemma
2.11 shows that it also has a short representative @xmath . However
Lemma 2.8 shows @xmath , so for every @xmath , there is a unique @xmath
with @xmath and @xmath is short. It then follows from Lemma 2.11 that
every @xmath is short. ∎

### 2.2 Calculating @xmath-invariants of @xmath

Now we use the representatives for @xmath studied in the previous
section to calculate the @xmath -invariants of @xmath . Since the
intersection form on @xmath is independent of the choice of the knot
@xmath , it gives a choice of correspondences,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence also a choice of correspondence

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using this we can define @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand, recall that there are identifications [ OS11 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

for which the @xmath -invariants of @xmath satisfy the formula [ NW15 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath .

When @xmath is an integer and @xmath is obtained by attaching a single
@xmath -framed 2-handle to @xmath the correspondence ( 2.5 ) can be
easily reconciled with the one in ( 2.6 ). In this case, the @xmath
-structure @xmath , is labeled by @xmath , when @xmath [ OS08 ] . It is
clear that in this case the correspondences in ( 2.5 ) and ( 2.6 ) are
the same. Hence for @xmath satisfying @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Remark 2.13.

It turns out that the correspondences between @xmath and @xmath used in
( 2.5 ) and ( 2.6 ) coincide in general. However, we will evaluate
@xmath without using this.

Ozsváth and Szabó have shown that the manifold @xmath is sharp [ OS03a ,
OS03b ] (or alternatively [ OS05c ] ).

###### Theorem 2.14 (Ozsváth-Szabó).

The manifold @xmath is a sharp manifold bounding @xmath . In particular,
for any @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

By generalizing the ideas in [ Gib15 , Proof of Theorem 1.1] , this
allows us to calculate @xmath for @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.15.

For any @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the manifold obtained by attaching a single @xmath framed
2-handle to @xmath along @xmath . Since @xmath is obtained by attaching
2-handles to @xmath , we can write @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath .
For any @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus for any @xmath , ( 2.9 ) shows that we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However, from ( 1.1 ) we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Combining these, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

for any @xmath .

Now consider @xmath . If @xmath is left-full, then it takes the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath . Thus, by a sequence of push-downs performed at
consecutively at @xmath and @xmath , we arrive at

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which satisfies @xmath and @xmath . Thus by ( 2.10 ), we have the bound

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath . The following claim establishes the lemma for @xmath .

###### Claim.

For all @xmath , we have equality in ( 2.11 ).

###### Proof of Claim.

Let @xmath where @xmath . Using the inequalities given in ( 2.11 ) and
Lemma 2.8 to count the the elements of @xmath which are left full or
otherwise, we obtain

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (2.12)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

On the other hand, using ( 2.7 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This shows that we have equality in ( 2.12 ). Consequently we must also
have equality in ( 2.11 ) for any @xmath . ∎

Now we deduce the lemma for arbitrary @xmath .

Suppose first that @xmath . By ( 2.10 ), we have @xmath . Since the
@xmath form a complete set of representatives for @xmath , the above
claim shows there is @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , it follows that @xmath . As @xmath cannot be left-full if
@xmath , this proves the lemma, when @xmath .

We can now assume @xmath . At most one of @xmath or @xmath is left-full.
If @xmath is not left-full, then Lemma 2.15 shows that there is @xmath ,
with @xmath and @xmath is left-full if and only if @xmath is left-full.
This gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as required. Since @xmath -invariants are invariant under conjugation
and @xmath represents the conjugate of @xmath under our identification
@xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, if @xmath is left-full, then we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

completing the proof. ∎

### 2.3 The Changemaker Theorem

Let @xmath be the positive-definite manifold bounding @xmath obtained by
attaching 2-handles @xmath , …, @xmath to the 4-ball, as in Figure 2.1 ,
according to the continued fraction expansion @xmath , where @xmath and
@xmath for @xmath (i.e we are no longer allowing @xmath ). Note that a
unique continued fraction of this form exists for all @xmath . Suppose
that @xmath bounds a sharp negative-definite manifold @xmath . Using
this we can form the closed smooth manifold

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath and @xmath are positive-definite @xmath is
positive-definite with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Donaldson’s Diagonalization Theorem, the intersection form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is isomorphic to the diagonal form on @xmath [ Don87 ] . From now on we
will identify @xmath with @xmath by choosing an orthonormal basis @xmath
. Under such an identification the first Chern class gives a surjective
map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall also that we have identified @xmath with the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For each 2-handle @xmath of @xmath , let @xmath be the image of its
homology class under the inclusion induced by the inclusion @xmath .
Under these identifications, if @xmath has @xmath then its restriction
@xmath corresponds to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This following lemma is the natural generalization of [ Gre15 ,
Lemma 2.5] to rational surgeries.

###### Lemma 2.16.

The following are true.

1.   For any @xmath , @xmath if and only if there is @xmath , such that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.   For all @xmath in the range @xmath , the vector @xmath satisfies

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.13)
      -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

Observe that for any @xmath , we have @xmath . Thus if @xmath to
restricts @xmath on @xmath , then ( 1.1 ) and Theorem 2.14 show

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (2.14)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

By Lemma 2.12 , equality can occur in ( 2.14 ) only if @xmath .

Now as @xmath is sharp, for any @xmath , there is @xmath with @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular, if we form @xmath by gluing @xmath to @xmath , then
@xmath realizes the lower bound in ( 2.14 ). This shows that for any
@xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Under our identification of @xmath with the diagonal form this give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since any @xmath satisfies @xmath with equality if and only if @xmath ,
statement @xmath follows from ( 2.15 ).

Now fix @xmath in the range @xmath . From ( 2.14 ) we see that any
@xmath with @xmath and @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with equality only if @xmath . This shows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the final inequality follows from Lemma 2.15 and ( 2.15 ).
However, Lemma 2.15 also shows that @xmath , satisfies @xmath . This
shows the lower bound in ( 2.16 ) is attained, proving statement @xmath
. ∎

The following lemma is Gibbon’s result [ Gib15 , Theorem 1.2] with extra
hypotheses on the @xmath -invariants of @xmath removed. The proof given
is a streamlined version of the one found by Gibbons.

###### Lemma 2.17.

The vectors @xmath satisfy Conditions I, II and III in the definition of
a @xmath -changemaker lattice and we have the bound

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be an orthonormal basis for @xmath . For @xmath and @xmath ,
set @xmath . Without loss of generality, we will assume that this basis
has been chosen so that @xmath for all @xmath . It will be useful to
consider the quantity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As in Definition 1.14 , we will consider the sets

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We break the proof of Lemma 2.17 into a number of steps.

###### Step 1.

We have @xmath if and only if @xmath . In particular, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and ( 2.17 ) holds.

###### Proof.

It follows from Lemma 2.16 that for @xmath in the range @xmath , we have
@xmath if and only if there is @xmath , such that @xmath . The maximal
value that @xmath can attain for any @xmath is @xmath – obtained by
choosing @xmath . This shows @xmath if and only if @xmath . By
definition, @xmath is the minimal integer such that @xmath , so @xmath .
As @xmath , we must have @xmath , so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

proving ( 2.17 ). ∎

For the remainder of the proof we set @xmath .

###### Step 2.

For all @xmath and all @xmath , we have @xmath . That is, Condition II
of Definition 1.14 is fulfilled.

###### Proof.

Consider @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Lemma 2.15 and Step 1 , we have @xmath . So by Lemma 2.16 @xmath
there is @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath , we have @xmath for each @xmath . Consequently, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . However this can only be achieved if @xmath or @xmath .
In either case @xmath as required. ∎

###### Step 3.

For @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

That is, Condition III of Definition 1.14 is fulfilled.

###### Proof.

For @xmath , it will be useful to decompose @xmath as the disjoint union
@xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We prove this step separately for @xmath and @xmath .

First assume that @xmath . Consider

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Lemma 2.15 and Step 1 , we have @xmath . So by Lemma 2.16 @xmath ,
there is @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath
and if @xmath , then @xmath . Thus @xmath and @xmath are necessarily
disjoint. Thus we can compute

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since we are assuming that @xmath for all @xmath , it follows that
@xmath if and only if @xmath , and that @xmath only if @xmath . Since
@xmath , it follows that @xmath , as required.

Now assume that @xmath . Consider

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Lemma 2.15 and Step 1 , we have @xmath . So by Lemma 2.16 @xmath ,
there is @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . Observe that for such a
@xmath , @xmath implies @xmath and @xmath implies @xmath . Thus we have
@xmath . Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

this shows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as required. ∎

After possibly reordering the @xmath , we may assume that @xmath takes
the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the unique element of @xmath given by Step 3 when @xmath
.

###### Step 4.

The tuple @xmath of elements appearing in ( 2.18 ) satisfies the
changemaker condition. That is, Condition I of Definition 1.14 is
fulfilled.

###### Proof.

We deal with the cases @xmath and @xmath separately.

First we assume that @xmath , i.e that @xmath . In this case we have
@xmath . It follows from Step 1 and Lemma 2.15 , that for all @xmath in
the range @xmath , @xmath . Thus, there is @xmath such that @xmath . If
we write @xmath , where @xmath , and @xmath in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath for all @xmath , then we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath was an arbitrary value in the range @xmath it follows that
@xmath satisfies the changemaker condition.

Now assume that @xmath . In this case, we have @xmath . For @xmath in
the range @xmath , consider the @xmath -structure

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Noting that @xmath is left-full, Step 1 and Lemma 2.15 shows that @xmath
. Therefore there is @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . By Step 3 and
the assumption that @xmath , we must have @xmath . Thus by Step 2 , we
must have @xmath . This means that if we write @xmath , where @xmath ,
and @xmath in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath for all @xmath , then we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This shows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath was an arbitrary value in the range @xmath it follows that
@xmath satisfies the changemaker condition. ∎

This completes the proof of the lemma. ∎

###### Lemma 2.18.

We have an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

By considering the Mayer-Vietoris sequence for @xmath , then we obtain
the exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This shows that there is an embedding

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The following two claims show that @xmath and @xmath have the same
discriminant. Since @xmath and @xmath have the same rank, this shows
that map in ( 2.19 ) is an isomorphism, as required.

###### Claim.

@xmath .

###### Proof of Claim.

Since the restriction map @xmath is surjective, the map @xmath induced
by inclusion is surjective. By considering the long exact sequence for
cohomology of the pair @xmath , we obtain exact sequences

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By combining these two sequences with the universal coefficients theorem
and Poincaré duality, we see that the map in ( 2.20 ) must give an
isomorphism on the torsion subgroups @xmath and @xmath . Therefore (
2.20 ) gives the the exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we identify @xmath with @xmath via Poincaré duality, then this first
map is precisely the inclusion of @xmath into its dual lattice, giving
the desired value of the discriminant. ∎

###### Claim.

We have @xmath

###### Proof of Claim.

This argument is adapted from [ Gre13 , Lemma 3.10] . Define the
homomorphism @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the matrix

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The group @xmath is cyclic of order @xmath . Observe that @xmath is
surjective. If @xmath , then this is trivially true. If @xmath , then
Lemma 2.17 shows that there is unit vector @xmath such that @xmath and
@xmath for @xmath . Such an @xmath satisfies @xmath , which is a
generator. Similarly, if @xmath , then the set of changemaker
coefficients is non-trivial so there is @xmath with such that @xmath .
This shows that @xmath . However, the kernel of @xmath splits as @xmath
. Since @xmath , this shows that @xmath , as required. ∎

∎

###### Remark 2.19.

In fact, this argument shows that any @xmath -changemaker lattice has
discriminant @xmath .

We now piece together the results from this section to prove Theorem 2.1
.

###### Proof of Theorem 2.1.

Suppose that @xmath bounds a sharp manifold @xmath . Together Lemma 2.17
and Lemma 2.18 show that there are vectors @xmath , such that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

@xmath satisfies ( 2.13 ) and the @xmath satisfy conditions I, II and
III in Definition 1.14 . If we take @xmath as an orthonormal basis for
@xmath , then without loss of generality, we can assume that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath . Thus, we see that @xmath satisfy condition IV of
Definition 1.14 when considered as vectors in @xmath . This means that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a changemaker lattice. Therefore, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , as required.

Finally, we verify ( 2.1 ). Observe that if @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath , then @xmath for all @xmath . Thus if we take @xmath ,
then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus ( 2.13 ) is sufficient to imply ( 2.1 ). This completes the proof.
∎

### 2.4 Sharp cobordisms

We have previously discussed sharp manifolds. It will be useful to make
the related definition of a sharp cobordism. Let @xmath be a
negative-definite cobordism between oriented rational homology
3-spheres. That is @xmath is a manifold with boundary @xmath . By ( 1.1
), we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath .

###### Definition 2.20.

We say that the cobordism @xmath is sharp if for all @xmath , there is
@xmath such that @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark 2.21.

Since @xmath , where @xmath is the unique @xmath -structure on @xmath ,
we see that a manifold @xmath is sharp if and only if the manifold
obtained by removing an open ball from @xmath is a sharp cobordism from
@xmath to @xmath .

The composition of two sharp cobordism is again a sharp cobordism.

###### Lemma 2.22.

Let @xmath and @xmath be sharp cobordisms. Then the composition @xmath
is also sharp. In particular, if @xmath bounds a sharp manifold @xmath
and there is a sharp cobordism @xmath , then @xmath is a sharp manifold
with boundary @xmath .

###### Proof.

Observe that the composition @xmath is also negative-definite with
@xmath . Since @xmath is sharp, for every @xmath there is @xmath such
that @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath is sharp, we can find @xmath such
that @xmath and @xmath . Now consider the @xmath -structure @xmath
obtained by gluing @xmath and @xmath . By construction @xmath and

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This shows that @xmath is sharp. ∎

#### 2.4.1 Sharp cobordisms between surgeries

Let @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath and
@xmath . Now let @xmath and @xmath be the 4-manifolds with boundaries
@xmath and @xmath obtained by attaching 2-handles according to the two
given continued fractions as in Figure 2.1 . The manifold @xmath is
naturally included as a submanifold in @xmath and @xmath is a
positive-definite manifold with boundary @xmath . As before, we may take
a basis for the homology groups @xmath and @xmath given by the 2-handles
and in the same way we may identify @xmath and @xmath with @xmath and
@xmath respectively. We can also define subsets @xmath and @xmath , as
in Section 2.1.1 .

###### Lemma 2.23.

If @xmath is not an odd integer or @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a sharp cobordism.

###### Proof.

For any @xmath , we may choose @xmath such that @xmath . Let @xmath and
consider

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will make use of the following claim.

###### Claim.

If @xmath is not an odd integer or @xmath , then for at least one @xmath
, we have @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof of Claim.

Since @xmath , we always have @xmath and @xmath is left-full if and only
if @xmath is left-full. Thus Lemma 2.15 shows @xmath whenever @xmath or
@xmath is not left-full. So the claim is true unless @xmath and @xmath
is left-full.

As @xmath is left full only if @xmath , @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath
for all @xmath , we now need to prove the claim under the assumptions
that @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath . In this case, we have @xmath and
@xmath is left full if and only if @xmath for all @xmath . Thus Lemma
2.15 shows @xmath except when @xmath .

It remains only to prove the claim when @xmath and @xmath . In this
case, @xmath must be even and we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By assumption, we have @xmath . As @xmath is even, this implies @xmath ,
and hence that @xmath . This shows that @xmath , concluding the proof of
the claim. ∎

It follows from the above claim, that there is @xmath such that @xmath .
Let @xmath denote the restriction of @xmath to @xmath . Since @xmath ,
it follows from ( 2.9 ), that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This implies that @xmath is a sharp cobordism. ∎

###### Remark 2.24.

In fact, the proof of Lemma 2.23 shows that @xmath is sharp except when
the continued fraction for @xmath is @xmath where @xmath is an even
integer and @xmath .

#### 2.4.2 Proof of Theorem 2.5

Recall that if @xmath bounds a sharp manifold for some @xmath , then (
2.17 ) in Lemma 2.17 shows that @xmath . Thus Theorem 2.5 follows from
the following lemma.

###### Lemma 2.25.

If @xmath are positive rational numbers, then there is a sharp cobordism
from @xmath to @xmath . Consequently, if @xmath bounds a sharp manifold,
then so does @xmath .

###### Proof.

Lemma 2.23 shows that if @xmath , then there is a sharp cobordism from
@xmath to @xmath for @xmath for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath for @xmath and
@xmath . In particular, the identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

shows that there is a sharp cobordism from @xmath to @xmath . If @xmath
, then for some @xmath , we can write their continued fractions in the
forms

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . From the above, we see that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

forms an increasing sequence of rational numbers, with @xmath and @xmath
such that there is a sharp cobordism from @xmath to @xmath . Since Lemma
2.22 shows that the composition of sharp cobordisms is again sharp,
there is a sharp cobordism from @xmath to @xmath , as required. ∎

### 2.5 Calculating stable coefficients

In this section, we deduce Theorem 2.3 from Theorem 2.1 by using
equation ( 2.1 ) to show that the stable coefficients of the changemaker
lattice @xmath are an invariant of @xmath . Thus, this section is
devoted to solving the following problem.

###### Question 2.26.

Given a non-negative sequence, @xmath , which satisfies @xmath for all
@xmath , is there @xmath with @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath ?

We may assume that @xmath for all @xmath and that the @xmath form a
decreasing sequence:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Observe that ( 2.21 ) has three pieces of input data, the sequence
@xmath and the two integers @xmath and @xmath . Given some choice of
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , there is no guarantee that there is @xmath
satisfying ( 2.21 ). However, we will show that if such a @xmath exists,
then it is unique and characterize the dependence of its coefficients on
@xmath .

###### Theorem 2.27.

If @xmath satisfies ( 2.21 ), then the coefficients satisfying @xmath
are determined by @xmath . In particular, they are independent of @xmath
and @xmath .

This is exactly what we need to deduce Theorem 2.3 from Theorem 2.1 .

###### Remark 2.28.

If @xmath , then any @xmath minimizing the right hand side of ( 2.21 )
must have @xmath . So we see that @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . Thus we may assume that @xmath for all @xmath .

For @xmath , it will be convenient to consider the quantities

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These are illustrated in Figure 2.2 . Throughout this section, we will
let @xmath denote

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will show how to calculate the @xmath in terms of @xmath . First we
need to define the following collection of tuples for each @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 2.29.

We can calculate @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath , and @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Since the @xmath form a decreasing sequence with @xmath if and only if
@xmath , we necessarily have @xmath . We see that @xmath if and only if
there is @xmath with @xmath . The smallest of value @xmath for which
this is true is @xmath , which is obtained by taking @xmath . Thus we
get @xmath , as required.

Now observe that for @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath and @xmath , then there is @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath
. If we write the coefficients of @xmath in the form @xmath , then these
conditions become

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath for all @xmath , any vector @xmath minimizing the right-hand
side of this expression can be assumed to satisfy @xmath for all @xmath
. Thus we we see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath .

The equation ( 2.22 ) also shows that there must exist @xmath satisfying
@xmath and @xmath . This implies the inequality

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which completes the proof. ∎

###### Remark 2.30.

It follows from this lemma that @xmath and @xmath . In particular this
implies that @xmath . This is illustrated in Figure 2.2 .

We now begin the process of showing how the remaining @xmath can be
recovered from the sequence @xmath . We begin with the simplest case,
which is when @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.31.

If @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath takes the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

If @xmath , then @xmath and Lemma 2.29 implies that @xmath . This shows
that we have @xmath for all @xmath .

Suppose now that @xmath . By Lemma 2.29 , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus we must have @xmath and hence @xmath . If @xmath , then we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which implies the @xmath for @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath
and @xmath , giving the other two possibilities in the statement of the
lemma. ∎

From now on we will suppose that @xmath . This allows us to define the
quantity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath and @xmath , we must have @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.32.

If @xmath or @xmath , then @xmath .

###### Proof.

For @xmath , Lemma 2.29 shows that there is @xmath such that @xmath . If
@xmath , then consider @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By construction, we have @xmath and @xmath As @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we have a maximiser @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath does not
satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath , then there is @xmath such that @xmath . So by ( 2.23 ),
we see that @xmath . We will show that if @xmath satisfies the
hypotheses of the lemma, then there must be at least one maximiser which
does not satisfy ( 2.24 ) for all @xmath .

Let @xmath be such that @xmath and @xmath . The Cauchy-Schwarz
inequality implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

showing that @xmath with equality if and only if @xmath . Therefore,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with equality only if @xmath . We will let @xmath denote the quantity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now take @xmath , which satisfies the conditions given by ( 2.24 ). It
follows that

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (2.25)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

If @xmath is odd and @xmath , then ( 2.25 ) shows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular, there is no @xmath satisfying ( 2.24 ). Since @xmath ,
there is @xmath with @xmath and so ( 2.23 ) implies that @xmath .

If @xmath , then we must have @xmath . Therefore, ( 2.25 ) shows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular, there is no @xmath satisfying ( 2.23 ). Since we are
assuming there is an even @xmath , we have @xmath and so there exists
@xmath such that @xmath and so ( 2.23 ) implies that @xmath . ∎

If @xmath , then @xmath must fall into one of a small number of cases.

###### Lemma 2.33.

If @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath takes the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

If @xmath , then Lemma 2.32 and the observation that @xmath show that
@xmath . We consider these two possibilities separately.

First, suppose that @xmath . Lemma 2.32 shows that if @xmath and @xmath
, then @xmath is odd for all @xmath . Thus, @xmath must take the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However, it is straightforward to verify that this @xmath gives @xmath
and @xmath . This shows that we must have @xmath , in this case.

If @xmath and @xmath , then Lemma 2.32 implies that we have @xmath for
at most two values @xmath . Thus if @xmath , then @xmath must take the
required form given in the lemma. Furthermore, it can be easily verified
that @xmath for @xmath and @xmath . This shows that @xmath in these
cases. ∎

Let @xmath denote @xmath . The following lemma allows us to calculate
the @xmath iteratively.

###### Lemma 2.34.

If @xmath is minimal such that @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be such that @xmath . Such an @xmath must also satisfy @xmath
. In particular @xmath for @xmath .

Now we consider @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have @xmath . This implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let @xmath , be such that @xmath . Since @xmath , we may assume @xmath .
Thus we can define @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have @xmath . Therefore we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Combining ( 2.26 ) and ( 2.27 ) shows that @xmath , as claimed. ∎

The following lemma shows that this iterative process will calculate
most of the @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.35.

If @xmath satisfies @xmath for all @xmath , then @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be such that @xmath . There is @xmath such that @xmath . Such
an @xmath must satisfy @xmath for @xmath . Let @xmath be defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as required. ∎

Now we prove Theorem 2.27 . Note that this proof can easily be converted
into an algorithm for calculating @xmath .

###### Proof of Theorem 2.27.

If @xmath , then Lemma 2.31 shows that the stable coefficients of @xmath
are determined by @xmath . Thus we may assume @xmath and hence we may
define @xmath . If @xmath , then Lemma 2.33 shows that the stable
coefficients of @xmath are determined by @xmath . Thus we may assume
that @xmath . Now Lemma 2.34 shows that if @xmath is determined by the
@xmath , then either @xmath is determined by the @xmath or @xmath
satisfies @xmath for all @xmath . However, in this latter case Lemma
2.35 shows that @xmath for all @xmath . Thus the @xmath determine all
values @xmath . Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

this is sufficient show that all the stable coefficients of @xmath are
determined by the @xmath . ∎

###### Proof of Theorem 2.3 and Corollary 2.4.

By Theorem 2.1 , if @xmath bounds a sharp manifold @xmath for some
@xmath , then the intersection form @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath -changemaker lattice @xmath where @xmath satisfies ( 2.1
). Theorem 2.27 shows that the stable coefficients of @xmath are
determined by the values of the @xmath . As the @xmath are invariants of
@xmath , this shows that the stable coefficients are an invariant of the
knot @xmath .

Since a @xmath -changemaker lattice is determined up to isomorphism by
its stable coefficients and the value @xmath , this shows that @xmath is
determined by @xmath and @xmath . As we have @xmath , this shows that
@xmath is determined by the @xmath the slope @xmath and @xmath , proving
Theorem 2.5 . Moreover, if @xmath is a sharp manifold with boundary
@xmath and @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , this proves Corollary 2.4 . ∎

## Chapter 3 Characterizing slopes for torus knots

In this chapter, we take a brief diversion to address the problem of
determining characterizing slopes of torus knots.

###### Definition 3.1.

We say that @xmath is a characterizing slope for @xmath if the existence
of an orientation-preserving homeomorphism from @xmath to @xmath implies
that @xmath .

Using a combination of Heegaard Floer homology and geometric techniques,
Ni and Zhang were able to prove the following theorem.

###### Theorem 3.2 (Ni and Zhang, [Nz14]).

For the torus knot @xmath with @xmath any non-trivial slope @xmath
satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a characterizing slope.

Their argument requires an upper bound on the genus of any knot @xmath
satisfying @xmath . Since @xmath is an @xmath -space bounding a sharp
manifold for @xmath , we can apply the following theorem to obtain
@xmath , whenever @xmath [ McC14b ] .

###### Theorem 3.3.

Suppose that for some @xmath , there are knots @xmath such that @xmath
is an @xmath -space bounding a sharp manifold. If @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This allows us to lower Ni and Zhang’s quadratic bound to one which is
linear in @xmath .

###### Theorem 3.4.

For the torus knot @xmath with @xmath any non-trivial slope @xmath
satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a characterizing slope.

###### Remark 3.5.

Theorem 3.3 is not the best possible result. For example, the genus
bound can be improved to @xmath [ McC14b ] . We have opted for the
weaker statement here because it allows the proof to be simplified but
leaves the conclusions of the main application, Theorem 3.4 ,
unaffected.

### 3.1 Recovering the Alexander polynomial

The proof of Theorem 3.3 occupies this section. The key ingredient is
the following lemma which provides conditions under which the
changemaker structure of a lattice is unique.

###### Lemma 3.6.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -changemaker lattice with stable coefficients
@xmath , where @xmath . Let @xmath be an embedding such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a @xmath -changemaker lattice. If @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath
have the same changemaker coefficients.

###### Proof.

First note that if the continued fraction expansion for @xmath is @xmath
, then @xmath , with equality if and only if the set of stable
coefficients for @xmath is empty. Thus we see that the lemma is true
when @xmath has no stable coefficients simply by looking at the value of
@xmath .

From now on we will assume @xmath has non-trivial stable coefficients.
There is a choice of orthonormal basis for @xmath such that @xmath takes
the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath . It follows that @xmath contains vectors @xmath
defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will consider the image of these vectors under @xmath . For @xmath in
the range @xmath , let @xmath denote the vector @xmath . For @xmath and
@xmath satisfying @xmath , we have @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is clear that we may choose orthogonal unit vectors @xmath such that
@xmath and @xmath .

There are two possibilities for @xmath . We can either have @xmath or
there is a unit vector @xmath such that @xmath . However, if we have
@xmath , then there is no vector @xmath with @xmath and @xmath ,
contradicting the existence of @xmath with @xmath . Thus @xmath must
take the form @xmath . Continuing in this way, it follows that there is
a choice of distinct orthogonal unit vectors @xmath in @xmath , such
that @xmath for each @xmath in the range @xmath .

Now we determine the form that @xmath must take. Consider the quantity
@xmath . For @xmath we have @xmath for @xmath and @xmath . This shows
that we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus by computing the norm of @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , it follows that @xmath .

Thus we see that @xmath takes the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some choice of unit vector @xmath . Since @xmath , it follows that
@xmath for @xmath .

Let @xmath be a vector in the orthogonal complement of @xmath . Since
@xmath must satisfy @xmath for @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular, if @xmath , then @xmath . This shows that if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a @xmath -changemaker lattice, then @xmath for @xmath and @xmath . As

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it follows that @xmath takes the form,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This shows that @xmath and @xmath have the same changemaker
coefficients, as required. ∎

There are examples of lattices admitting embeddings into @xmath as
changemaker lattices in more than one way, we cannot prove
unconditionally that the changemaker structure of a lattice is unique.

###### Example 3.7.

There is an isomorphism of changemaker lattices:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This isomorphism can be seen by observing that both lattices admit a
basis for which the bilinear form is given by the matrix

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This example is a consequence of the fact that @xmath .

###### Proof of Theorem 3.3.

Suppose that @xmath is an @xmath -space bounding a sharp 4-manifold
@xmath with intersection form @xmath . Let @xmath . Theorem 2.1 shows
that there is an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a @xmath -changemaker lattice and the torsion coefficients of @xmath
can be computed by the formula

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

If we write @xmath in the form @xmath , then Lemma 2.29 shows that
@xmath can be computed by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath for all @xmath , we have @xmath . Thus we have

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

If @xmath is another knot such that @xmath , then there is also an
isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a @xmath -changemaker lattice and the torsion coefficients of @xmath
satisfy the formula

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

As a changemaker lattice does not contain any vectors of norm one, we
must have @xmath . It follows that we also have @xmath . This shows that
@xmath and @xmath are isomorphic changemaker lattices in @xmath .
Combining the inequality ( 3.2 ) with the assumption @xmath allows us to
apply Lemma 3.6 . This shows @xmath and @xmath have the same changemaker
coefficients. Therefore, ( 3.1 ) and ( 3.3 ) show that the torsion
coefficients satisfy @xmath for all @xmath . As shown in Remark 1.9 ,
the torsion coefficients of @xmath and @xmath determine their Alexander
polynomials, so we have @xmath and @xmath , as required. ∎

### 3.2 Characterizing slopes

In this section, we prove Theorem 3.4 . Our proof follows the one given
by Ni and Zhang. We obtain our improvement through the following lemma.

###### Lemma 3.8.

For the torus knot @xmath with @xmath , any knot @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath , has genus @xmath and Alexander polynomial @xmath .

###### Proof.

Since @xmath is a lens space [ Mos71 ] , the work of Ozsváth and Szabó
have shows that it is an @xmath -space bounding a sharp manifold [ OS03b
, OS05c ] . Using Theorem 2.5 , this shows that @xmath is an @xmath
-space bounding a sharp manifold for all @xmath . As @xmath , we may
apply Theorem 3.3 to get the desired conclusion. ∎

###### Remark 3.9.

It is possible to exhibit a sharp manifold bounding @xmath explicitly.
Since the manifold @xmath is a Seifert fibred space with base orbifold
@xmath with at most 3 exceptional fibres [ Mos71 ] , it bounds a plumbed
4-manifold. For @xmath , one can find such a plumbing which is
negative-definite and hence sharp [ OS03b ] .

Using results of Agol, Lackenby, Cao and Meyerhoff, Ni and Zhang obtain
a restriction on exceptional slopes of a hyperbolic knot [ Ago00 , Lac03
, CM01 ] .

###### Proposition 3.10 (Lemma 2.2, [Nz14]).

Let @xmath be a hyperbolic knot. If

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath is hyperbolic.

Combining this with work of Gabai, they show that it is not possible for
surgery of sufficiently large slope on a satellite knot and a torus knot
to yield the same manifold.

###### Lemma 3.11.

If @xmath is a knot such that @xmath for @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath is not a satellite.

###### Proof.

If @xmath is a satellite knot, then let @xmath be an incompressible
torus. This bounds a solid torus @xmath which contains @xmath . Let
@xmath be the core of the solid torus @xmath . By choosing @xmath to be
“innermost”, we may assume that @xmath is not a satellite. This means
that @xmath is either a torus knot or it is hyperbolic [ Thu82 ] . Since
@xmath contains no incompressible tori and is irreducible, it follows
from the work of Gabai that @xmath is again a solid torus and @xmath is
either a 1-bridge knot or a torus knot in @xmath [ Gab89 ] . In either
case, this is a braid in @xmath and we have @xmath where @xmath and
@xmath is the winding number of @xmath in @xmath .

Since @xmath , Proposition 3.10 shows that @xmath cannot be hyperbolic.
Thus we may assume that @xmath is a torus knot, say @xmath . Since
@xmath is an @xmath -space and @xmath we have @xmath . The manifold
@xmath is Seifert fibred over @xmath with exceptional fibres of order
@xmath . Hence we can assume @xmath . By Lemma 3.8 , we have @xmath .
However, since @xmath is a satellite, its Alexander polynomial takes the
form @xmath , where @xmath is the companion knot of @xmath . In
particular, we have @xmath and, consequently, @xmath . Comparing the
orders of the exceptional fibres again, this implies that @xmath .
However, we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where the last inequality holds because we have @xmath . This is a
contradiction and shows that @xmath cannot be a torus knot. Thus we see
that @xmath cannot be a satellite knot. ∎

###### Proof of Theorem 3.4.

Suppose that @xmath is a knot in @xmath with @xmath for @xmath . Lemma
3.8 shows that @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath is not hyperbolic,
Proposition 3.10 shows that @xmath is not a hyperbolic knot. Lemma 3.11
shows that @xmath is not a satellite knot. Therefore, it follows that
@xmath is a torus knot. Since two distinct torus knots have the same
Alexander polynomial only if they are mirrors of one another, @xmath is
either @xmath or @xmath . As @xmath admits positive @xmath -space
surgeries, it follows that @xmath , as required. ∎

## Chapter 4 Lattices

We develop the lattice theoretic results on which the proofs of the main
results rely. The two types of lattice we will require are changemaker
lattices, as defined in Definition 1.14 , and graph lattices, which are
discussed in Sections 4.1 and 4.2 respectively.

#####

For the purposes of this thesis, a positive-definite integer lattice
@xmath is a finitely-generated free abelian group with a
positive-definite, symmetric form @xmath , given by @xmath . All
lattices occurring in this paper will be of this form. We say that
@xmath is indecomposable if it cannot be written as an orthogonal direct
sum @xmath with @xmath non-zero sublattices.

For @xmath , its norm is the quantity @xmath . We say that @xmath is
irreducible if we cannot find @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath .

### 4.1 Changemaker lattices

In this section, we will explore the properties of changemaker lattices.
The definition of a @xmath -changemaker lattice was given in Definition
1.14 . For @xmath , a @xmath -changemaker lattice @xmath is an
orthogonal complement

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the @xmath satisfy, among other properties,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In order to work effectively with changemaker lattices we will choose an
orthonormal basis for @xmath as follows.

If @xmath , then we will choose an orthonormal basis @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are the changemaker coefficients of @xmath and @xmath .

If @xmath , then we will choose an orthonormal basis @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are the changemaker coefficients and for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . In this case @xmath and @xmath .

###### Definition 4.1.

We say that the changemaker coefficient @xmath is tight if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We say that @xmath is tight if @xmath is tight for some @xmath ,
otherwise we say that @xmath is slack .

###### Remark 4.2.

Although the stable coefficients determine a @xmath -changemaker lattice
up to isomorphism, they are not invariants of the lattice. In Example
3.7 , we saw that the two 21-changemaker lattices with stable
coefficients @xmath and @xmath are isomorphic.

#### 4.1.1 Fractional and integral parts

In this section, we study the properties of non-integer changemaker
lattices. Throughout this section @xmath will be the @xmath -changemaker
lattice,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath . We will also assume from now on that @xmath .
The case @xmath is a degenerate case, and, as the following remark
justifies, ignoring it does not result in any serious loss of generality
in what follows.

###### Remark 4.3.

If @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath . Thus any @xmath satisfies @xmath .
In particular, we see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , this shows that such an @xmath is isomorphic to the
@xmath -changemaker with trivial stable coefficients. By applying this
observation several times if necessary, we see that @xmath is isomorphic
to the @xmath -changemaker lattice with trivial stable coefficients,
where @xmath satisfies @xmath and @xmath .

It will be convenient to decompose @xmath into its fractional and
integral parts.

###### Definition 4.4.

The fractional part @xmath is defined to be the lattice

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The integral part @xmath is defined to be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark 4.5.

Note that the following are true.

1.  In general, neither @xmath nor @xmath is a sublattice of @xmath .

2.  The fractional part @xmath is isomorphic to the @xmath -changemaker
    with trivial stable coefficients.

3.  The integral part @xmath is isomorphic to the @xmath -changemaker
    lattice with the same stable coefficients as @xmath .

4.  For any @xmath there are unique vectors @xmath and @xmath , such
    that @xmath . It is a straightforward calculation that for any
    @xmath , we can compute their pairing via the formula:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (4.1)
      -- -------- -- -------

Next we will construct a basis for the fractional part of @xmath .
Recall the integers @xmath occurring in our choice of orthonormal basis.
Consider the set @xmath . We can write @xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath . Define also @xmath . For @xmath set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

First observe that the @xmath and @xmath in the definition of the @xmath
and @xmath are such that for all @xmath and all @xmath ,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

It follows that @xmath for all @xmath and all @xmath , and hence that
@xmath for all @xmath . Observe further that for all @xmath , we have
@xmath . Thus it follows that @xmath for all @xmath .

By construction, the @xmath satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Example 4.6.

Since @xmath has continued fraction @xmath and @xmath satisfies the
changemaker condition, one example of a @xmath -changemaker lattice is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In this case, the fractional part is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the @xmath arising by the above construction are @xmath and @xmath .
The integral part of @xmath is the lattice

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we check that the @xmath form a basis for @xmath .

###### Lemma 4.7.

The set @xmath forms a basis for @xmath .

###### Proof.

For any integer combination @xmath , with at least one @xmath non-zero,
we can consider @xmath . Since this satisfies @xmath showing that @xmath
. Therefore, the @xmath are linearly independent.

It remains to check that the @xmath span @xmath . Suppose that we have
non-zero @xmath . We will prove by induction on @xmath that @xmath is in
the span of the @xmath . Since @xmath for all @xmath , it follows that
@xmath for any @xmath , otherwise we would have @xmath . Thus @xmath for
some @xmath . If we consider @xmath , then this satisfies @xmath or
@xmath . In either case, we can assume that @xmath is in the span of the
@xmath . It follows that @xmath is also in the span of the @xmath . ∎

The following continued fraction calculation will be useful later.

###### Lemma 4.8.

The @xmath satisfy the continued fraction

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We can prove this by induction on the size of @xmath . If @xmath , then
@xmath , so the continued fraction in question is simply @xmath .

If @xmath with @xmath , then consider @xmath . In this case, we have
@xmath and if we consider the fractional part of a @xmath -changemaker
lattice, then it has a basis @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath for @xmath
. That is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and, using the inductive hypothesis,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

as required.

If @xmath with @xmath , then consider @xmath . In this case, we have
@xmath and if we consider the fractional part of a @xmath -changemaker
lattice, then it has a basis @xmath , where @xmath for all @xmath . That
is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and, using the inductive hypothesis,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

as required. ∎

#### 4.1.2 Standard bases

In this section, we construct a basis for a @xmath -changemaker lattice
@xmath . The changemaker conditions show that if @xmath and @xmath is
not tight then there is a subset @xmath such that @xmath . Choosing such
an @xmath whenever @xmath is not tight we can define @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

when @xmath is not an integer, and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

when @xmath is an integer. Given such a collection of @xmath , we will
call the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

a standard basis for @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.9.

A standard basis @xmath is a basis for @xmath .

###### Proof.

We give a proof when @xmath is not an integer. This can easily be
modified to the integer case.

First observe that the standard basis elements are linearly independent.
Suppose that we we have @xmath . If there is some @xmath , then we can
consider @xmath . This satisfies @xmath . Similarly if there is some
@xmath , then we can consider @xmath . This satisfies @xmath . In either
case if there is a non-zero @xmath or @xmath , then @xmath is non-zero,
showing the linear independence of the standard basis elements.

It remains to check that the standard basis spans @xmath . As @xmath is
a non-integer changemaker lattice, we may write any @xmath as @xmath ,
where @xmath and @xmath . We have @xmath if and only if @xmath . Hence
if @xmath , then @xmath lies in the span of the @xmath , by Lemma 4.7 .
Consider @xmath , with @xmath non-zero. In this case, we will proceed by
induction on the quantity @xmath . Consider the vector @xmath . Either
@xmath or @xmath . In either case, we can assume that @xmath lies in the
span of the standard basis and hence so does @xmath . Thus the standard
basis spans @xmath . ∎

The following lemma shows that if a lattice has a basis which “looks
like” a standard basis for a half-integer changemaker lattice, then the
lattice is a half-integer changemaker lattice.

###### Lemma 4.10.

Suppose we have a collection of vectors

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath and for @xmath , @xmath with @xmath and @xmath , then
the lattice spanned by @xmath is a half-integer changemaker lattice.

###### Proof.

Define @xmath inductively by @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . For each
@xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Proposition 1.13 , the @xmath satisfy the changemaker conditions. If
we take @xmath and @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a half-integer changemaker lattice. By construction, @xmath satisfies
@xmath for all @xmath . Therefore @xmath for all @xmath . In fact, we
see that the @xmath provides an example of a standard basis for @xmath .
Thus by Proposition 4.9 , @xmath is the lattice spanned by the @xmath .
∎

#### 4.1.3 Irreducibility

Now we wish to study the irreducibility of certain vectors in @xmath and
@xmath . Recall that @xmath is irreducible if it cannot be written in
the form @xmath for non-zero @xmath and @xmath in @xmath with @xmath .

The following observation on irreducible vectors of sublattice of
diagonal lattices will be useful in what follows.

###### Proposition 4.11.

Consider @xmath with orthonormal basis @xmath . Let @xmath be a
sublattice. Consider a vector @xmath which can be written in the form
@xmath for disjoint @xmath . If @xmath for some @xmath with @xmath ,
then there are subsets @xmath and @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

If such an @xmath and @xmath exist, then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

However every summand is ( 4.2 ) is at most zero, so it must be exactly
zero. In particular @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath for all @xmath and
@xmath for all @xmath . Thus we see that @xmath for @xmath and @xmath .
Since @xmath , this also gives the statement about @xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 4.12.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -changemaker lattice. If @xmath satisfies @xmath
and @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose @xmath satisfies @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath .

If @xmath is an integer changemaker lattice, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This shows that @xmath for all @xmath and hence that @xmath .

If @xmath is a non-integer changemaker lattice, then it follows from
@xmath that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This shows that @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath . For any @xmath ,
there is a unique @xmath such that @xmath . Observe that @xmath
satisfies @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath . Thus we see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This shows that @xmath for all @xmath . Thus @xmath , as required. ∎

###### Lemma 4.13.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -changemaker lattice. If @xmath takes the form

1.  @xmath or

2.  @xmath ,

for some subset @xmath , @xmath or @xmath , then @xmath is irreducible.

###### Proof.

Suppose we can write such a @xmath as @xmath for some @xmath with @xmath
. There is a single @xmath such that @xmath . Without loss of generality
we may assume that @xmath . However, it then follows from Proposition
4.11 that @xmath for all @xmath . Thus by Lemma 4.12 , we have @xmath ,
showing that @xmath is irreducible. ∎

The other irreducible vectors we will be interested in are the
following.

###### Lemma 4.14.

If @xmath is a @xmath -changemaker lattice with @xmath and some
changemaker coefficient @xmath is tight, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is irreducible.

###### Proof.

We give a proof when @xmath . The same argument works when @xmath .

If @xmath is a half-integer changemaker lattice, then it takes the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Suppose we can write @xmath as @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . This
gives

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

Now the only term in ( 4.3 ) which can be strictly positive is then term
@xmath which is at most one. It follows that we must have @xmath and
@xmath for @xmath and @xmath . We may assume that @xmath .

If @xmath is non-zero then we must have @xmath for some @xmath . Such a
@xmath is necessarily unique with @xmath and @xmath . If such a @xmath
exists, then @xmath shows that we have @xmath . Altogether this shows
that there is @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However as @xmath , this shows

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which contradicts the requirement that @xmath . Therefore @xmath and
@xmath is irreducible, as required. ∎

###### Remark 4.15.

Lemma 4.13 and Lemma 4.14 shows that every element of a standard basis
is irreducible.

Next we classify the irreducible vectors in the fractional part of a
changemaker lattice.

###### Lemma 4.16.

Let @xmath be a non-integer changemaker lattice. The vector @xmath is
irreducible if and only if @xmath is in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath is irreducible. For convenience, we set @xmath . Let
@xmath be minimal such that @xmath . Since @xmath is irreducible if and
only if @xmath is irreducible, we may assume that @xmath . Let @xmath be
minimal such that @xmath . Let @xmath . By direct computation, we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By the choice of @xmath and @xmath , this shows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath is irreducible, this implies @xmath . Thus we see that any
irreducible vector is of the stated form.

To prove the converse, consider @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath ,
@xmath for all @xmath , and @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath for all
@xmath . In either case, if @xmath with @xmath and @xmath , then
Proposition 4.11 shows that either @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath , or
@xmath for all @xmath and @xmath . However for any @xmath , @xmath
implies that @xmath . Thus Lemma 4.12 implies either @xmath or @xmath .
Therefore @xmath is irreducible, as required. ∎

###### Lemma 4.17.

Let @xmath be a non-integer changemaker lattice. If @xmath is
irreducible, then the fractional part @xmath is irreducible.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath . We may write @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath ,
then @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath , irreducibility of @xmath implies
that @xmath or @xmath .

Now we suppose @xmath . We may assume that @xmath and that @xmath ,
where @xmath . Let @xmath be minimal such that @xmath . For convenience,
we are using the convention that @xmath . Now consider

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Lemma 4.16 , this is irreducible. We shall prove the lemma by showing
@xmath . First we need to bound the quantity @xmath . We have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

In particular, this yields the inequality

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now let @xmath be minimal such that @xmath . There is @xmath such that
@xmath . Hence, if we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath . Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath for all @xmath , we have the bound

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now consider

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using ( 4.1 ) along with the inequalities ( 4.4 ) and ( 4.5 ), we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

If @xmath , then the irreducibility of @xmath implies that @xmath .
Otherwise the above inequality shows that @xmath and in particular that
@xmath . Thus we may consider @xmath . Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it follows that @xmath . In either case, we have @xmath , which implies
irreducibility, as required. ∎

#### 4.1.4 Indecomposability

Now we study the indecomposability of @xmath -changemaker lattices.
Recall that the lattice @xmath is indecomposable if it cannot be written
as an orthogonal direct sum @xmath with @xmath .

###### Lemma 4.18.

If @xmath is a non-integer changemaker lattice, then @xmath is
indecomposable.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a standard basis for @xmath . Suppose that @xmath . Since
every @xmath is irreducible, we must have @xmath or @xmath . We may
assume that @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath , it follows
that we must have @xmath . Now consider @xmath for @xmath . If @xmath is
tight, then @xmath . In this case, @xmath so we have @xmath . If @xmath
is not tight then @xmath for some @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath .
Since @xmath , this allows us to prove by induction that @xmath . Thus
we have @xmath and we can conclude that @xmath . This shows that @xmath
is indecomposable. ∎

###### Example 4.19.

The requirement that @xmath is a non-integer changemaker lattice is
necessary for Lemma 4.18 to hold. One can easily construct examples of
decomposable integer changemaker lattices. For example, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However in the case of integer lattices, we have the following.

###### Lemma 4.20.

If @xmath is a decomposable integer changemaker lattice with changemaker
coefficients @xmath and stable coefficients @xmath , then @xmath .

###### Proof.

We will show that @xmath is indecomposable if @xmath . Let @xmath be a
standard basis for @xmath . By Remark 4.15 , every element of @xmath is
irreducible. Suppose that @xmath . As @xmath is irreducible, we must
have @xmath or @xmath . We may assume that @xmath . Now we will show
that if @xmath , then for every @xmath , there is @xmath with @xmath .
Since @xmath and @xmath implies @xmath . This allows us to deduce @xmath
and hence that @xmath , proving indecomposability.

Consider any @xmath . We consider 3 possibilities separately. If @xmath
is tight, then @xmath and we have @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath .
Note that in this case we must have @xmath , as we are assuming @xmath .
Thus we have @xmath . It remains only to consider the case @xmath . In
this case @xmath for some @xmath . In particular, we must have either
@xmath or @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath . If @xmath , then since
@xmath for all @xmath , we have @xmath . This completes the proof. ∎

### 4.2 Graph lattices

In this section, we collect the necessary results on graph lattices. The
material in this section is largely based on that of Greene [ Gre13 ,
Section 3.2] . There has, however, been some reworking since we find it
convenient to avoid using the concept of a root vertex.

Let @xmath be a finite, connected, undirected graph with no self-loops.
For a pair of disjoint subsets @xmath , let @xmath be the set of edges
between @xmath and @xmath . Define @xmath . The degree of a vertex
@xmath is @xmath .

#####

Let @xmath be the free abelian group generated by @xmath . Define a
symmetric bilinear form on @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will use the notation @xmath , for @xmath . It follows from the above
definition that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath and any @xmath . It follows that @xmath for all @xmath .
If we define the graph lattice of @xmath to be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then the bilinear form on @xmath descends to @xmath . It follows from
the assumption that @xmath is connected that the pairing on @xmath is
positive-definite ¹ ¹ 1 Taking @xmath in ( 4.6 ) shows that @xmath if
and only if @xmath is constant on the connected components of @xmath .
As @xmath is connected, this shows @xmath only if @xmath . . This makes
@xmath into an integer lattice. Henceforth, we will abuse notation by
using @xmath to denote both the vertex @xmath and its image in @xmath .

#####

We compute the product of arbitrary @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be
elements of @xmath . For any @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since we also have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we can express the pairing @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

If @xmath for some @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore ( 4.6 ) shows that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . Examining each term in ( 4.7 ) individually, we see that
the right hand side is at most zero. This inequality will be used so
often that we will record it as the following lemma.

###### Lemma 4.21.

Let @xmath be a sum of vertices, then for any @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The irreducible vectors in @xmath will be of particular interest.

###### Lemma 4.22.

The vector @xmath is irreducible if and only if @xmath for some @xmath
such that @xmath and @xmath induce connected subgraphs of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Write @xmath . Since @xmath , we can assume the @xmath are chosen so
that @xmath .

Suppose @xmath is irreducible. Let @xmath and @xmath . By direct
computation, we get

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Combining this with the irreducibility of @xmath , it follows that
@xmath . If the subgraph induced by @xmath is not connected there would
be @xmath disjoint with @xmath and @xmath , but this would give @xmath
and @xmath . This also shows the subgraph induced by @xmath must be
connected, since @xmath irreducible implies that @xmath is irreducible.

#####

To show the converse, we apply ( 4.7 ) in the case where @xmath and
@xmath induce connected subgraphs. Let @xmath be such that @xmath . By
Lemma 4.21 , this means @xmath . In particular, using ( 4.7 ), we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . This means every summand in the above equation must be 0.
Thus if @xmath and @xmath are both in @xmath or @xmath and @xmath , then
@xmath . Thus since @xmath and @xmath induce connected subgraphs, @xmath
is constant on @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath or
@xmath . Thus if @xmath for some @xmath , then @xmath or @xmath . Thus
@xmath is irreducible. ∎ Recall that a connected graph is 2-connected if
it can not be disconnected by deleting a vertex. This property is
characterised nicely in the corresponding graph lattice.

###### Lemma 4.23.

The following are equivalent:

1.   The graph @xmath is 2-connected;

2.   Every vertex @xmath is irreducible;

3.   The lattice @xmath is indecomposable.

###### Proof.

The equivalence @xmath follows from Lemma 4.22 .

To show @xmath , suppose that we may write @xmath as the orthogonal
direct sum @xmath . For any irreducible @xmath , we must have @xmath or
@xmath . Therefore if every @xmath is irreducible, then the sets @xmath
partition @xmath . Therefore @xmath and @xmath . This implies that
@xmath , and hence that the partition is trivial, i.e. we have either
@xmath or @xmath . Therefore @xmath or @xmath and @xmath is
indecomposable.

Now we prove the implication @xmath . Suppose @xmath is not 2-connected,
so there is a vertex @xmath such that @xmath is disconnected. Suppose
that @xmath has non-empty components @xmath and @xmath . Then we have
@xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are the sublattices spanned by the
vertices of @xmath and @xmath respectively. This shows that if @xmath is
not 2-connected, then @xmath is decomposable. ∎

Recall that an edge, @xmath , is a cut-edge if @xmath is disconnected.

###### Lemma 4.24.

The lattice @xmath contains a vector of norm one if and only if @xmath
contains a cut edge.

###### Proof.

Suppose @xmath contains a vector @xmath with @xmath . Since any vector
of norm one is irreducible, Lemma 4.22 shows that there is a subgraph
@xmath such that @xmath . Since @xmath , we see there is a single edge
between @xmath and @xmath . This edge is necessarily a cut-edge.
Conversely, suppose there is a cut-edge in @xmath . This means there is
a subgraph @xmath such that @xmath . If @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

giving a vector of norm 1 in @xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 4.25.

Suppose that @xmath is contains no cut-edges and there is an irreducible
vertex @xmath such that we can find @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath .
Then there is a cut edge @xmath in @xmath and if @xmath are the vertices
of the two components of @xmath then @xmath . Furthermore, there are
unique vertices @xmath , with @xmath , and any vertex @xmath satisfies
@xmath .

###### Proof.

We will use the irreducibility of @xmath to show that @xmath and @xmath
are irreducible. Suppose that we can write @xmath with @xmath . Since
@xmath , it follows that @xmath or @xmath . Without loss of generality,
we may assume that @xmath and hence that @xmath . Using the
irreducibility of @xmath , this implies either @xmath or @xmath . If we
assume @xmath , then it follows that @xmath and @xmath . Thus from
@xmath and @xmath , we obtain @xmath and @xmath . Combining these shows
that @xmath . As @xmath contains no cut-edges, Lemma 4.24 shows that
@xmath does not contain any vectors of norm 1, so we can conclude that
@xmath . Therefore we have shown that @xmath or @xmath , so we have
shown that @xmath is irreducible. An identical argument shows that
@xmath is irreducible.

#####

As @xmath and @xmath are irreducible, Lemma 4.22 shows that they take
the form @xmath and @xmath , for some @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , we must have @xmath and @xmath . Thus, @xmath and @xmath
, where @xmath and @xmath are disjoint and @xmath . Moreover, using
irreducibility and Lemma 4.22 again, it follows that subgraphs induced
by @xmath and @xmath must all be connected. Since @xmath , it follows
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This gives a unique edge from @xmath to @xmath . The rest of the lemma
follows by taking @xmath and @xmath to be the end points of this edge. ∎

## Chapter 5 Alternating diagrams and tangles

This chapter is spent developing the background material on alternating
diagrams and tangles that we will require in subsequent chapters.

### 5.1 The Goeritz form

Given a diagram @xmath of a knot or link @xmath , we get a division of
the plane into connected regions. These regions can be coloured black
and white in a chessboard manner. There are two possible choices of
colouring and both of these give an incidence number, @xmath , for each
crossing @xmath of @xmath according to the convention in Figure 5.1 .

We construct a planar graph, @xmath , by drawing a vertex in each white
region and an edge @xmath for every crossing @xmath between the two
white regions it joins and we define @xmath . We call this the white
graph corresponding to @xmath . This gives rise to a Goeritz matrix
@xmath defined by labeling the vertices of @xmath by @xmath and, for
@xmath , setting [ Lic97 , Chapter 9]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Although the Goeritz matrix depends on the choice of diagram, its
determinant does not. Hence we can define the determinant of @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The other invariant we wish to compute from the Goeritz matrix is the
signature.

###### Theorem 5.1 (Gordon and Litherland [Gl78]).

Let @xmath be a diagram for a link @xmath that is shaded and oriented so
that there are @xmath positive crossings of incidence -1 and @xmath
negative crossings of incidence +1. Let @xmath be the signature of the
Goeritz matrix @xmath . Then the signature can be computed by the
formula,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

#####

Now suppose that @xmath is an alternating, non-split link, with a
reduced alternating diagram @xmath . We may fix the colouring so that
@xmath for all crossings. For such a diagram, the white graph @xmath is
connected and contains no self-loops or cut-edges. In this case, the
pairing given by @xmath defines a lattice @xmath which is isomorphic to
the graph lattice @xmath . Under these assumptions ( 5.1 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is equal to the number of positive crossings.

#####

In proving Theorem 5.1 , Gordon and Litherland showed that for any
diagram @xmath of a knot @xmath , there is a 4-manifold with boundary
@xmath and intersection form given by the Goeritz matrix @xmath [ GL78 ]
. Ozsváth and Szabó showed that if @xmath is a non-split alternating
link, then this manifold is sharp.

###### Theorem 5.2 (Ozsváth-Szabó, [OS05c]).

Let @xmath be a non-split alternating link with a reduced alternating
diagram @xmath . The double branched cover @xmath is an @xmath -space
and it bounds a sharp 4-manifold @xmath with intersection form
isomorphic to @xmath .

Combining this with the results of the first chapter, we obtain the
following corollary.

###### Corollary 5.3.

Let @xmath be a knot such that @xmath for some @xmath and some
alternating link @xmath . If @xmath is a reduced alternating diagram for
@xmath and @xmath , then @xmath is isomorphic to the @xmath -changemaker
lattice

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that the torsion coefficients of @xmath satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . Furthermore, if @xmath are the stable
coefficients of @xmath , then these depend only on @xmath and the genus
can be computed by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

As @xmath , @xmath is not a split link. So, given a reduced alternating
diagram @xmath , we may apply Theorem 2.1 to the sharp manifold @xmath
from Theorem 5.2 and the surgery @xmath . This shows that for some
@xmath , @xmath , where @xmath is the @xmath -changemaker lattice

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . By Remark 2.2 , @xmath for @xmath . As @xmath is an @xmath
-space, the @xmath are given by the torsion coefficients of @xmath ,
proving ( 5.3 ). As @xmath is reduced, @xmath contains no cut-edges. By
Lemma 4.24 , this shows that @xmath contains no vectors of norm one.
This shows that @xmath , as required. Theorem 2.3 shows that the stable
coefficients do not depend on the surgery slope. The formula for the
genus is a consequence of Lemma 2.29 . ∎

#### 5.1.1 Flypes

If @xmath and @xmath are any two reduced diagrams for @xmath , then one
can be obtained from another by a sequence of flypes [ MT93 ] . The
following lemma, which is an application of Lemma 4.25 , allows us to
detect certain flypes algebraically and provides an explicit isomorphism
by relating the vertices of @xmath and @xmath . The flypes in question
are depicted in Figure 5.2 .

###### Lemma 5.4.

Let @xmath be a reduced alternating diagram. Suppose @xmath is
2-connected and has a vertex @xmath , which can be written as @xmath ,
for some @xmath with @xmath . Then there are unique vertices, @xmath ,
satisfying @xmath , and there is a flype to a diagram @xmath and an
isomorphism @xmath , such that the vertices of @xmath are obtained from
those of @xmath by replacing @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath
.

###### Proof.

By Lemma 4.25 , there is a cut edge, @xmath , in @xmath between @xmath
and @xmath satisfying @xmath . Thus there are subgraphs @xmath and
@xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . For @xmath , we have @xmath and
@xmath . For @xmath , we have @xmath and @xmath . Thus, it follows that
replacing @xmath and @xmath by @xmath and @xmath gives the set of
vertices for the graph @xmath , obtained by replacing @xmath by two
vertices with an edge @xmath between them, in such a way that @xmath is
a cut set, and then contracting @xmath . This graph is planar, and can
be drawn in the plane so that @xmath for @xmath , obtained by a flype
about the crossing corresponding to the edge @xmath and the region
corresponding to @xmath . This is illustrated in Figure 5.2 . ∎

The other type of flype we will wish to consider is of the type shown in
Figure 5.3 . Suppose that we have an alternating diagram @xmath with
white regions @xmath and @xmath which form a cut set in @xmath and have
a crossing between them. If @xmath is a component of @xmath , which is
adjacent to an edge between @xmath and @xmath in the plane, then Figure
5.3 shows that there is a flype in @xmath which rotates the tangle
corresponding to @xmath by @xmath . Let @xmath be the diagram resulting
from this flype. Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath , we get an explicit isomorphism from @xmath to @xmath by
replacing each vertex @xmath by @xmath and by replacing @xmath and
@xmath by @xmath and @xmath respectively.

### 5.2 Rational tangles

We will give a summary of the necessary background material on rational
tangles and their slopes. A more comprehensive account can be found in [
BZ03 ] or [ Gor09 ] . A tangle in @xmath is a pair @xmath where @xmath
is a properly embedded 1-manifold. We say @xmath is a marked tangle , if
@xmath consists of 4 points and we have fixed an identification of the
pairs @xmath and @xmath , where the marking on @xmath is as illustrated
in Figure 5.4 . Two marked tangles @xmath and @xmath are considered
equivalent if there is an isotopy of @xmath , fixing the boundary @xmath
, which takes @xmath to @xmath .

For integers @xmath , we get a rational number @xmath via the continued
fraction

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consider the marked tangles @xmath and @xmath and the tangle operations
@xmath and @xmath , as shown in Figure 5.4 . Using these operations and
the above continued fraction, we can construct a marked tangle @xmath
defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

It turns out that this marked tangle @xmath depends only on the fraction
@xmath and not on the choice of continued fraction.

###### Definition 5.5.

We say that a marked tangle @xmath is a rational tangle of slope @xmath
if it is equivalent as a marked tangle to @xmath .

###### Remark 5.6.

By definition, applying @xmath or @xmath to the rational tangle @xmath
gives a new rational tangle. Using ( 5.4 ), we can calculate the slopes
of the tangles obtained this way:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Observe that as an unmarked tangle any rational tangle is homeomorphic
to the trivial tangle, @xmath . Conversely, it is a theorem of Conway
that a marked tangle which is homeomorphic to @xmath is a rational
tangle and that its isotopy class as a marked tangle is determined by
its slope [ Con70 ] .

Since any rational tangle is homeomorphic to the tangle @xmath , its
branched double cover is a solid torus, @xmath . Consider the branched
double cover of @xmath given in Figure 5.5 . If we orient the curves
@xmath and @xmath so that @xmath , then classes @xmath form a basis for
@xmath and with respect to this basis, the class which represents a
meridian in the branched double cover of @xmath is @xmath . This could
be used to give an alternative definition of the slope of a rational
tangle.

### 5.3 Tangles in alternating diagrams

Observe that the above identification of rational tangles with the
rational numbers depends on the marking on the boundary of the tangle.
When a rational tangle occurs in an alternating diagram, we will
describe a choice of marking which will allow us to define its slope
without ambiguity. Suppose the rational tangle @xmath is contained in an
alternating diagram @xmath . As in Section 5.1 , we can colour @xmath so
that every crossing has incidence number @xmath . We then choose a
marking on the boundary so that the arc @xmath lies in a shaded region
and @xmath does not. This allows four choices of markings on the sphere.
However, in each case the lifts of @xmath and @xmath give the same basis
for @xmath , so the slope of @xmath is independent of this choice.
Throughout this thesis, we will use this convention for the slope
whenever we have a rational tangle in an alternating diagram.

The following proposition allows us to find rational tangles in an
alternating diagram and to calculate their slope using the degrees of
vertices in the corresponding white graph.

###### Proposition 5.7.

Let @xmath be a reduced alternating diagram. Suppose that there is a
disk in the plane whose boundary intersects two distinct white regions
of @xmath . Let @xmath be the tangle contained in the disk and let
@xmath be the subgraph of @xmath induced by @xmath . Suppose that @xmath
consists of vertices @xmath for @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are the
white regions which intersect the disk boundary. If there is precisely
one edge between @xmath and @xmath for @xmath and every remaining edge
in @xmath is incident to @xmath , then @xmath is a rational tangle.
Moreover, if @xmath denotes the number of edges incident to @xmath in
@xmath for @xmath , then the slope of @xmath is @xmath , which can be
calculated by the continued fraction

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Proof.

We proceed by induction on the number of crossings. If @xmath does not
contain any crossings, then it is equivalent as a marked tangle to
@xmath . It is not @xmath as we are assuming @xmath has at least two
white regions. In this case, @xmath consists of two vertices and no
edges between them. Therefore @xmath and ( 5.6 ) is satisfied. The
conditions in the proposition are sufficient to guarantee that @xmath is
obtained from a smaller tangle @xmath by applying one of the operations
@xmath or @xmath . We consider the cases @xmath and @xmath separately.

If @xmath , then there is a crossing between @xmath and @xmath . So we
see that @xmath is obtained by applying the operation @xmath to a tangle
@xmath where the white graph @xmath is obtained by deleting an edge
between @xmath and @xmath . By the inductive hypothesis, we can assume
that @xmath is a rational tangle of slope @xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By ( 5.5 ), we have @xmath . Therefore @xmath is a rational tangle of
slope @xmath . Hence, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as required.

If @xmath , then there is no crossing between @xmath and @xmath and the
sole crossing incident to @xmath is between @xmath and @xmath . Thus we
see that @xmath is obtained by applying the operation @xmath to a tangle
@xmath where the white graph @xmath is obtained by deleting @xmath . By
the inductive hypothesis, we can assume that @xmath is a rational tangle
of slope @xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By ( 5.5 ), we have @xmath . Thus @xmath is a rational tangle of slope
@xmath . Hence, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as required. ∎

### 5.4 The Montesinos trick and alternating surgeries

Now we suppose that we have a knot or link @xmath with a diagram @xmath
obtained by replacing a @xmath -tangle in a diagram of the unknot @xmath
by a rational tangle of slope @xmath . The double cover of @xmath
branched along @xmath is again @xmath and the @xmath -tangle lifts to
give a solid torus @xmath . Let @xmath be the knot given by the core of
@xmath . Let @xmath be a null-homologous longitude of @xmath lying in
@xmath and @xmath be such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we consider the branched double cover of @xmath , we see that it is
obtained by cutting out the interior of @xmath and gluing in a solid
torus in such a way that a curve representing the homology class @xmath
bounds a disk. Therefore, we see that @xmath is obtained by surgery on
@xmath . In particular, we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Remark 5.8.

There are different conventions for labeling the slope of a rational
tangle and the slope of Dehn surgery (c.f the remark after Corollary 4.4
in [ Gor09 ] ). We have chosen to orient @xmath and @xmath , so that
@xmath . In order to match the usual conventions for Dehn surgery, we
would need to reverse the orientation on @xmath . This explains the
minus sign appearing in the surgery coefficient of ( 5.7 ).

In order to determine the sign of the integer @xmath , we will quote a
special case for which it is known.

###### Proposition 5.9 (Proof of Theorem 8.1, [OS05a]).

Suppose that a knot @xmath can be unknotted by changing a negative
crossing to a positive one. Then the knot @xmath arising through the
Montesinos trick satisfies @xmath where @xmath .

#####

Recall that we defined @xmath to be the set of knots arising by applying
the Montesinos trick to almost-alternating diagrams of the unknot. We
can now calculate the relationship between the surgery slope and tangle
replacement in this case.

###### Proposition 5.10.

Let @xmath be a knot or link with an alternating diagram @xmath
containing a rational tangle of slope @xmath . Let @xmath be the
alternating diagram obtained by replacing this tangle with a single
crossing @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath is a positive unknotting crossing
or @xmath and @xmath is a negative unknotting crossing, then @xmath ,
where @xmath ; @xmath for some integer @xmath ; and @xmath is the knot
corresponding to the almost-alternating diagram of the unknot obtained
by changing @xmath .

###### Proof.

As @xmath is assumed to be an unknotting crossing, let @xmath be the
almost-alternating diagram of the unknot obtained by changing it. Let
@xmath be the corresponding knot. We see that @xmath is obtained by
replacing the non-alternating crossing in @xmath , which is a @xmath
-tangle, by a @xmath -tangle. As shown in Figure 5.7 , this is
equivalent to replacing a @xmath -tangle by a @xmath -tangle.

Applying ( 5.7 ) and the discussion preceding it, we see that there is
an integer @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . The sign conditions on the unknotting crossing @xmath
combined with Proposition 5.9 imply that @xmath . Taking @xmath , we see
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To complete the proof, observe that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

## Chapter 6 Unknotting number one

In this chapter, we use the machinery of changemaker lattices and sharp
4-manifolds to prove Kohn’s conjecture for alternating knots.

###### Theorem 6.1.

For an alternating knot @xmath the following are equivalent:

1.  @xmath has unknotting number one;

2.  @xmath can be obtained by half-integer surgery on a knot in @xmath ;

3.  @xmath has an unknotting crossing in every alternating diagram.

A more precise statement is the following theorem, from which Theorem
6.1 easily follows.

###### Theorem 6.2.

Let @xmath be a knot with @xmath and a reduced alternating diagram
@xmath . The following are equivalent:

1.  @xmath and @xmath can be unknotted by changing a negative crossing,
    or @xmath and @xmath can be unknotted by changing a positive
    crossing;

2.   there is a knot @xmath such that @xmath ;

3.   the Goeritz lattice @xmath is isomorphic to a half-integer
    changemaker lattice;

4.  @xmath and @xmath contains a negative unknotting crossing, or @xmath
    and @xmath contains a positive unknotting crossing;

The key step accomplished in this chapter is to prove the implication
@xmath . Throughout this chapter, we will consider a half-integer
changemaker lattice

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the @xmath form an increasing sequence with @xmath , and suppose
that we have a reduced alternating diagram @xmath with an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This isomorphism gives us a distinguished collection of vectors in
@xmath given by the image of the @xmath vertices of @xmath . We call
this collection @xmath , and, in an abuse of notation, we will sometimes
fail to distinguish between a vertex of @xmath and the corresponding
element in @xmath . We will use @xmath to denote the vector

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark 6.3.

Lemma 4.18 shows that the lattice @xmath is indecomposable. By Lemma
4.23 , this means that @xmath is 2-connected and any @xmath is
irreducible.

#####

It will be necessary for us to flype @xmath to obtain a new reduced
alternating diagrams. In all cases, this flype will be an application of
Lemma 5.4 or a flype as appearing in Figure 5.3 . In either case, if
@xmath is the diagram we obtain from such a flype, then we get a natural
choice of @xmath and hence an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Whenever we flype, we will implicitly use these choices of isomorphism
to speak of @xmath without ambiguity.

###### Example 6.4.

If @xmath is a reduced alternating diagram for the right-handed trefoil,
then @xmath is a graph with two vertices and three edges and we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath is isomorphic to the unique half-integer changemaker lattice
of rank one and it has vertices @xmath , as shown in Figure 6.1 . In
fact, as @xmath has only two non-zero irreducible vectors, this is the
only reduced alternating diagram with @xmath isomorphic to a changemaker
lattice of rank one.

#####

Recall that @xmath is tight if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

that @xmath is tight if there is @xmath with @xmath tight; and that
@xmath is slack otherwise. The following variant on Proposition 1.13
will be useful.

###### Lemma 6.5.

If @xmath is not tight, then we can write @xmath for some @xmath .
Moreover, if @xmath is slack we may assume that @xmath .

###### Proof.

If @xmath is not tight, then @xmath . Thus, Proposition 1.13 implies the
existence of @xmath such that @xmath .

If @xmath is slack, then we we will prove that there is a choice of
@xmath containing 1 by induction. If @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath .
Thus suppose @xmath and let @xmath . If @xmath , then by induction we
may assume that @xmath for @xmath with @xmath . The set @xmath then has
the desired properties. ∎

#####

We use the fact that @xmath is a changemaker lattice to deduce
information about the elements of @xmath . The following lemma serves as
a useful sample calculation as well as being helpful in its own right.

###### Lemma 6.6.

Let @xmath for some @xmath be a vertex or a sum of vertices. If there is
@xmath with @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath , then
@xmath .

###### Proof.

We apply Lemma 4.21 to @xmath . This gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However by hypothesis, @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath . So we also
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as required. ∎

It is worth noting that further information can be gleaned from the
proof of the preceding Lemma. For example, we see that @xmath , for all
but possibly one @xmath . Such arguments will be used frequently later
in this paper. In these arguments, the vector @xmath will usually be
constructed by applying Lemma 6.5 .

### 6.1 Marked crossings

In this section, we will define marked crossings and prove their
existence. We will also show that if there is more than one marked
crossing, then any one of them is an unknotting crossing.

###### Lemma 6.7.

If @xmath for @xmath is a sum of vertices, then

1.  @xmath ;

2.  @xmath ; and

3.   if @xmath is irreducible with @xmath , then @xmath .

###### Proof.

We use similar arguments to establish all three parts of the lemma.

(i) Since @xmath is also a sum of vertices, we may assume that @xmath .
Let @xmath be minimal such that @xmath . We may write @xmath for some
@xmath . Let @xmath . By construction, @xmath . By Lemma 4.21 , @xmath .
This gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath .

(ii) We may assume @xmath . Let @xmath be minimal such that @xmath . We
may write @xmath for some @xmath . Let @xmath . We have @xmath . By
Lemma 4.21 , @xmath . This gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath .

(iii) Suppose now that @xmath is irreducible. We may assume that @xmath
. Let @xmath be minimal such that @xmath . If @xmath , then let @xmath .
By irreducibility, it follows that either @xmath or

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This shows that @xmath in this case. Suppose now that @xmath . We may
write @xmath for some @xmath . If @xmath , set @xmath . If @xmath , set
@xmath . In either case @xmath . By irreducibility, it follows that
either @xmath or

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This shows that @xmath in this case. ∎

Since the @xmath span @xmath and we have @xmath , there is @xmath with
@xmath . Lemma 6.7 @xmath shows that @xmath must be unique and that
@xmath . Similarly, there is a single vertex @xmath with @xmath and it
satisfies @xmath .

###### Definition 6.8.

We say that @xmath and @xmath are the marker vertices of @xmath and that
any crossing between the corresponding regions of @xmath is a marked
crossing .

#####

Returning to Example 6.4 , we see that every crossing of the trefoil in
Figure 6.1 is a marked crossing.

#####

Note that replacing @xmath by @xmath gives another isomorphism with the
same marked crossings. For the purposes of notation, it will be
convenient to fix this choice of sign in the next lemma.

###### Remark 6.9.

Suppose @xmath is a vertex that can be written @xmath , with @xmath . By
Lemma 5.4 , this gives a cut edge @xmath in @xmath and a flype to a
diagram with @xmath and @xmath as vertices. Observe that if @xmath or
@xmath , then the edge @xmath does not correspond to a marked crossing.
This means that the flype can be chosen to fix the marked crossings
which will again be marked crossings of the new embedding. In
particular, such a flype commutes with the act of changing a marked
crossing.

With this in mind, we make our first flypes and prove the existence of
marked crossings.

###### Lemma 6.10.

Let @xmath and @xmath be the marker vertices with @xmath and @xmath . Up
to choices of sign for @xmath , we either have @xmath , or there is a
flype, preserving marked crossings, which gives a diagram @xmath with a
marker vertex @xmath . Furthermore, @xmath , and hence @xmath , contains
between one and three marked crossings.

###### Proof.

First, we will show one of the inequalities @xmath or @xmath holds.
Suppose that we have @xmath . By Lemma 6.7 @xmath , this gives @xmath .
Lemma 4.13 shows that the vector @xmath is irreducible. Thus Lemma 4.22
implies there is @xmath such that @xmath . From @xmath , it follows that
@xmath and @xmath . Thus @xmath is also a sum of vertices. Using Lemma
6.7 (ii), we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which implies @xmath . Therefore at least one of @xmath or @xmath must
hold.

#####

Thus up to replacing @xmath by @xmath , we may assume that @xmath . As
before, let @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath as @xmath is irreducible.
Assume that @xmath . In this case, @xmath . Applying Lemma 5.4 gives a
flype to @xmath with @xmath and @xmath as vertices in @xmath . Since
@xmath , this flype preserves marked crossings, as in Remark 6.9 .

#####

Since Lemma 6.7 @xmath shows @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This shows that there are between one and three marked crossings. ∎

#####

It follows from Lemma 6.10 that we may assume that the diagram @xmath
has a marker vertex in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we will study some of the effects of changing a marked crossing. In
particular, we will show that if there are multiple marked crossings,
then they are unknotting crossings.

###### Lemma 6.11.

Let @xmath be the knot obtained by changing a marked crossing @xmath in
@xmath . Then @xmath is almost-alternating with @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, if @xmath has more than one marked crossing, then @xmath is
the unknot and the diagram @xmath obtained by changing @xmath is @xmath
or @xmath for some @xmath , where @xmath is a diagram as in Figure 1.5 .

###### Proof.

As in the statement of the lemma, let @xmath be the diagram for @xmath
obtained by changing @xmath in @xmath . The diagram @xmath is
almost-alternating by definition.

#####

The embedding of @xmath into @xmath gives a factorization of the Goeritz
matrix, @xmath , where @xmath is the @xmath -matrix

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some choice of @xmath vectors @xmath . Let @xmath be the right-most
@xmath submatrix of @xmath . Recall from Section 4.1.2 that the
changemaker lattice @xmath admits a standard basis. Let @xmath be such a
standard basis, where @xmath is the basis element with @xmath . Let
@xmath be the @xmath -matrix @xmath . Since the lattices spanned by the
rows of @xmath and @xmath are isomorphic, we have @xmath . As @xmath is
a standard basis, @xmath is triangular and all diagonal entries take the
value @xmath . Therefore we have @xmath .

#####

Let @xmath and @xmath be the marker vertices with @xmath and @xmath .
Since @xmath , we see that @xmath is a Goeritz matrix for @xmath .
Therefore,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as required.

#####

Now we compute the change in the knot signature. Observe that @xmath is
a positive-definite matrix of rank @xmath . Since @xmath is alternating,
the Gordon-Litherland formula ( 5.2 ) shows that the signature is
calculated by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the number of positive crossings in @xmath . If @xmath
is positive, then @xmath has @xmath positive crossings of incidence -1
and 1 negative crossing of incidence +1. If @xmath is negative, then
@xmath has @xmath positive crossings of incidence -1 and no negative
crossings of incidence +1. Thus, Theorem 5.1 gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as required.

#####

Suppose that @xmath has more than one marked crossing. We may assume
that @xmath is a diagram with marker vertex @xmath . Since @xmath , the
marked crossings are adjacent in @xmath . This allows us to perform a
Reidemeister II move on @xmath to obtain an alternating diagram, @xmath
, for @xmath . The white graph @xmath is obtained by deleting two edges
between the marker vertices of @xmath . The determinant of an
alternating knot is equal to the number of maximal spanning subtrees of
the white graph of any alternating diagram [ Cro59 ] . So as @xmath has
no self-loops and @xmath , it follows that @xmath is a tree.
Furthermore, as @xmath has no cut-edges, @xmath must be a path whose
endpoints were the marker vertices in @xmath . Therefore, @xmath is a
diagram of a clasp knot and @xmath is @xmath or its reflection @xmath ,
depending on which marked crossing was changed, for some non-zero @xmath
. ∎

### 6.2 A single marked crossing

Lemma 6.11 shows that if @xmath has multiple marked crossings, then any
one of these marked crossings is an unknotting crossing. Now we wish to
deal with the case where there is a single marked crossing. We will
perform further flypes to find diagrams with extra structure. The aim is
to show we can flype so that after changing the marked crossing there is
an obvious untongue or untwirl move that can be performed.

#####

By Lemma 6.10 , we may assume that @xmath is such that one of the marker
vertices takes the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will write @xmath for the other marker vertex. In this section, we
are assuming @xmath and hence that @xmath . Since @xmath is a vertex of
degree three, there are other vertices pairing non-trivially with @xmath
.

###### Definition 6.12.

There are two cases to consider.

-   We say we are in Situation A if there are two vertices @xmath and
    @xmath with

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    We necessarily have @xmath and @xmath .

-   We say we are in Situation B if there is a single vertex @xmath with
    @xmath . Such a @xmath satisfies @xmath and @xmath .

In Situations A and B, we will call @xmath and @xmath , and @xmath , the
adjacent vertices respectively.

#####

Let @xmath be maximal such that @xmath . If @xmath , then for @xmath let
@xmath be @xmath .

###### Definition 6.13.

If @xmath is such that @xmath and @xmath are vertices, then we say that
@xmath is in standard form .

The following lemma shows that after further flypes we may assume @xmath
is in standard form.

###### Lemma 6.14.

There is a sequence of flypes to a diagram @xmath which contains @xmath
and @xmath as vertices. Furthermore, these flypes preserve the marked
crossing.

###### Proof.

By Lemma 6.10 we are already assuming that @xmath is a vertex. Suppose
there is @xmath , for which @xmath is not a vertex. Take @xmath to be
minimal such that @xmath is not a vertex. By Lemma 4.13 , @xmath is
irreducible, thus Lemma 4.22 shows that we may write @xmath for some
subgraph @xmath . As @xmath is a vertex and @xmath , there is a vertex
@xmath with @xmath . Since @xmath , this must satisfy @xmath . As @xmath
and @xmath is irreducible, it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular, @xmath . By Lemma 5.4 , we can flype to obtain a diagram
@xmath with @xmath and @xmath as vertices. Since @xmath and @xmath for
@xmath , this flype leaves @xmath and @xmath as vertices and, by Remark
6.9 , it can be chosen to preserve the marked crossing. Thus, we may
flype so that all of the @xmath and @xmath are vertices. ∎

#####

It follow that if @xmath , then we must be in Situation A and we can
take @xmath . Since @xmath can pair non-trivially with at most two
vertices for @xmath , it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we consider whether @xmath is tight or slack.

###### Lemma 6.15.

Assume @xmath is in standard form and we are in Situation A. Then the
changemaker vector @xmath is slack if and only if @xmath is
disconnected. Moreover, if @xmath is slack, then @xmath and @xmath lie
in separate components of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose @xmath is slack. This implies @xmath . Let @xmath be minimal
such that @xmath . By Lemma 6.5 , we may find @xmath with @xmath , such
that @xmath . Consider @xmath . By Lemma 4.13 this is irreducible. So by
Lemma 4.22 , it can be written as @xmath for some connected subgraph
@xmath of @xmath . Using Lemma 4.21 combined with @xmath and @xmath , it
follows that @xmath . Since @xmath , this implies @xmath is reducible.
From Lemma 4.22 , it follows that @xmath is a cut set. Observe that
@xmath and @xmath must lie in separate components of @xmath since @xmath
is not a cut-vertex.

#####

For the converse, suppose there is @xmath with @xmath . By Lemma 4.14 ,
the vector @xmath is irreducible. Thus, Lemma 4.22 shows that there is a
connected subgraph @xmath , such that @xmath . Since @xmath , it follows
that @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath is connected, it follows that
@xmath and @xmath must lie in the same component of @xmath . Thus if
@xmath were a cut-set, then @xmath would also be disconnected. As @xmath
is 2-connected, this shows that @xmath is not a cut-set. ∎

Armed with this information, we perform another sequence of flypes. As
ever, these will come from Lemma 5.4 and, by Remark 6.9 , can be chosen
to commute with changing the marked crossing.

###### Lemma 6.16.

If @xmath is tight, then there is a sequence of flypes to a diagram in
standard form such that we have marker vertex @xmath in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

If @xmath is tight and the marker vertex @xmath in @xmath is not in the
form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then we will show that there is a flype to diagram @xmath in standard
form for which the marker vertex either satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath or

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is sufficient to prove the lemma, since a sequence of such flypes
cannot continue indefinitely.

#####

Let @xmath be minimal such that @xmath . There is @xmath such that
@xmath .

###### Claim.

We have @xmath .

###### Proof of Claim.

Suppose that the claim does not hold. We can take @xmath . Since @xmath
, we can take

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath was taken to be minimal, we have either @xmath or @xmath .
Thus we have @xmath . Observe that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However, Lemma 6.15 and Lemma 4.22 show that @xmath is irreducible when
@xmath is tight. This provides a contradiction. ∎

Consider @xmath . By Lemma 6.6 , we have @xmath , with @xmath only if
@xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath by irreducibility of @xmath . This
implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is already in the required form. If @xmath , then, by Lemma 5.4 , we may
flype to get diagram a @xmath containing @xmath as a vertex. The above
claim shows that @xmath for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Hence the
diagram @xmath is in standard form. As @xmath , we must have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as required. ∎

###### Lemma 6.17.

If @xmath is slack, then there is a sequence of flypes to a diagram in
standard form such that we have adjacent vertex @xmath in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Suppose @xmath is slack, so we are necessarily in Situation A. Suppose
also that the adjacent vertex @xmath is not in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will show that there is a flype to diagram a @xmath in standard form
for which the adjacent vertex satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath or

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Observe that this is sufficient to prove the lemma, since a sequence of
such flypes cannot continue indefinitely.

#####

Let @xmath be minimal such that @xmath . Observe that @xmath . By Lemma
6.5 , there is @xmath with @xmath and @xmath .

#####

By Lemma 6.6 , @xmath , with @xmath only if @xmath . We consider the two
cases separately. If @xmath , then @xmath as @xmath is irreducible.
However, by the minimality of @xmath , this implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#####

Suppose @xmath . By Lemma 5.4 , we may flype to a diagram @xmath with
@xmath as a vertex. Note that as @xmath in this case, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However, we need to show that @xmath is in standard form. Observe first
that @xmath and @xmath , so @xmath remains as a vertex in @xmath . Since
we are assuming that @xmath is slack, @xmath is disconnected with @xmath
and @xmath lying in separate components. Say @xmath and @xmath . Since
the vertices @xmath form a path, we have @xmath . Now let @xmath be a
cut-edge in @xmath . We claim @xmath is not in @xmath .

###### Claim.

The edge @xmath is not incident to any vertex in @xmath .

###### Proof of Claim..

Since @xmath is a cut-edge in @xmath , any cycle containing @xmath must
also contain @xmath . Let @xmath be an edge incident to some vertex in
@xmath . We will show @xmath is contained in a cycle not containing
@xmath . Since @xmath is 2-connected, @xmath is contained in some cycle
@xmath . If @xmath contains @xmath (or any vertex in @xmath ), then it
must also contain @xmath and @xmath . However as there is an edge
between @xmath and @xmath , @xmath form the vertices of a cycle @xmath
containing @xmath . Thus @xmath is not a cut-edge in @xmath . ∎

As @xmath is not incident to any vertex in @xmath it is not incident to
any of @xmath . It follows from Lemma 5.4 that @xmath are vertices in
@xmath . In particular, this shows that @xmath is in standard form. ∎

#####

From the preceding lemmata, it follows that there is a sequence of
flypes to a diagram @xmath in standard form with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

depending on whether @xmath is tight or slack. As the following two
lemmata show, we can now deduce the existence of a crossing between the
regions corresponding to the marker vertex @xmath and one of the
adjacent vertices. Both proofs run along very similar lines, and like
much of what has gone before, they make heavy use of Lemma 4.21 applied
to carefully chosen combinations of vectors.

###### Lemma 6.18.

Suppose @xmath is tight and @xmath is in standard form with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath if we are in Situation A, and @xmath if we are in
Situation B. In either case, @xmath satisfies the inequality @xmath .

###### Proof.

Since the vector @xmath is non-zero, we may take @xmath minimal such
that @xmath . We will prove the lemma for the cases @xmath and @xmath
separately.

##### Case @xmath:

First we suppose that @xmath holds. There is @xmath such that @xmath .
If we define @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

then we obtain @xmath with @xmath . By direct computation, we obtain the
inequalities

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

By subtracting ( 6.2 ) from ( 6.3 ), we see that the inequality

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

holds. Applying Lemma 4.21 to the sum of vertices @xmath yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore, by combining ( 6.4 ) and ( 6.5 ) we obtain @xmath . This
completes the proof in the case @xmath .

##### Case @xmath:

Now we suppose that @xmath holds. In this case, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath for @xmath , so we wish to establish an upper bound for
@xmath . Let @xmath be minimal such that @xmath . Observe that such an
@xmath exists and is at most @xmath . By Lemma 6.5 , we may pick @xmath
, @xmath with @xmath , and @xmath , such that the vector

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is in @xmath . Let @xmath be the set @xmath . Note that we have @xmath
and that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath is a sum of vertices, we can apply Lemma 4.21 to get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore combining ( 6.6 ) and ( 6.7 ) gives

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

where we are also using that @xmath for @xmath . As @xmath , we also get
the inequality,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using the inequalities in ( 6.8 ) and ( 6.9 ) we get the upper bound

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . This allows us to compute

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Since @xmath , this implies @xmath which is the required inequality. ∎

###### Lemma 6.19.

Suppose @xmath is slack and @xmath is in standard form with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , then @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath .

###### Proof.

As @xmath is slack, we have @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath . So from
now on we assume that @xmath . The proof that @xmath mirrors closely the
proof of Lemma 6.18 .

#####

Since @xmath is non-zero, we may take @xmath minimal such that @xmath .
We will prove the lemma for the cases @xmath and @xmath separately.

##### Case @xmath:

First we suppose that @xmath holds. By Lemma 6.5 , we may choose @xmath
such that @xmath and the vector

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is in @xmath . By a direct computation we obtain the following four
inequalities. If @xmath , then we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand, if @xmath , then we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

By subtracting ( 6.10 ) from ( 6.11 ) or ( 6.12 ) from ( 6.13 ), we see
that there is a choice, @xmath or @xmath such that the inequality

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

holds. Applying Lemma 4.21 to the sum of vertices @xmath yields the
bound

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

By combining ( 6.14 ) and ( 6.15 ), we obtain the bound @xmath . Since
@xmath , this proves the lemma when @xmath .

##### Case @xmath:

Now suppose that @xmath holds. In this case, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath for @xmath , so we need to bound the quantity @xmath above.
Let @xmath be minimal such that @xmath . Observe that such an @xmath
exists and is at most @xmath . By Lemma 6.5 , we may pick @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath such that the vector

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is in @xmath . Since @xmath , we may assume that we have @xmath . Let
@xmath be the set @xmath . By choice of @xmath , we have then @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath is a sum of vertices, we can apply Lemma 4.21 to get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

By combining ( 6.16 ) and ( 6.17 ), we arrive at the inequality

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (6.18)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

where the second line follows from the fact that @xmath and that @xmath
for all @xmath . Since @xmath , @xmath and @xmath all hold, we also get
the bound

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The inequalities ( 6.18 ) and ( 6.19 ) combine to give

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This then allows us to compute

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Since @xmath , this gives @xmath , which is the required bound. ∎

It will be useful to subdivide Situation A into two cases.

###### Definition 6.20.

If @xmath , then we say we are in Situation A2 . Otherwise, we say that
we are in Situation A1 .

Note that in Situation A2, @xmath is necessarily slack and we must have
@xmath . Finally we are ready to accomplish the main aim of this section
and prove that we can obtain a diagram with the required structure near
the marked crossing.

###### Proposition 6.21.

If @xmath has an alternating diagram @xmath with a single marked
crossing @xmath , then there is a sequence of flypes to a minimal
diagram, @xmath , which takes the form shown in Figure 6.3 in the
neighbourhood of @xmath . Each of the flypes can be chosen to fix @xmath
and hence commutes with changing @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Lemma 6.16 and Lemma 6.17 , there is a sequence of flypes fixing
@xmath to get @xmath in standard form, with an adjacent vector of the
form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

if @xmath is slack or a marker vertex of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

if @xmath is tight. We prove the proposition for each of the three
situations A1, A2 and B separately, although the argument is similar in
all cases.

##### Situation A1

In this case we can assume @xmath has marker vectors @xmath and @xmath
and adjacent vectors @xmath and @xmath . Lemma 6.19 and Lemma 6.18 show
that we may assume @xmath . In particular, this means that @xmath
contains a triangle with vertices @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Choosing
such a triangle separates the plane into two regions. Let @xmath be the
region not containing @xmath . We may assume that we have chosen the
triangle so that the interior of @xmath does not contain any edges
between @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath does not contain any of the
vertices of @xmath , then @xmath has form required by the proposition.
So suppose that @xmath does contain a vertex @xmath of @xmath . Any such
vertex @xmath must satisfy @xmath , so if we take @xmath to be the
subgraph induced by the set of all vertices contained in @xmath , then
@xmath must be a union of connected components of @xmath . Thus @xmath
and @xmath must appear as in Figure 6.4 . Therefore, as in Figure 5.3 ,
we can perform a flype by twisting the tangle corresponding to @xmath .
Let @xmath be the diagram obtained by performing this flype. If we let
@xmath denote @xmath , then the set of vertices @xmath is obtained from
@xmath by replacing @xmath with @xmath , @xmath with @xmath and @xmath
with @xmath for all @xmath . Thus, the vertices @xmath and @xmath are
the marker vertices for @xmath and @xmath and @xmath are the adjacent
vertices. Altogether this gives us @xmath in the required form and
proves the proposition in Situation A1.

##### Situation A2

In this case, we can assume @xmath has marker vertices @xmath and @xmath
and adjacent vertices @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . This
means @xmath and @xmath form a triangle in @xmath and there are no
further edges from @xmath . This triangle separates the plane into two
regions. Let @xmath be the region not containing @xmath . Since @xmath
is 2-connected, and none of the vertices adjacent to @xmath and @xmath
are contained in @xmath , we see that the @xmath does not contain any
vertex of @xmath in its interior. Thus we may take @xmath and no further
flypes are required to prove the proposition in this case.

##### Situation B

In this case, @xmath is necessarily tight and we can assume @xmath has
marker vectors

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath and adjacent vector @xmath . Lemma 6.18 shows that @xmath .
Thus @xmath and @xmath form a triangle in @xmath with two edges between
@xmath and @xmath . Now let @xmath be a region bounded by this triangle.
Any vertex @xmath which is contained in the interior of @xmath must
satisfy @xmath , so we see that @xmath and @xmath must be contained in
different connected components of @xmath . If we take @xmath to be the
subgraph induced by the set of all vertices contained in @xmath , then
we see that @xmath and @xmath must appear as in Figure 6.5 . From Figure
6.5 , we see that, as in Figure 5.3 , there is a flype obtained by
twisting the tangle corresponding to @xmath . Let @xmath be the the
diagram obtained by performing this flype. If we let @xmath denote
@xmath , then the set of vertices @xmath is obtained from @xmath by
replacing @xmath with @xmath , @xmath with @xmath and @xmath with @xmath
for all @xmath . Thus @xmath and @xmath are the marker vertices for
@xmath and @xmath is the unique adjacent vertex. Altogether this gives
us @xmath in the required form and proves the proposition in
Situation B.

∎

### 6.3 Changing marked crossings

Now we study the effects of changing a marked crossing. We have already
considered the case of multiple marked crossings in Lemma 6.11 , so we
suppose there is a single marked crossing, @xmath . By Proposition 6.21
, we may assume that we have flyped so that the neighbourhood of the
marked crossing is as shown in Figure 6.3 . Let @xmath be the knot
obtained by changing the marked crossing. This crossing change gives an
almost-alternating diagram @xmath . In Situation A1, there is an obvious
untongue move and in Situations A2 and B there are obvious untwirl
moves. Let @xmath be the new almost-alternating diagram obtained by
performing these moves. There is a crossing, @xmath , in @xmath , such
that changing @xmath gives an alternating diagram @xmath . In each case,
the embedding of @xmath can be modified in a natural way to obtain an
embedding of @xmath into @xmath . These operations are illustrated in
Figure 6.6 , Figure 6.7 and Figure 6.8 . These new embeddings will be
used to provide the induction step in a proof that @xmath is the unknot.

###### Lemma 6.22.

The image of @xmath under the given embedding is a changemaker lattice
and @xmath is a marked crossing for this embedding.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a standard basis for @xmath as in Section 4.1.2 . Since
@xmath is also basis for @xmath , we can consider the change of basis
matrix @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In fact, since each element of @xmath is irreducible, Lemma 4.22 implies
that it can be written as a sum of vertices and hence that for each
@xmath we have either @xmath for all @xmath or @xmath for all @xmath .

#####

We consider each of the Situations A1, A2, and B separately. Although in
each case the proofs are virtually identical – all that differs is the
new embedding. In each case we use a minor of the matrix @xmath to
construct a basis for @xmath satisfying the hypotheses of Lemma 4.10 .

##### Situation A1

If we write the vertices @xmath and @xmath in the form @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath , then @xmath has an embedding into @xmath with vertices
@xmath obtained by replacing @xmath in @xmath by @xmath . This is shown
in Figure 6.6 .

In this case, we enumerate the elements of @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath , the matrix @xmath takes the
form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows that the bottom-right @xmath -minor satisfies @xmath . Thus
if we set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath , then @xmath forms a basis for @xmath . We will show that
this basis satisfies the hypotheses of Lemma 4.10 . It is clear that
@xmath for all @xmath . In particular @xmath takes the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath if @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Observe that @xmath and @xmath . It follows that @xmath , and hence that
@xmath . It remains to check that @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath ,
which implies that @xmath , as required. If @xmath , then @xmath , which
implies that @xmath and hence that @xmath as required.

Thus @xmath satisfies the hypotheses of Lemma 4.10 and hence that the
image of @xmath is a changemaker lattice in @xmath . It is clear that
that @xmath is a marked crossing for this embedding.

##### Situation A2

If we write the vertices @xmath and @xmath in the form @xmath and @xmath
, then @xmath has an embedding into @xmath with vertices @xmath obtained
by replacing @xmath in @xmath by @xmath . This is shown in Figure 6.7 .

In this case enumerate the elements of @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath , @xmath takes the
form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows that the bottom-right @xmath -minor satisfies @xmath . Thus
if we set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath , then @xmath forms a basis for @xmath . It is clear that
@xmath for all @xmath . In particular @xmath takes the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath if @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By proceeding as in Situation A1, one can show that we always have
@xmath , and, furthermore that @xmath .

Thus @xmath satisfies the hypotheses of Lemma 4.10 and hence that the
image of @xmath is a changemaker lattice in @xmath . It is clear that
that @xmath is a marked crossing for this embedding.

##### Situation B

If we write the vertices @xmath and @xmath in the form @xmath and @xmath
, then @xmath has an embedding into @xmath with vertices @xmath obtained
by replacing @xmath in @xmath by @xmath . This is shown in Figure 6.8 .

In this case, we enumerate the elements of @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath , the matrix @xmath takes the
form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows that the bottom-right @xmath -minor satisfies @xmath . Thus
if we set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath , then @xmath forms a basis for @xmath . Proceeding as in the
preceding two situations, we find that @xmath takes the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath if @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore, we find that we always have @xmath and that @xmath .

Thus @xmath satisfies the hypotheses of Lemma 4.10 and hence that the
image of @xmath is a changemaker lattice in @xmath . It is clear that
that @xmath is a marked crossing for this embedding. ∎

### 6.4 The main results

Putting together the results of this chapter we obtain the following
theorem.

###### Theorem 6.23.

Suppose that @xmath is a reduced alternating diagram with @xmath is
isomorphic to a half-integer changemaker lattice. Any marked crossing is
an unknotting crossing which is negative if @xmath and positive if
@xmath . Furthermore, if @xmath is the almost-alternating diagram
obtained by changing a marked crossing, then @xmath can be reduced to
one of the clasp diagrams @xmath by a sequence of flypes, untongue and
untwirl moves.

###### Proof.

We show by induction on the rank of @xmath that the diagram obtained by
changing a marked crossing in @xmath can be reduced to one of the clasp
diagrams @xmath by a sequence of flypes, untongue and untwirl moves.
First suppose that @xmath has rank one. As shown in Example 6.4 , this
means @xmath is a minimal diagram of the right-handed trefoil. In
particular, when @xmath every crossing in @xmath is both marked and an
unknotting crossing. The diagram obtained by changing one of these
crossings is clearly a clasp diagram.

Suppose now that @xmath has rank @xmath . If there is more than one
marked crossing, then Lemma 6.11 shows that any one of them is an
unknotting crossing and that the diagram obtained by changing a marked
crossing is a clasp diagram. Thus we need only consider the case that
there is a single marked crossing, @xmath . Let @xmath be the knot
obtained by changing @xmath . By Proposition 6.21 we can flype @xmath to
an almost-alternating diagram which admits an untongue or an untwirl
move. Let @xmath be the diagram obtained by performing this move. By
Lemma 6.22 we can assume @xmath is obtained by changing a marked
crossing in a reduced alternating diagram @xmath with the rank of @xmath
strictly less than @xmath . Therefore, by the inductive hypothesis,
@xmath is an almost-alternating diagram of the unknot which can be
reduced to a clasp diagram by a sequence of flypes, untongue and untwirl
moves.

The statement about the sign of the marked crossing follows from Lemma
6.11 and the fact that the unknot has signature 0. ∎

###### Proof of Theorem 6.2.

The Montesinos trick, as stated in Proposition 5.9 , gives @xmath .
Corollary 5.3 gives @xmath . The implication @xmath is trivial.

#####

The implication @xmath follows from Lemma 6.10 , which shows that the
diagram @xmath contains a marked crossing and Theorem 6.23 , which shows
that this marked crossing is an unknotting crossing of the required
sign. ∎

###### Proof of Theorem 6.1.

The implication @xmath is trivial. The rest of the proof follows more or
less immediately from Theorem 6.2 . Since the unknotting number is
preserved under reflection, and for any knot @xmath we @xmath for some
@xmath if and only if @xmath , Theorem 6.2 gives the equivalence @xmath
.

Similarly, Theorem 6.2 shows that if an alternating knot @xmath has
unknotting number one, then any reduced alternating diagram for @xmath
contains an unknotting crossing. Since introducing nugatory crossings
does not affect the property of having an unknotting crossing, this
shows that every alternating diagram for @xmath must contain an
unknotting crossing. This proves @xmath and completes the proof. ∎

## Chapter 7 Non-integer surgeries

After using half-integer changemaker lattices to study the alternating
knots whose double-branched covers arise as half-integer surgery in the
preceding chapter, we now extend this analysis to arbitrary non-integer
changemaker lattices to obtain our diagrammatic criterion for when the
double branched cover of an alternating knot or link arises by
non-integer surgery.

###### Theorem 7.1.

Let @xmath be an alternating knot or link. For any @xmath with @xmath ,
the double branched cover @xmath arises as @xmath -surgery on a knot in
@xmath if and only if (1) @xmath possesses an alternating diagram
obtained by rational tangle replacement from an almost-alternating
diagram of the unknot and (2) the corresponding surgery slope @xmath .

This tangle replacement is described more precisely in the following
statement.

###### Theorem 7.2.

Let @xmath be an alternating link. Let @xmath be coprime integers and
suppose that @xmath , where @xmath . The following are equivalent:

1.   there is @xmath with @xmath ;

2.   for any reduced alternating diagram @xmath of @xmath the Goeritz
    form @xmath of @xmath is isomorphic to a @xmath -changemaker
    lattice;

3.  @xmath has a reduced alternating diagram @xmath containing a
    rational tangle @xmath of slope @xmath . such that if @xmath is the
    alternating diagram obtained by replacing @xmath with a single
    crossing @xmath , then either @xmath and @xmath is a positive
    unknotting crossing or @xmath and @xmath is negative unknotting
    crossing.

The convention we are using for the slope of a rational tangle in an
alternating diagram is set out in Section 5.3 . The condition that
@xmath in Theorem 7.2 is necessary for @xmath to hold. However, when
@xmath the situation is even simpler. The following is a straightforward
consequence of known bounds on @xmath -space surgeries.

###### Proposition 7.3.

If @xmath is an alternating surgery for some @xmath , then @xmath is the
unknot. In particular, @xmath is a lens space and @xmath is a 2-bridge
link.

###### Proof.

If @xmath is an alternating surgery, then @xmath is an @xmath -space
knot [ OS05c ] . Therefore we must have have the bound [ OS11 ] :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, @xmath implies that @xmath is the unknot. The proposition
follows since surgery on the unknot yields lens spaces, which are the
branched double covers of 2-bridge links. ∎

### 7.1 The fractional tangle

The objective of this section is to show that if @xmath is a reduced
alternating diagram with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a @xmath -changemaker lattice with @xmath , then there
is a sequence of flypes to obtain an alternating diagram which can be
obtained by rational tangle replacement on an almost-alternating diagram
of the unknot. We fix a choice of isomorphism,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This gives a distinguished collection of vectors in @xmath given by the
image of the vertices of @xmath . We call this collection @xmath , and,
in an abuse of notation, we will fail to distinguish between a vertex of
@xmath and the corresponding element in @xmath .

###### Remark 7.4.

Lemma 4.18 implies that @xmath is indecomposable. Thus Lemma 4.23 shows
that @xmath is 2-connected and any @xmath is irreducible. By Lemma 4.17
, this shows for any @xmath the fractional part @xmath is also
irreducible.

It will be necessary for us to flype @xmath to obtain a new reduced
alternating diagrams. As in the previous chapter, these flypes will be
either an application of Lemma 5.4 or a flype as appearing in Figure 5.3
. In either case, if @xmath is the diagram we obtain from such a flype,
then we get a natural choice of @xmath and hence an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Whenever we flype, we will implicitly use these choices of isomorphism
to speak of @xmath without ambiguity.

#####

In order to prove Theorem 7.2 , we will study the vertices in @xmath
which have a non-zero fractional part. This will allow us to obtain a
diagram in which @xmath specifies a tangle. We will take @xmath to be
the basis of @xmath as constructed in Section 4.1.1 . First we show that
there is a sequence of flypes to a diagram in which @xmath are vertices.

###### Lemma 7.5.

We may flype to obtain a diagram in which @xmath are vertices.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be maximal such that @xmath is not a vertex. By Lemma 4.17 ,
@xmath is irreducible. Therefore, Lemma 4.22 shows that there is @xmath
such that @xmath . In particular, this implies that there exists some
@xmath with @xmath , for @xmath . As @xmath is assumed not to be a
vertex, we have @xmath . Therefore, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which implies that @xmath is not a vertex. This shows @xmath takes the
form @xmath , for @xmath .

Since @xmath , we may apply a flype as given by Lemma 5.4 . This yields
a new diagram @xmath with @xmath . Since @xmath for all @xmath , it
follows that @xmath are still vertices. Iterating this process shows
that we may flype to obtain a diagram @xmath with @xmath in @xmath . ∎

From now on we will assume that we have performed flypes as in Lemma 7.5
, and have a diagram @xmath with @xmath .

###### Lemma 7.6.

There is a unique vertex @xmath with @xmath and this has @xmath . There
is a unique vertex @xmath with @xmath and this vertex has fractional
part @xmath .

###### Proof.

First we will show that any vertex @xmath with @xmath necessarily has
@xmath . Since @xmath is irreducible, it is of the form @xmath . As
@xmath , we have @xmath . This shows that @xmath . Now suppose that
@xmath is any vertex with @xmath . By irreducibility of @xmath , it
follows that @xmath . If @xmath , then we have @xmath and we get a
contradiction from the fact that @xmath . This proves the statement
about the fractional part of @xmath .

Now we show the uniqueness of @xmath . Since @xmath , this is also
implies the uniqueness of @xmath . Suppose there are vertices @xmath and
@xmath , with @xmath . To show they cannot be distinct, we consider the
vector @xmath , which satisfies @xmath . Now let @xmath be minimal such
that @xmath . By Proposition 1.13 , there is @xmath , such that @xmath .
Hence we may take @xmath . Now consider the inequality,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Since this exceeds the bound in Lemma 4.21 , it follows that @xmath is
not the sum of distinct vertices. In particular, this implies @xmath ,
which gives the required uniqueness statement. ∎

Now let @xmath and @xmath be the vertices as determined by Lemma 7.6 .
We wish to determine the number of edges between @xmath and @xmath .
These edges, along with the vertices @xmath , will provide the rational
tangle we are seeking. First we need some bounds on vectors in @xmath .

###### Lemma 7.7.

If @xmath for some @xmath , then @xmath . Furthermore, if @xmath is
irreducible with @xmath , then @xmath .

###### Proof.

We may assume @xmath . Let @xmath be minimal such that @xmath . By
Proposition 1.13 , we may write @xmath for some @xmath . So we have
@xmath . Let @xmath and observe that @xmath . By Lemma 4.21 , @xmath .
This gives

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Therefore, @xmath , which gives the required bound.

#####

Suppose now that @xmath is irreducible, and @xmath . By Lemma 4.16 and
Lemma 4.17 , this implies that @xmath . Let @xmath be minimal such that
@xmath . If @xmath , then let @xmath . By irreducibility of @xmath , we
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which implies @xmath , as required. Suppose @xmath , we may write @xmath
for some @xmath . If @xmath , set @xmath . If @xmath , set @xmath . In
either eventuality, we get @xmath with @xmath . By irreducibility, it
follows that either @xmath or

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which implies @xmath . Thus we get the necessary bounds on @xmath in all
cases. ∎

###### Lemma 7.8.

The vertices @xmath and @xmath satisfy the inequality @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Lemma 4.13 , the vector @xmath is irreducible. So, by Lemma 4.22 ,
there is @xmath , such that @xmath . Since @xmath , it follows that
@xmath and @xmath . Thus @xmath is also a sum of vertices. Applying
Lemma 7.7 gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This implies @xmath or @xmath . We will now prove the lemma for the case
@xmath . The argument can easily be modified to treat the case @xmath .

#####

Suppose that @xmath holds. By Lemma 7.7 , this implies @xmath . As
before, we consider @xmath . If @xmath , then the irreducibility of
@xmath implies @xmath and we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is the required bound. If @xmath , then @xmath . Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we are required to show @xmath . However, we have @xmath , by Lemma 4.25
and @xmath , by Lemma 7.7 . Thus it suffices to show that @xmath or
@xmath . Suppose @xmath . By Lemma 4.25 , this implies the existence of
a vertex @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath is irreducible. The
condition @xmath implies that @xmath , so such a @xmath satisfies @xmath
. Therefore we are required to have @xmath . Using the irreducibility of
@xmath , Lemma 7.7 implies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This implies that @xmath , which completes the proof for this case.

#####

If @xmath , then one can consider @xmath , which allows one to carry out
an almost identical argument. ∎

The vertices @xmath form a path between @xmath and @xmath in @xmath and
there are at least @xmath edges between @xmath and @xmath . Performing
some flypes of the form given by Figure 5.3 if necessary, we may assume
that there is a disk in the plane whose boundary intersects only the
regions @xmath and @xmath and its interior contains precisely @xmath of
the crossings between @xmath and @xmath , the regions @xmath , and all
crossings incident to them. In particular, this means that @xmath are
the regions of a subtangle in @xmath , and the white graph @xmath in the
interior of the disk is as in Figure 7.1 . We will call this tangle the
fractional tangle .

###### Lemma 7.9.

The fractional tangle is a rational tangle of slope @xmath .

Here we are using the convention for slopes of rational tangles in
alternating diagrams as described in Section 5.3 .

###### Proof.

Observe that the fractional tangle satisfies the hypotheses of
Proposition 5.7 . This shows that it is a rational tangle and its slope
may be calculated by ( 5.6 ). Observe that there are @xmath crossings
incident to @xmath in the fractional tangle. Thus if the slope of the
fractional tangle is @xmath , then ( 5.6 ) shows this is determined by
the continued fraction

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows from Lemma 4.8 that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence that the slope of the fractional tangle is @xmath , as
required. ∎

We are now in a position to prove the following proposition.

###### Proposition 7.10.

Let @xmath be an alternating link diagram and suppose that @xmath is
isomorphic to a @xmath -changemaker lattice

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath can be written in the form @xmath for @xmath . Then there
is a sequence of flypes to a diagram @xmath which contains a rational
tangle of slope @xmath . Furthermore, if the fractional tangle is
replaced by a single crossing @xmath to obtain a alternating diagram
@xmath , then @xmath is isomorphic to the half-integer changemaker
lattice

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in such a way that @xmath is a marked crossing.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath , be the basis for the @xmath as constructed in Section 4.1.1
. By Lemma 7.5 we may flype to a diagram in which @xmath are vertices.
Lemma 7.6 shows that any such diagram contains vertices @xmath and
@xmath with @xmath and @xmath . By Lemma 7.8 and discussion following it
we may further flype to a diagram @xmath in containing a fractional
tangle which is the one determined by the regions @xmath and @xmath
crossings between @xmath and @xmath . By Lemma 7.9 , the fractional
tangle is a rational of the required slope. Let @xmath be the
alternating diagram obtained by replacing the fractional tangle with a
single crossing @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath are the only regions in
@xmath with non-zero fractional part, we see that @xmath admits an
embedding into @xmath , where @xmath is obtained from @xmath by deleting
@xmath and replacing @xmath and @xmath by @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. By considering the image of this embedding we see that
@xmath is isomorphic to the @xmath -changemaker lattice

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , it is clear from the definition that @xmath is a marked
crossing for this embedding. ∎

Now we give an explicit example to show the tangle replacement of
Proposition 7.10 in action.

###### Example 7.11.

Let @xmath be the @xmath -changemaker lattice, given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is isomorphic to the Goeritz form of the alternating knot @xmath .
Figure 7.2 shows an alternating diagram @xmath of @xmath with the
induced labeling on the white regions. There is a fractional tangle in
@xmath and, as expected, it is of slope @xmath . Replacing the
fractional tangle by a single crossing, @xmath , we obtain an
alternating diagram @xmath . As shown in Figure 7.2 , there is an
embedding of the Goeritz form @xmath into @xmath which shows that @xmath
is isomorphic to the @xmath -changemaker lattice

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This isomorphism makes @xmath into a marked crossing. As one would
expect from Theorem 6.23 and the fact that @xmath , @xmath is a positive
unknotting crossing.

This allows us to prove Theorem 7.2 and Theorem 7.1 .

###### Proof of Theorem 7.2..

Corollary 5.3 gives the implication @xmath . Applications of Proposition
7.10 and Theorem 6.23 prove @xmath . The implication @xmath is a
consequence of the Montesinos trick as stated in Proposition 5.10 . ∎

###### Proof of Theorem 7.1.

After reflecting if necessary, this follows immediately from the
equivalence @xmath in Theorem 7.2 . ∎

### 7.2 Knots in @xmath

We show that the set @xmath accounts for all non-integer alternating
surgeries.

###### Theorem 7.12.

If @xmath is an alternating surgery where @xmath , then there is @xmath
with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark 7.13.

Since @xmath and @xmath are both @xmath -space knots, the fact that they
have the same Alexander polynomials shows that they have isomorphic knot
Floer homology.

Although the existence of @xmath follows immediately from Theorem 7.2 ,
the statement regarding Alexander polynomials requires further work.

###### Example 7.14.

Let @xmath to be one of the unknotted clasp diagrams @xmath as in Figure
1.5 . If we remove a the interior of small ball about a non-alternating
crossing, then the resulting tangle is a rational tangle. This shows
that the knot complement of the corresponding knot in @xmath is
homeomorphic to the solid torus, i.e that the corresponding knot is the
unknot.

Let @xmath be obtained from an almost-alternating diagram obtained by
changing a marked crossing. We will show how the Alexander polynomial of
@xmath can be determined from the corresponding changemaker lattice.
First we require a lemma.

###### Lemma 7.15.

Let @xmath and @xmath be isomorphic @xmath -changemaker lattices. If
@xmath , then @xmath and @xmath have the same changemaker coefficients.

###### Proof.

Pick an orthonormal basis @xmath for @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be a standard basis for @xmath , where @xmath for @xmath and
@xmath for some @xmath and some @xmath such that @xmath .

#####

Suppose that we have an embedding @xmath whose image is @xmath .
Consider first @xmath , for @xmath . Since the @xmath satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

there must be mutually orthogonal unit vectors @xmath in @xmath for
which @xmath . Since @xmath for all @xmath , we must have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows that @xmath and @xmath . As @xmath , we must have @xmath and
@xmath . As @xmath contains no unit vectors, we can assume that @xmath .
As @xmath , there must be some other unit vector @xmath such that @xmath
. As @xmath , we have @xmath .

Now consider @xmath for any @xmath . First observe that we have @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath for @xmath . Therefore, @xmath and @xmath . This
gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath , it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath .

As @xmath and @xmath it follows that there must be a unit vector @xmath
such that @xmath . Hence we have @xmath .

We will complete the proof by inductively showing that there are
orthonormal vectors @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now suppose that there are @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . We have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

for all @xmath . As

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

this shows that there is a unit vector @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as required. ∎

###### Lemma 7.16.

Let @xmath be a reduced alternating diagram with an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a @xmath -changemaker lattice. If @xmath is a marked
crossing for this embedding and @xmath is the knot arising from the
almost-alternating diagram obtained by changing @xmath , then the
torsion coefficients of @xmath satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the diagram obtained by replacing the marked crossing
@xmath by a @xmath -tangle @xmath for some @xmath , as shown in Figure
7.3 .

By Proposition 5.10 , this is the link whose double branched cover
arises by @xmath -surgery on @xmath . Thus by Corollary 5.3 , @xmath is
isomorphic to a @xmath -changemaker lattice

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where @xmath computes the torsion coefficients of @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath .

However, by the embedding given in Figure 7.3 , we see that @xmath is
isomorphic to the @xmath -changemaker lattice

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus the lattices @xmath and @xmath are isomorphic. As we have chosen
@xmath to be large, Lemma 7.15 applies to show @xmath and @xmath have
the same changemaker coefficients. Consequently, for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath (c.f Remark 2.28 ). It also follows that @xmath for @xmath
(c.f Remark 2.2 ). ∎

We can now prove the main result of this section.

###### Proof of Theorem 7.12.

Suppose that we have a knot @xmath with an alternating surgery. By
reflecting if necessary, suppose that @xmath for some alternating knot
or link @xmath and some @xmath .

If @xmath , then Proposition 7.3 shows that @xmath is the unknot. Since
the unknot is in @xmath , there is nothing further to prove.

Now assume that @xmath . Let @xmath be any reduced alternating diagram
for @xmath . Corollary 5.3 shows that @xmath is isomorphic to a @xmath
-changemaker lattice

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the torsion coefficients of @xmath satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath .

Proposition 7.10 shows that @xmath possesses an alternating diagram
obtained by replacing the marked crossing in a diagram @xmath with a
rational tangle of slope @xmath , where the marked crossing arises from
an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Theorem 6.23 and Proposition 5.10 show that there is @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Lemma 7.16 , the torsion coefficients satisfy @xmath for all @xmath .
As shown in Remark 1.9 , the torsion coefficients determine the
Alexander polynomial, so we have @xmath , as required. ∎

### 7.3 Bounds on alternating surgeries

Given a knot @xmath , we provide some restrictions on the surgery slopes
for which @xmath can be an alternating surgery. As surgery on the unknot
always results in a lens space, we see that every non-zero surgery on
the unknot is an alternating surgery. This behaviour is not typical; all
other knots admit alternating surgeries for only a restricted range of
slopes.

###### Theorem 7.17.

Let @xmath be a non-trivial knot admitting alternating surgeries. There
is an integer @xmath , which can be calculated from the Alexander
polynomial of @xmath such that if @xmath is an alternating surgery, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since it can be shown that the @xmath in Theorem 7.17 satisfies @xmath ,
we obtain a generalization of a bound on lens space surgeries originally
due to Rasmussen [ Ras04 ] .

###### Corollary 7.18.

Let @xmath be a non-trivial knot. If @xmath is an alternating surgery,
then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The work of Greene provides a lower bound on alternating surgery slopes
in terms of the genus [ Gre15 , Theorem 1.1] .

###### Theorem 7.19 (Greene).

If @xmath is an alternating surgery and @xmath is non-trivial, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be an alternating surgery on a non-trivial knot. By
reflecting if necessary, we may assume that @xmath . Corollary 5.3 shows
that there is a collection of changemaker coefficients @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Proposition 1.13 , @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath , so we see that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This shows that the genus satisfies,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

When @xmath , this implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as required. ∎

###### Remark 7.20.

This shows that the bound in Proposition 7.3 can improved: if @xmath is
an alternating surgery and @xmath , then @xmath is the unknot.

It is also possible to say something about the knots which admit
alternating surgeries in the full range allowed by Theorem 7.17 .

###### Theorem 7.21.

Suppose that @xmath is a nontrivial knot admitting alternating surgeries
@xmath for each of the slopes @xmath , where @xmath is the integer
appearing in Theorem 7.17 . If @xmath and @xmath satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath is a reducible surgery and @xmath is a torus knot or a
cable.

#### 7.3.1 Proving Theorem 7.17 and Theorem 7.21

In this section we prove Theorem 7.17 , Corollary 7.18 and Theorem 7.21
.

###### Proof of Theorem 7.17 and Corollary 7.18.

Let @xmath be a nontrivial knot with an alternating surgery. Since a
non-trivial knot cannot admit both positive and negative @xmath -space
surgeries, we may assume that all alternating surgeries on @xmath are
negative. If @xmath is an alternating surgery for some @xmath , then
Corollary 5.3 shows that there is a @xmath -changemaker lattice @xmath
such that any reduced alternating diagram @xmath of @xmath satisfies
@xmath . Let @xmath be the changemaker coefficients for @xmath and
@xmath be the corresponding stable coefficients. We will take

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proposition 1.13 shows that at least @xmath of the @xmath are equal to
one. Therefore, we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This proves the lower bound.

Let @xmath and @xmath be the @xmath -changemaker lattice with the same
stable coefficients as @xmath .

###### Claim.

There is an alternating diagram @xmath , with @xmath .

###### Proof.

If @xmath , then Proposition 7.10 shows that there is a diagram @xmath
such that @xmath , where @xmath is the @xmath -changemaker lattice with
the same stable coefficients as @xmath . Let @xmath be the corresponding
set of vertices. If we take

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then there are marker vertices of the form @xmath and @xmath in @xmath
where @xmath . By Lemma 6.10 , this gives us a marked crossing in @xmath
. If we resolve this marked crossing as in Figure 7.4 , then we obtain a
diagram @xmath such that @xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The set of vertices @xmath for this isomorphism are obtained by
replacing @xmath and @xmath in @xmath with @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. ∎

Take @xmath to be a diagram such that @xmath . Write @xmath in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . We will complete the proof of Theorem 7.17 by showing
that @xmath .

Let @xmath be the set of vertices arising from the isomorphism @xmath .
Note that for @xmath , we have @xmath . Assume that @xmath .

###### Claim.

We may assume @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Lemma 4.20 , @xmath shows that @xmath is indecomposable. By Lemma
4.23 , this means @xmath is 2-connected and every vertex in @xmath is
irreducible. This means we can apply Lemma 5.4 to flype @xmath .

Let @xmath , be minimal such that @xmath is not in @xmath . Suppose
first that @xmath . Since @xmath is irreducible, Lemma 4.22 implies that
it can be written as a sum of elements of @xmath . Hence, there is a
vertex @xmath with @xmath . As @xmath is irreducible and not equal to
@xmath , we have @xmath . Therefore via Lemma 5.4 we can flype to obtain
@xmath with @xmath .

Now we suppose that @xmath . Since @xmath is irreducible, it can be
written as a sum of elements of @xmath . Since @xmath is a vertex of
@xmath and @xmath , there is @xmath with @xmath . This must satisfy
@xmath . By Lemma 5.4 , we can flype to obtain a diagram @xmath with
@xmath . Moreover, since @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath , we see that
@xmath are in @xmath . Thus proceeding inductively, we see that we can
assume that @xmath is chosen such that @xmath are all in @xmath . ∎

Now consider the vector @xmath . This is irreducible so it can written
as a sum @xmath for some subset @xmath . As @xmath , we must have @xmath
and there must be a vertex @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . As @xmath ,
there are precisely two vertices that pair non-trivially with @xmath .
One of these is @xmath which has @xmath . If @xmath , then we can take
@xmath . As this pairs non-trivially with @xmath and also satisfies
@xmath , it follows that @xmath . This shows @xmath , completing the
proof of Theorem 7.17 .

Now we deduce Corollary 7.18 . As @xmath for all @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Combining these in equalities with @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

as required. ∎

###### Proof of Theorem 7.21.

Suppose that @xmath is an alternating surgery for some @xmath . There is
an alternating diagram @xmath and a @xmath -changemaker lattice

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath . Write @xmath in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are the stable coefficients.

By Proposition 7.10 , there is an alternating diagram @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is an alternating surgery for some @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

must also be a changemaker lattice. In particular is shows that @xmath
is slack.

As the set of stable coefficients is non-trivial, @xmath is not a clasp
diagram. Therefore Lemma 6.10 and Lemma 6.11 show that @xmath contains a
unique marked crossing @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath , be the marker
vertices for this marked crossing. As @xmath is slack, Lemma 6.15 shows
that we can assume that @xmath and @xmath form a cut set in @xmath .
Thus if @xmath is the diagram obtained by resolving @xmath so that the
regions corresponding to @xmath and @xmath merge, then we can assume
that @xmath is not 2-connected and, in particular, that @xmath is not
prime. However @xmath is isomorphic to the @xmath -changemaker lattice

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Lemma 4.23 , this shows that @xmath is decomposable. However, if
@xmath is an alternating surgery, then for any reduced alternating
diagram @xmath of @xmath satisfies @xmath . This shows that any such
@xmath is not prime. Therefore, @xmath is reducible.

Since @xmath , it follows from the work of Hoffman and Matignon-Sayari
on the cabling conjecture that @xmath is either a cable or a torus knot
[ Hof98 , MS03 ] . ∎

### 7.4 Tsukamoto’s theorem

Finally, we complete our proof of Tsukamoto’s theorem on the
almost-alternating diagrams of the unknot. [ Tsu09 , Corollary 1.1] .

###### Theorem 7.22 (Tsukamoto).

Any reduced almost-alternating diagram of the unknot can be obtained
from @xmath , for some non-zero integer @xmath , by a sequence of
flypes, tongue moves and twirl moves. For each @xmath , @xmath is the
almost-alternating diagram shown in Figure 1.5 .

The proof is given by combining Theorem 6.23 with the following lemma.

###### Lemma 7.23.

Let @xmath be a reduced alternating diagram with an unknotting crossing
@xmath such that either @xmath is positive and @xmath or @xmath is
negative and @xmath , then there is an isomorphism from @xmath to a
half-integer changemaker lattice for which @xmath is the marked
crossing.

###### Proof.

Construct a new alternating diagram @xmath by replacing @xmath by a
@xmath -tangle @xmath for some @xmath greater than the number of
crossings in @xmath . As shown in Figure 7.5 , this means replacing
@xmath by a twist containing @xmath crossings.

By Proposition 5.10 , this means that @xmath arises by @xmath -surgery
where @xmath for some @xmath . By Theorem 7.2 , we know that @xmath is
isomorphic to a @xmath -changemaker lattice @xmath , and we get a
corresponding labeling of regions of @xmath by elements of @xmath . The
continued fraction for @xmath is @xmath . So @xmath takes the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As the fractional part @xmath is spanned by @xmath , any vector in
@xmath with non-zero fractional part satisfies @xmath . Since the image
of @xmath must span @xmath , there are regions @xmath and @xmath with
non-zero fractional part and these must be adjacent to at least @xmath
crossings. However, as @xmath exceeds the crossing number of @xmath , we
see that the only regions of @xmath which adjacent to more than @xmath
crossings are the regions adjacent to the tangle @xmath that we
introduced. Therefore the regions adjacent to @xmath are a labeled by
@xmath and @xmath , for some @xmath and @xmath contained in @xmath and
@xmath does not appear in any other region of @xmath . By replacing
@xmath and @xmath by @xmath and @xmath respectively, we obtain an
embedding of @xmath into @xmath whose image is the half-integer
changemaker lattice

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is clear that @xmath is the marked crossing for this embedding. ∎

###### Proof of Theorem 7.22.

Up to reflection, Lemma 7.23 shows that every almost-alternating diagram
of the unknot can be obtained by changing a marked crossing in an
alternating diagram. However, Theorem 6.23 shows that any diagram
obtained by changing a marked crossing can be obtained from @xmath , for
some non-zero integer @xmath , by a sequence of flypes, tongue moves and
twirl moves. ∎