This thesis broadly concerns the origins of life problem, pursuing a
joint approach that combines general philosophical/conceptual reflection
on the problem along with more detailed and formal scientific modelling
work oriented in the conceptual perspective developed.

The central subject matter addressed by this thesis is the emergence and
maintenance of compartmentalised chemistries as precursors of more
complex systems with a proper cellular organization. Whereas an
evolutionary conception of life dominates prebiotic chemistry research
and overflows into the protocells field, this thesis defends that the
‘autonomous systems perspective’ of living phenomena is a suitable –
arguably the most suitable – conceptual framework to serve as a backdrop
for protocell research. The autonomy approach allows a careful and
thorough reformulation of the origins of cellular life problem as the
problem of how integrated autopoietic chemical organisation, present in
all full-fledged cells, originated and developed from more simple
far-from-equilibrium chemical aggregate systems.

Moving away from the original highly abstract formulation of the theory
of autopoiesis, this work demonstrates that a heuristic concept like
autonomy can be converted into a set of concrete questions to be
addressed through accurate scientific means, both experimentally and
theoretically. A semi-empirical approach to modelling protocell systems
is adopted to investigate the initial complementary relationships that
could have been established between chemical reaction networks and
self-assembling compartments. In particular, results of this thesis
highlight that effects of water osmosis could have been highly
influential on the dynamic capabilities of early protocells.

The overall message of this dissertation for origin-of-life researchers
is to call attention to a set of commonly overlooked transitions in the
development of increasingly complex material systems: namely those
concerned with the complementary relationship between selectively
permeable membranes and chemical reaction networks. This is especially
important in terms of identifying and implementing systems with a
relatively complex architecture of interactions among their molecular
and supra-molecular components, which could be regarded as intermediate
steps toward the immensely complex organisation of a minimal living
cell. Although part of that huge gap may need to be covered by an
evolutionary process ruled by natural selection, other central parts of
the puzzle will require discovering complex molecular mixtures that
engage in sufficiently robust, dynamic interactions leading to entities
resembling cells.
