## 5.2. Structure of bosonic states: quantum de Finetti theorems

Roughly speaking, the quantum de Finetti theorem asserts that any @xmath
-body bosonic state looks, for large @xmath , as a convex combination
(statistical mixture) of pure BECs. Let @xmath be any separable complex
Hilbert space and @xmath a (sequence of) bosonic @xmath -body states.
Thus @xmath is a self-adjoint, positive, trace-class operator on @xmath
, e.g. @xmath for @xmath . Then, modulo extraction of a subsequence, one
should have in mind an approximation of the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath a Borel probability measure on the one-body Hilbert space
@xmath . Thus, for large @xmath , there are so to say only pure BECs in
the @xmath -body state space. Of course the latter is convex, so it must
also obviously contain convex combinations of BECs, as in the right-hand
of ( 5.2.1 ), but these are, for many practical purposes, the only
relevant possibilities. The energy functional appearing in ( 5.1.5 )
being a linear function of @xmath , it becomes intuitively clear that it
is energetically favorable to have a single BEC as an approximate ground
state, provided one is able to pass to the large @xmath limit in the
energy.

There is actually a condition that @xmath should satisfy, namely it
should be a few-body Hamiltonian including only @xmath -body terms for
@xmath fixed, or at least @xmath small compared to @xmath . This is
because the correct meaning one should give to ( 5.2.1 ) involves
reduced density matrices: let

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The true statement is that, modulo extraction of a subsequence
independent of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the measure @xmath does not depend on @xmath . This kind of result
is a quantum analogue of the famous classical de Finetti/Hewitt-Savage
theorem [ 98 , 99 , 158 , 104 , 156 , 261 , 246 , 11 , 170 ] , used
extensively to deal with classical mean-field limits. The quantum
version originates in [ 332 , 162 ] . Recent variants and improvements
may be found in [ 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 70 , 118 , 184 , 67 , 155 ] . In
this section we describe two results obtained jointly with Mathieu Lewin
and Phan Thành Nam, respectively in [ 206 ] and [ 204 ] . Put together,
these lead to a fully constructive proof of (the rigorous version of) (
5.2.3 ). I refer to my lecture notes [ 299 , 300 ] for a more detailed
exposition of this proof, which is reminiscent of a semi-classical
approach due to Ammari and Nier [ 14 , 15 , 16 ] .

#### 5.2.1. A finite dimensional quantitative version

The main content of [ 206 ] is a new proof of results originating in [
70 , 67 ] . It has also been found independently by Lieb and Solovej [
234 ] (for other purposes than the quantum de Finetti theorem), and yet
another proof appeared in [ 155 ] . Variants of the result have also
been considered [ 60 , 70 , 71 , 73 , 289 , 45 ] .

A question one might want to ask is whether ( 5.2.3 ) can be made
quantitative. The answer is known in the classical setting [ 104 , 156 ]
: it is possible to construct an explicit measure for which explicit
error estimates can be proven. Unfortunately, this construction cannot
be used in a quantum setting (it is based on empirical measures, a
purely classical concept). A quantum analogue of the Diaconis-Freedman
theorem is available only in the case where the one-body Hilbert space
is finite dimensional:

###### Theorem 5.2.1 (Quantitative quantum de Finetti theorem).

Let @xmath be a finite dimensional complex Hilbert space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be a @xmath -body bosonic state and @xmath its reduced
density matrices. Let @xmath be the probability measure

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          (5.2.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath the Lebesgue measure on the unit sphere @xmath of @xmath .

Denoting

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

the associated state and @xmath its reduced density matrices, we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This implies in particular the bound

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for all @xmath .

A few comments:

-   As mentioned previously, the result is not new. The construction was
    first introduced in [ 70 ] , where a bound similar to ( 5.2.7 ) is
    derived. The explicit formula ( 5.2.6 ) originates in [ 67 ] . In [
    206 ] we re-derived the result using an analogy with well-known
    semi-classical ideas (coherent states, upper and lower symbols, cf [
    214 , 328 ] ) and the second-quantized formalism (the CCR algebra).

-   The error bound ( 5.2.7 ) easily follows from the explicit formula (
    5.2.6 ). The latter does come in handy in some cases, e.g. in the
    proof of some results of Chapter 6 below.

-   Note that the estimate ( 5.2.7 ) is interesting mostly when @xmath
    (think of @xmath as being fixed), i.e. when there are many more
    particles than available one-body states. It is rather intuitive
    that something special should happen in this case.

-   It is very satisfying that one has a simple explicit construction
    such as ( 5.2.1 ). The error bound we obtain can be shown to be
    (essentially) optimal with this construction, and it remains an open
    problem to see whether another one would improve the error.

-   However, the particular form of the approximate de Finetti measure
    used above is crucial in the proof of the results of Chapter 6 . In
    short, this has the form of a lower symbol in a coherent state
    basis, which allows to apply (variants of) the celebrated
    Berezin-Lieb inequalities [ 32 , 214 , 328 ] .

#### 5.2.2. The weak quantum de Finetti theorem

For infinite dimensional one-body Hilbert spaces such as @xmath , no
explicit error bound quantifying the precision of ( 5.2.3 ) is known at
present. One has to be content with formulating ( 5.2.3 ) as a limit
statement, or as an equality in the case of states having infinitely
many particles. This formulation is actually the original one [ 332 ,
162 ] . It provides useful information on the limit of @xmath -body
states only if one is able to pass to the strong @xmath - limit in
@xmath , where @xmath denotes the trace class. This requirement can turn
into a severe restriction in applications: if the system under
consideration is not confined, mass may be lost in the limit, and one
cannot hope for a strong limit.

To remedy this, we introduced and proved in [ 204 ] a so-called weak
quantum de Finetti theorem, which generalizes the original statement to
the case where one is able to pass to the weak- @xmath limit ² ² 2
Whence the name we coined. Beware that the weak theorem is actually
stronger than the usual version, refered to as “strong quantum de
Finetti” in [ 204 ] and subsequent papers. . Our proof is constructive,
reducing the infinite dimensional statement to the finite dimensional
case via “geometric localization” arguments as presented in [ 201 ] .

###### Theorem 5.2.2 (Weak quantum de Finetti).

Let @xmath be a complex separable Hilbert space and @xmath a sequence of
bosonic states with @xmath . We assume that for all @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in @xmath . Then there exists a unique probability measure @xmath on the
unit ball @xmath of @xmath , invariant under the action of @xmath , such
that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for all @xmath .

A few comments:

-   The above essentially describes the generic case : given a sequence
    of @xmath -body states, one can always extract diagonal subsequences
    to ensure that ( 5.2.8 ) holds.

-   When the convergence in ( 5.2.8 ) is strong, the mass is conserved
    in the limit, and thus @xmath has to be concentrated on the unit
    sphere of @xmath . The converse is also true. Also, since @xmath
    does not depend on @xmath , we see that strong convergence for one
    particular @xmath implies convergence for all @xmath .

-   The constructive proof via geometric localization yields corollaries
    that turn useful when dealing with a mean-field problem with loss of
    mass at infinity.

-   Ammari and Nier have more general results [ 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 ] . In
    particular, it is not necessary to start from a state with a fixed
    particle number. One can consider a state on Fock space provided
    suitable bounds on its particle number (seen as a random variable in
    this framework) are available. See Chapter 6 below for a discussion
    of this situation.

### 5.3. Mean-field limits

We now turn to stating rigorous versions of the meta-Theorem 5.1.1 in
two cases where inter-particles interactions are frequent but weak. One
usually refers to this situation as the mean-field regime . Since every
particle interacts weakly with essentially all the others, one can hope
that correlations effects will average out. Then particles should behave
independently, and their interactions converge to a mean self-consistent
effect, because of the law of large numbers. The quantum de Finetti
theorem discussed above is the main tool we use to substantiate this
picture.

#### 5.3.1. Mean-field regime

The main focus in the paper [ 204 ] is the case where the one-body
potential @xmath is not trapping. Then, some particles can fly apart and
the issue is to prove that those which stay bound do form a
Bose-Einstein condensate. Note that there might be several clusters of
bound particles: those staying in the well of the one-body potential,
and those who are bound by the attractive part of the interaction
potential if it is strong enough. The proof of the following theorem
requires to show that all these clusters form BECs.

In this section we have to rely on several (concentration-)compactness
arguments. We can thus not deal with two limits at the same time and
take @xmath in ( 5.1.1 ). As for the external and interaction potentials
@xmath we make standard assumptions [ 284 , 285 ] ensuring
self-adjointness of the many-body Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath for @xmath and @xmath and decay at infinity. To state the
result, we denote

  -- -- -- ---------
           (5.3.2)
  -- -- -- ---------

the appropriate NLS functional, usually called Hartree functional in
this context where the interaction is non-local. To describe particles
escaping the potential wells, we also need the functional without
external fields:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The mass of minimizing sequences can be split into several clusters.
Accordingly, we denote

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We may now state (a particular case of) the main result of [ 204 ] ,
where @xmath and the corresponding @xmath are defined as in Section 5.1
:

###### Theorem 5.3.1 (Derivation of Hartree’s theory in the mean-field
regime).

Under the preceding assumptions, we have:

@xmath Convergence of energy.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath Convergence of states. Let @xmath be a sequence of @xmath
-normalized quasi-minimizers for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and @xmath be the corresponding reduced density matrices. There exists
@xmath a probability measure on the unit ball of @xmath with @xmath ,
where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

such that, along a subsequence,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

weakly- @xmath in @xmath , for all @xmath .

@xmath If in addition the strict binding inequality

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

holds for all @xmath , the measure @xmath has its support in the sphere
@xmath and the limit ( 5.3.8 ) holds in trace-class norm. In particular,
if @xmath has a unique (modulo a constant phase) minimizer @xmath , then
for the whole sequence

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for all fixed @xmath .

-   The main originality here is to deal with the case where mass is
    lost at infinity. When @xmath is trapping, similar results had been
    obtained previously [ 117 , 279 , 282 , 349 ] .

-   The measure appearing in the above is of course the de Finetti
    measure defined by Theorem 5.2.2 . The latter, together with its
    constructive proof and corollaries, is basically the only tool
    needed to prove Theorem 5.3.1 .

-   It is a classical fact that @xmath coincides with the set of weak
    limits of minimizing sequences for ( 5.3.2 ). This follows from the
    usual concentration-compactness method for non-linear one-body
    variational problems. Thus, the weak limits for the @xmath -body
    problem are fully characterized in terms of the weak limits for the
    one-body problem. Also, for large @xmath , the HVZ-like binding
    inequalities for the many-body problem reduce to binding
    inequalities for the Hartree functional.

-   It is certainly possible for the convergence in the above statement
    to be only weak- @xmath , which covers a certain physical reality.
    If the one-body potential is not attractive enough to retain all
    particles, we will typically have a scenario where

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath is a critical mass that can be bound by the potential
    @xmath . In this case, @xmath will not be achieved if @xmath and one
    will have a minimizer for Hartree’s energy only for a mass @xmath .
    If for example the minimizer @xmath at mass @xmath is unique modulo
    a constant phase, the above result implies

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and one should note that the limit has a mass @xmath . This scenario
    happens for example in the case of a “bosonic atom” [ 31 , 21 , 23 ,
    329 , 161 ] .

-   Note that, in actual experiments, one-body potentials that decay at
    infinity are always used to cool the gas below the critical
    temperature for BEC, by allowing the hotter atoms to escape the trap
    (evaporative cooling). Such a situation can be modeled by the above
    setting.

#### 5.3.2. Weak NLS regime

We next consider the case of small but positive @xmath in ( 5.1.1 ).
Then the effective interaction is short-range (a Dirac delta), although
the interaction range is much larger than the typical interparticle
distance. This is still a mean-field situation, but the fact that two
limits need to be dealt with at the same time adds some difficulties. In
particular, a quantitative argument is required: one cannot simply use
compactness arguments to pass to the limit. The estimates we rely on are
those of Theorem 5.2.1 . Since they are valid only in finite dimension
we need a way to project the many-body Hamiltonian and control the error
thus made. In [ 208 ] we project on the low-lying eigenstates of the
one-body Hamiltonian and control their number (which enters the error
in ( 5.2.7 )) via a semi-classical inequality à la Cwikel-Lieb-Rosenblum
(CLR) [ 94 , 217 , 292 ] . This method requires @xmath to be trapping,
but does not use any sophisticated estimate beyond Theorem 5.2.1 and the
CLR inequality. It is thus very general, and pays the price for this by
being limited to rather small @xmath , i.e. not too singular
interactions. We shall go beyond this limitation in Section 5.4 below.

We here deal with the case of trapped bosons, assuming that for some
constants @xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In this case, the one-body Hamiltonian @xmath has a discrete spectrum on
which we have a good control thanks to Lieb-Thirring-like inequalities.
As for the vector potential @xmath , that can model a magnetic field or
Coriolis forces acting on rotating particles, it is sufficient to assume

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

A particularly relevant example is given by @xmath for @xmath and @xmath
for @xmath , corresponding to Coriolis forces due to a rotation at speed
@xmath around the @xmath -axis, or a constant magnetic field of strength
@xmath pointing in this direction.

Since @xmath becomes singular in the limit anyway, we make comfortable
assumptions on the unscaled potential @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We also assume that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which simplifies the replacement of @xmath by a Dirac mass to obtain the
limit functional

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the associated ground state energy

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The latter being finite depends on the sign of the effective coupling
constant, which will in this section be taken as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In order for the limit problem to be well-defined, we need some
assumptions on @xmath . Indeed, if @xmath , the interaction is
attractive and it is not obvious that the quantum kinetic energy is
strong enough to stabilize the system. It in fact turns out that the
validity of the mean-field approximation demands slightly stronger
assumptions than those ensuring that ( 5.3.16 ) to be finite:

@xmath When @xmath , a ground state for ( 5.3.16 ) exists if and only if
@xmath . This is because the cubic non-linearity is super-critical ³ ³ 3
One may for example consult [ 176 , 337 ] for a classification of
non-linearities in the NLS equation. in this case: the interaction
energy dominates the quantum kinetic energy in stability issues. It is
moreover easy to see that @xmath if @xmath is negative at the origin.
The optimal assumption happens to be a classical stability notion for
the interaction potential:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This is satisfied as soon as @xmath , @xmath and @xmath with @xmath the
Fourier transform of @xmath . This assumption clearly implies @xmath ,
and one may easily see by changing scales that if it is violated for a
certain @xmath , then @xmath .

@xmath When @xmath , the cubic non-linearity is critical, i.e. it
competes with the quantum kinetic energy at the same order of magnitude.
A minimizer for ( 5.3.16 ) exists if and only if @xmath with

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the unique [ 185 ] (modulo translations) solution to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The critical interaction parameter @xmath is the best possible constant
in the interpolation inequality

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We refer to [ 148 , 255 ] for the existence of a ground state and to [
348 ] for the inequality ( 5.3.20 ). A pedagogical discussion may be
found in [ 127 ] .

In view of the above conditions, it is clear that in 2D we have to
assume @xmath , but this is in fact not sufficient: as in 3D, if the
interaction potential is sufficiently negative at the origin, one may
see that @xmath . The appropriate assumption is now

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for all @xmath . Replacing @xmath by @xmath and taking the limit @xmath
shows that this implies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If the strict inequality in ( 5.3.21 ) is reversed for a certain @xmath
, then @xmath . The case where equality may occur in ( 5.3.21 ) is left
aside here. It requires a more thorough analysis, see [ 148 ] where this
is provided at the level of the NLS functional.

@xmath When @xmath , the cubic non-linearity is sub-critical and there
always exists a NLS minimizer. In this case we need no further
assumption because the quantum kinetic energy always dominates the
interaction energy.

The following theorem is proved in [ 208 ] :

###### Theorem 5.3.2 (Weak NLS limit of the many-body problem).

Assume that either @xmath , or @xmath and ( 5.3.21 ) holds, or @xmath
and ( 5.3.17 ) holds. For @xmath further suppose that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the exponent appearing in ( 5.3.11 ). We then have

1.   Convergence of the energy:

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (5.3.23)
      -- -------- -- ----------

2.   Convergence of states: Let @xmath be a ground state of ( 5.1.1 )
    and @xmath its reduced density matrices. Along a subsequence we
    have, for all @xmath ,

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (5.3.24)
      -- -------- -- ----------

    strongly in @xmath . Here @xmath is a probability measure supported
    on

      -- -- -- ----------
               (5.3.25)
      -- -- -- ----------

    In particular, when ( 5.3.15 ) has a unique minimizer @xmath (up to
    a constant phase), we have for the whole sequence

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (5.3.26)
      -- -------- -- ----------

-   Apart from the @xmath case (where there is no restriction), the
    assumption ( 5.3.22 ) we make on @xmath is rather strong. It can be
    improved a little bit, see the original paper for a discussion. In
    any case, the methods of [ 208 ] always require @xmath , i.e. a
    mean-field-like regime.

-   As previously mentioned, the assumptions on @xmath are close to
    optimal, thanks to the method of proof based on the quantum de
    Finetti theorem. In particular, the above result seems to be the
    first derivation of ground states with attractive interactions. This
    is particularly tricky in 2D, since such minimizers exist only for
    small enough values of the effective coupling constant.

### 5.4. Dilute limits

The next step of the program discussed in this chapter is to consider
dilute limits where interactions are rare but strong. In other words:
improve the range of @xmath obtained in Theorem 5.3.2 . This is very
important in practical applications: in the cold atoms context, the
emergence of BEC in interacting Bose gases has much more to do with
diluteness of the quantum gases under consideration than with the
weakness of the interactions.

The mathematical state of the art on this question, prior to the results
discussed below, is contained in a seminal series of papers by Lieb,
Seiringer and Yngvason [ 240 , 241 , 228 , 229 , 230 , 232 , 231 , 223 ,
224 , 317 ] , parts of which are reviewed in [ 227 , 318 , 359 ] . In
this approach, structural properties of the Hamiltonian play a key role
in the proofs. In particular, the interaction potential is required to
be positive. As we mentioned previously, in the dilute regime, delicate
estimates are required, and we cannot avoid relying on the structure of
the Hamiltonian to prove these. Nevertheless, the use of the quantum de
Finetti theorem simplifies a lot the proofs.

In the following we present two results, proved respectively in [ 267 ]
and [ 205 ] :

-   We first revisit the so-called Gross-Pitaevskii limit ( @xmath ) for
    the ground state of a trapped 3D Bose gas. Relying on the quantum de
    Finetti theorem and a new two-body estimate we simplify the
    Lieb-Seiringer-Yngvason approach of this problem. Interestingly, the
    new approach is rather insensitive to the presence of a gauge field
    @xmath , which is a considerable simplification. Indeed, improving
    the results of [ 228 ] to the case of non zero @xmath was a
    technical tour de force in [ 224 ] .

-   Next we discuss the case of the attractive 2D Bose gas. Using
    specific two-body estimates and a bootstrap argument, we can improve
    the range of @xmath available to @xmath with @xmath as in ( 5.3.11
    ). Note that [ 241 , 229 ] can go much further in the case of
    repulsive interactions. The novelty of [ 267 ] is thus to reach the
    dilute limit (it is always possible to take @xmath with this method)
    in the case of the attractive 2D Bose gas.

#### 5.4.1. 3D case, the Gross-Pitaevskii regime

In this section we start again from ( 5.1.1 ), with @xmath . The
one-body potential @xmath shall be trapping, but we do not need a
specific assumption on its growth at infinity:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As for the gauge vector potential @xmath , only mild assumptions are
required:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.4.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for some constant @xmath . For simplicity, we assume that the
interaction potential @xmath is a fixed function which is non-negative,
radial and of finite range,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The main point in this section is that we shall take @xmath . This is
essentially the largest relevant value of @xmath in 3D, and the result
changes qualitatively in this regime, as we now explain.

For @xmath , the naive approximation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.4.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

does not capture the leading order behavior of the physical system. In
fact, strong correlations at short distances @xmath yield a nonlinear
correction, which essentially amounts to replacing the coupling constant
@xmath by @xmath the scattering length of @xmath , whose definition we
now recall (see [ 227 , Appendix C] ): Under our assumption on @xmath ,
the zero-energy scattering equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has a unique solution and it satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some constant @xmath which is called the scattering length of @xmath
. In particular, if @xmath is the potential for hard spheres, namely
@xmath when @xmath and @xmath when @xmath , then the scattering length
of @xmath is exactly @xmath . In a dilute gas, the scattering length can
be interpreted as an effective range of the interaction: a quantum
particle far from the others is felt by them as a hard sphere of radius
@xmath . A useful variational characterization of @xmath is as follows:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.4.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Consequently, @xmath is smaller than @xmath . Moreover, a simple scaling
shows that the scattering length of @xmath is @xmath , so that the
scenario @xmath corresponds to fixing the scattering length of the
interaction potential, the so-called Gross-Pitaevskii limit. The limit
problem then consists in a NLS functional where the strength of the
interactions is set by the scattering length:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.4.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that this functional is not obtained by testing @xmath with
factorized states of the form @xmath . We shall denote

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.4.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

the Gross-Pitaevskii ground state energy.

###### Theorem 5.4.1 (Derivation of the Gross-Pitaevskii functional).

Under the above assumptions on @xmath and @xmath , we have, for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.4.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Moreover, if @xmath is an approximate ground state for @xmath , namely

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then there exists a Borel probability measure @xmath supported on the
set of minimizers of @xmath such that, along a subsequence,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.4.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

strongly in @xmath where @xmath is the @xmath -particle reduced density
matrix of @xmath . In particular, if @xmath subject to @xmath has a
unique minimizer @xmath (up to a complex phase), then there is complete
Bose-Einstein condensation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.4.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As we mentioned previously, the result in itself is not new (only (
5.4.8 ) is for @xmath ): it was first proved in [ 228 ] in the case
where @xmath and then extended to non-zero @xmath in [ 224 ] . Both
proofs, in particular that for @xmath , are pretty difficult, and the
main contribution in [ 267 ] is to provide substantial simplifications.
We shall discuss only the energy lower bound and convergence of states
proofs, the energy upper bound being taken directly from [ 228 , 317 ] .

The main difficulty in dealing with the GP limit is that an ansatz
@xmath does not give the correct energy asymptotics. In this regime,
correlations between particles do matter, and one should rather think of
an ansatz of the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

or a close variant, where @xmath is linked to the two-body scattering
process. In the time-dependent literature, one may find different ways
of taking this most crucial fact into account, see [ 114 , 115 , 29 ,
280 ] . For the ground state problem we consider here, there seems to
exist only one approach, relying on an idea due to Dyson [ 106 ] ,
generalized several times as need arose [ 240 , 226 , 224 , 227 ] . The
trick is to bound the Hamiltonian from below by an effective one which
is much less singular (roughly, has a smaller @xmath ), but still
encodes the scattering length of the original interaction potential. The
philosophy is that if @xmath is the ground state of the original
Hamiltonian, then roughly

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath encodes the two-body scattering process and @xmath is a
ground state for the effective Dyson Hamiltonian.

The next task is then to justify the mean-field approximation for the
ground state @xmath of the Dyson Hamiltonian. There are two key
difficulties:

-   The effective Hamiltonian has a three-body interaction term.
    Obviously one has to show that it can be neglected, e.g. by showing
    that the probability of having three particles close by is small.

-   Although the Dyson Hamiltonian has a smaller @xmath than the
    original one, we still have to deal with the mean-field
    approximation in the “rare but strong collisions” limit if we are to
    be able to neglect three-body interactions. In other words, even
    though the effective Hamiltonian is much less singular than the
    original one, we do not have the freedom to reduce the singularity
    as much as we would like.

It is in treating these two difficulties that our new method
significantly departs from the previous works [ 208 , 224 ] . We shall
rely on a strong a priori estimate for ground states of the Dyson
Hamiltonian. Roughly speaking, we use the variational equation to prove
a bound of the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

independently of @xmath . This second moment estimate is the key point
in our analysis. It is reminiscent of similar estimates used in the
literature for the time-dependent problem [ 113 , 114 , 115 , 116 ] .
The use of Dyson’s lemma is crucial here: one should not expect ( 5.4.11
) to hold for the ground state of the original Hamiltonian.

We use ( 5.4.11 ) for two distinct purposes:

-   Control three-body contributions in the Dyson Hamiltonian, showing
    that they can safely be neglected. In [ 224 ] this was achieved by a
    complicated argument based on path integrals.

-   Improve the strategy of [ 208 ] (discussed in Section 5.3.2 ) to
    extend it to the “rare but strong collisions” regime. Indeed,
    although much less singular than the full model, the Dyson
    Hamiltonian still is in this regime. The two-body estimate ( 5.4.11
    ) gives a very strong control on the errors made by projecting the
    Dyson Hamiltonian onto low kinetic energy modes.

Finally, the use of the quantum de Finetti theorem as a basic building
block of the proof gives a simplified interpretation of the emergence of
the effective one-body energy. Moreover, it simplifies drastically the
convergence of states proof, which goes via a Feynman-Hellmann-type
argument. That is, by applying the whole strategy to an auxiliary
Hamiltonian with a smooth, small, @xmath -body say, perturbation and
ultimately taking the size of the perturbation to @xmath .

#### 5.4.2. 2D case, attractive interactions

As a last instance of Statement 5.1.1 , we consider the dilute limit for
2D particles with attractive interactions:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As alluded to in Section 5.3.2 , this is the most delicate case in so
far as the interplay between quantum kinetic energy and pair
interactions is concerned. Indeed, for @xmath and @xmath , attractive
interactions generically lead to a collapse of the ground state, while
for @xmath , the system is stable for any interaction strength. In 2D,
the NLS functional is stable only for small enough values of the
coupling constant, which corresponds (beware the scaling of the coupling
constant in ( 5.1.1 )) to the existence of a critical mass for stability
of the many-body system. This mass-critical scenario at the level of the
ground state has a natural extension to the dynamical problem, where
global existence versus finite time blow-up are strongly conditioned by
the mass of the initial datum (see [ 176 , 337 ] and references
therein).

As in Section 5.3.2 , our results depend on the growth at infinity of
the one-body potential @xmath . We assume that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

To have a stable system we make an almost optimal assumption on the
interactions potential, similarly as in Section 5.3.2 :

  -- -- -- ----------
           (5.4.13)
  -- -- -- ----------

It is easy to see that this implies @xmath with @xmath the critical
coupling constant ( 5.3.18 ) for existence of a NLS ground state. Thus
the ground state energy

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

is well-defined, where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A simple condition implying ( 5.4.13 ) is @xmath .

The results of [ 208 ] allow to derive the above limit problem when
@xmath , provided

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In [ 205 ] we extend this range to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This is a qualitative improvement: while @xmath , we have @xmath . We
can thus treat a dilute limit where interactions are rare but strong:

###### Theorem 5.4.2 (Attractive dilute 2D Bose gases).

Assume that @xmath , @xmath , @xmath satisfy the above. Then, for every
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Moreover, for any ground state @xmath of @xmath , there exists a Borel
probability measure @xmath supported on the ground states of @xmath such
that, along a subsequence,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

If @xmath has a unique minimizer @xmath (up to a phase), then for the
whole sequence

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

-   The estimates leading to the above result answer a question raised
    by Xuwen Chen and Justin Holmer in their derivation of focusing
    time-dependent NLS equations [ 65 , 64 ] . In the case of the
    harmonic trap @xmath , one can combine their BBGKY-type ⁴ ⁴ 4 That
    is, based on the Bogoliubov-Born-Green-Kirkwood-Yvon hierarchy of
    evolution equations for reduced density matrices. approach and the
    results of [ 205 ] to derive the time-dependent 2D focusing NLS
    equation in the regime @xmath . If @xmath , the next order
    correction to the 2D focusing quantum dynamics can be obtained using
    the Bogoliubov approach [ 209 , 266 , 265 ] (see [ 37 ] for the
    defocusing case).

-   The basic strategy of proof is the same as in [ 208 ] , see Section
    5.3.2 : projection onto low-lying energy eigenstates of the one-body
    Hamiltonian and use of the finite dimensional quantum de Finetti
    theorem 5.2.1 .

-   The main novelty allowing to reach larger values of @xmath is the
    use of a priori moments estimates having the same flavor as ( 5.4.11
    ). Roughly speaking, the variational equation for ground states of (
    5.1.1 ) implies

      -- -------- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.4.20)
      -- -------- -------- -- ----------

-   Note that the above estimates are not truly a priori bounds since
    they involve the many-body ground-state energy @xmath in the
    right-hand side. The ideal case would be to know stability of the
    second kind: @xmath . Of course, this is far from obvious: it should
    be the conclusion and not the premise. To put ( 5.4.2 ) to good use,
    the starting point is an energy lower bound obtained in [ 200 ] by
    the operator methods alluded to in Section 5.1 . This yields
    stability of the second kind for the mean-field regime @xmath and
    may be combined with ( 5.4.2 ) and the quantum de Finetti theorem in
    an induction procedure leading to stability for @xmath .

## Chapter 6 Bosonic thermal states and non-linear Gibbs measures

We now move one step further in the description of large bosonic systems
by considering equilibrium states at positive temperature, with the
upshot of gaining a better understanding of the BEC phase transition.
Here we present joint results with M. Lewin and P.T. Nam [ 207 ] ,
following mainly the expository note [ 203 ] . We refer to [ 301 ] for
another look at the main results of [ 207 ] , with an emphasis on their
relation to constructive quantum field theory [ 102 , 138 , 247 , 327 ,
335 , 343 ] and the use of invariant measures in the study of non-linear
dispersive partial differential equations [ 196 , 41 , 42 , 43 , 44 ,
341 , 48 , 47 , 338 , 49 ] .

Recall that full Bose-Einstein condensation is the phenomenon that,
below a certain critical temperature @xmath , (almost) all particles of
a bosonic system must reside in a single quantum state of low energy.
Ideally one would like to prove the existence of such a temperature and
provide an estimate thereof. For an interacting gas this has so far
remained out of reach. In particular, for the homogeneous Bose gas,
there is still no proof of Bose-Einstein condensation in the
thermodynamic limit, even in the ground state. However, this might not
be the main question of interest for the description of cold atoms
experiments. Indeed, those are performed in magneto-optic traps, which
set a fixed length scale to the problem. The gases in which BEC is
observed are thus not homogeneous, and the thermodynamic limit is not
the most physically relevant regime in this context.

A lot of progress has been achieved in recent years by considering
different scaling regimes, more adapted to the case of inhomogeneous
systems, e.g. the mean-field and the Gross-Pitaevskii limits. For
trapped systems, BEC in the ground state and its propagation by the
many-body Schrödinger dynamics is now fairly well understood (see [ 30 ,
141 , 200 , 227 , 299 , 300 , 315 , 318 ] and Chapter 5 for reviews).
Even in these somewhat more wieldy regimes, very little is known about
positive temperature equilibrium states. In particular, an estimate of
the critical temperature (or, more generally, temperature regime) is
lacking.

In this chapter, we discuss some of our recent results [ 207 ] , in the
perspective of the previously mentioned issues. The main idea is to
relate, in a certain limit, Gibbs states of large bosonic systems to
non-linear Gibbs measures built on the associated mean-field
functionals. This is a semi-classical method, where the BEC phenomenon
can be recast in the context of a classical field theory. Although, as
far as the study of BEC is concerned, our results are rather partial, it
is our hope that our methods might in the future help to shed some light
on the physics we just discussed.

### 6.1. The grand-canonical ensemble

We consider @xmath bosons living in @xmath and work in the
grand-canonical ensemble. Let thus @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the symmetric @xmath -fold tensor product appropriate for bosons and

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

be the bosonic Fock space. We are interested in the positive temperature
equilibrium states of the second-quantized Hamiltonian @xmath defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with ¹ ¹ 1 We do not consider a gauge field in this discussion. This is
for simplicity only, cf the original paper.

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Here @xmath is a chemical potential, @xmath is a trapping potential,
i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath is a positive , symmetric, self-adjoint operator on @xmath .
The methods of [ 207 ] are limited to rather smooth repulsive
interactions, thus @xmath will in general not be a multiplication
operator. We shall comment on this issue below but, for the time being,
think of a finite-rank @xmath with smooth eigenvectors, corresponding to
a regularization of a physical interaction.

We are interested in the asymptotic behavior of the grand-canonical
Gibbs state at temperature @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The partition function @xmath fixes the trace equal to @xmath and
satisfies

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the infimum of the free energy functional

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

over all grand-canonical states (trace-class self-adjoint operators on
@xmath with trace @xmath ). It turns out that an interesting limiting
behavior emerges in the regime

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

provided one makes the following assumptions:

###### Assumption 6.1.1 (One-body hamiltonian).

We assume that, as an operator on @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and that there exists @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that one can always find a @xmath such that ( 6.1.5 ) holds. The
easiest case, for which our results are the most satisfying, is that
where one can take @xmath (refered to as the trace-class case). This
happens only in 1D and if the trapping potential grows sufficiently fast
at infinity, i.e.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath small enough and @xmath .

###### Assumption 6.1.2 (Interaction term).

We pick @xmath a positive self-adjoint operator on @xmath and
distinguish two cases:

-    either one can take @xmath in ( 6.1.5 ) and then we assume

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (6.1.7)
      -- -------- -- ---------

-    or @xmath in ( 6.1.5 ) and we make the stronger assumption that

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (6.1.8)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    for some @xmath .

In essence, these (rather restrictive) assumptions correspond to asking
that the non-interacting Gibbs state has a well-controlled interaction
energy. Indeed, one can compute that its two-body density matrix behaves
as @xmath in the limit @xmath . In the 1D case ( 6.1.6 ) where @xmath ,
we can take for example @xmath a multiplication operator, e.g. by a
bounded function @xmath . The assumption we make when @xmath does not
cover such operators.

### 6.2. Non-linear Gibbs measures

The natural limiting object in the setting we just described turns out
to be the non-linear Gibbs measure on one-body quantum states given
formally by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a partition function and @xmath is the mean-field energy
functional

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The rigorous meaning of ( 6.2.1 ) is given by the two following standard
lemmas/definitions:

###### Lemma 6.2.1 (Free Gibbs measure).

Write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and define the associated scale of Sobolev-like spaces

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Define a finite dimensional measure on @xmath by setting

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are the real and imaginary parts of the scalar
product.

Let @xmath be such that ( 6.1.5 ) holds. Then there exists a unique
measure @xmath over the space @xmath such that, for all @xmath , the
above finite dimensional measure @xmath is the cylindrical projection of
@xmath on @xmath . Moreover

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where this is seen as an operator acting on @xmath .

Note that the free Gibbs measure never lives on the energy space @xmath
. It lives on the original Hilbert space @xmath if and only if ( 6.1.5 )
holds with @xmath . We can now define the interacting Gibbs measure as
being absolutely continuous with respect to the free Gibbs measure:

###### Lemma 6.2.2 (Interacting Gibbs measure).

Let

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

If Assumptions 6.1.2 hold we have that @xmath is in @xmath . In
particular

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

makes sense as a probability measure over @xmath . That is, the relative
partition function satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Equation ( 6.2.5 ) is the correct interpretation of the formal
definition ( 6.2.1 ). It is this object that we derive from the bosonic
grand-canonical Gibbs state.

### 6.3. Mean-field/small temperature regime

Our main result in [ 207 ] relates, in the limit ( 6.1.4 ), the
grand-canonical Gibbs state ( 6.1.1 ) to the classical Gibbs measure on
one-body states defined in Lemma 6.2.2 . It is useful to recall the
notion of @xmath -particle reduced density matrix for states over @xmath
. For a “diagonal” state of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

this is the operator @xmath on the @xmath -particles space @xmath
defined by ² ² 2 The partial trace is taken over the symmetric space
only.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for every bounded operator @xmath on @xmath . These are helpful for
rewriting expressions involving only @xmath -particle operators. Remark
that the normalization convention taken here differs from that of
Chapter 5 : if @xmath is a @xmath -body state, @xmath has trace @xmath .

###### Theorem 6.3.1 (Derivation of nonlinear Gibbs measures).

Under Assumptions 6.1.1 and 6.1.2 we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the infimum of the free-energy functional ( 6.1.3 ) and
@xmath the relative partition function defined in Lemma 6.2.2 .

Let furthermore @xmath be the reduced @xmath -body density matrix of
@xmath . We have,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

strongly in the Schatten space @xmath . In case @xmath in ( 6.1.5 ) we
also have, for any @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

strongly in the trace-class.

An obvious caveat of our approach is the case @xmath where the result is
not as strong as one would hope. We conjecture that ( 6.3.3 ) continues
to hold strongly in the Schatten space @xmath also for @xmath , but this
remains an open problem. More importantly, it would be highly desirable
to go beyond the stringent assumption ( 6.1.8 ). There are however
well-known obstructions to the construction of the Gibbs measure @xmath
in this case. A minima, a Wick renormalization [ 102 , 138 , 327 ] must
be performed in order to make sense of the measure when @xmath is a
multiplication operator. The quantum Gibbs state one starts the analysis
from should also be modified accordingly. We refer to [ 133 ] for recent
results in this direction.

Let us comment on the relevance of this result to the BEC phenomenon:

-   First, this theorem seems to be the first giving detailed
    information on the limit of the thermal states of a Bose system at
    relatively large temperature. The result ( 6.3.2 ) clearly shows the
    absence of full BEC in the regime we consider. For finite
    dimensional bosons, things simplify a lot and versions of Theorem
    6.3.1 were known before, see [ 144 , 143 , 168 ] , [ 183 , Chapter
    3] , and [ 299 , Appendix B] .

-   The asymptotic regime ( 6.1.4 ) should be thought of as a mean-field
    limit. In fact, when @xmath , ( 6.3.2 ) indicates that the expected
    particle number behaves as @xmath , so that taking @xmath
    corresponds to the usual mean-field scaling where the coupling
    constant scales as the inverse of the particle number. Roughly
    speaking we are thus dealing with the regime

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   Still in the case @xmath , one should expect from a natural
    extrapolation of this theorem that full BEC does occur in the regime

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    which would indicate that the critical temperature scales in this
    case as the particle number. A natural idea would be to confirm this
    by studying the concentration of the non-linear Gibbs measure @xmath
    on the mean-field minimizer when the chemical potential is varied.

-   A comparison with the case of particles with no quantum statistics
    (boltzons) is instructive, see [ 203 ] for details. First, the
    emergence of the non-linear Gibbs measure truly requires Bose
    statistics. Next, for trapped boltzons, the critical temperature for
    BEC scales as @xmath when @xmath in the mean-field regime. Only when
    @xmath at the same time as @xmath does full BEC occur in the Gibbs
    state. One should expect that the critical temperature is much
    higher for bosons than for boltzons. This can be seen from comparing
    the above theorem and [ 336 , 204 , Section 3.2] : @xmath in the
    mean-field limit whereas @xmath . In fact, Theorem 6.3.1 suggests
    that in some situations the critical temperature for bosons can be
    as high as @xmath .

### 6.4. Berezin-Lieb inequality for relative entropies

The proof of Theorem 6.3.1 is lengthy and shall not be reviewed here. We
however discuss its main conceptual building blocks, restricting to the
trace-class case @xmath . First, as one easily realizes, @xmath
minimizes the relative free-energy functional (the second term is a von
Neumann relative entropy)

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.4.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

whose minimum is @xmath . It is crucial to work directly on that
difference, characterizing it as the minimum of some functional. We
expect that both terms taken individually diverge very fast.

On the other hand, @xmath is the infimum of some variational problem of
which @xmath is the solution: @xmath minimizes

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.4.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

amongst all @xmath -absolutely continuous measures @xmath on the
one-body Hilbert space @xmath . The second term is the classical
relative entropy of @xmath relative to @xmath .

The above observations make the semi-classical nature of Theorem 6.3.1
apparent. We have to relate the minimization problems for the quantum
and classical free-energy functionals ( 6.4 ) and ( 6.4 ). In order to
describe quantum objects, operators on a Hilbert space, in terms of
classical objects, probability measures, we rely on quantum de Finetti
theorems again, as discussed in Section 5.2 . This time we need
Fock-space versions thereof. In the trace-class case, the following
result of [ 15 ] is sufficient:

###### Theorem 6.4.1 (Grand-canonical quantum de Finetti theorem).

Let @xmath be a sequence of states on the Fock space @xmath . Assume
that there exists a sequence @xmath such that, for all @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.4.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then, there exists a unique Borel probability measure @xmath on @xmath
such that, along a subsequence,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.4.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

weakly in the trace-class for every integer @xmath .

Some comments:

-   To deal with the non-trace-class case @xmath , some improvements are
    necessary, provided in [ 207 ] , but we shall not discuss this here.

-   The case @xmath of Theorem 6.3.1 could be rephrased as saying that
    the de Finetti measure of the sequence @xmath is the nonlinear Gibbs
    measure @xmath .

-   Here @xmath should be thought of as a semiclassical parameter
    essentially forcing the particle number to behave as @xmath . To
    apply this result in our context, we need to check that ( 6.4.3 )
    holds, with @xmath and @xmath . In the trace-class case, this is not
    too difficult because the particle number is well under control.

-   Since we have convergence of density matrices, a lower bound to the
    interaction energy term in ( 6.4 ) follows from this theorem.

In view of the last point, the main remaining task is to estimate the
relative entropy term in ( 6.4 ). One should keep the following in mind:

-   Contrarily to the energy, it is not expressed in terms of reduced
    density matrices only. It genuinely depends of the full state.

-   One should not “undo” the relative entropy to consider only the von
    Neumann entropies of @xmath and @xmath directly, since we do not
    expect a good control on those.

Well-known tools to link quantum entropy terms to their semiclassical
counterparts are the so-called Berezin-Lieb inequalities [ 32 , 214 ,
328 ] . Since we work in infinite dimensions and we cannot undo the
relative entropy to rely on known inequalities, we need the following
new result:

###### Theorem 6.4.2 (Berezin-Lieb inequality for the relative entropy).

Let @xmath and @xmath , @xmath be two sequences of states satisfying the
assumptions of Theorem 6.4.1 . Let @xmath and @xmath be their de Finetti
measures. Then

  -- -- -- ---------
           (6.4.5)
  -- -- -- ---------

Some comments:

-   Clearly, this will give the desired lower bound to the relative
    entropy term in ( 6.4 ) if we can prove first that the de Finetti
    measure of the free Gibbs state @xmath is given by @xmath . Since
    all the density matrices of @xmath can be explicitly computed, this
    is easily shown by direct inspection.

-   For the proof of this result, we rely heavily on a constructive
    approach to Theorem 6.4.1 , reminiscent of the proof of Theorem
    5.2.2 we discussed previously. The precise way one can approach the
    measure by explicit functions of the states, as in ( 5.2.1 ), is
    crucial.

-   The link with semi-classics proceeds by seeing the de Finetti
    measure both as a lower symbol/covariant symbol/Husimi
    function/anti-Wick quantization and as an approximate upper
    symbol/contravariant symbol/Wigner measure/Wick quantization based
    on a coherent state decomposition.

-   We also rely on deep properties of the quantum relative entropy:
    joint convexity and monotonicity under two-positive trace preserving
    maps [ 347 , 270 , 56 ] . These are in fact equivalent to the strong
    subadditivity of the quantum entropy, a crucial property proved by
    Lieb and Ruskai [ 221 , 222 ] .

## Chapter 7 Emergent fractional statistics

Traditionally, for sound experimental and theoretical reasons, quantum
particles are divided into two classes: bosons and fermions. The
many-body wave-function of a system of bosons is symmetric under
particle exchange, while that of a system of fermions is anti-symmetric.
This implies fundamental differences in their behavior: fermions satisfy
the Pauli exclusion principle (at most one particle per quantum state),
bosons do not. Consequently, fermionic bulk matter is stable, while
bosonic bulk matter is not [ 110 , 111 , 215 , 225 ] . Free bosons in
thermal equilibrium distribute in single-particle quantum states
following the Bose-Einstein statistics, while free fermions follow the
Fermi-Dirac statistics. Bosons condense into a single one-particle state
(see Chapters 5 - 6 and references therein) while fermions form a Fermi
sea. Some fundamental inequalities such as the Lieb-Thirring kinetic
energy lower bound hold only for fermions [ 235 , 236 , 225 ] .
Cherished physical principles, such as the classification of elements in
the Mendeleev periodic table, are valid because electrons are fermions.
Others, such as the possibility of creating a laser, are valid because
photons are bosons.

In this chapter we discuss some contributions to the theory of anyons ,
that is, of particles that do not fit in the bosons/fermions dichotomy.
The very possibility that such exotic objects could exist should be seen
as a daring hypothesis. We shall thus first start by a quick
introduction to the anyons concept in Section 7.1 , making no claim of
originality (see [ 132 , 198 , 356 , 164 , 123 , 264 , 172 , 273 ] for
general references). In brief, we shall recall that anyons can exist
only in low spatial dimensions, 1D or 2D, so that they can only be
quasi- or dressed particles of constrained systems. Next, in Section 7.2
we summarize the findings of [ 250 ] where we vindicate ¹ ¹ 1 Without a
mathematical proof, but what we think is a sounder physical proof than
what has appeared in the literature so far. the general belief [ 20 ,
189 , 167 ] that some quasi-particles arising in fractional quantum Hall
physics indeed behave as anyons. Finally, in Section 7.3 we summarize [
249 ] , giving modest elements of answer to the question “Suppose one
manages to create anyons in the lab, how can one probe their physics ?”
As we shall explain, appropriate effective models are necessary to
answer that question, and we focus on the derivation of one such model
from first principles.

### 7.1. The concept of 2D anyons

There does not seem to be a universal way of building a quantum theory,
starting from a reasonable classical one. The possibility for exotic
particle statistics has staid hidden in implicit quantization choices
for years, until those were recognized as true choices instead of
obvious necessities [ 136 , 140 , 197 , 330 , 331 , 354 , 355 ] . To
appreciate this, we shall first review the usual theoretical argument
supporting the bosons/fermions dichotomy.

#### 7.1.1. Bosons and fermions

Let us consider @xmath quantum particles living in the physical space
@xmath . The classical configuration space is @xmath and one describes
the quantum system with a complex-valued wave-function @xmath . Since
@xmath is interpreted as the direct-space probability density of the
system, and @xmath as the momentum-space probability density ² ² 2 With
the convention that the Fourier transform is a @xmath isometry. , we
have to impose

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

but this is not the only physical constraint. Indeed, actual particles
are indistinguishable , so that the labeling of coordinates @xmath is
arbitrary. Thus, one should obviously demand that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for any permutation @xmath of @xmath indices, where @xmath is the
unitary operator that permutes particle labels:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is sometimes improperly claimed that ( 7.1.1 ) implies that @xmath is
either symmetric or anti-symmetric. There are counter-examples [ 136 ] ,
but one should realize that indistinguishability is a stronger concept
than ( 7.1.1 ). In quantum mechanics, every possible measurement on a
system is represented by a self-adjoint operator @xmath on @xmath . The
expected value of the quantity represented by @xmath , when measured in
the state @xmath , is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus one should demand that any such value does not depend on the
labeling of the particles, and the bosons/fermions dichotomy comes about
via the following elementary lemma:

###### Lemma 7.1.1 (Bosons and fermions).

Let @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

satisfy, for any bounded self-adjoint operator @xmath on @xmath and any
permutation @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then either

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

or

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

###### Proof.

Take @xmath . According to ( 7.1.2 ), we must have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath and hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some complex number @xmath with modulus one. For consistency we see
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

must hold for all @xmath . The map @xmath is a thus one-dimensional
representation of the permutation group and it follows that either
@xmath or @xmath ∎

Of course, this argument is mostly academic: that all known particles
behave as either bosons and fermions is quite simply an experimental
fact. But in view of the above, there seems to be little to no room,
even in theory, for other possibilities. One could then claim that the
dichotomy is a fundamental fact of nature. That is, provided one trusts
the (elementary) quantization procedure just described, which, in
hindsight, is more subtle than it looks.

#### 7.1.2. Anyons

The breakthrough leading to the introduction of anyons occurred in [ 197
] where it was realized

-   that there is one choice implicitly made in the above quantization
    procedure,

-   that a different quantization can lead to different particle
    statistics,

-   that these can occur only in low dimensions @xmath .

A parallel approach is that of [ 354 , 355 ] where it is argued that in
low dimensions the spin needs not be quantized. Hence, via the
spin-statistics theorem, one may hope for exotic particle statistics. We
shall not describe this approach here ³ ³ 3 The spin-statistics theorem
is a result of relativistic quantum field theory. One can prefer not
having to use it to discuss ordinary non-relativistic matter. , nor that
of [ 140 ] , and now turn to a (very crude) summary of the findings of [
197 ] .

In fact, the only choice made in the above quantization procedure that
is not a basic axiom of quantum mechanics, and that is not obviously
logically necessary, is that we have first quantized, then symmetrized .
Namely, we have first introduced wave-functions, and then restricted
possible choices thereof by a physical symmetry postulate. What happens
if we instead first symmetrize, then quantize ?

We shall not enter into the mathematical description of this process,
but state the essential conclusions, restricting ⁴ ⁴ 4 There is an
ambiguity in 1D, in that one cannot continuously exchange particles on a
line without making them collide. to @xmath :

-   In dimension @xmath , the former conclusion remains valid, only
    bosonic and fermionic wave-functions are logically consistent
    possibilities.

-   For @xmath , there is a whole continuum of other possible choices,
    labeled by a real number @xmath . Bosons correspond to @xmath ,
    fermions to @xmath

This difference is of topological origin: one removes particles
encounters points from the configuration space, because they are
somewhat singular. A given particle then moves in a punctured space. The
punctured 3D space is simply connected, while the punctured 2D space is
not. In 3D and higher, the first homotopy group of the classical
configuration space is the permutation group, in 2D it is the braid
group. The latter has a continuum of one-dimensional representations,
and this is where the continuum of possible statistics originates from [
357 , 358 ] .

In short, in 2D there is no inconsistency in demanding that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a real number that can be restricted to @xmath by
periodicity. One refers to @xmath as the statistics parameter, and
speaks of fractional statistics ⁵ ⁵ 5 Although, strictly speaking,
irrational @xmath is also allowed. if @xmath , that is when we deal with
particles that behave neither as bosons nor as fermions. The term anyons
(“any”-ons) was coined by Wilczek [ 355 ] because the statistics
parameter can a priori be any number.

Of course the above object cannot be a function, for it would be
multi-valued ⁶ ⁶ 6 Think of permuting a pair of indices twice; the
function then picks a phase @xmath . unless @xmath (bosons) or @xmath
(fermions). It should in fact be seen as a fiber bundle, which would
complicate any theoretical description and mathematical analysis.
Fortunately, there is a natural, albeit formal, way to fall back on the
familiar description in terms of wave-functions. We present this next.

#### 7.1.3. Magnetic gauge picture

In the sequel we shall be interested in the quantum mechanics of
non-relativistic 2D particles obeying fractional statistics. This means
that we are interested in acting on “functions” satisfying ( 7.1.5 )
with a many-body Hamiltonian of the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the usual momentum operator for particle @xmath , @xmath
is the vector potential of an external gauge field, @xmath a one-body
potential and @xmath a pair interaction potential. The usual way to
render this problem more tractable is to write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the angle of the vector @xmath in the plane. That way,
@xmath has, at least formally, bosonic symmetry (its @xmath is @xmath
modulo @xmath ) and one might prefer to describe the system in terms of
it. The important observation is that acting on @xmath with @xmath is
formally equivalent to acting on @xmath with a new, effective
Hamiltonian:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The effective gauge vector potential is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.1.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and it depends on the position of the particles. The associated magnetic
field is a sum of delta functions

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.1.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

One can thus see non-relativistic anyons as ordinary bosons that carry
in addition fictitious Aharonov-Bohm-like flux tubes whose vector
potential influences the other particles. Of course one could choose a
convention where @xmath is fermionic instead, with obvious modifications
to the above equations. One could even (although this does not seem a
very good idea) describe 2D fermions as bosons coupled to flux tubes,
and vice-versa.

The above formalism based on ( 7.1.7 ) and ( 7.1.8 ) is called “magnetic
gauge picture” by opposition to the “anyon gauge picture” based on (
7.1.5 ) and ( 7.1.6 ). The obvious advantage is that we can now think in
terms of bosonic (or fermionic) wave-functions. The obvious drawback is
that the anyon Hamiltonian is pretty complicated. Even in the free case
@xmath , very few exact results on the spectrum or dynamics of @xmath
are known. Well-educated approximations are thus highly desirable, even
more so than for usual interacting bosons and fermions (the effective
magnetic interaction contained in ( 7.1.8 ) is considerably more
intricate than a simple pair interaction). Section 7.3 below is
concerned with this issue. Before entering this question, we discuss the
emergence of fractional statistics for a certain type of quasi-particles
in Section 7.2 . Interestingly, we shall see that it is the magnetic
gauge picture, and not the anyon gauge picture, that naturally emerges.
For all practical purposes relevant to this memoir we thus can, and
shall, consider only the former description. Anyons are thus identified
in the sequel as ordinary bosons or fermions feeling an effective
Hamiltonian of the form ( 7.1.8 )

### 7.2. Anyons in quantum Hall physics

That fractional statistics can occur only in low dimensions seems a
no-go for their relevance to fundamental particles. All of these
(electrons, photons, quarks …) are 3D objects. Even if restricted to
lower dimensions in the lab, they retain their 3D statistics, which can
only be bosonic or fermionic. The statistics of composite objects, such
as protons, neutrons and atoms, are obtained by adding the statistics of
their constituents: this can only produce bosons or fermions.

Anyons can thus only exist as quasi-particles of low dimensional
systems. In this section we discuss the emergence of 2D fractional
statistics for the most prominent candidates that seem to have been
considered in the literature so far: quasi-holes of the Laughlin state.
We have already studied the Laughlin wave-function in some detail in
Chapter 3 . Here we shall be interested in some of its elementary
excitations, called quasi-holes. We argue that, when coupled to tracer
particles, they effectively change the statistics of the latter. The
tracer particles, dressed by the quasi-holes of the Laughlin
wave-function, become anyons with statistics parameter

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the exponent in the Laughlin wave-function ( 3.1.3 ) and
@xmath the original statistics parameter of the tracer particles (thus
@xmath or @xmath , bosons or fermions). The possibility of creating
anyons in the fractional quantum Hall effect context seems to be widely
accepted [ 137 , 139 , 333 , 189 , 167 ] . It has recently been proposed
[ 77 , 36 , 263 , 276 , 291 , 345 ] that this physics could be emulated
in ultra-cold atomic gases subjected to artificial magnetic fields. It
is such a system we have in mind primarily, although the following might
still be of relevance to the usual 2D electrons gases where the FQHE is
observed.

Warning. The reader should be aware that the results of this section are
not mathematically rigorous, contrarily to everything discussed in this
memoir so far. They are included because

-   their authors (this is joint work with Douglas Lundholm [ 250 ] )
    have good hope to render them rigorous, at least in parts, in the
    near future;

-   they avoid some issues with the usual arguments in favor of
    fractional statistics;

-   they give a physical motivation to the rigorous results of Section
    7.3 below, and to future investigations.

#### 7.2.1. Tracer particles in a Laughlin liquid

Consider the following thought experiment: two different species of 2D
particles interact repulsively among themselves, and couple to a uniform
magnetic field. Such a set-up has already been suggested [ 78 , 360 ,
361 ] as a way to probe the emergence of fractional statistics, using
cold atomic gases.

The Hilbert space for the joint system is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the number of particles of the first type and @xmath the
number of particles of the second type. For definiteness we assume that
the two types of particles be bosons, whence the imposed symmetry in the
above Hilbert spaces. The following however applies to any choice of
statistics for both types of particles.

We write the Hamiltonian for the full system as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is the Hamiltonian for the first type of particles and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

that for the second type of particles. We shall denote @xmath and @xmath
the coordinates of the two types of particles and choose units so that
@xmath , and the mass and charge of the second type of particles are
respectively @xmath and @xmath . We keep the freedom that the first type
of particles might have a different mass @xmath and a different charge
@xmath . The first type of particles should be thought of as tracers
immersed in a large sea of the second type. We shall accordingly use the
terms “tracer particles” and “bath particles” in the sequel.

We have also introduced:

-   the usual momenta @xmath and @xmath .

-   a uniform magnetic field of strength @xmath . Our convention is that
    it points downwards:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   intra-species interaction potentials, @xmath and @xmath . We think
    of short-range potentials for simplicity.

-   an inter-species interaction potential @xmath . Again, @xmath should
    be thought of as being short-range.

The next step is to assume a strong hierarchy of energy scales. The
requirements are rather stringent, but we think they are ultimately
necessary for the emergence of fractional statistics. We assume that the
energy scales of the problem are set, in order of decreasing
importance/magnitude, by

1.  the external magnetic field @xmath , which forces all bath particles
    to occupy lowest Landau levels orbitals. Note that the splitting
    between Landau levels for the tracer particles is rather
    proportional to @xmath so if @xmath it is reasonable to allow that
    they occupy several Landau levels.

2.  the interaction potential @xmath , which forces the joint
    wave-function of the system to vanish when two bath particles
    encounter.

3.  the interaction potential @xmath , which forces the joint
    wave-function of the system to vanish when a bath and a tracer
    particles encounter.

4.  all the rest, which, as we will argue, essentially boils down to an
    effective energy for the tracer particles.

This leads us to a reasonable ansatz for the joint wave-function of the
system:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath describes a Laughlin state of the @xmath bath particles,
coupled to @xmath quasi-holes at the locations of the tracer particles:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We have here identified @xmath and @xmath . We choose @xmath to enforce

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for any @xmath . We thus ensure normalization of the full wave function
@xmath by demanding that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In ( 7.2.5 ), @xmath and @xmath are two positive integers. The latter
should be even for symmetry reasons (it would be odd if the bath
particles were fermions).

#### 7.2.2. Derivation of the magnetic gauge Hamiltonian

The wave-function @xmath describing the tracer particles is the only
variable part left. One thus wants to choose it properly in order to
approximate the ground state of the full system. Our main claim is that
this can be achieved by taking @xmath as the ground state of some
effective Hamiltonian:

###### Statement 7.2.1 (Emergence of fractional statistics).

We make the previous assumptions on the energy scales of the problem. In
addition we suppose that @xmath and that @xmath contains a hard-core of
radius larger than @xmath . Then we claim the following:

1.   An ansatz of the form ( 7.2.4 ) is a good approximation for the
    ground state of the full system.

2.   The full ground state energy satisfies

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (7.2.7)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    where

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (7.2.8)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    @xmath being defined as in ( 7.1.9 ).

3.   Consequently, the optimal choice for @xmath is a ground state of
    @xmath and we have

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (7.2.9)
      -- -------- -- ---------

A few comments are in order, keeping in mind that this statement is not
a rigorous theorem:

-   We are lead to conjecture that all the physics boils down to the
    motion of the tracer particles. These are dressed by holes in the
    density of bath particles and thus become quasi-particles whose
    physics is determined by an emergent Hamiltonian.

-   A first remarkable fact about @xmath is that the charge of the
    tracer particles gets reduced: @xmath in the coupling to the
    external magnetic field. This comes about because Laughlin
    quasi-holes carry a fraction of an electron’s charge [ 187 , 188 ] .
    This is a well documented fact, including experimentally [ 310 , 101
    , 256 ] .

-   That the Laughlin quasi-holes have fractional statistics had also
    been conjectured early on [ 20 , 153 , 154 ] . This has so far not
    been confirmed experimentally, despite some promising hints [ 51 ]
    and some interesting proposals [ 308 , 147 , 177 , 178 , 78 , 360 ,
    361 ] .

-   In our approach, the emergence of fractional statistics comes about
    via the vector potential @xmath , as discussed in Section 7.1 .

-   One could formally gauge @xmath away and consider minimizing a usual
    magnetic Hamiltonian amongst wave functions satisfying ( 7.1.5 )
    with @xmath . This is not desirable since the magnetic gauge
    Hamiltonian acting on bosonic wave-functions we derive directly is
    more tractable, see Section 7.3 below and references therein.

-   The original paper [ 250 ] also discusses possible experimental
    signatures of the above statement. In some specific experimental
    regime, one can argue that a measurement of the density of the
    tracer particles should reveal a clear influence of fractional
    statistics.

-   The usual argument in favor of fractional statistics, originating in
    [ 20 ] (see also [ 179 , 180 , 181 , 264 ] ), proceeds by first
    treating the tracer particles/quasi-holes as classical parameters in
    the function ( 7.2.4 ). That is, we freeze the @xmath degree of
    freedom and consider @xmath as a family of parameters for the
    quasi-holes wave-function. One can compute that, upon moving a
    @xmath around another adiabatically, the quasi-holes wave-function
    picks a Berry phase @xmath . This Berry phase is then identified
    with the square of the statistics exchange phase quasi-holes should
    have in a quantum description. While certainly compelling, this
    argument is not devoid of issues (see for example [ 122 ] ).

-   The main leap of faith in the argument of [ 20 ] is the
    identification of the Berry phase picked by the bath particles’ wave
    function and the statistics phase of the tracer particles. This is
    completely avoided in our approach, since we do not appeal to the
    Berry phase concept at all.

### 7.3. Average-field approximation for almost bosonic anyons

Now that we have seen that anyons can emerge in some concrete physical
situations, we turn to the next obvious question. Namely: how does a
system of anyons behave, what characteristic features of it could be
observed ? Since the free anyon Hamiltonian ( 7.1.8 ) is pretty
intricate, and basically no general exact results are known (contrarily
to the case of free bosons or fermions), this raises the question of
deriving effective, simpler theories. In this section we report on the
results of [ 249 ] , where such an effective theory is rigorously
derived, in a mean-field-like limit.

#### 7.3.1. Model for trapped extended anyons

Here we consider the ground state problem for free anyons in a trapping
potential @xmath , that is we are interested in the bottom of the
spectrum of the Hamiltonian (we discard @xmath from the notation for
shortness)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the gauge vector potential is again given by ( 7.1.9 ). Compared
to ( 7.1.8 ) and ( 7.2.8 ) we have discarded the external gauge vector
potential and the pair interaction. This is because they would not
complicate the picture significantly, at least with the approach we
follow in [ 249 ] . The above Hamiltonian can be rigorously defined and
shown to enjoy crucial functional inequalities [ 186 , 251 , 252 , 253 ]
. However, its complicated structure makes it very hard to draw precise
predictions, even about its ground state. To appreciate this, consider
formally expanding the squares in ( 7.3.1 ). We obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (7.3.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where we wrote

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for the 2D Coulomb kernel. We are thus dealing with ordinary bosons
(recall that we are interested in the action of @xmath on symmetric
wave-functions) that experience:

-   a two-body interaction mixing space and momentum variables (second
    line);

-   a three-body interaction (third line);

-   a singular two-body interaction (the terms on the fourth line are
    not locally integrable).

In this section we want to justify that, in spite of these peculiar
features, the ground state of @xmath can in some regime be approximated
in the form of a pure tensor power @xmath , in the spirit of Chapter 5 .
In the context of fractional statistics, such approximations are usually
refered to as “average-field models” [ 120 , 66 , 68 , 339 , 340 , 164 ,
350 ] .

An immediate difficulty is that pure tensor powers @xmath are not in the
domain of @xmath , because of the singular pair interaction. To remedy
this, we smear the Aharonov-Bohm flux carried by each particle on a disc
of radius @xmath : let

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and consider (observe that @xmath )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

together with the regularized Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This so-called “extended anyons” model is discussed in [ 186 , 257 , 339
, 69 ] . Besides the fact that it offers a reasonable simplification of
the original Hamiltonian, one can motivate it because anyons should be
seen as emergent quasi-particles, and have thus a finite radius. In
Statement 7.2.1 , this is set by the radius of the hard-core we assumed
was contained in @xmath .

For fixed @xmath , this operator is self-adjoint on @xmath and we shall
denote

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

the associated ground state energy (lowest eigenvalue) for @xmath
extended anyons. We are interested in the asymptotics of @xmath and the
associated minimizers in the limit @xmath and @xmath .

#### 7.3.2. Justification of the average field approximation

To obtain a well-defined limit problem we set

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a given, fixed constant. This choice ensures that all
terms in ( 7.3.1 ) are formally of order @xmath or smaller. Physically
it means we consider “almost bosonic anyons”. One can also perturb
around fermions, but we have not studied this case. Note that if we
simply took @xmath at fixed @xmath , we would recover ordinary bosons at
leading order. One could then only see the effect of the non-trivial
statistics in a perturbative expansion, a route followed e.g. in [ 321 ,
76 , 322 , 272 , 75 ] .

The effective model we shall derive encodes the effect of anyon
statistics in the form of a self-consistent gauge field:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.3.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.3.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

One obtains this functional by the same kind of steps as in the case of
usual bosons with pair interactions: either replacing the magnetic gauge
vector potential by a mean-field, or by taking (essentially) an ansatz
of the form @xmath . We denote @xmath the ground state energy obtained
by minimizing ( 7.3.8 ) subject to the unit mass constraint

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For technical reasons we assume that the one-body potential is confining

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and that the size @xmath of the extended anyons does not go to zero too
fast in the limit @xmath . The following is the main result of [ 249 ] :

###### Theorem 7.3.1 (Validity of the average field approximation).

We consider @xmath extended anyons of radius @xmath in an external
potential @xmath satisfying ( 7.3.10 ). We assume the relation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and that the statistics parameter scales as ( 7.3.7 ).

Then, in the limit @xmath we have for the ground-state energy

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Moreover, if @xmath is a sequence of ground states for @xmath , with
associated reduced density matrices @xmath , then we have, along a
subsequence,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

strongly in the trace-class when @xmath , where @xmath is a Borel
probability measure supported on the set of minimizers of @xmath ,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

A few comments:

-   The method of proof is inspired from that of [ 208 ] , cf Chapter 5
    . The use of the quantum de Finetti theorem is even more crucial
    here: there does not seem to be any way of using the structure of
    the magnetic gauge Hamiltonian to justify the approximation.

-   Actually, its peculiar form adds quite a few twists to the proof,
    compared to [ 208 ] . We have to rely on some specific functional
    inequalities [ 248 , 160 ] to control the error terms.

-   Note that the limit problem ( 7.3.8 ) comprises an effective
    self-consistent magnetic field. A term in the form of a
    self-consistent electric field is more usual. Taking the @xmath of
    @xmath we see that the effective field is directly proportional to
    the matter density.

-   We deal with the limit @xmath at the same time as @xmath because
    typically the anyon radius should be much smaller than the total
    system’s size. This is reminiscent of the NLS and GP limits for
    trapped Bose gases, see again Chapter 5 and references therein.

-   Taking @xmath not too small in the limit @xmath is a requirement in
    our method of proof. It is in fact not clear whether some lower
    bound on @xmath is a necessary condition for the average field
    description to be correct. For very small or zero @xmath , it is
    still conceivable that a description in terms of a functional of the
    form of ( 7.3.8 ) is correct in the limit. A first satisfying step
    would be to allow @xmath , the typical inter-particle distance.